AKOLOYTHOS OR A SECOND FAIR WARNING To take heed of the SCOTTISH DISCIPLINE,
In vindication of THE FIRST. (Which the Rt. Reverend Father in God, THE Ld.
BISHOP OF LONDON DERRIE Published Ao 1649.) Against a schismatical and
seditious REVIEWER R. B. G. One of the bold Commissioners from the REBELLIOVS
KIRK IN SCOTLAND To His Sacred MAJESTY K. CHARLES the SECOND when at the
HAGE, BY RI. WATSON Chaplane to the Rs. Hoble. THE LORD HOPTON.

HAGH, Printed by SAMUEL BROUN, English Bookeseller. 1651.

To the Rt. Honorable. the LORD HOPTON Baron of Straton, etc. One of the Lords
of His Majeties most honorable Privy Council.
MY LORD:
Upon discovery of a late motion in some sheets, I found my book to have
been hitherto but in a trance, which receiving as I thought, (but knew not from
whence) a mortal wound before it appeared in the encounter, I gave over long
since for down right dead and buried in the press. When it recovered spirits
enough to crave my hand, I could not deny it so small a courtesy as to help
it up. In that it looks not so vivide and fresh complexioned as heretofore it
might, it shares-but in the ordinary effects of such misse-fortune. If
resuming what it was speaking a twelve-moneth since, be censured for
impertinencie to these times, and (it may be) laughed at by some for
prophesying of things past the possibility of their success, the fault may be
theirs that disordered the leaves when well suited, and the failing not mine,
who undertoke not against all changes of minds, or alterations of counsels, or
preventions of causes running on then visiblie to the same issues I assigned
them in my conjecture. But these exceptions, My Lord, though they clip the
fringe, neither unshape, nor shorten the garment I intended as the proper guise
for Scottish Presbytery to be seen in the very same with that wherein the Rt.
Reverend Bishop of London Derrie had well clad her, soon afterward not only
undecentlie discomposed, but rent in pieces by the rudeness of an angry
fury, one of those six evil spirits that haunted (in the night of sorrow)
with both tempting and terrifying apparitions, His Royal MAJESTY and your H.
H. at the Hage. From whose praevailing violence no rescue could be offered but
by repelling the tempest of his language, wherewith he thought to keep all
Antagonists at a distance, and by blowing in his face the fire and stinking
sulphur of his breath. If your Lordship please to pass a little through the
smoke, and take no offense at the smell which in a near approach will be found
to be little of my making, Truth and reason will be beter discerned in a
readiness to entertain you, as some longer train of Authority had likewise
if Fathers and Councels in this pilgrimage of ours had been, to a just number,
within my reach, and some later Writers at the pleasure of my call. The stand,
or at least some impediment in the march, of these Bloody Presbyters, which
this forlorn hope will, in some likelihood cause for a time may by your
Lordship, unpraejudic'd, be taken for an hapie augurie of the absolute defeat
unquaestionablie to follow, if occasion require, by a greater strength, and
that under the conduct of beter experience in these polemical affairs. In the
interim though I humbly crave the honor and power of your patronage (whereof
from your integrity and constancy in Gods cause and the Kings, I praesume), I
assume not the boldness to constitute your Lordship any party in the liberty
I take, beyond forward expressions, to declare what may be thought some
singularity in my sense. If any small Politician, whose conscience is squared
by no religion at all but what plainly lies in the image worship of his
temporal designs. will be (which I must look for to be) quaestioning the
prudence of my speeches, I thank God he has no privilege to give judgment
against the sincerity of my thoughts. I can no longer conceal, My Lord, how
much I am troubled to see our Churches diffusive charity mistaken, the
precious balm, which she ever liberally poured into the wounds of her
neighbors, cast by some of their hands like common oil upon her domestike
flames purpofelie to consume her; And the skirt, she often spread over their
nakedness, cut of, with an unhandsome intent to laugh at her shame, had she
not an under garment of innocence to praevent them. To behold, after so many
years cantonizing our Religion amongst Protestant Congregations of different
opinions, (reconciled in nothing but, or nothing more then in a negative to the
Papist) our selves, in the end, at a sad loss for protection (or indeed free
permission) from any, now necessitated to seek it. This makes me so many times
in this discourse turn her away from all new names and professions arising
whether from protestations or Covenants. to the unconf^derate Catholic
Christianity among the Ancients where she is sure to have the ^afest
sanctuary of truth for her doctrine and practice* though she can expect no
armed assistance from the dead to maintain the distressed Members of her
communion. If this must be interpreted a schismatical inclination, let me be
left in my hold upon the horns of this altar, while others rise from their
knees to sit down, out of good felloship, at the Tables; and drink of all
waters they care not what, so draw'n from a cisterne of the Reformed, forsaking
or vilifying, for the time* that clearer Crystal fountain of their own.
Whereas would they enter, as they are quaestionlesse obliged, an unanimous
resolution to demand every where the public exercise of their canonical
devotion, they would either, upon the grant, reap more comfort in continuing
the worship of their Fathers, or, upon unworthie denial, more reason to scruple
at such a facile conjunction with them, who disclaiming their prayers can not
be thought serious when they praetend an harmony in that faith by which they
are exhibited unto God. And (to put your Lordship in mind of a late instance
delivered on good credit) who maligning our persons, and mocking at our
calamities in their Schools, are very unlikelie so to alter their minds as to
turn their Barbarous reproach into any brotherly kiss or Christian welcome,
when they step but the next door into their Temples. I confess, My good Lord,
this Magisterial advice may beter become the mouth of some Elder Pastor, who
is likely to have more sheep wandering from his fold then he who can scarce
properly be said to have had any in his charge yet none such, I hope, has
reason to take amiss my modest endeavor, while he is otherwise employed, to
recover those I find straggling within my call. It being upon due consideration
to be feared, that after some few years (if there must be yet more of our
miserable dispersion) with out an universal industrious circumspection of young
and old, as we have broken our pipes, we may throw away our whistles, and fold
up our time with our arms in ae comfortless discourse about the flocks we
once had which now alas are got into other pastures; Invite strangers to fight
for our Churches while our own Congregations are instituted to forget the
holiness in the separation of such places, the sacred distance of the meanest
from worke-or warehouses, and the fairest from Piatz'as of pleasure or
Exchanges for their bargains. If what I speak, My Lord, be truth, I shall not
hearken to them that may tell me it is miss placed, my conscience suggesting
that the climate and season has too often been heretofore neglected; If false,
I have a sponge as ready as ever I had a pin to wipe out all but my shame,
which shall be set forth, at your Lordships pleasure, in an English sheet,
though it never will be brought unto the Scottish stool to do its penance. In
attendance on which sentence, if neither your Lordships approbation nor pardon
must be expected, I stoup down to acknowledge my self, as well in submission
to your censure as execution of your commands:

MY LORD, Your Lordships Most humbly devoted servant RI: WATSON.

D. Hieron. Praefat. in Lib. Esdr.
Legant qui volunt; q^i nolunt, abjiciant.

Horat.
-- quae nivali pascitur Algid^
Devota quercus inter and ilices;
Aut crescit Albanis in herbis
Victima, Pontificum secures
Cervice tinget --
Dr. Creighton' s Letter.
My dear Friend, Brother, and Fellow-sufferer, Mr. Watson,
I Thank you for the confidence you reposed in my integrity and affection to
your self, and your cause, that you would permit me to read your Treatise, in
^heets, before it went to the press; which I found so well digested in method,
so full of ingenuity, (...) variety of Learning, so perspicuous, acute and
elegant, that I should seem to derogate from your worth, if I added ought to
the commendations of your writing.

I may boldly say, you have laid your Adversary flat on his back, you have
dressed him to the purpose: (...), as the Greek proverb runs in Suidas: When they
have caught the Polypus, they ply him with bastinadoes, cudgel his dissembling
coat lustily, to make him ta^e, feed, and grow fat.

Yet I am afraid your Noble Instructions will produce no great effect upon that
man: Parce labori Nicopompe: non ignorant se errare, nec moniti emendationem
promittunt, says Antenorius to the Author of Argenis in that Book: You might
have spared your pains (good Mr. Watson) they know they are wrong as well as
you can tell them; but all the earth shall never make them confess an error,
or amend it.

And you will pardon me that I quote Argenis in so weighty a cause: Similes labra
lactucas; they are more fabulous, and greater liars, then Argenis: and some
slight, prating, finical Nicopompus, I hold a far more proper Antagonist to
deal with these men, then you, or any learned grave Divine: For they will say
what they please, and maintain what they say, not by strength of reason, but by
wilfulness, hate, malice, revenge, and blood: Creed, aut jug^lum dabis, is
their motto, Believe, or I Will cut thy throat. And were those holy and primitive
Saints now alive, and did read the practices of those men, compared with the
innocent passages of Argenis, that draw no blood, they would infinitely far
prefer that airy wellpenn'd Fancy before the Acts of their Assemblies, nay even
in point of truth: And perhaps posterity, after a while, may be brought to the
same degree of understanding and judgment.

They are a perverse generation; and you have took a Wolf by the ears, which
you must make account to hold till doomsday: you must never hope to be free
from Bailey's replies, and janglings: They are like the Indian Dogs in Strabo,
presented to Alexander the Great, so fierce and pertinacious, that when they
once catch hold, Archimedes's Instrument will hardly pull them off, (...), they
will stick and tear, till their eyes turn round in their eye-holes or sockets,
and drop out of their heads.

And I never yet knew any man go beyond your Adversary Bailey, in sti^ness,
pride, and arrogance: It is much about a dozen years, since he first published
his Canterburian self-conviction; The man had seen some Visions in Trophonius's
Den, raptures, and embryo's of his own addled brain, and out he comes to vent
them, like Aesop's Ass, jetting in purple: He was now high set in pursuit of
same, and, like a valiant Combatant, he enters the field, brandishes his sword,
and looks about whom he may dare to take up the bucklers against him; and
scorning to cope with a Pigmee, he challenges no less men then my Lord's Grace
of Canterbury, and all the Learned Divines of England; and much grieved he was
in mind, that my Lord's Grace himself would not vouchsafe him the honor to
confute him: as if a skie-towring Eagle, or Gyre-falcon, should have stoopt to
a Kite or Carrion: I dare say, the least line of that incomparable profound
Conference with Fisher, written by that peerless glorious Martyr for the Church
of England, is of more weight and worth, then all that ever Bailey did, or
shall, compose, to the worlds end, could he live Methusalem's age over and
over, and spew out yearly whole Vaticans of Books.

And you may see, Sir, to your comfort, he is no changeling; He is Crimson died
in grain: Hyaena follicat, and non mutat pellem; the Hyaena will double, and
falter, this way, and that, yet still continue an Hyaena.

He had done with my Lord's Grace of Canterbury long ago, and it was time, when
he and his accomplices had brought him to a scaffold: But no sooner had my Lord
of Londonderry appeared in public, though with some short avisoes to beware
their villainies, but Bailey will have at him: Who but Baily? the great Kill-cow
of the North? that unappall'd Champion? that Goliath of brass? that confounder
of Bishops in England, Scotland, and Ireland? He startles, and stares about, at
the very name of a Bishop reels, frets and fumes; it is more odious to him then
a Turkish Mufti, it rides him like an Incubus, or Nightmare, he cannot rest or
sleep for it.

I could not choose but smile, though with much indignation, to mark his saucy
impertinent haughtiness: In the very Frontispice of his Book, how unreverently
he calls my Lord Bishop, Dr. Bramble, Late Bishop; as if his Lordship were not
now what before he was; as if his Order could be cancelled by popular
suffrages, ^s the waspish Puritan thinks fit to rise in Arms, and teach their
misled rabble to cry No Bishops, no Bishops; as if they could be pulled down,
and set up, at men's pleasure, as in King James's minority, like a Weathercock
in the wind, to wave on the loose hinges of State-Interests; to rise and fall
with ebbs and tides of popular insurrections. Dr. Bramble, late Bishop? How
late, Bailey? What has the Bramble scratcht you by the face, that you so
wilfully mistake his name? You impudence! And who made you Priest, good
Nehemiah? Had you imposition of hands? Episcopal benediction? And when I pray
began his Lordship to be no Bishop? from the General Assembly at Glasgow,
November. 38? Indeed from Christ, to the holy Vigils of that Assembly, the whole
Christian world held it a sacred Order; the next day after that Assembly, they
proclaimed it Antichristian, and annulled it. And who gave you or them that
Authority? Mercy God! in one night to blast that Order, and turn it
Antichristian, which over all the world had stood Christian 1600 years before!
O nox quam longaes! It is madness to imagine it. I am persuaded in my
Conscience, and will live and die in that Faith, let all the Puritans in
Christendom prate, and preach, and scribble what they please to the contrary,
That all the Kings, and Princes, and Parliaments, and Assemblies in the world,
have no jus^ power to abrogate that Order. Bishops are the Apostles immediate
Successors; have a Divine Right in Christ's Church, from Christ's Apostles, as
great as Christ's Apostles could give them, or Christ give his Apostles, or God
the Father give Christ: Sicut me mi^it Pater, sic ego mitto vos.

And where had Priests been all this while? how had they appeared? how been
distinguished? how known from Heretics and Schismatics, down through so many
ages, if they had wanted Bishops in a clear Succession still to regulate and
ordain them?

But things are turned topsie-turvie in these barbarous tumults and
combustions; the Son has supplanted the Father who begat him; the Priest
unthroned the Bishop who made him, and mounting his saddle, like a proud
Usurper, furiously spurs on, to make good that Proverb, Set a Beggar on
Horseback, and he will ride to the Devil.

What blood and murder? what treasons and rebellions have overflowed the World
since these tenets were first broached?

Instit. 4. cap. 2. 5. 2. No succession from the Apostles: No succession of
Bishops. Instit. 4. cap. 3. 5. 4. Only 5 Orders in the Church, Prophets,
Apostles, Evangelists, Pastors, and Doctors: whereof the three first moment
any, and for their own times. Instit. 4. chapter 3. 5. 8. Bishops, Priests, and
Pastors, all one. Instit. 4. cap. 4. 5. 2. Bishops chosen by the Priests
themselves, upon humane consent, and for occasion. Instit. 4. cap. 4. 5. 15.
Bishops gave no Ordination; only because they sat first among the Priests,
Ordination was falsely understood to be the Bishops. Instit. 4. cap. 11. 5. 1.
That the power of the Keys, and Spiritual Jurisdiction, rests in a mixed Company
of Lay Elders and Priests. Instit. 4. chapter 10. 5. 3. That no external Law made
by the Magistrate can bind the Conscience. Instit. 4. chapter 20. 5. 31. That the
Inferior Magistrate ought, by virtue of his place, to call the Supreme
Magistrate to account, and punish him severely, cut his head off; if the
inferior ^onnive or spare him, he must be held as a perfidious traitor for
betraying the Peoples Rights and Liberties.
These, these, Sir, have been the bane of Christianity, and ruin of the Church
of England: And though, to our great grief, these have took fire in our times,
and produced more sad an desperate effects then heretofore, because the Prince
of the Air is more powerful, and vigilant to increase his Kingdom now, toward
the near approaching consummation of the World; yet formerly extravagancies
have been maintained as pernicious as these: John Wickliff was a far more
dangerous and sturdy Traitor then he. Many have raised paradoxes of di^efull
consequence; but never did any attempt, by an universal defection, to dissolve
all bond of Loyalty and Obedience to God and Man, as Wickliff did.

That God was bound to obey the Devil.

That Churches adorned, were Synagogues for Satan.

That Bishops, Deans, and Doctors, were the Hierarchy of Antichrist.

That there was no Sacrilege.

That Kings were bound, on pain of damnation, to take away all means of
livelihood from a Clergy that misspent it.

That any Tyrant might be slain, lawfully, and meritoriously, by any man, or
any Subject, notwithstanding any former Oath, and uncondemned of any Judge.

That God could give no Hereditary Succession to any King, for Him, and his
Heirs.

A King was no King, that committed mortal sin; nor any sinner, a just
possessour of any thing.

These Assertions Wickliff boldly preached, not in close Conventicles, but
publicly, and printed them, in Edward the Third's declining dotage, I may say,
upheld by the greatness of John of Gant, and Piercy Earl Marshall of England,
against the Prelates and Clergy of those times, whom the Duke infinitely hated.
And for these, Wickliffs bones were burned, 30 years after his death, by a
General Council held at Constance 245 years ago.

And would God his Doctrines had burned with him, and been buried in utter
darkness, for then we had not now wandered, like forlorn Pilgrims, upon the
desolation of the most glorious Church that ever shone in Christendom: we had
not seen what the Sun yet never saw, our Kings scaffolded, the Crown of England
trampled under foot, the Royal Race undone and scattered, our Reverend Bishops,
and Learned Men, abused and baffled by every insolent, stinking peasant:

For though, at that time, those hollow-hearted Lollards, and their abettours,
fell short of their aim and expectation, by the matchless sword of Henry the
5th. England's undanted Mars, and the learned Pen of Thomas of Walden his
Confessor, into whose bosom that mirror of valiant Monarchs breathed out his
innocent soul; yet now they have hit us home to the quick.

A torrent stopped will make way through hidden channels, bu^st out at another
time, in another place, unlooked for: We feel it now, Bohemia felt it then, by
means of some Gentlemen of that Country, Students in Oxford, who conveyed
Wickliffs Books home with them to Prague, which John Huss published in High
Dutch, another jovial John of the same stamp and race, burned alive for
Wickliffs Doctrine, the next year after Wickliffs bones, by the same Council:
And what Wars that caused, what inundations of blood by Zisca and his
Taborites, through the whole Reigns of Wences^aus, and the renowned Sigismund,
no age shall ever forget, or parallel, but ours, whose impiety will transcend
as far the belief of posterity, as now it surmounts all bypast Examples. God
keep my soul from these muckle mawn John's, and their ways, these John's of all
John's: I protest, I never read their Books, or think of their devices and
stratagems, without horror and amazement: Obnubilo animam, as that African
spoke, and sto ut fulguritus, aut sacrum bidental.

And therefore, Mr. Watson, I pity you above all men, who, since you have
undertook this business against Bailey, have been forced to lay aside your
Noble Studies, the Holy Fathers, and History of the Church, to rake in mud, and
dunghils; to plunge in quagmires full of croaking Toads, and hissing Setpents,
Covenants, Oaths, Perjuries, Assemblies, Reformations by blood, Knox and
Buchanan, Consarcinations of traiterous plots, masses of untruths and lies.

But you have played the man, and I must ever love and honor you, for your
excellent Learning, for your pains in this cause, for your unshaken constancy
to the Church and Crown of England, for your perpetual Industry at your Book,
and for your unspo^ed life and conversation: Of all which as I have been an
eyewitness, these five years and upward in our exile; so shall I ever be ready
before God and man to attest them with hand and heart, and to write my self
till death,

From my Chamber at U^recht, in the very Id^ of December, 1650. SIR, Your
unfeigned, affectionate Friend, Brother, Fellow-Sufferer, and Servant, ROB.
CREIGHTON.

TO THE READER.
I Am necessarily to advertise you, That if you be notvery conversant in the
Rd Bishops Warning and his adversaries Review before you enter upon my reply,
you will in the end be as unsatisfied about the true state of the controversy,
as all the way offended at the incohaerence of the paragraphs or periods in the
book, there being, to ease the Printer, not much to advantage me, very little
inserted that mine relates to, which notwithstanding is penned as if you had
the other perpetually in your sight. The credit I claim to have given to
several historical circumstances of a Country, which I yet never saw,
wherewith I could not be furnished from printed books, is upon the sufficient
assurance I have of the fidelity and ability in such persons as are natives,
whom I consulted as oracles in many cases, and received their answer in no
dark ambiguitie of words; But laid down positivelie in their papers, which if
their indifference had been the same with mine: I should have published with
their names, whereby to put out the envious man's eye and keep curiosity from a
troublesome impertinencie in inquiry. I shall make no apology at all to you
for my engagement in the dispute, having allreadie done it where more due. I
shall briefly this for some tantologie, much indecencie and levitie in my
language, Desiring the first may be imputed to some necessity I was cast upon
by the Reviewers frequent repetitions, and some difficulty to recollect what
expressions had passed from me with the sheets, most of which I was to part
with successivelie as I pennd them at several distances of time and place
reteining no perfect copy in my hands. The second is that dirt which did
stick like pitch unto my fingars while I was handling the foul Review, and so
has defild my book. The third came from no affectation to be facetious, for
which I am little fitted, yet thought I might as well sport it as a Divinity
Professor in his chair, who having it seems, made have to the second
infancy of his age, or reassumd his first, would never, it may be, have been
at quiet, unless I had rocked him in his cradle, or played a little with his
rattle. The strange misse-takes many times introduced by his ignorance of our
tongue that in my absence praepared all for the press are rectified with
references to the pages where. Which amendments in favor of your self as well
as justice unto me should be at first transplanted to their several colonies by
your pen. The Greek leters that have lost their grace by the Latin habits
wherein they are constrained to appear, being crowded here and there out of
all significancie and order, and so left at large, have their authority made
good to the full sense of the commission they brought with them, every where by
the English Interpreter or Paraphrast when you meet them. Which intimated, I
have no greater courtesy to crave from you, if one the Revievers impartial and
aequitable comparers, then to hearken to truth and reason, and to signify what
you find here dissonant from either, which I promise you shall be acknowledged
or amended Adieu.

Yours R. W.

A Table of the Chapters.
CHAPT. I. THe Scots bold address with the Covenant to K. Chapter 2. Their party
inconsiderable. The Bishop's method, language, and matter asserted. The
quaestion in controversy unawares granted by the Reviewer. Page 1. II. The
Scottish Discipline overthrowes the right of Magistrates to convocate Synods,
and otherwise to order Ecclesiastical affairs. 10. III. The last appeal to
the Supreme Magistrate justifiable in Scotland. 41. IV. Seditious and
Rebellious Ministers in Scotland seldom or never censured by the Assembly.
47. V. The Discipline exempts not the supreme Magistrate from being
excommunicate. 57. VI. Kings may sometime pardon capital offenders, which the
Disciplin^rians d^nie. As they do their Royal right to any part of the
Ecclesiastike revenue. 59. VII. The Presbytery cheates the Magistrate of his
civil power in ordine ad spiritualia. 65. VIII. The divine right of
Episcopacie beter grounded then that pr^tended in behalf of Presbytery. 93.
IX. The Commonwealth is a monster when Gods Soveraignite in the Presbytery
contradicts the Kings. 113. X. No concord between Parliament and Presbytery.
116. XI. The Presbytery cruel to particular persons. 124. XII. The Presbytery
a burden to the Nobility, Ministry, and all Orders whatsoever. 130. XIII.
The Bishops exceptions against the Covenant made good, and this proved. That no
man is obliged to keep it who has taken it. 176.
AN ANSWER TO THE EPISTLE DEDICATORIE
HAd Mr. Baylie contained himself within the limits My reason for refuting his
Epistle.
of an Epistle, I had there left him to canonize his Living Lord and all his
family, and with what dexterity he pleased to rubb his honorable head piece
into a good conceit of his Review. But since the great Diana in his book, so
gloriously bespangled with the counterfeit Alchy^ie of the late Scottish
Story, is lead hither to be magnified by any superstitious inadvertent reader,
and his Lordships hand made use of only to hold the candle, by the false light
of his name and pretended virtues the better to commend Her Godesse-ship to
public view; I can not pass by without looking in to see the sight, and spend
my verdict upon the motions that attend it.

And that His Lordship may not be mistaken to stand altogether for a shadow,
The Rewiewers vanity in giving titles inconsistent with the praesent condition
and practice of his Lord.
I first cast my eye upon the potent Lord John, and must plainly tell his
admirer Mr. Baylie, he had better deserved the honor of this title, if he had
employed his power, as he was in duty and by oath obliged, in the vindication
of His Majesty, and His Royal Father, of ever blessed memory, as he has most
dishonourablie and impotentlie against them both. Nor is it much for his credit
in the head of this Epistle to be styled one of His Majesty's Privy Council,
and in the heart of His Kingdom to be one of the public conspiracy against
him, of a Lord justice general to become a special Injusticiarie in his
country.

The Reviewers long experience of his sincere zeal, etc. argues him to be none
of the late illuminates, and gives us some hopes the he has proceeded upon the
dictates of his conscience, though unhappilie erroneous: long habits The Earl
of Cassils no late Illuminate.
though at first contracted by the perverseness of the will, by perpetuity
becoming very efficacious in imposing fallacies upon the understanding, so that
he which does ill may hereby be as well persuaded that what he does is good, as
he that often tells a lie has at length himself believ'dit to be a truth.

His rigid adhaerence to the praetended rights and privileges of his Country
being professed haereditarie, takes off some what from the personal imputation,
No credit for his family to be commended by Buchanan.
yet with all demonstrates that it is not all blood Royal which runs in His
Lordships veins, nor it may be all blood Noble, having so ample testimony
from him, who had always some dregs of the Common shore in his ink and
whose power is cankerd with envious invectives against them, that have not laid
their honor in the vulgar dust, and levelled Majesty as well as Nobility
with the people. Whose Ghost will not thank the Reviewer for calling him,
Prince of Historians, being so little enamourd with titles of that nature, Very
Improper to style Buchanan Prince.
that he accounted them, where they were more properly due, Legitimi regni
gravissima pestis. Praet. ad Dial. de jur. Reg.
the filth of flaterie, and the plague of all legitimate praerogative.

His exemplarie practice in publike-private duties is indeed some what
singular, my self having seen him very zealouslie penning down such slender
(to omit what I might call in the Reviewers language praeter The Reviewers
sermon divinity.
and anti-scripturall) divinity, as was not fitting for any Novice or
Catechumen in Religion to own, much less for so grave a Theologue to preach,
and so well exerciz'd an adultist to register for his use. I commend beter the
exemplarie practice of the Reviewers brother Presbyter, who seemed to take a
sound nap in the mean time, hoping, it may be, to be better inspired in his
dream.

This He may well count it an advantage to have the E. Cassils his Judge.
potent Lord, thus qualified and brought up to his hand, I can not blame Mr.
Baylie for choosing him to be his patron, (who discernes with his eyes and
decernes by his dictates) who being judge and party, both will quaestionlesse
do right like a Lord Justice in the business.

The An honor for the Bp. to be called by the Rev: unpardonable incendiaire.
praejudice the Reviewer would here at first cast upon the person of the Bishop
will advance his own reputation but a little in high way Rhetorike, not
advantage him one whit with any of those judicious and aequitable comparers he
expects; who being able to instruct themselves, upon these many late years
experience, that what Mr. Baylie calls that Church and Kingdom is only a
praevalent party of Schismatikes and Rebels, what adhaerence to the sacred
truth of God an obstinate perseverance in an execrable covenant, which has
tied up the hands of many a poor subject from the enjoyment of all the just
liberties the established Jaws of Scotland hold out to him; will look upon
the Bishop as a courageous assertour of Gods truth, the Churches purity, the
Kings supremacy, the subjects liberty, and if for that condemned by an
unanimous faction in both Kingdoms, will commend his zeal, reverence his
name, and rank him with the prime Fathers of the Church, who so soon
endeavored to stop that deluge of misery wherewith Britanie and Ireland have
been most unhapilie overwhelmed.

For the dirtie language he uses here and otherwhere extreme saucy spirit,
stigmatized incendiarie, etc. I desire the Reader to take notice I shall sweep
it The Rev's uncleanlie language.
out of his and my way, yet if he thinks it may serve his turn, as well as
the Aristoph. Plut.
garlike heads did Cario and his master in the Comoedie, the Printers boy shall
throw it by itself at the back side of my reply in a piece of white paper,
that he may not foul his fingers. The active boldness of the Scottish
Presbyterians in Holland, etc,


What the Reviewer calls Boldness was prudence and seasonable caution in the
Bishop to praesent his book to the eminent personages and in this place,
observing the indefatigable industry of Mr. Baylie and his brethren of the
mission, very frequentlie in their persons, perpetually by many subtle and
active instruments they employed before and after their coming hither,
insinuating into the hearts and affections of all people here, of what sex or
condition soever, in Courts, Towns, Universities, Country, praepossessing
them with the Justice of their cause, the innocence of their proceedings, the
moderation of their demands, the conformity of their practice and design to
the praesent discipline and Government of the Church and presbytery in these
Provinces. And great pity it is that all people, nations and languages have it
not translated into their own dialect, that a discovery of this grand
imposture may be made to them who are so insolentlie summoned to fall down and
worship this wooden idol of the discipline, and threatened the aeternal fiery
furnace if they refuse it.

In the next Paragraph the Reviewer draws Cerberus like his threeheaded
monster out of hell, The three headed monster in controversy
Discipline, Covenant, and unkindne's to our late sovereign.

-- [ Sen. Her. Fur.
Novos
Resumit animos victus, and vastas furens
Quassat catenas.] --
HIs The Scottish Discipline vrey different from that in Holland and France.
Apology for the first, being the conformity I mentioned principally with the
Brethren of Holland and France, whom he would very feign flater into his
party, and make the Bishop whether he will or no fall foul upon them, whom
His Lordship: has scarce mentioned in all his tract: And I having no reason
nor desire to enlarge the breach shall say no more then this, (because some
what he will have said) That if their discipline harmoniouslie be the same
particularly in those extravagancies His Lordship mentions, (which to my
knowledge they deny) and for alleging which, they are little beholding to Mr.
Baylie, they are all alike concerned, yet having as learned Apologists of their
own, when they find themselves agriev'd, will in their own case very likely
speak their pleasure. No Reformed Church calls regular Episcopacie
Antichristian.
In the interim I must require his instance where any Reformed Church has
declared regular Episcopacie which we call Apostolical, Antichristian.

What particular persons of Mr. Baylies temper may have published must not
pass for an Ecclesiastical decree. And if all, even in those Churches he
mentions, might freely speak their mind, I believe that order would have
their Christian approbation as it is in any reformed Countries established.
Many eminent persons in those Churches have approved of it Vindic: of K. Chapter p.
125. Apost. Instit. of Episcopacie.
some such relation was made not long since about certain Divines of the
Religion in France, and some that came from other parts to the Synod of Dort.
And I can acquaint the Reviewer with the like piece of charity bestowed by P.
M^lin in the letters, that passed from him to Bishop Andrews, beside what Mr.
Chillingworth (as I take it) has collected out of him and Beza in favor both
of name and thing, though not to the same latitude we extend them. And (which
will not be altogether impertinent to add) I do not remember I have heard
that Causabon and Vossius, no obscure men in the French and Dutch Churches,
were at any time by their presbytery excommunicate for becoming limbs of the
English Antichrist, Praebendaries of the Archiepiscopall Church of Canterbury
with us. But if the Reviewer here begin to cant, and distinguish Episcopal
declinations different from Episcopacie.
between Episcopacie and Episcopal declinations, (for that indeed is the
expression that he uses* I must ingenuouslie acknowledge that there may be
some practical declinations in Episcopacie which may be Antiapostolical and
Antichristian, beside and against the line of the Word, the institution of
Christ and his Apostles; but I know none such in the Churches of England,
Scotland, or Ireland, if there have been any they are not our rule, and by his
own then must not be stated to be the controversy between us. The
Presbyterian aberrations which Presbyteria aberrations. the same with
Presbytery.
the Bishop has observed, are for the most part taken from the crookenesse of
the Discipline it self, which in the very Acts of their Assemblies, he finds
not so straight as to run parallel with the word of God, or practice of the
true Catholic Church, and whether what His Lordship cites to that purpose be
calumnious imputations or no will best appear in the procedure of our
discourse.

But the Reviewer takes it ill that Didoclave, Gerson, Bucer, Salmasius and The
praesent concernment greater to reveal the Scottish Discipline, the^ refute old
adversaries of Episcopacie.
Blondel were not rather replied to, then the mysteries of the Kirk Discipline
revealed. This poor trick of diversion will not take. If what has been writ
in the behalf of Episcopacie stand firm notwithstanding these or any other
storms that pass over, it requires no such frequent reparations. The holy
cause indeed will shortly need such auxiliaries as these. He does well
therefore to call for them in time. Sr. Claud Somays likely to be no great
friend to the Discipline.
And yet it may be the imcomparable knight will not be charmed by a little
mercenarie breath into the rear of a distressed beggarlie engagement. He has
been since better informed of many fraudulent practices in the Kirk, and so
well satisfied about the state of our affairs, that Mr. Baylie is little
pleased (for all his sugar candi'd commendations) with the earnest he has
allreadie given to employ his pen and pains about a better subject for the
future. And it is a mere fiction, what he so confidentlie averres, of He offe
red no dispute with the Kings Chaplains about Episcopacie.
Sr. Claud Somayi's offering to dispute with the Divines by a Person of honor
about the King, a person of reverence, then not far from him having told me
that His Majesty knows not any thing of the buisinesse, nor did the Divines
about him hear of any thing to that purpose. Therefore let his person of honor
come out from behind the curtain, and vouch his credit to be such as quolibet
contradicente we must believe him: when he appears in his colors and makes
good any such offer as is mentioned, I presume I may say that no apprehensions
of trouble and hazard will de^erre such judicious and learned Champions from
entering upon any just and reasonable vindication of truth. In the mean time
they do but the duty of their places in their Royal attendance They
transgress not the duty of their place by informing the Kings conscience
about.
(which the Reviewer calls the Court artifice and their trade) if they watch
the seasons and distribute the hours of the Kings opportunities, wherein
priva^elie (to avoid the importune intervention of other civil^ business, not
to decline I know not what contradiction, which they are not in that case
reasonably to expect from their modest fellow servants of the laity, and I
hope there are no Clerical Disciplinarians there about* to instill into His
Majesty's tender mind how unsafe it is for his soul, and how little for his
honor, to desert the Holy Church, that is the Episcopal doctrine and
government which came into the world with Christianity it self, has for 1500
years enjoyed a joint haereditarie succession, The Primi^ive Doctrine and
Discipline.
and aequi-universall diffusion with the same, to join with a crew in a
Northern corner of rebellious Covenanters, if you will have it so, for ought
hitherto can be judged enemies to God, to his Father, and to Monarchy it
self, if he will take it upon his Father or Grandfathers word. To put him
farther Eikon Basilike cap. 14. Praeservation of the Church.
in mind that his Martyred Father said, There are ways enough to repair the
breaches of the state without the ruin of the Church, (it is the Episcopal
Church that he means) To instruct him that he may as conscientiouslie pardon
the Irish as the Pardoning the Irish and toierating their Religion.
Scots, and reward with a limited liberty of their Religion; and what other
gracious encouragements he pleases, the first fruits of their voluntary
submission to his government, without imposing the slaverie of any covenant, or
conditioning for a toleration in his other Kingdoms. And this to be (as it is)
in reference to a Parliament to be convened so soon as the state of that
Kingdom will admit. To assure him that this is very consistent with
conscience, honor, Eikon. Basilike. conscience, honor, reason, law.
and all Good reason, and for ought they know, repugnant to no law, yea, to
link the soul of the most sweet and ingenuous of Princes (too sweet, too
ingenuous indeed to have to deal with the rough-hev'd Covenanters of the
mission) with those Inclining his mind to the Counsels of his Father.
Golden chains let down from heaven, and reached out by the hand of a tender
hearted father to his son, in those peerlesse Counsels which the most prudent
advice in the last Testaments of all his praedecessours can not parallel. To
tell him then, That his neck Cant. 4 4.
is like the ^ower of David, builded for an armourie, whercon there hang a
thousand bucklers, all shields of mighty men.

The Bishops Eikon Basilike penned wholely by ^. Chapter ^. not a syllable of it by
the Bishops.
unluckie foot, as he calls it, is visible only in Mr. B^lie's margin, As
close as he and others follow upon the sent, not the least tracke in e'ikon
Basilike will in the end be found by them, nor by the whole pack of
bloud-hounds other where.

But to be sure here as well as in 100 Pamphlets beside is the foul Scottish
Presbyterian paw, which besmeared His Royal Majesty while he lived, and would
now spoil that precious ointment, and cast as ill a savor as it can upon his
sacred memory being dead. Not the Bishops, God not they the supporter of the
Matyr'd King.
but God, it may be sometime by their subordinate Ministry, strengthened our
Royal Sovereign to his last, in that which the lamp of natural reason, the
leading star of Catholic Antiquity, the bright sun in the firmament of the
Word and above all, that inexpressible light streaming from the spirit of God
revealed to him to be the safe sanctuary of truth. Not the Bishops, but the
The hardhearted Scottish Presbyterians.
Presbyterian Scots hardened their hearts to thrust their native King out of
their protection, and with out any compassion did drive him from Newcastle to
Holmebie the fatal praecipice to K. Chapter 1.
Holmebie, which appears to be the fatal praecipice where he fell. And these
same men continue after his Endeavors to make it such to K Chapter 2.
death to cry loud in the cares of his son to take that direct path to his
ruin, ratner then root or branc^, or slip shall be left of the Praelatical
Clergy, whom they would feign have lie like dung upon the face of the earth,
and make a fat soil to pamper the Presbyterian in his lusts.

Their His best way to praevent it is consorting with his Fathers book.
gathering together His Majesty's papers, (if they must needs have the honor
of causing them to be presented in a book, with out a page or syllable of
their own) was but binding up that bundle of myrrh which should lie all night
in the Virgin breast of his Royal son, who maugre all the malice of his
enemies, has that beloved for his comfort. That fall Wherein is divine wisdom
and Counsel.
of ungracious dew, as the Reviewer Diabolically calls it, came from an higher
region then the Bishops. It was the judgment of God given to the King, and by
him his righteousness to the Kings son. It is he that here comes down like
rain into this fleece of wool, this most soft, sweet, and ingenuous of
Princes, and in gentle drops waters that precious piece of red earth by his
praecepts. And may this dew so prosper with him, that the Ps. 72.
following words may have their accomplishment in his reign. In his time may
the righteous flourish, and abundance of peace then and afterward, even so long
as the Moon endures. May his dominion be (as it ought) from the one sea to the
other, and from the flood to the end of that alter orbis, that little world of
his Kingdoms divided by the flood from the greater. May they that dwell in the
Wilderness of error contest no longer, but kneel before him and his enemies
lick the dust of his feet.

But by the way it is worth Gods providence in ordering his commendations of
this book to proceed out of the mouth of the Reviewer.
the readers observing, and however causelesslie praejudiced, may invite him to
be conversant in that most excellent book, which in the midst of that gall
that drops from his pen, whose heart and hand were bent to blot it out of the
opinion of men, has by the providence of God such a Crystal stream of
commendation to the world, for Elo^ution, Reason, Devotion, for Imitable
essays of piety, wisdom, patience, and every virtue confessed; And he that
will not be swayed with one word without reason, has his Majesty's sense from
the mouth of his enemy, about the danger of the Covenant and the faction that
stands for it, And may take it for the timous burning of a dying martyr, and
have a care that among too many serpents and so few doves, his innocence be
not swallowed with the rest.

What follows may be worth His Majesty's notice, The Reviewers seasonable
advertishment to the King.
being the assertion of no other man then Mr. Baylie, not long since a
pretended commissioner for the Covenant. That the same hand that penned the 27
th. Chapter in the book entitled Eikon Basilike, (which he calls Episcopal,
but His Majesty knows very well to be Regal) did it on purpose to separate
him for ever from all his covenant subjects. And how K. Chapter 1. no Presbyterian
in heart no^ ^ongue at Newcastle and the Isl^ of Wight.
near that came to the heart, language, and writings of our late Sovereign,
let them who were best acquainted with his carriage and most intime affections
at Newcastle and in the Isle of Wight speak their conscience. For the two
former we have more auth^ntike care testimonies then the Reviewer, and the last
is demonstrative out of all the papers that passed from him. To lay aside for
the time those against which Mr. Baylie is, more maliciously, then
ignorantly, praejudic'd. His several His papers to Mr. Henderson against it.
printed letters to Mr. Henderson speak his sense about Presbytery at
Newcastle, and some what more at large may in due time, what he thought of it
at the Isle of Wight. These, with other undeniable evidences, may render the
Reviewer a mere Sceptike, if not rather a knight of the post unto the world.

How it concerns Kings when they take in hand Pallas targe^ to have the face
of No Bishop No King.
Episcopacie on the bosse, King James that had most of her wisdom, could best
tell. The experience whereof being too dear bought by his Martyr-sonne, and
commended in his Testament to our Sovereign, the Praelates need not take up
the old statuaries cunning to contrive it. To be sure Ovid. Met. lib. ^. sab. 1.
this both Perseus, or Presbyter, here paints a Gorgons head, on every page of
his book, and twists every line with a serpent, hoping to make stones and
stocks of his readers, who must submit to his authority in silence, and stand
fixed in what antike postures he assigns them. What ever some may do out of
ignorance and weakness, we hope the providence of God will keep the King out
of the Scottish Presbyters hands, and the breath of his mouth blow all such
flies and lice out of his quarters.

And thus much shall serve by way of answer or paraphrase upon what the
Reviewer has brought in apology for the Discipline of the Kirk.

In the next place he becomes a nimble The Reviewers false profession in
public contrary to conscience and vulgar knowledge.
advocate for the idol worship of the Covenant. Where I am glad to find him
acknowledging any such thing as reason framed by the University of Oxford
against it, having, not long since, heard this confident aver, (without a
blush as I take it) in his chamber-conventicle at the Hague (where not any one
that was present but knew what he said to be most notoriously false, except a
poor silly creature or two that might be decoyed in upon design) That not
any thing hitherto had been objected against the Covenant, whereas he could not
be ignorant then, more then now, that this, with many other learned and
rational tracts, had been long since published against it, and for ought I know
must stand unanswered to this day. Which affected ^alsitie so amused me and
others at that time, that had not some prudential motives restrained us, we
must have offered him some affront in the place. And at this it so praejudiceth
me against his credit, as I believe not a line in his book for which he brings
me no beter authority then his word. What he spoke then he has much ado to
refrain from printing now, only mollifies The (...) speech now printed in
effect.
it with his canting about the matter. To this day, he says, no man has showed
any error in the matter of the Covenant. I am sure not any clause in its
literal or mystical sense has escaped the discussion of those acute
Antagonists it has found: and what this chemical matter should be, that is of
so subtle an extraction, I can not guess. For the forming and taking it he
praetends a necessity their adversaries imposed which necessity was nothing
else but No necessity for the Scots to enter into a Covenant which is.
their own just icalousies and fears that an uncertain multitude, the
necessary instruments, and indeed sole slaves to do the work, could not be
kept constant to the cause with out the awful superstition of an oath. Which
false fire is pursued with a thunderclap from the pulpit, whence damnation's
daily threatened to the infringers. And being thus driven into an airie castle
which these engineers have fortified by the Mathematical subtlety of their
words, he says, neither fraud nor force shall reduce them, for they fear
forsooth No oath of God but the Devil.
the oath of God. Which God is no other then that Baal Berith, that Jupiter
Foederatus, to whom the Israelites made a shameful defection after Gidcons
death, Judge. 8. 33. 'Ethckan e'autois ton Baal diatheken, so the septuagint
renders it. They set up to themselves Baal the Covenant that is the false God
or Devil of the Covenant. And yet this Mirio puts it to the quaestion, and
seems to wonder Why any that love the King should hate the Covenant, the whole
No wonder why the lovers of the King are no Covenanters.
design and practice of which has been so apparentlie destructive to his
Royal Father and all the loyal subjects that he has. Nay with all it is too
well known, how many true The Cheat of the Covenant.
lovers of the King, but too deceitful lovers of themselves, who, through
fear or covetousness, hoping to praeserve their estates and liberties, have
been cosin'd into this courteous Covenant, and then by their jealous or wanton
masters, have been stripped naked, turned out to beg their bread, and regaine
their souls and credit as they could. So that this straight tie can in some
cases we see play fast and loose, and the strictness of it, whereof we have
had so sad an experiment, will be found only by the hands of the holy
leaguers (for such we know were the newnam'd Independents at first) to bind
Religion, Majesty, and Loyalty to the block, and then lay the axe to the
root of them all, and stifle them from repullulating if they can. Therefore
they that manage the conscience whether of Court, or City, or Country, do
well if they possess their Religious votaries with a particular full sense of
the inevitable misery that will follow them if they be catchd in this noose
and advise them to whip all such saucy beggars, such Whying Covenanters from
their gates.

The next task of the Reuiewers Engineer-ship is to draw an out work about
the open The Scot-Presbytirian open unkindnesse that is treason against the
late King.
unkindnesse (treason prettily qualified in the term) against the (observe he
says not our) late King, which he makes of so large a compass, that all the
Presbyterian credit he can raise will never be able to maintain it for an
hour: which this skillfull officer foreseeing, despair puts him first upon a
salie, where the Ghosts of Wick^iffe, and Husse, and Luther, and with a brazen
piece of falsehood, his Disciples are draw'n out to assault his dangerous enemy
in his trench. For (which he knows Bishops in other Reformed Churches.
as well as I can tell him) there are other parts of the Reformed world beside
England, and those of Luthers Disciples, that keep up Episcopacic The Revie^ers
in constancy.
to this day. And forgetting in part what he has said allreadie and minding
less, what he shall b^bble otherwhere about the business, he tells us here
it is the violence of ill advised Princes, which when he pleases, he makes the
Policy of the Bishops themselves that has kept up this limb of Antichrist,
he means the Episcopal order in England. Since the first Reformation whence
has come the perpetual trouble in our land the History of the Schismatical
Puritan^ will sufficiently satisfy any man that will search. And how the
Church and Kingdom are now at last come so near the ground the Disciplinarian
practices will evidence. But the Scottish Presbytery that gave the first kick
at the miter, and has since lift up the other leg against the Crown, may
chance to catch the fall in the end, having now much ado to light upon its
feet.

Having K. Chapter 1 never justified the Scottish contests.
made his ^ecreat he begins to endeavor the maintaining of his masterpiece by
degrees, and tell us, Their first contests stand justified this day by King and
Parliament in both Kingdoms Ans: And must so stand, I say not jufied, till
King and Parliament meet once again in either to consider, whether with out a
new ratification by their favor, your after contests make not a just
forfeiture of their gracious condescension to your first. His Majesty of ever
blessed memory has told you His charity and Act of Pacification forbids him
to reflect on Eiko^n Bas^like Chapter 13.
former passages. Which argues some such passages to have been as were not very
meritorious of his favor. And though his Royal charity may silence, it does
not justify your contests by that Act.

The borders of Scotland being as well His Majesty's as yours (though you keep
to your Presbyterian The King may bring an army to the Scottish borders.
style, which affords no propriety to others then themselves, and yields very
little community to Kings, the King, our borders) I hope it was free for him to
move toward them as he pleased. If your resistance to the Magistrates he
deputed made him for the security of his person come attended with an army
for his guard; or if the rod and axe could inflict no paenal justice by virtue
of the judge's word upon a banded company of miscreants at home, and therefore
sent abroad to crave the regular assistance of the sword; no laws of God nor
your Country dictates any just or necessary defense, which is nothing but an
unjustifiable rebellion: Nor can Dunce law A law above Dunce law.
so justify your meek lying down in your arms, but that, if the King would
have made his passage to you with his sword, you might have justly been by a
more learned law helped up with a halter about your neck.

The novations in Liturgy and Canons contrary neither to the laws of God nor
Scotland.
Religion were not such a world, but that two words, Liiurgie and Canons may
compass it. What was in them contrary to the laws of God has a blanke
margin still that requires your proof, and that any were to the laws of your
Country will never be made good, having the King and Lords of the Counsel, I
mean those of your Kingdom that did approve them.

The power in The Reviewers brag K. Chapter 1. gave the Scot^ too easy conditions.
your army to dissipate the Kings is but a little of Pyrgopolynices breath. The
easy conditions given you to retreat may be attributed to His Majesty's mercy
and averseness from blood, not to his apprehension of your power.

The Kings second coming toward you with an army He had good reason to raise a
secound army against them.
was upon no furious motion of the Bishops, who had no stroke in his Council
for war, but upon the fiery trial you put him to by that many flagrant
provocations, wherewith you and other incendiaries nearer home daily environed
him, who fearing the precedent accommodation by peace might afford respite for
a farther more particular discovery of the principal actours in and
contributers toward the late war, and expose many considerable brethren to a
legal trial, notwithstanding the agreement contracted; impatient ambition
having allreadie been too much impeded by observing the easy conditions you
mention made the first breach, and according to the right account first raised
a military power, which His Majesty had very good reason to suppress. The
success you had by your first impression upon part of His Majesty's Army at
New-bourne, and your easy purchase of the Town of New Castle was not such as
cleard the passage to London, The Scots success at New bourne opened not a
passage for them to London.
without the farther hazard of which you were too well paid for your stay in
Northumberland, and instead of a rod that was due, you carried too honorable a
badge at your backs of His Majesty's meekness, when the second time you
returned in peace.

What passed after your packing away The Pr. Scottish Rebellion copied by the
English.
to the raising of the new army you speak of you may read and blush, if you
have any grace, in the former part of His martyred Majesty's book, if you have
none, you may, as I believe you do, laugh in your slovenly sleeve to see your
prompt scholars come to so good perfection, and copy your own rebellion to
the life. The Bishops then were little at leisure to look abroad to any such
purpose, being happy if they could get an house for their shelter from the
threats and stones that flew very thick about their ears, the rabble rout at
London by that time being well informed what effectual weapons stones and
stools, and such like as fury on a sudden could furnish, had been against
black gowns and white sleeves at Edinburgh before.

That any army could at that time be raised, when the Kings K. Chapter 1 his
raising an army a sign of divine providence.
Forts, Magazines, Militia, Navy, were seizd into the hands of your Rebel
brethren, was a special mark of divine providence clear in so happy
success, as he that ran might then have read their ruin writ by the fingar of
God had nor the black cloud of our sins eclipsed that light, blotted out
that handwriting, and shour'd down vengeance upon our heads.

That such earnest and pitiful entreaties The Rebels faint in their faith
notwithstanding the revelations they pretend to.
should be made to strengthen the arm of flesh, by Gods people, in Gods cause,
after such divine revelation that this was the appointed time wherein Christ's
Kingdom was to be exalted on earth, that the Saints should flourish, laugh,
and sing at the downefull of that man of sin, etc. Is a note me thinks that
spoils all the harmony of the rest*

That upon such earnest entreaties the Scots The Presb. Scots coming in no
condition of the peace
were obliged to come in is not to be found among all those easy conditions
made and their double former returning in peace.

Their fear of a third Their guilt made them fear a third war.
war to pass over their brethrens carcasses to themselves is a strong
argument of their guilt, that their advise and some other assistance had passed
over the late agreement made between His Majesty and them to promote that
horrid rebellion against him.

That so many intercessions Their work of supererogation in inter^eding.
with the King for a moderate and reasonable accommodation had been used by
them, was a relic of Popery they kept notwithstanding the reformation they
had made, and they did truly supererogate in that work, no law of the three
Kingdoms (I take it) making them umpires between the King and his subjects,
nor is it yet revel'd to the world what divine authority they had (as was
pretended in their Remonstrance) to come in the name of our Lord and Master
Their Remonstrance.
Jesus Christ, to wa^ne the King that the guilt which cleav'd so fast to his
throne and soul was such, as if not time^ie repented would involve him and his
postcriti^ under the wrath of the everliving God.

For how moderate, how reasonable They mediate for no reasonable accommodation.
accommodation they mediated appears in the 19 propositions, to the substance
of every one of which their unreasonable brethren adhaered to the end.

That they were at any Were never slighted nor rejected.
time slighted and rejected is a mere calumny of the Reviewer', he would have
told us when, and where, if he could. That al they asked was not granted, Were
justly denjed.
was upon unanswerable reasons, which His Majesty rendered in his public
Declarations about the Treaties, etc.

That they and their fainting Covenants the common road for factions.
brethren were so easily persuaded to enter into a Covenant together is no
great mervaile, His Majesty tells them. Solemn leagues and Covenants......
are the common road used in all factions and powerful perturbations of state
or Church..... by such as ay^e to subdue all to their own will and power,
under the disguizes of holy combinations.

The express articl^s in the Covenant, for the pr^servation of Royalty, etc.
are spun so fine, and woven so thin, as that white vail^ can not hide the face
of that black rebellious devil that is under it.

Whereof they being conscious that had been very well acquainted with the
mystery, no less then an whole Remonst. about the Treaty in the Isle of wight.
army together, conduct us to the perfect beholding the sweet countenance of
this late Baal Berith as he lies. We crave (say they) leave to believe that an
accommodation with the King, in the way and term^s you are upon, or any at all,
as the case now stands, that shall implie his restitution; or shall not provide
for his subjection to trial and judgment, would first not be just before God
or man, but many ways evil. Secondly, would not be safe. 1. The Covenant
engaging to the matters of religion, and public interests primarilie and
absolutely (mark that) with out any limitation, and after that to the
preservation of the Kings person and authority, but with this restriction,
(mark this too) viz. In the preservation of the true religion and liberties of
the Kingdoms. In this case, though a Cavallier might make i^ a question, yet
who will not rationallie resolve it, That the preceding matters of religion and
the public interest, are to be understood as the principal and supreme matters
engaged for, and that of the Kings person and authority as inferior and
subordinate to the other. 2. That where persons joining to make a mutual
covenant, if the absent parties shall oppose it and the matters contained in it,
surely that person excludes himself from any claim to any benefit therefrom
while he continues so refusing and opposing. So that you see notwithstanding
the express articles for The Covenant destructive to all the Royal line.
the preservation of Royalty, His Majesty may be brought to his trial, and
all his posterity too, when the holy brethren can catch them, be murdered at
their own gates according to the express sense of several articles in the
Covenant for maintenance of religion, and liberty. And what unkindnesse was
here in the Scots to their King? Besides, whosoever will take the pains to
compare The charge against K. Chapter 1. taken out of the Pr. Scots Remonstrance.
The Presb. Scots wicked Impostours, no messeangers of Christ.
the particulars in the Scottish Remonstrance which they brought in their hands
when they came in upon the Covenant, with those in the accursed Court
proceeding against His late Royal Majesty may be able to do Dorislaw, Steel,
Cook, etc. some little courtesy in their credit and plead for them that they
drew not up, but only transscribed a charge brought long since from Edinburgh
to London. And yet what unkindnesse was here in the Scots to their King?

There is yet one thing more whereof upon this mention of Remonstrance and
Covenant I can not but advertize my reader having but lightly touched upon it
before. That whereas the Scots in their Covenant confess before God and the
world many sins whereof they were guilty, and for which they desire to be
humbled. Viz. That they had not as they ought valued the inaestimable benefit
of the Gospel. That they had not labored for the purity and power thereof;
That they had not endeavored to receive Christ in their hearts (mark that)
nor to walk worthy of him in their lives; These men tell the King in their
remonstrance, That they come in the name of their Lord and Master Jesus Christ,
to warn him about the guilt of I know not what sins they there heap
together upon his soul. A very likely story to believe, That Christ had sent
them into England with this covenanting paper in their hands; who had shut him
out of doors very lately, and would not receive him into their hearts.

Notwithstanding all the pretended glorious success, obtained more by The
Kings party not subdued when His Majesty left Oxford.
the name then exploits of the Scottish army, the opposite party was not so
fully subdued, but that the multitude of garrisons, (beside Newarke which
might have cost them dear) surrendered after His Majesty's leaving Oxford make
a great flame in the Burningbush which your zealous friend John Vicars has
kindled.

You will hardly persuade any your judicious comparers of this your preface
The King not necessitated to cast himself upon the Scots.
with the many treacherous practices you had used, that His Majesty in the
greatest necessity would not have chosen rather to have cast himself into the
merciless yet more merciful arms of the sea, then without the strongest
deliberate engagement into the perfidious and more fluctuating army of the
Scots. Nor yet had all your underhand oaths and promises prevaild for the
unhappie credulity of a most pious and prudent King, if some Better credit in
all likelihood, had not interposed it self, which it may be was more deceived
then it deceived. Therefore your story about London, Lin, Holland and France
is He had promised all reasonable satisfaction before.
a greater circuit then his Majesty took in his designed journey to Newarke.
The promise of sati^faction that carried him thence to New- Castle might have
long before been his conduct to London if Religion and Reason might have been
permitted to go along which him.

That he gave not what you expected, that is to say his Royal soul to the
Devil, his old oaths might very well hinder him, for I pray tell me why a King
His Religious adhe rence to his old oaths.
as well as a Rebel may not fear the oath of God.

It is not unlikelie that the prime leaders of the English army were at that
time weary of your company, who filled the best of their quarters, and did
least of your service, Nor that you were out of heart as well as reputation by
the signal victories to a miracle all most obtained against you, by, not your
companion good Sir James Grahame, but the Thrice renowned Marquess Montrosse,
whose proceeding had been most successful and happy, and may they still be
for His Majesty's affairs.

If there were such divisions in Scotland, what could better compose them The
King^ presence migh: best have composed the divisions in Scotland.
then the personal presence of the King? but this was not according to the
Kingdoms liberty meant in the third article of the covenant, In the
preservation of which, that is, so far as you thought fit ^o make consistent
with which, and in the defense of what they call the tr^c Religion, which you
took for granted he never intended to complie with, you had sworn to defend
the Kings Majesty's person, and that is one of the forenam'd express ar^icles
to that purpose. The hazard of a war weighed heavier in the balance of your
counsels then the hazard of his Royal person in the hands of his
irreconcilable enemies* forgeting that the work of righteousness in
performance Isai. 32. 17.
of your promises would have been a more lasting peace, and the effect of that
righteousness, quietness and assurance for ever.

The sectarian Army which you scarce durst have called so at that time, had
His garrisons surrendered upon the counter. feit professions of the Pr. Scots.
otherworke then to go into Scotland but that your hollow-hearted professions
to the King, who was in no very indifferent case to make sure conditions of
advantage to himself, made him order the surrender of his garrisons into their
hands. So you saved His Majesty from the rack to bring him to the scaffold*
And you with your Brother-Presbyters escaped the like torture then, but if you
go on to stretch your conscience till it crack, we shall see as well the
punishment as the guilt of that murder glowing at your heart.

After two such accidental confessions wherein your Army demonstrativelie They
ob^ine no terms satisfactorie to the King.
showed themselves either false foolishlie credulous or cowards at best you
reckon up several conveniences of His Majesty's being in one of his houses
near London, when it had been ever before pretended to the poor deluded people
that he was to be brought to his Parliament in London. And this you did upon
the faith of that Parliament, which you say kept up a sectarian Army against
you. A very good argument to prevail with you for their credit. Upon such
terms as should be satisfactorie to the King, particularly mentioned in the
paper deliverd to the King by the Commit of Estates upon the 15 of May 1646.
and noted in that of June 8. to the speaker of the House of Peers, subscribed*
By his affectionate friends and humble servants, Lauderdail, Iohnston, Henry
Kennedie (your own potent good Lord, etc.) That if* His Majesty should delay
to go about the readiest ways, and means to satisfy both his Kingdoms,
they would be necessitated for their own exoneration to acquaint the Committee
of both Kingdoms at London that a course might be taken by joint advic^ of
both Kingdoms, for attempting the just ends expressed in the solemn league
and Covenant By which His Majesty was to bring satisfaction to them and you,
not (as you say) to receive terms satisfactorie to himself. Wherein because
he made not what have was required, you exonerated your self of all the malice
you had unto his person and made an end of his days, which was just the end
you aimed at in the Covenant.

This being the true case, you ask, Whether it were any injustice? Yes, to
Their injustice, unkindnesse imprudence
imprison his person by confining him to an house, and to weaken his power by
robbing him of his garrisons, Whether any unkindnesse? Yes, to give up your
native King, who you confess cast himself on your protection, to them who
were so far from affording him any of his palaces near London, that it was
death for any man to harbor him in his house. What imprudence it was, let the
best politician of you all speak, because ablest to judge; Or the worst, who
by this time can evidence, how besotted you were to your utter disrepute and
destruction; What advantage at that time you had to lay the fairest color upon
the foulest fact that ever you committed and win the world, by an aftergame,
into an high opinion of your trust; What, to gain the length of your line in
the liberty of Religion or laws; And, as for wealth and honor, you might,
upon such a merit, in all likelihood, have had, what the vastest ambitious
Helluo could ask, or three luxuriant Kingdoms could yield you. Whereas now
you have ripped up your false hearts, and throw'n your guilt in the face of the
sun; so that the sound of your rebellion is gone into all lands, and your
treachery travailes in a poverb^ even to the ends of the earth; Your Religion
has many times since struggled for life, which the mercy, or temporizing
subtilitie of your sectarian enemy has preserved, and your laws have taken
their liberty from his sword; He deteines at this time the wages of your
wickedness in his house, and your honor not long since kissed his foot, and
by four Commissioners humbly waited on him to his doors.

But you come to a closer question, Whether the deliverie of the Kings person
Their deliverie of the Kings person was a selling him to his Enemies.
were a selling of him to his enemies? Ans: It may be such for all that you say
against it. Your Masters are not always wont to pay your arreares upon single
service, I hinted even now that your miscariages of late have cut you off a
good sum that is behind, which by Ordinance of Parliament is to be disposed
otherwise.

Let the capitulation have been in reference to what it will, and the Act of
what you call the English Parliament exclude the disposal of the King; we know
that was the subject of many papers that passed between you, which were penned
with so much collusion and cunning, that any broker might see a bargain was
driving between crafty merchants, till, having clapped hands, the one brought
his rich commodity to Holm^bic, and the other paid his money at Non-Castle.

The unexpected evil (for I must alter the number and admit of none but the
They might have prevented the murder that followed.
murder of the King) that followed, which no mortal eye could foresce any
mortal heart might fore fear, and the well affected brethren have prevented,
if they pleased. The Armies rebellion is very nonsignificant language from your
pen, unless figurativelie expressing the vengeance of God upon that rebellious
city, which with her golden cup had made the Land drunk, and the Nations mad
with the abundance of her wine. Ier. 51. 7.


What you call destroying the Parliament was but the plucking up and throwing
out of the way that rotten root, the stock and fairest branches whereof had
been cut down by the keen axe of a violent vote long before.

How ready these Scots (which the Reviewer must vindicate) were to the They
were not readi^ to the utmost of their power.
utmost of their power to have prevented the mischief in the murder of the
King, and what hazard they ran of what was dearest to them appears by their
have to come in to Duke Hamiltons party, and the large contributions they gave
toward the raising an army to that purpose. To make good the proverb. Murder
will out, the next words implie the Reviewers confession. The hard measure they
had often received from the King stuck then in their stomakes, and An old
grudge the reason why they were not.
would not out till now, with their malice impostumated in his blood. That they
did not in time, and unanimouslie stir to purpose for that end, they are
indeed to answer it to God, who were the true authors thereof. And who they
were let the Scottish pulpits (I mean not their Presbyters) speak out. The
innocence of the Church is not cleard in the following treatise to be so much
as Pilates, they can not wash their hands in it, nor their mouth. They made the
S. Matthew. 27. 24.
tumults they never asked what evil he had done, and this Royal bloudwill be
upon them and upon their children.

But here comes up a second part of their venomous vomit (for though The Kings
not granting all demands.
they cast the temptation upon the serpent, they charge the original sin upon
the King) The King gave not his good subjects satisfaction by granting all
their demands which they found most necessary and due, This they say [by the
mouth of the Reviewer] was the cause of the many miseries, and if there be any
connection, was the cause why they stirred not in time, and what is the meaning
of this but Caiphas's expedit? It is very expedient very necessary he die for
these people, and (thanks good Presbyter Scot) pay this debt of satisfaction
in his blood Which conclusion is no sooner dispatched, but like very logical
Rebels, they fall presently on making a new syllogism, and prepare a second
argument They bear the like grudge against K. Chapter 2.
of the axe. The very same cause ties up this day the hands of Covenanters --
could they have (that is they can not have) the young King to join with them
in their covenant, to quit his unhappie Bishops, to lay aside his formal and
dead liturgy and the satisfaction to his good subjects which they find
necess^rie and due; He has drawn some what beside his limbs from the loins
of his father; though the serpent has not reached him the fruit of the
forbiden tree, he has transmitted as much malignance in In libro Cap. 1-
the bark. Ergo when they get him into their hands (which God forbid) it is but
talking a little with the Pharisees and Priests, taking the money according to
the covenant, They have made the premises and may then, sit at home with their
hands in their pockets, being well assured the conclusion must follow, quia
expedit, It is very expedient another man, because another King (which the hand
of heaven powerfullie prevent.) The Reviewers politic flaterie.


To draw him into the net, this decoy ducke courts His Majesty with more truth
then good meaning; for he puts it into a parenthesis I'observe, that when
hereafter it shall be left out, the Scottish Reviewer and Remonstrances may not
jarre in their expressions. [ A lovelie, hopeful, and promising Prince, for
all natural endowments, as this day breathes in Europe, or for a long time has
swayed a S^epter in Britaine] And yet this lovelie Prince without taking the
Covenant etc. shall not breath nor sway the scepter in Scotland.

With which and some other ungracious principles a nest of these unluckie
Northeme birds did lately besiege him, not in his cabin, [for his fathers
work lay upon their hands, when he was there they wanting then the iron
instrument to cut the silver cord of his life] but in his Royal bedchamber at
Ecclesiast. 12. 6.
the Hague. And going home, it should seem by the weeping cross, they and the
good people, because they can doc no more, sit down with mournful eyes, till
occasion be administered that by Dunce law (which holds as well against the
son as the Father) they can doc no less then lie down in their arms for
their just and necessary defense. But they hold here and it is time I think,
for they have transgressed to^ far the bounds of an epistle.

CHAPTER I. The Scots bold address with the Covenant to K. Chapter 2 Their party
inconsiderable. The Bishops method, language, and matter asserted. The
quaestion in controversy unawares granted by the Reviewer. The
unseasonablenesse of the Scots coming to the King at the Hague.

WHile Six walking Images, the pretended Commissioners of the Church and
Kingdom of Scotland, that is to say, a selected pack of the most zealous
disciplinarian faction, which had fairlie wrought the destruction of both,
were, with the greatest impudence that ever was heard of, pressing into His
Majesty's sad and most disconsolate retirement at the Hague, when he held back
the face of his Job 26. 9. Job 16. 16.
throne, and had spread his cloud upon it, When his face was foul with
weeping, and on his eyelids the shadow of death; While, with the highest
cruelty that could be, instead of condoling his most lamentable afflictions,
beyond the tyranny of Jobs comforters, they were going about not only to lay
open in his sight, but to thrust violently that bloody axe (the Covenant I
mean) which had cut off his Royal Fathers head, into his hands; This reverend
and resolute Prelate steps in between them and the Court, throws in their eyes
the guilt not only of their late actions, but of their old Antimonarchical as
well as An^iprelaticall government it self, not so much hoping to amuze them,
or stop them in their progress to the King (whose adamantine face, and
elephantine feet, he knew would break through all the briars and thorns that
the hand of truth could cut out of that Northern wilderness of error, and
lay, though never so thick, in their way) as to set the mark of that beast in
their forhead, which destroys root and branch of Religion and Laws, of Regal
and Apostolical government, yea and of the liberty of the people, that all
well affected to any of these or themselves might have seasonable warning to
get out of their way, or gather strength to hunt this wild monster out of the
world.

Which accurate Remonstrance of the Bishops carrying with it the The seasonable
success of the Bishops Warning.
highest authority of their Assembly acts provincial and general, of the
concurrent sense in the writings of many their deified Divines prevailed with
all impartial and advertend persons to bring this glittering Godesse of the
Scotsh discipline to the touch, to discover all the dirt and dross whereof
every limb of her is made, and reduced many, her before incautious worshipers,
to a better practice of their duty, and opinion of the Catholic truth. So
that the shrine trade being very likely to go down, and the craftsmen's
gain to fail, this Demetrius, as it hapens, at a distance from the great
company of his brethren, advises only with one of his tribe and 3. or 4.
the idola^rous worshipers of his imaginations, and cries aloud in print Magna
est* Diana, Great is Diana of the Scots. yea, so great he makes her in the very
first page of his book as if she were Queen of heaven and earth, no other
divine providence but hers able to recover* as he speaks, the woefully
confounded affairs of the King, and (...) other nations hands upon the earth
but the Antiprelatical be the instruments to effect it.

Whereas they are at this time the most inconsiderable faction in His Majesty's
Dominions, being kept at a bay by the present tyranny in England, having such
distractions and divisions among themselves, The Scottish Presbyterians an
inconsiderable party.
so intermingled with a Royal and Independent party, that let them talk or
write what they will* they can make no muster roll of their own strength, and
durst they speak out their desires, or could their guilt permit them an
assurance of security and protection, they would with all their hearts take
sanctuary in the person, as well as hitherto they have done an abused
authority from the name, of their King, and cast themselves with their
covenant, and their claims, to all former concessions, even touching their
discipline, at his foot. But desperatione ultim^ in furorem animus convertitur,
instead of that they turn despair into madness, hoping only for some
miracle to be wrought by the hand of God, that they may have company in Sen
Con^rov. Job 8.
their ruin. Naturali quodam deploratae mentis affectu morientibus,
gratissimum est commori. But we are told the hopes of such hypocrites shall
perish, That they shall be cut of, and their trust be but a spiders web.

Having done his cry, he begins to chop logike with the Bishop, The Bishops
method apposite to his matter.
complains of his method, though most apposite to the purpose, calls for
Scripture, Fathers, Reason, as if disciplinarian practical instances required
the strength of any of the three, unless the virtuous precedents of Father
John of Leyden, or Kniperdolin should come in, as they may in judgment against
the Scots. He admits of the His proof (...) by tenets
Bishops proofs (and I am very glad he does) butias by (...), belonging little
or nothing to the main question: Whereas if The overthrowing the rights of
Magistrates to convocate Synods, etc. Chapt. 2. Subjecting the supreme to their
censures. chap. 5. Cheating him of his civil power in order to religion. chapter
7. be but by tenets; Their challenging this exorbitant power by divine right.
chapter 8. That the exercise of it is hurtful to all orders of men. chap. 12.
Belong little or nothing to the maine questions about the discipline, it should
seem we must climb heaven for the height of the controversy, and see whether
it will suffer God any more then the King, to sit sure in his throne, and have
the supreme government of the world. The heap of calumni^s he mentions is a
faithful collection of historical narrations, which requires not the
credulity of the simple, but the search of sedulous people, if distrusted, who
may take the other books in their way, and satisfy themselves about what
passages he pretends to be detorted.

If any of the Bishops allegations* are coincident with them in Lysimachus His
allegations confirmed by others.
Nicanor and Isachars burden, they have two witnesses at least to quit them at
the bar, and need not stand to the mercy of Judge Baylie for their pardon.
Whatsoever were the sufferings of the authors Mr. Corbet and Mr. Maxwell the
Reverend Archbishop of The Reviewers rash and uncharitable judgment about the
ends of Mr. Corbes and Archbishop Maxwell.
Towmond, truth and integrity ought not to be danted, The hand of heaven is
not always guided by the mouth, nor Gods judgments discernd by the eye of
the Disciplinarian brethren, though most commonly we hear of no less then
the murder of the best men, when they make themselves dispensers of his
punishments. I am credibly informed that Mr. Corbet was murderd by the Irish,
the Archbishop, stripped naked and left desperately wounded, but by Gods mercy
recovered and since died a natural death. What spirit it is that has co^ind
Mr. Baylie into this uncharitable belief of Gods strange punishments in their
ends, or rather framed contrary to his conscience this rash judgment in his
mouth I leave to the Christian reader to conjecture. Had the like befallen any
couple of his brethren, he would have writ with their blood some red letters in
the Calendar, and made them currentlie pass for two Martyrs of the discipline.
If what the Bishop and they have jointlie published be His vanity in
mentioning the frequent impressions of his books
fully aswered by Mr. Baylie in his book printed at London, Edinburgh and
Amsterdam, because the weight of the press adds every time more strength to
his arguments, for I know not else to what purpose he mentions the several
impressions) he might have saved this labor of Reviewing, and published a
fourth editon of it at Delfe.

After so much praejudice the Bishop is beholding to you for his hearing, and
since you have tasted the sweetness of his spirit, and soberne^ His language
more bitter then the Bishops and his have greater to vent it. No regard wanting
in the Bishop to Scripture nor reverence to th Reformed Churches.
of his language in his first page, you do well to spit out the bitterness of
your own in a mad epistle before your book.

If any regard had been wanting in his Lordship to the passages of Scripture
whereupon you build your Antiepiscopal tenets, the quotations would have been
some what more numerous in your Review. That no reverence should be required to
the harmony of the Reformed he takes care in the third paragraph of his book
where he says he hopes there is nothing whereof he convicteth you but will be
disavowed...... by all the Protestant Churches in the world, which it should
seem they may do and yet agree with you in the maine of your discipline, for
you called all those but bytenets even now. That they do so beyond a non
admission, to a rejection of our Episcopacie as Antichristian (between which as
I take it there is some difference) I desire you to tell us where.

What respect the Bishop bears to the Civil Magistrate and laws, appears
best by his vindication of just authority to them both against Nor respect to
the Magistrate and laws.
your disciplinarian encroachments. His Lordship does not forget by what
authority your discipline is established though the extravagance of your
practices stands not justified by that which you pretend to. If your rule does,
it does not quit it self of censure, in reference to its reception otherwhere,
because vested with the power of a civil law in Scotland; nor is that law
unalterable when a future Parliament may take into consideration the
inconveniences that accompany it. The Bishop need not be grieved* being as
ignorant as your self (and you are enough, as King knowing as you would seem)
that His Majesty does not at all question the justice, because he does not the
legalitie of these sanctions. Therefore his Lordship may think on, and speak
on when he pleases more about this bussinesse, and yet vouch with out a mark
loyalty in his face; nor (for ought you draw from him) need his veins be so
empty, nor his stomach so sharp set as to eat his former words, much less
be so desperate as to burn his whole book, the consistence of it with his
toughts, and professions laying no slander upon the King, and his Royal Father
of ignorance, and injustice, the one having The Bishop no slanderer of the King
no^ his Royal Father.
established, the other offering to establish by your civil laws such a
Church discipline as is mentiond, both having done it upon most unreasonable
importunity, without any known inclination to, or approbation of the same,
Farther, what a slander this would prove, upon your grounds (beyond the
irreverence toward any actions of a King) which is haled hither in a forced
consequence by the cords of your malice may be guessed by the Royal Father's
confession in his solitude. If any shall impute my yiedling to them [the Scots]
as my failing, and Eikon Basilikon chapter 17.
sin, I can easily acknowledge it; but that is no argument to do so again,
or much more For the Royal son, His Majesty now being* you say, he The
Reviewers seasonable advertissement about the Kings late offer, to the Scots.
has not yet gone beyond an offer, therefore His Martyred Fathers poenitential
acknowledgement of his failing, and sin joined to your seasonable admonition,
That there can be no such actual concession, but upon the peril of ignorance,
or huge injustiee, except he ownes it as well to be the religious dictate of his
conscience, as a poltike indulgence upon necessity of state, may probably
move him at leisure to deliberate, and whatsoever he shall determine to do in
this, (wherein God direct him for the best) as well for his own sake, as the
saftie of his Kingdoms make him cautious hereafter how the importunity of the
mission gets ground upon his goodness, when all his grants shall be so
publikelie registered as conscientious acts, and, by such barbarious pens,
delivered to posterity as sealed with his soul.

The Bishops presumption in that which follows is none but what No resh
presumption in the Bishop.
from the grounds of modest Christian charity may be raised, viz. That a
knowing and a just King (such as your own character renders him) will
acknowledge that contrary to the dictates of his conscience, which is proved
contrary to the laws of God, and man, And this may be proclaimed, if not
prohibited without being his Confessor or taking it from the Clerk of the
closet in any whisper. Nor does your mistrust of reports bear authority
enough, to make His Majesty's conscience pass for Presbyterian, no more then
that for a command, or imposition by law which was by your petitionarie
violence ravished from his passive innocence into a grant. So that you see in
the very beginning you stumble at a straw, and being to find somewhat worse
in your way, you were best life your legs higher in your progress. The Scots
endeavors to impose their discipline upon England.


How much the Disciplinarian Scots have contributed from the beginning toward
the alteration of Religion in England, is too large a story to be inserted in
this dispute. Their old account the Rt* Reverend Archbishop Bancroft cast up
in his Dangerous positions, and English Scotizing Discipline. their later
arreares ruu very high in the history of our times, beginning with his
religious and learned successor, The loss of whose head is not more to be
imputed to the peoples clamours, then the Scottish papers. Whatsoever they did
before, I hope they can not deny themselves to be one of the horned beasts,
which together with their English brethren make the supporters of the
Presbyterian Rebels scutcheon in the Coveriant. This in their remonstrance
upon their last inroad into England, when their fainting brethren with the
cause were giving up the ghost, they tell the King plainly they shall
zealouslie and constantly in their several vocations endeavor with their
estates and lives to pursue and advance. This pursuance was against the King
and Bishops, which with the Convocation of divines are the true and full
representatives of the Church of England. The assembly of Divines were but
locusts and caterpillars brought together at Westminster by a Northern wind.
The laws of England convocate no such creatures nor in such a manner. King and
Parliament were mere names, had then, and there, no real being, and so no
breath to such a purpose, nor those in the two Houses afterward more then the
heads on the top of them in any politic capacity to ordain the abolition of
Episcopacie. Beside, what the Assembly did deliberate and debate, poor
mechanike people it is very well known'n they did as daily laborers, and
sacrilegious, hirelings, spend the thread of their time in your service, and
paid the price of their souls for a sequestration or two the Covenanting
brethren's pillage of the Church. So that if they began the song, you know by
whom they were paid for their pains, and if they danced not after your pipe,
poor scraping wretches they came at your call, and howsoever you were in a
medley together, to be sure your Covenanting Devil had got you all into a
circle, and will better distinguish you when he calls to you for his reckoning.
But, by your favor good Sir, His Majesty kept out, K. Chapter 1. in no harmony
with the Presbyterians.
and for the very three years you mention told you plainly he would make one
in the practike harmony of the Catholic Church. That permission (for it was
no more) necessity extorted, and though he could not at that time get you all
into Bedlam, he thought in three years you would pipe and dance your selves
weary and then be content to give way to a better solemnity of the Cathedral
music to come in. In the mean time estates and lives engaged in the
advancement of the Covenant by the sword, the end thereof being to setle
discipline, was me^ing with and imposing upon our Church. Quod erat
demonstrandum.

The Bishop you see gives a shrewd guess who they are you endeavor All
Protestants implied to be Erastians as well as the Episcopal by Mr. Baylie.
to brand with the name of Erastians, and how all Protestant Churches, even
such as are not Episcopal, must be beholding to you for that title because they
come not up to the rigor of your Discipline. Wherein Erasttus flaterd the
Magistrate to the prejudice of the just rights of the Church, concernd you
as well to prove as to mention, and then to have draw'n a parallel of the like
flaterie in the Bishop. Your doubting argues you ignorant or negligent, and
confirms my belief that you have travailed as little in Erastus's doctrines as
his ways, and gone no farther then the title of his book. What His Lordship
asserts about the supremacy of the Civil Magistrate, and Ecclesiastike
jurisdiction derived from thence is but what he and all his brethren have
sworn to, and not one of the late Bishops retracted who claimed Episcopacie by
divine righs, nor were they at daggers drawing with that horrible word Erastian
Caesaro-papisme; having a far more monstrous creature, called
Scoto-Presbytero-Papisme, to encounter. Our laws are the same as well to the
latter as the elder Bishops, and if their subjection to them must be accounted
such an error, the next pedlars pack that you open we may look to find
Christianity bundell'd up into a sect. The Bishop has more charity in him
then to become an accuser of his friends, and so much ingenuitie as to hear
your sense, not only speak his own about their writings, which when you
bring in any particular instance showing them to join with the most rigid*
Presbyterians in opposing Erastus about the Magistrates power, you may look
for your answer

Here the Reviewer, I can not say for want of a pare of spectacles The Reviewer
not acquainted with the late controversy between us and the Papists.
(for who is more blind then he that will not see) is pleased to over look
the whole body of the Bishops charge against them, and instead of quiting
himself to any purpose, recriminates only upon other men's scores, having; as
it seems, been very slenderly acquainted with the late controversies between
the Papists and us, and not sounded the depth of the question, as it was stated
by our later most learned writers, particularly that most glorious martyr the
Right Reverend Archbishop of Canterbury with the rational and subtle Mr.
Chillingworth, who between them having cleared the well of that dirt which
defiled commonly the fingars of them that went to draw water at it before,
made the face of truth appear at the botome to any that came impartiallie to
behold it. But the Bishop mentioning nothing hearebout, I have no authority
farther to enlarge, being obliged only to put Mr. Baylie in mind that in his
next Review he give account to the world, Why the Scottish Presbytery comes not
into the harmony of all Protestants both Lutharans and Calvinists, who give
unto the English Episcopal Church the right hand of fellowship and why he and
his later Brethren out do their forefathers* who durst not condemn her either
as defective in any necessary point of Christian piety, or redundant in any
thing that might virtuallie or by consequence overthrow the foundation. The No
Canterburian design but what was forged at Edenburg.
Canterburian design was forged at Edinburgh into a pass for the Scots to
come over the borders. The Prelatical party might charitablie wish, but never
rationallie hope to see all Christian Churches united in truth and love, so
long as the perverse Presbytery confines all Religion to it self. For
whatsoever the blew caps came in, we know when they went out they carried many
vvainloades of somevvhat else beside the spoil of the blacke-caps
reconciliation with Rome, and so long as such booty is to be had, they want
more power, then will, to set up a new controversy in England. But while they
are thinking of that, I must put them in mind of what we have in hand, and
notwithstanding Mr. Baylies pretense assure him King James, who had trouble
enough with them, makes good upon his own experience, that every nicitie u a
fundamental among them, and every toy takes Basilikdor.
up as great a dispute, as if the Holy Trinity were questioned...... De
minimis Politiae Ecclesiasticae quaestiunculis tantum excitant turbarum ac si
de sacrosancta Trinitate ageretur. The Scot^ heretofore gave no so bad language
to the English Bishops. 1. Pet. 5. 2


As touching your answer to the last charge, you cunningly omit what is found
in the letter, a word at least of approbation to the office of Episcopacie, in
that Bishops are called guides, or leaders of Christ's flock^, wherein a
superintendence, Prelacie, or precedence is own, they being Pastorum Pastores,
for by the flock there is mean'd the inferior Ministry, not Laity,
otherwise that text of St. Peter is unfitlie applied, Feed the flock of
Christ, which is committed to your charge, caring for it not by constraint
e'piscopountes mi a'nagkastos [e'piscopountes is being Bishops over it] where
a'nagkastos must relate to the Ministers who were constrained to wear the cap,
surplice, and tippet, or else be deprived of all Ecclesiastical function as
your Assembly complains at the very beginning of the letter. Yet had they writ
no more then you produce, and had been of the same mind with you now, it would
follow necessarily that you acknowledge several members of Antichrist
Ministers of the word, reverend Pastors and brethren of the Kircke. Which give
me but under your hand in your next. My Lord of Derrie I presume will use you,
as his professed brother very kindly, and trouble you no more about that
business. I must add this; Mr. Knox, as furious otherwise as he was, before
Queen Elizabeth's time when as your Historian relates in his life, K. Edward VI.
offered him a Bishoprike, he refused it with a grave severe [yet not so severe]
speech saying the title of Lordship and great state had quid commune cum
Antichristo, somewhat common with Antichrist, he said not the office of an
English Bishop was Antichristian, nor his person a limb of Antichrist himself.

What the same Assembly said or did about the Archbishop of Though they acted
enough against their Bishops a^ ^me.
St. Andrews was in the midst of their freanzie, when, as by their actions may
be judged, they had already made good what they threatened, and were become
subjects or slaves to the tyranny of the Devil, Whose title their successors,
have these last ten years renewd, and paid a greater homage then ever, to that
Lord.

What you suppone is a grant of the question, That some 80. years ago the
Scots might admit the Proiestant Bishops tolerable in England, the law being
still the same upon which they are founded, and if their practice be not, which
is more then you prove, whatsoever it may detract from their persons, it
derogates no thing from the continuance of their office. Neither has your
inspection been so accurate of its nature, but that like unskillfull
physicians, ye have cast away Ierr. 8. 22.
that balm of Gilead whereby the health of the daughter of Gods people must be
recovered, and like ignorant simplers, have throw'n over the hedge for a
noxious weed that Sovereign plant which God ordained for the perpetual service
and sanitie of his Church.

As for those crimes which you mention, though you will never be The crimes
alleged not the grounds of K, Chapter 1. his concessions against Episcopacle in
Scotland
able to make them good against the Reverend Prelates of any the three
Kingdoms, yet for shame say not for those you got the consent of the King to
condemn, kill and bury in your country the sacred order of Episcopacie in
that Church. His Majesty having not expressed the least word or syllabe to
that purpose. The most that ever he yielded was this. For it should be
considered that Episcopacie was not so rooted, and settled there [in Scotland]
as it is here [in England] nor I (in that respect) so strictly bound to continue
it in that Kingdom as this: for what I think in my judgment best, I may not
think so absolutely necessary for all places, and at all times. Not so
rooted and settled, not so absolutely necessary implies no act of everting the
foundations both of Religion and Government etc. nor can such an act be so
pleasing to Kings, nor that order, which is wholelie employed therein, win so
much upon their affections and judgments as to make them profess to the world
they think it best, as you see our King of blessed memory has done.

When England thereafter, as you term it, did root out that unhappie plant,
Episcopacie in England not put down by a legal Assembly, and Parliament
they danced after the Scottish pipe, though England was neither in that thing,
called an assembly, nor in any full and free Parliament that did it. They were
but a few rotten members, that had strength enough then to articulate their
malice in a vote, but have since given up the ghost being cut down by the
independencie of the sword, and their presbytery with them, for a Stinking
weed throw'n over the hedge, or Severu's wall, into Scotland, where they, and
their blew-bottle brethren are left to lie unpittied on the dunghill together.
The rest of the Reformed Churches otherwhere did never cast out, what they
never had, such an happy plant as regular Episcopacie in their grounds, those
that have (as some such I have told you there are) carefully keep it. The one
part has been more wise in their actions, the other more charitable to us in
their words. Let the Scots applaud, or clap their hands when they please, there
is an act behind, the plays' not yet done.

CHAPTER II. The Scottish Discipline overthrowes the right of Magistrates to
convocate Synods, and otherwise to order Ecclesiastical affairs.
THe Bishop does not forget his challenge about the Magistrates right in The
Reviewer knows not good logike when he meets with it.
convocating Synods. But if Mr. Baylie's eyes be too old to see a good,
argument in an enthymem, let him take it out of an explicit syllogism, which
may fairlie be draw'n out of His Lordships first and second paragraph in this
Chapter.

MAJ. That Discipline which does countenance the Church to convene within the
Magistrates territories, whenever, wheresoever they list: To call before them
whomsoever they please, etc: does overthrow the Magistrates right to convocate
Synods. to confirm their Acts, etc. MIN. But this new Discipline does
countenance the Church to convene within the Magistrates territories,
whenever, wheresoever they list, etc. Ergo, CONCL. This new Discipline does
overthrow the Magistrates right to convocate Synods, etc.
The Major his Lordship proves from that known Soveraignite of power wherewith
all Princes, and States are endued; From the wariness of the Synod of Dort,
Can. 50. From that decree out of Ench. Cand smin. Synods ought to be called by
the supreme Magistrate, if he be a Christian, etc. From the power the Emperors
of old did challenge over General Councels; Christian Monarchs in the time of
Popery over National Synods; The Kings of England over their Convocations: The
Estates of the United Provinces. From the professions of all Catholics and
Protestants in France, very particularly and liberally the State of Geneva,
where the ordering of all Ecclesiastike affairs is assumed by the Seigniorie.

The Minor, he takes for granted, is known out of all the proceedings in the
Presbytery; which from time to time have thus convened, and convocated
themselves, and therefore His Lordship only intimates it in his first
paragraph, yet afterward proves it in part by an Assembly, meeting when it had
been prohibited, and sitting after it was discharged by the King, which the 20.
Presbyters did at Aberdene Anno 1600. And all this with the Reviewer, is to
forget the challenge, because he has forgot his logike, and the new light has
dazeld the eye of his old intellectual faculty to discern. The truth of it
is, this was a little too hot for Mr. Baylies fingars, because it makes such
clear instances about the Synod of Dort and Geneva, wherein they differ from
the Scottish Presbytery, which he will not own because he every where denies,
and therefore takes no notice of it as he goes.

Nor can any ignorance of the way of the Scottish Discipline be imputed to the
The Bishop not ignorant of the way of the Scottish Discipline.
Bishop, who produces, so numerouslie, the practical enormities thereof, and
strikes at the very foundation as infirm, because contrary to the known
laws and lawful custome^, the supreme Magistrate dissenting and disclaiming.
For what he pretends to have been unquestionablie authentike by virtue of
Parliament Acts and the Kings consent since the first reformation, I have
otherwhere successivelie evidenced, up as far as the unhappie beheading of
Marie Queen of Scots in England, (to which the rest may be hereafter annexed)
to have no other strength then what rage and violence could afford it. The
power which he says The Reviewers Sophystrie.
every man in Scotland gives the King, without controversy, to call
extraordinary Assemblies when he pleases, takes not away, in its have, the
maine part, of the Bishops objection, implying no negative to this. That the
Presbytery, has often extraordinarily assembled without the Kings leave, nay
against his command, nor will they be checked in that rebellious license by his
power.

What the Bishop means to speak of the Kings power in choosing Elders, etc.
The Bishops meaning about the Kings power in choosing Elders.
Mr. Baylie might know, but that still he has no mind to take notice, That in
the former paragraph His Lordship spoke of a seigniorie, a Civil Magistrate at
Geneva, to which at the end of the year are presented the Elders, and by that
continued or discharged. The Civil Magistrate in Scotland has no more power
in placing or displacing, (which before was called continuing or discharging)
the Elders, then in the election of the Emperor, whose inhaerent right he
conceives to be as good there as at Geneva, therefore if the laws do not
expresselie provide it, they are such, he thinks, as tend to the overthrowing
of that right. This His Lordship means as part of that he was to prove, being
a clause in the title of his Chapter.

Your closing with the Parliament, which the Bishop has not mentioned,
Ecclesiastike laws.
is but to beget a wonder by making an hermaphrodite of the question which
before was but single in your sex. You are not so united, but that I can
untwist you, and, though against your will, consider, in this case, the
Presbytery by it self. The making of Ecclesiastike laws in Scotland (as for
England it shall not be here disputed, as desirous as you* are to be wandering
from home) was never* in justice, nor with any Kings content, referred, so
absolutely, to Ecclesiastike The head of the Church.
Assemblies, as not to ask a ratification from the crown. What the Bishops
mind is about the head of the Church will be clearlie rendered when just
Authority demands it, but His Lordship thinks not good to be catechized by
every ignorant Scottish Presbyter, nor give answer to every impertinent question
he puts in.

If your fingars itch to be handling the extrinsecal power in the Minister
derivative from the supremacy of the King you were best turn over Erastus and
the learned Grotius, after which I guess we Assembles are the Kings arbitrarie
Couns^s.
shall hear of you no more. Your Assemblies are Arbitrarie but at Royal
pleasure otherwise then as by your covenanting sword you cut of their relation
to the King and his great Councels. So that your Kings were willing to accept,
and had good reason to assume, more then ever you would give them.

How you robbed them of their right by your multiplied rebellions see The Bishop
had reason to instance in particulars.
Scotish-Presbyterian self conviction in my Epitome of your story.

If the Bishop had left this matter in general, your hue and cry to be sure,
had gone after him for particulars. His reasoning stands not to the courtesy
of your indulgence, being grounded upon the Acts of your Assemblies, whose
backs had been long since broke with the weight, of no peckadillos in
disputing, but high and mighty villainies in rebelling, had it not the strength
of the whole lay Presbytery to support it. Though by the way I must tell you,
The failings of your officers may be taken as natural to, and inseparable from
your office, when, having been so notoriously public, they pass without your
censure, or dislike. So that this mote, as much as you miskenne it, will prove
a beam in your eye, and of such consequence in this argument, as you will
scarce find the way through the most heinous particulars that follow.

The first of which lays such a block in your way, as you can The Assembly
contest with the King about his command.
not step over, till you have as good as acknowledged one of the principal
articles in that charge. You confess His Majesty did write from Stirling to
the General Assembly at Edinburgh 1579. that they should cease from concluding
any thing in the discipline of the Church, during the time of his minority.
And how well you obeyed it, we may collect by what follows. Upon this desire
[dutifull subjects would have taken it for a command] the Assembly did
abstain from all conclusions [that we shall see presentlie] only they named
a Committee to go to Striveling for conference with His Majesty upon that
subject. Any man that is acquainted with your Assembly logike will know that
this clause with the only, if it pass not for a conclusion, caries the force
of two praemises with it; And he must be very ignorant in your story that has
not found all your conferences with your Kings to have been contests. Whether
this was so or no, I leave to the discretion of the reader, when he sees what
you say followed thereupon. Immediately a Parliament is called in October. 1579.
And in the first Act declares and grants jurisdiction unto the Kirk..........
And declares that there is no other face of a Kirk, nor other face of
Religion, then is praesentlie, by the favor of God established within this
Realm, And that there be no other jurisdiction Ecclesiastical acknowledged
within this Realm, then that whilke is and shall be within the samen Kirk, or
that which follows therefrae concerning the praemises. Now let us lay all this
together. The young King is resolved to have no meddling with the discipline,
yet no sooner does he see your Commissioners sweet faces, but immediately a
Parliament is called And in that Parliament your Discipline must have the
primacie In the Acts; And that leading Act must not only establish what you
have at hand, but, upon the engagement of Regal and Parliamentarie power,
purchase all future possibilities of your pleasure, and give your invention a
patent to play the wanton. There must be some witchcraft sure in your
Committee, and (by your relation) a magic spell to retrive on such a sudden,
the Kings wandering affections to the Discipline. Conf. at Hapt. Court. And.
Melvin Epist. ad Th. Bez. 1579. K. I and his Nobility against the Discipline.
Vindic. Epist. Hieron. Philadelph The Reviewer and his brethren agree not in
their story. Duo foliae dila^ erata and in ignem conjecta.


But when I find His Majesty professing, that after ten years of age you
never had his heart. A brother of yours lamenting that for five years before
this you had had a perpetual conflict with the Bishops, and ever got the worst.
That most of the Nobility, upon several interests, were at this time bent
against you, I am at a loss for the Kings liberty, as much as for some other
concurrent due authority, in this Act, and read nothing but your violence in
these proceedings. But let us see how you and a namelesse friend of yours
agree. He tells us the letter that Dunkenson brought to this Assembly had
otherguede contents.

That the King only quickened your dispatch in consultation about some head of
the discipline, and preparing your unanimous result for the consent of the
Parliament that follows.

The Kings jealousy of your meddling with these affairs he seems to
anticipate by two years of your account and if there were any such thing,
whereof he doubts, he says the King was better informed of the truth. He
farther complains of two whole leaves about this business that were rent out
of your public records. that ever since left posterity in a cloud this was
done in the year 1584. which he calls the hour of darkness. You say the
authentike Registers are extant, and convince the Bishop to be heir of
falsehood. Error caecut qua c^pit eat All the truth that I can pick out of this
confusion is, That the King was disaffected to the Discipline; That the
Assembly did not obey his command nor answer his desire with their silence;
And that what consent you say, he gave in Parliament soon after, was either
forged, or procured by constraint. What follows concerning your rigor to the
Papists, and many orthodoxe Christians comprehended in that title, is easily
credited. But you should have done well to have set down the names Dominorum
Consilii ex quornm deliberatione proclamation was made, and then we should have
known how near they were of k^nn to your faction. Some body tells us, That
the Ministers did deliberate, and Buchanan did act [according to Geor. Con. De
duplic. stat. Relig. apud Scot. lib. 2...... ministri cu^ omnia ex suo
suorumque arbitrio pendere, savente and annitente imprimis Buchanan^,
cernerent, etc. K. I. his dislike of the short Confession. Many unjustifiable
practices about it. Vindie. Epist Hieron. Philadelph. Archiepis. Fan, S. Andr.
Pa. 1 77
the maxims of loyalty he published.] That the Kings name was to it, and what
else you pleased, is not much to be doubted, when you had got his person in
your power. For how short a time you could keep his inclination to the
Discipline, which was proclaimed, ap pears out of your story of an Assembly
man's penning. How cordiallie peremptory the King was in his command, and how
forward in subscribing whatsoever is in the Act for the short Confession of
faith; And what good effects it wrought among the people, you may take notice
out of His Majesty speech in the Conference at Hampton Court, wherein he
shows how ridiculous the thing was, and the person that drew it up. I think
it unfit to thrust into the book every position negative.......... according
to the example of Mr. Craige in Scotland, who with his I renounce and abhor,
his detestations and abrenunciations, did so amaze the simple people, that they
not able to conceive all those things, utterlie gave over all, falling back to
Popery, or remaining still in their former ignorance. These are the Kings
words about Mr. Craige the Author, and his Confession, which you may compare
with the Act, you pretend to at your leisure. The approbation of the Assembly
was but the harmony of a faction, such being excluded as were not prejudged
approvers or, if praesent, overaw'd by a praevalent party in their vote, as
much as other Ministers abroad, by Philadelphi Vindicatours confession, in
their consent. Qu^s credat quenquam, qui rem sacram administrabat....... ausum
fuisse calculo suo non probare. Or if they were free and did approve it, they
did it in that sense that many Orthodoxe persons did swear or subscribe
it........... in eam confessionem jurasse neminem Presbyteriorum regimini
alligat. Which King Chapter 1. in his large Declaration tells you to be consistent
with Episcopacie, is unquaestionablie true. Or it may be the register of your
approvers was handled as the roll of subscribers, wherein were a great many
more names then had been hands............. add Episcopos nunc sedentes and
magnam partem Archiepis. Fan. S. Adr.
Ministrorum subscriptiones illas inficiari. The opposition Of the Kings
Commissioner it may be was engrossed in the two leaves torn out of your
public records, if not left out as impertinent to the proceedings of that
Assembly. If he gave a passive consent by his silence, it was in conformity
to his Masters subscription and command which you mentioned. The direction of
His Majesty for the 50. Classical Assemblies was specializ'd by your power
which did direct him. The erecting of them was with no intent to pull down
Episcopacie, as may be, in effect gathered from your words. For if they remain
to this day, the same stood while the Bishops were in power as subordinate
chapters or consistories unto them.

These some Noble men, you speak of, were most of the Nobility, Epist. ad
Theod. Bez The reason upon which the Nobility maintained Bishops.
Pseudo-Episcopatu.
as your Brother Andr. Melvin does acknowledge.......... reluctantibus nobilium
plerisque. And these did not now erect, of new, a titular Episcopacie, but
maintained that which had been legallie established. And this they did, not
only to hold fast their Ecclesiastical revenue, but upon other more
conscientious grounds, as he ingenuouslie confesses. Viz. To keep the state of
the Kingdom entire from being rent in pieces; sublato enim Episcopatu [Il'e
leave the lie for his heirs to lick up] regni statum convelli. To praeserve
Majesty due to the King* constitutis Presbyteriis regiam* Majestatem imminui
And, by asserting his right to some Church revenues, to prevent the utter
exhausting of his exchequer......... bonis Ecclesiasticis........... restitutis
Regis aerarium exhauriri causantur.

That the Nobility enjoyed so much of the revenue, beside what The Presbytery
the Cause of the Nobilities keeping the revenue of the Church.
was paid in to the King, came upon the perpetual divisions raised by the
Presbytery in the Kingdom, which perturbing ever the establishment of the
Episcopal order, and voting them to have no more right to the means then they
had to the office, the learned at least and prudent Nobility having better
assurance that neither power nor means belonged de jure to the brethren of the
discipline, it is not unlikelie, till the controversy should be ended, they
framed a kind of plausible argument to continue the steward ship in themselves.
Yet in the mean time, by your leave, they Episcopacie more then titular by the
Covenanters acknowledgement.
did effectuate more then a title to this and tul^han Bishop: And this kind of
Prelates pretended right to every part of the Episcopal office, and exerciz'd
much more then you mentioned. Which having been made good against you in
several volumes, I shall only bring an undeniable argument, by producing
confitentes reos, the whole pack of Covenanters of all orders and qualities,
as well Ministers, as others, Who in their public bill or Complaint, upon which
an Act of the Presbytery of Edinburgh passed October. 24. 1638. have these
words. Whereas the office of a Bishop (as it is now used within this Realm)
was condemned by the book of policy, and by the Act of the Assembly holden
at Dundee, Anno 1580. Whereof these are the words; For as much as the office of
a Bishop (as it is now used, and commonly taken within this Realm) has no
sure warrant from Authority, etc. Hence I argue thus. The office of a Bishop
now used in the year 1580. and the office of a Bishop, now used in the year
1638. is ex confesso the same. But the office of a Bishop 1638. consisted in
the power of ordination and jurisdiction: Ergo so did the office of a Bishop
1580. And as much is implied by the Act of that Synod which condemns
expresselie the power as well as the title of Bishops, and that with reference
to the persons of the Bishops then living, that had executed this power, and
were to lay it down^ or become excommunicate. Therefore you show us but the
half face in your discovrse about their voting in Parliament, Into which
employment they crept not, but came upon confidence of better authority then
any general Assembly could give them, as shall be proved hereafter,
particularly in the case of Rob. Montgomerie Archbishop of Glasgow whom you
name. That there was some debate takes of somewhat from the Kings forwardness
in commanding, subscribing and directing in special. That he showed hi good
satisfaction, I believe The Bishop too courteous in passing over 27. years
story
not, when you publish it with a blancke Reviewer. But the Warner here jumps
over no less then 27. years time, etc. Ans. The Bishop undertook no
continued history of your Disciplinarian rebellions. Therefore in passing over
27. years he saved himself a trouble, but has done too great a courtesy for
you, unless you were more thankful for his silence. Though indeed this
signal rebellious Convention of a few stubborn ignaro's at Aberdener shows to
what mean, base, and abject persons, who were never any way remarkable as men
of great gifts Decl. of His Majesty's Co^nc. Imperfect policy alterable at the
Kings pleasure.
an height and maturitie of mischief your other sucking Conspiracies had come
to; if Royal presence had not been at hand to suppress their growth and nip
these black boutefeus in the bu^. That King James at that time was by his
English Bishops persuasions resolved to put down the general Assemblies of
Scotland, is disavowed in words by public proclamation, bearing date the 26.
September. and in act by appointing one to be holden at Dundee the last Tuesday
of Julie. Yet if he had, with the grave advice and consent of his three
Estates, your Church lanes and constant practice must have struck sail, as it
afterward did, unto the supremacy of that power. Himself telling you, That no
Monarchy either in Civillor Ecclesiastical policy, had then attained to that
perfection that it needed no reformation; Nor that infinite occasiou^ might not
arise, whereupon wise Princes might foresee, for the benefit of their (...),
just cause of alteration. For what immediately follows, take His Majesty's
answer out of a Declaration penned with his own hand.

As to the nature of their particular privilege in holding of Assemblies, they
The Privilege of Assemblies limited.
have in this their last praetended Assembly broken the limitations of that
privilege that is clearlie set down in the first Act of the Parliament in
the 92 year, which is the latest and clearest warrant for their Assembly. For
there it is specially provided. That as We give them license for holding of
their Assemblies once in the year or oftener as occ^sion shall require (which
proves that all their power only proceeds from us) so must it not be convened
without our own praesence, or then of our Commissioner, nor no day, nor place
set down for the next Assembly, but by Our, or our Commissioners appointment,
except we be not pleased neither to go in our own person, neither to send any
for assisting the said Assembly. And how these limitations have been observed
by them at this time, let the world judge, first in not only refusing the
praesence of our Commissioner, but most contemptuously and injuriouslie
barring the door upon him, and next in setting down the diet of the next
Assembly without either his privitie, or consent.

The letter which His Majesty's Commissioner Sr. Alex: Strayton of Lowrenston
The Legal proceedings against the Aberdene Assembler^
offered you know was a missive from the Lords of the Council, not addressed to
them as to an Assembly, and therefore no such capacity required to their
receiving it. His Majesty's letter to the Commissioners of the general
Assembly signifying his pleasure to have the appointment of this meeting
deferred, and no new indiction to be made without his consent, having been long
before delivered, and the substance of it by them communicated to the several
Presbyteries of the Kingdom. In contempt whereof these persons assembled at
Aberdene, where, the day before they sat down, was a publication at the
mercate Cross of a charge to the contrary from the Lords of the Council.
Beside, they had not, His Majesty tells them. any warrant to hold a new
Assembly, without the praesence either of the Moderatour of the last, or of
the ordinary Clerk of the Assembly. As for their dutiful demeanor
afterward, That they rise immediately after the reading of the Missive, Mr.
Baylie knows to be absolutely false, Howsoever, the naming a diet for the
next meeting was against an express clause in His Majesty's letter, which by
the Council is called a Rebellious, and traitorous misbehaviour.

For the trouble that followed hereupon, if by the counsel of Archbishop
Bancroft, that could not be pernicious, because the proceeding against them was
legal. They were called before the Lords of His Majesty's Council; had liberty
given them to entertain lawyers, and make their defense, which proved a
Declinatour disclaiming all subjection to His Majesty, and His Council; This
Declinatour was repelled, and they were found to have unlawfullie convened; His
Majesty commanded that the ordinary course of justice should proceed.
Whereupon Six of them were presented upon panel at Lynlithgow before His
Highness Justice being the ordinary Judge, who had joined to him a great
number of Noblemen, etc. Their indictment grounded upon the first statute in
May 1584. Two of Their obstinacy.
their Procuratours, and Counselors at law, not being able to persuade them to
a course of humility, did upon their obstinacy refuse to plead for them,
Indeed Six, or seven of them, touched with the open discovery made by the
Kings Declaratour, upon humble submission were dismissed, and sent home to
their charge. See more particularly of all these in the Declarations of K.
James, and his Council 1606.

The next instance of the Bishops, Viz. Their abolishing the chief festivals
of the Church, the Reviewer can not justify to any purpose The Church
festivals abolished in Scotland by no just Authority.
either from the authority, or the time. For first this great Council of
Scotland were but a parsel of the rebel Nobility that had of late deposed,
and persecuted the poor Queen Dowager to the death, And now having the young
King and Queen at as great a distance as France, at the same rate order the
affairs of the Church as they had the policy of the State. The charge they
gave the Assembly brethren dated the 29. day of April 1590. (the sum whereof
is so formallie placed in the front of the Discipline) was upon procurement by
themselves, It being ordinairie with them, when they had any new device on
foot, to extort some pretended authority by their letters. Therefore it is but
a mock obedience by service not only offered, but obtruded. Nor was it so
pleasing to them, whom they here own for their masters, but that after many
days perusal, it was with dislike, and scorn rejected by diverse. Those that
signed it had no power to ratify it, no more then just before, the Confession
of faith, which they were feign to send over into France. And how their Act, or
promise in secret Council, dated the 27. of January, was illuded from time
to time, Knox relates, and very much laments in his story. For the time, there
was no such Parliament intervall as required the diligence of the Council of
State: for what they called a Parliament, though none, was but newly
dissolved, when presently consultation was had how the Church might be
established in a good, and Godly policy. The reason of which haste was lest,
the young Queen should come over, and interpose her Royal authority in this
great Council of State, as she did afterward, and rejected the Discipline, for
all the Act of State that had passed on it, demanding How many of those that
had subscribed would be subject unto it, and her Secretary telling them. That
many subscribed in side parentum, as children are baptized.

Those days which Mr. Baylie calls here fond feasts, out of the The primitive
Christians observed them
book of Discipline and that farther abominations, were not thought such by
the Primitive Christians, who were strict in the solemnity of such times. And
if the writings of the ancient Fathers, and the Godly, and approved laws of
Justinian the Emperor might be admitted, as once they were offered, to decide
the controversy betvixt us, we know what Orat: of the Protest. of Scotl. to
the Q. Reg. 1558.
Would become of this part of the Discipline. The authority of the Church,
warranted by the holy Scriptures is sufficient to justify them, and us in
this observance* Nor were the Scots so fallen out with these abominations, but
that they let them stand in the Calendar before their Liturgy, etc. And there
were a people in Scotland which, in the Bishops days, did celebrate those
feasts, Therefore ever since they have not showed such ready obedience to that
direction of the Discipline. See the Bishop of Brechen's defense of the Perth
Articles.

Your farre-fetecht comparison accidentally improves the Bishops knowledge by
a seasonable experiment, Who finds the Disciplinarian barbarismes in Scotland
as monstrous as any he ever read of in Iapan, and your nullities in religion as
many as Vtopia has in policy, or nature. If your thoughts had not been
rambling so far for recruits to your malice, you might have been furnished
with truth nearer home, which His Lordship brings nnto your door. As fine as
here you make your self for the triumph, out of every wing you pluck, you
will by and by be at a loss for your victory, and must then wear your blew
cap without a feather. For (that you may know The Bishop not mistake^ in the
Scottish Chronology.
my meaning) His Lordship can afford you no such pretty thing as the
antichronisme you lay hold on. He says not, That statute of treason was in
being in the year 1580. And his Printer you might see, had done him so much
right as to set a number 4. years older directly, against the place where it
is mentioned. His Lordships words are these Which ridiculous ordinance was
maintained stiffelie by the succeeding Synods, notwithstanding the statute,
That it should be treason to impugn the authority of the three Estates.

The plain sense whereof is this, The succeeding Synods to the year 1584.
maintained it stiffelie. And not only they but likewise the succeeding Synods
afterward, notwithstanding the statute then made, That etc. Yet, not to be too
literal, That there should be three Estates, to whom your brethren presented
their Assembly Acts as they did, by the King and them to be confirmed, even
before the year 1580. and yet, That to impugn the authority of the three,
estates or to procure the innovation, or diminution of any of them, should have
no statute nor law to make it, at least interpretative, treason, is a piece of
politikes that Iapan, nor Vt^pia, will never own, nor any man that is
civilized in submission to government believe.

The business of appeals we are to meet with in the chapter following, and so
far you shall have leave to travail with the counterfeit credit of that
untruth.

What you make here such a positive consent of Lundie the Kings Commissioner in
that Assembly, even now went no farther then a suspense in silence, where all
you found was, That it appeared not he apposed. What kind of Presbyteries were
erected by K. James and his Commissioners, and to what purpose.
And how that might be I there gave you my conjecture. In the next Assembly
1581. the Kings Commissioner Caprington was not so hasty to erect in His
Majesty's name Presbyteries in all the land. The business was this, The King
sends him, and Cuningham with letters to the Assembly at Glasgow, to signify,
That the thirds of the Ecclesiastical revenues, upon the conference had between
his Commissioners, and those which they had before sent from Dundee, were not
found to be the safest maintenance for the Ministry, they having been so
impaired in twenty years before, that nothing of certainty could appear;
That thereupon had been drawn a diagrame of several Presbyteries, whereby a
division of the greatest parishes was to be made, and a uniting of the less to
the end that the Ministers might be with more aequalitie maintained, and the
people more convenientlie assemble'd; That His Ma^estie had determined to sent
letters to several of his Nobility in the Country to command their meetings,
and counsel here about. This he did not till the next summer, nor was any thing
effected diverse years after. The conventions of the Ministry were Bishops to
praeside in them.
to be moderated by every Bishop in his Dioecesse, who was, by agreement, to
praeside in the Presbyteries with in his limits. So that the modelling
Presbyteries was only for settling a convenient revenue upon the Ministers,
and so far was it from abolishing Episcopacie, that the Bishops were to have
the managing the affair.

It would not have cost you, nor your printer, much pains to have Declar.
1582. The abuse of the Kings indulgence by the Presbyters.
put in what hapened before the year 1584 The opposition against your abuse
hereof by the Bishops Montgoinerie and Adamson; His Majesty's discharging by
proclamation the Ministers conventions, and Assemblies under pain to be
punished as Rebeils, publishing them to be unnatural subjects, seditious
persons, troublesome and unquiet spirits, members of Satan, enemies to the King
and the Commonwealth of their native Country, charging them to desist from
preaching in such sort as they did viz. against the authority in Church
causes, against the calling of Bishops, etc. removing, imprisoning, inditing
them, etc. Which put you upon the desperate attempts of surprising and
restraining His Majesty's person, whereof otherwhere. So that the King, you
see, had very good preparatives to purge his Kingdom of such turbulent
humors, before Captain Stuart The E: of Arran no wicked Courtier.
put him in mind to make use of that physike. Which Captain James was no such
wicked Courtier, when the saints in behalve of the Discipline, set him up to
justle with Esme Stuart Lord Aubignie for the nearest approach unto Royal
favor.

This Parliament 1584. was summoned with as loud a voice as any other, and was
as open as the sun at Edinburgh could make it. Nor was Captain Stuarts crime
about it such as to denominate his exile the vengeance of God, which was
wrought in the eyes of the world by your rebellion. Nor his death by
Dowglasse's high way murder, avenged His blood revenged.
afterward in alike terrible destruction and that in Edinburgh high street,
where sanguis sanguinem tetigit: blood touched blood, though I dare not, as you
do, judge for reward, nor divine such ambiguous cruelties for money: being no
Priest nor Prophet, as you are to the heirs of those bloody soulders in Micah
[chapt 3.] I dare not say that it either was the fingar of God, though he
employ not the hand of his power to restrain them.

Rev............ these acts of his Parliament the very next year were
disclaimed Bishop Bancroft Dang. Posi^ b. 1. Gibsons bold speeches to the King.
by the King, etc. Ans. They were not disclaimed the 21 of December the next
year, when James Gibson being questioned for disloyal speeches about them
before His Majesty and his Council, very impudentlie told the King, he was a
persecutour for maintaining them, and compared him to Jeroboam, and threatened
he should be rooted out, and conclude that race. His confidence was in the
return of the banished Rebel-Nobles, who forced all honest men from the Court,
possessed themselves of His Majesty's person, and acted all disorder in his
name. This was the regular restoring of Presbytery, Which to say was never
more removed to this day, in that sense, you must speak it, is to abuse the
ignorance of some new convert you have got in the Indies, who it may be, at
that distance, know not that, Bishops had the visible Church government in
Scotland, for about theirtie years together, since that time.

Rev. The Warners digression to the the perpetuity of Bishops in Scotland,
etc. Perpetuity the Bishops in Scotland.
Ans. The perpetuity of their order in that Kingdom is no disgression in this
place, where His Lordship shows your practical contradiction in pulling down
Episcopacie with one hand, and yet seting it up, though under the name of
Superintendencie, with the other.

The sequestring their revenue, and altering their names, and pruning off some
part of their power, he takes to be no root and branch ordinance, for the
deposition of their office, or utter extirpation of their order. This he
asserts to be the greatest injury your malice could ever hitherto bring about,
and therefore goes not one step out of his way to let you know. That Bishops
have been perpetual in your Church, Nor The Reviewers long reach for the
antiquity of Presbyters.
do you out of yours (but keep the same path of truth you began in) in
acquainting us with the antiquity of Presbyters, who, it should seem are
terrae filii that sprung up in Scotland, like so many mushromes, the next night
after Christianity came in: Though he that is read in your opinions and
actions, will take it for granted that you must pay the acknowledgement of your
Presbytery to the Sanhedrin, and your sects conversion to the Jews.

If you will impudentlie crowd it into the company of the first...... facile
est credere Victore^ Pomificem.... in Scotia reperisse multos quos salutaribus
undis expiaret alios quo^ Judaizantium in fecerat error. G. Con. De dupl. stat.
Rel. apud Scot. lib. 1. Multi ex Britonibus Christiani savitiam Diocletiani
tiementes ad eos [ Scotos] confugerant e quibus complures doctrina, and vitae
integritate clari in Scotia substiterunt, vitamque solitariam tanta sanctitutis
opinione apud omnes vixerunt, ut vita sanctorun cellae in templa commu^arentur.
Ex eoque consuetudo mansit apud posteros, ut prisci Scoti templa c^llas vocent.
Hoc genus Menachorum Chaldeos appellabant mansitque nomen, and institutum donec
Monachorum genus recentius in plures divisum ectas eos expulit Buchan. Hist.
lib. 4
Christians that came into Scotland, you can not deny but that for some part
of the Centuries you speak of, it was confined to the monks colls, never came
to clamor at the Court and the poor Culdiis, with a great deal more
humility and piety, then the Covenanters, carried it in their cowles.

Rev........... and after the reformation there was no Bishop in that land.
Ans. The reformation you mean, began the day before, or after the Greek
Calends, and if you will help me to an account of the one, I shall know how to
order the era of the other. Many years confusion there was of Popery,
Presbytery and Superintendencie. The reformed Episcopacie could never get
ground till King James set it forward, and then it went not far before it met
with your violent encounter by Sword, and Covenant, which never suffered the
crown nor Miter to stand long unshaken, till both were held up by the Arms of
England, and the Kings person secure at a distance to command you. That ever
such a thing as reformed Presbytery according to the Canon in your Discipline,
had the free positive consent of King, and Parliament (without which it can not
legallie pass for the Religion of your Kingdom) I deny to be visible any
where in your story.

Rev....... till the year 1610. Ans. That year did indeed complete the
Episcopal power, which King James had by degrees piouslie, and industriouslie
promoted many years before.

Rev......... When Bancroft did consecrate three Scots Ministers, etc. Ans. A
brother of yours tells us they were consecrated by Bishop Abbot: As evil as
their report was the men were not so bad, as their names need be in charity
conceled. They were John Spotswood, Andrew Lamb, and Gawin Hamilton, Bishops of
Glasgow, Brechen, and Galloway. Who enjoy now their reward in heaven for the
reviling they had on earth, it being for Gods sake and his Church] according to
our Saviors promise, St. Matthew. 5. 11. The first was a man for zeal to the
Church, fidelity to the King, prudence in Government, and constancy under
affliction singular, and inimitable, and indeed for his excellent gifts only
hateful to the Disciplinarians, though especially because he through long
experience was of all Scottish men best acquainted with and ablest to detect
their cross ways to the King and all Sovereign Magistracy. He died
piouslie, and peaceably at Westminster in the second year of this rebellion,
and was buried in the Abbey Church. The second was a great and affiduous
preacher, even when he was blind through extreme age, He also died in peace,
and with the good report of all, except these calumniatores, who hold that no
Bishop can be an honest man, and whose invention is so rich of nothing as
reproaches against better men then themselves. The third was a reverend
Praelate of great parts, and singular learning, a most constant preacher who
lived in peace, and died in his bed.

Rev....... that violent Commissioner the Earl of Dunbar. Ans. His violence
did not carry him beyond his Commission, and because he executed that upon the
rebellious Aberdene Assemblers, and would not take off some of his kindred or
acquaintance who were in the jurie, that deliberatelie cast them in their
verdict, nor intercede for their stay in Scotland, being desired; you here meet
with him at the Synod of Glasgow. Which being at large proved legitimate in
every circumstance required by law, is in vain condemned as null by your
faction. Nor was it corrupt in any more then three members of about 140. who
being rotten drop of from the close union and harmonious suffrage of the rest,

Rev:........... got authorized in some part of the Bishops office. Ans. I hope
Episcopacie entirely authorized in the Synod of Glasgow Vind. Epist Hitr.
Philadelph.
you will not deny that Bishops were authorized to ordain in this Synod. And
into how many particulars their power of jurisdiction was branched your brother
very pitifully complains......... jurisdictio in omnibus offendiculis, sive
in doctrina, sive in moribus.......... Armantur..... potestate exauctorandi
ministros, suspensionis censuram ir^ogandi, excommunicationem decer^endi, etc.
you may read the rest, and then tell us what part of their office was left out.

Rev. Superintendents are no where the same with Bishops, much less in
Scotland. Superintendents aequivalent to Bishops.
Ans. That they are aequivalent to Bishops is evident by the conformity in
their offices, and power. The particulars whereof His Lordship recites out of
the fourth and sixth heads of your 1. Book Discipl. To which upon my Review I
could add some more, if those were not enough. Their ambulatorie commission,
was no other then our Bishops ambulatorie visitation. If your only in the
time before have any influence here, and exempt them from all duties in their
visitation, bu^ preaching the word, etc. you cut of three parts of their
injunction in the Discipline. If they were only, as you say, for a time, it
concerns you to tell us where they ceased, and deny there were any since, or
ever shall be more but upon some future new plantation in your Churches
Presbyters not to have Synods as often as they list, nor do in them what they
please.


Being pressed about obtruding your Discipline, you tell us. For the
E^clesiastike enjoining of a general Assemblies decrees a particular
ratification of Parliament is unnecessarie. Which holds not where the
particular decrees of your Assembly transgress the general intent of that Act
whereby you are authorized to meet. That relates to the times and matters to be
treated of. In the former you are limited to custom, or praescription. In the
later to the doctrine, and discipline received. Which are therefore ratified in
such Acts together with your Assemblies, Presbytery and Sessions, that
obedience might be rendered upon the visible conformity of your decrees, and
injunctions to that rule. But to make any Act of Parliament so general as to
ratify at adventure all possible arbitrarie commands of your Assembly to the
altering of the doctrine or discipline established, were to praecontract
affinity with all sects, and haeresies, and to enter into an implicit league,
or Covenant with the Devil about his worship, so it may be de futuro ad
placitum Synodi generalis. Let me put this case, suppose a general Assembly
should, by an Ecclesiastical decree, enjoyne the canons of that Antichristian
government against which you praetend your discipline is framed. Whether or n^
is that injunction authentike upon the general A and of Parliament for their
Assembling without a particular ratification thereof? I might add how
ridiculous it is for you to make the power of your Assemblies so absolute, and
yet trouble King, and Parliament so often with your importunate petitions to
pass what is fully ratified before, and that by their own General Acts
including that very particular for which you supplicate.

The debates about the second book of Discipline I believe: But that in The
King consented not to the second bo^ke of Discipline.
the Assembly 1590. the Kings consent to it was obtaind, I can sooner admit
upon undeniable authority, then your Logike, you pretend not to the
perpetuity of His Majesty's personal praesence which was but some times, and
it should seem, not at that time of general consent. Nor is your Act for
subscription so clear in the assurance you give us that His Majesty's
Commissioner was there, you only take it for granted he was among the herd.
Nor so explicit in his positive consent, you only collect it from a clowdie
universal, and to serve your turn, honor him with a primacie in suffrage.
Wherein you are a little redundant in courtesy, there having been a time when
if His Majesty, K. Chapter 1. Larg. Declar. 1633. page 411.
or His Commissioner siting in Assembly should deny his voice to any thing
which appeared unjust, and repugnant to his laws, yet i^ that were concluded
by most voices, you would tell him he was bound jure divino to enforce
obedience to your Act. The case, for ought I know, stood no otherwise here in
this Assembly. Where, to discountenance the testimony you bring, you have
been told long before now, That the superintendents of Angus, Lothian Fi^e,
etc. George Refutat. libel. De Regim. Eccl. S^ot.
Hayes Commissioner from the North. Arbuthmoth of Aberdene, and others were
dissenters from this Act about the discipline, whereby His Majesty's, or His
Commissioners consent becomes somewhat improbable, to the authority whereof
such men as they had in prudence submitted, if not in duty by their silence.

That Statesmen in Parliament opposed it is evident. That the King ever
endeavored to get it pass, is your single assertion. Neque usquam fictum,
neque pictum, neque scriptum. If your Church did, it was for want of work, for
you told us even now, To this a particular ratification of Parliament was
unnecessarie.

What the Bishops opinion is about the p^trimonie of the Chuch, how The Bishop
no hypocrice in his challenge about the patrimony of the Church.
far, and by whom, and what part of it may be lawfully alienated, when just
occasion is given, I praesume His Lordship freely, and faythfullie will
declare. In the mean time his challenge against the Scottish Presbyterians is
without hypocrise, and injustice, Himself and many other good Prelates having
ever aesteem'd it a fault, to call the annexing some part of the Church
revenues unto the crown a detestable sacrilege before God. Nor can Mr. Baylie
instance in any indefinite disputes, including all that has been, or shall be
given to the Church, that have hapened since the first reformation between the
Kings, of England and their Bishops. Who had they found their Princes rapacious
sequestratours, would not have failed in their duty modestly to admonish them
of the danger, yet had it, may be, abstained from calling them. 1. Book D^sc.
6. head which be longs not, by haereditaire right to the Presbyters.
thieves and murderers, peculiar terms characteristical of the Discipline-To
which I think I shall do no injustice, if I assert that the revenues of
Bishops, Deanes, and Archdeacons, of Chapellries, Friaries of all orders,
together with the sisters of the seenes* (abstracting from the favor of
Princes) no more belong to the Scottish Presbyters, then they do to the Mufties
of the Turk. The intention of the doners having never been that such strange
catell should feed in their pastures. Nor can M. Baylie show me any law that
makes him heir to Antichrist, or a just inheriter of his lands. Beside,
methinkes the weak stomack'd brethren should take check at the meat offered
unto idols, and any silken sold Presbyter be too nice to array himself in the
ragge^ of Rome, or be clothed at that cost that belonged to the idolatrous
Priesthood of Let. o^ K. Ph. and Q. Mar. Ann. 1559.
Baal. But, it may be in the heat of Reformation, they went to work with the
coining irons, which they more then once got into their possession, and with
them altered the impres^ion of the beast. And the mattokes and (...). Which
other arms being wanting, they very often took in their hands, were,
possibly, only to turn up the Church land, and wherever crop had been
reap't by Antichrist, that abominable glebe went down to the center of the
earth.

What he talks about the Praelatical jus divinum, and their taking possessions
The Reviewer is the hypocrite.
by commands from Court without a process, requires his instance, and then he
shall have his answer. In the interim he plays the hypocrite in a question:
What if then, [the Disciplinarians] had gone to advance that right to all
jusdivinum, when the Assembly at Edinburgh Mainten. of the sanstatie. page 10.
The Disciplinarians declaration of their judgments in their impudent and
imperious supplicats.
did so April 24. 1576.

But he says, all the Scots can be challenged for, is a mere declaration of
their judgment and simple right in a supplication to the Regents Grace.

(...). These Scots judgment was not always in righteousness, and their
simplicity in supplicates had many times more of the Lion then the Lamb.
Witness that to the Queen Regent 1559. where they declare their judgments
freely as true and faithful subjects, they tell her, yet this is the style of
that declaration......... Except this cruelty be stayed by your wisdom, We
shall be compelled to take the sword of just defense, etc....... If ye give
^are to their pestilent counsel....... neither ye, neither yet your posterity
shall at any time after this find that obedience and faithful service within
this Realm which at all times ye have found in us. In the assemblies
supplications to the Lords of secret Council, May 28. 1561. the second article
annexed to, which was for the maintenance of the ministry, this. Before ever
these tyrants and dumb dogs Empire above us....... we..... are fully
determined to hazard life, and whatsoever we have recived of God in temporal
things........ And let these enemies of God assure themselves, That if your
Honors put not order unto them, That we shall shortly take such order, That
they shall neither be able to do what they list, neither yet to live upon the
sweat of the browe. December 25. 1566. They order requiring instead of
Supplicating and Churh censures to the disobedient. Their sixth head of Church
rents in the first book of Discipline runs very imperiously upon the must.
The Gentlemen, Barons, etc. must be content to live upon their just rents, and
suffer the Kirk to be restored to her liberty. And Jul. 21. 1567. They tell
them they shall do it, and shall pass nothing in Parliament until it be
done. That ever any assembly in Scotland did make any other address to the
Parliament for stipends then by way of such humble supplication, I grant, ^is a
great untruth. Nor were only the thirds thus petitioned for, but time after
time all tithes, rents, and whatsoever could be comprised under the patrimony
of the Church, were demanded as insolentlie as could be, which meets me every
where in their story, as frequentlie as Mr. Baylies dissembling, and
falsifying in his Review.

In the last instance the Bishop denies not but there was a time They
anticipate the law in the exercise, of the Discipline.
when a kind of Presbyteries was legallie approved and received, And this I
presume he will admit to be after the Assembly 1580. About which allreadie you
have indeed alleged more untruth then you had authority to show for it. I
have given you as much as that you brought will bear. What His Lordship brings
here is another discovery. That you did erect them in your Assembly Acts, and
put them in execution, as far as you durst, before any Parliament had passed
them. And Synodicallie established such, as no Parliament had passed. For this
he cites your Acts of several Assemblies, which you must either disavow,
Hieron. Philadelph. de Regim. Eccles. Scot. Epist. Iren. Philaleth. Narrat.
mot. Scotic.
or unriddle what the mistake is you impute. Unless you think good to save
that labor, and confess as well as other your Brethren, what is so manifest in
your story. The particulars of your proceedings herein, Archbishop Bancroft
long since collected in his book of Dangerous Positions; Where he shows how
you not only acted your selves at home, but sent your emissaries into England
to see the like practice there in the very face of Episcopal Government. What
other reasons, beside the recalling the Church patrimony, caused the refusal
of your second book of Discipline, I told you before. Which with the rest may
suffice to the vindication of what the Bishop premiseth in proof of the
conclusion he makes That the Dissiplinarians by their practies Their doctrine
as destructive as their practice.
have trampled upon the laws, and justled the Civil Magistrate out of his
Supremacy in Ecclesiastical affairs. His Lordship proceeds to his scrutinie
of your doctrine, wherein if he yet be more happy, as you courteously tell us
possibly he will, I shall take you to have the spirit of Tires^as, and having
justly lost your eyesight for rash judging, to be now better Ovid. Met. lib.
3. sub. 4
at prophesying then reviewing. Which immediately appears, by your wandering
at noonday, and being at a loss for that which every man may find in the very
place cited by the Bishop. None are subject to repair 2. Book of Disc. chapter 7.
2.
to this [the National] Assembly to vote, but Ecclesiastical persons, etc.
This His Lordship conceives to cross the Kings supremacy, which being as well
Ecclesiastical as civil, gives him a power of voting and presiding in
Assemblies. Nor was there ever act of free Parliament in Scotland, old or late,
nor any regular justifiable practice of that Church, but reserved this power to
the King, and his deputed Commissioner, without being chosen member of any
Presbytery, or made a ruling The Bishops Super-Erastianisme the doctrine of
the Reformed Churhes
elder in a National Assembly, which your book of Discipline calls the
general Eldership of the Kirk. Your hypercriticizing upon his thoughts (while
the spirit of divination comes upon you) makes his Lordship no Super-Erastian
in his doctrines. Though what transscendent haeresie there is in a moderate
answer to the malice in your question* any of your aequitable comparers may
read in what Vedelius, and Paraeus (no Ad Dissert. De Episc. Constant. M.
heretics I hope) have published to that purpose, as the doctrine of all
reformed Churches; the one quoting Bellarmine the other Stapleton as proper
patrons of the Sub-Erastian principles in the Discipline, and Vedelius, in his
preface giving the world a caveat of the danger by the mischief it had brought
upon England and Scotland in the year 1638. How opposite they were to the
Disciplinarian language, and sense in that particular which the Bishop
remonstrates, these single propositions can evidence. Mult^ magu est Christiani
Magistratus non solum apprehensive, and discretive, sed and definitive de
religione judicare* Here a definitive vote is asserted to the
Magistrate......... ad Magistratum Ph. Par. Vindic. propos. 8. D. Par. N.
Vedel. De Episc. Constable M. q. ^.
pertinet judicium de religione, seu rebus fidei, and causis
Ecclesiasticis......... tum formaliter, tum objective. Hereby a formal
judgment in religion is attributed. And this Doctor Rivet, who, I am told, is
called, and reverenced in the French, and Dutch Churches as the Calvin of these
times has vouched under his hand to be the Catholic doctrine of the Reformed.
If he had not, we are sure it was the primitive practice of the good Christian
Emperors to assume it, to whom our conformity is requisite. Of Constantine
the great, who was personally present in the Council of The practice of the
good primitive Emperors.
Nice; and is sometimes called koinono^ episcopoumenon for his communite of
suffrage with the Bishops. Of the Emperor Theodosius, who in the Council of
Constantinople sifted the several Confessions of the Arians, Macedonians,
Eunomians, and as Brentius relates it, cast himself upon his knees, craving
the assistance of Gods spirit to direct him in the choice of what was most
consonant to the doctrine of the Apostles. Which epicrisis, or completive
judgment, submitted unto by the Ancient Synods, had these authoritative terms
to express it. ^ebaioun, ^pipscphizesthai* ^pisphragizesthai, cratinein,
cratioun, epikyroun, ta pepragmen^, To the exercise hereof the Discipline of
your Reformed Brethren in these Countries not only admits, but craves the
presence, and suffrage of Delegates from the supreme Magistrate; without which
their Synodical Acts are not established. Quin etiam summi Magistratus Har.
Syn. Belgic. c. 10.
delegati sunt postulandi, ut in ipsorum praesentia eorumque suffragio Synodi
Acta concludantur. Nor did K. James any more in the Conference at Hampton
Court, then when in freedom. He would have done in any Scottish Presbyterian
Assembly, though he hated the name and thought of the thing, when somewhat was
propounded that did not like him, put it of with Le Roy s'avisera.

Rev. Yet the most of the prelatical party will not maintain hi^m heerin.
Ans. Bishop Andrews will in his Tortura Torti and Bishop Field (whom your
friend Didoclave calls Hierambicorum eruditissimum) in his volume of the Altar.
Damasc. page 15.
Church, beside many others. And possibly those that seem to be opposite may
be reconciled, if you have the manners to let them state the question among
themselves. The chief case wherein they [not you] instance of L^ontius Bishop
of Tripolis in his answer to Constantius the Emperor may be attended with
circumstances which may terminate the dispute, if not, we must not take it on
their word, that, for that, as well as his other more regular demeanor he is
owned by Antiquity to be kanonecclesias, as Suidas records, The rule of the
Church. However, it behooves you to cite your laws to which the Bishops
assertion is contrary, And I shall cut you short of that pompous train which
your vanity holds up in the universal of all the Princes that have lived in
Scotland, and confine you to two, (the rest being by their Religion unconcerned
in voting (though not in permitting) any Renounced by none of the Scottish King.
The Reviewers malice not any Prelatical principles does impossibilitate (as he
speaks) the peace betwixt the King and his Kingdoms.
Disciplinarian decrees) King James, and the holy martyr King Charles the
first, who I hope you have not the impudence to say ever made profession so
derogatorie to their right.

In what follows you practice over the fisherman in the fable, from whom you
know, that unless you trouble the water it is in vain for you to cast in your
net, and if you catch nothing for the Discipline you must sterve. The whole
paragraph is naught but a malicious seditious inference of your own, whereby
you affixe an odious sense to the dutiful attributes of Royal prerogative, and
your own guilt causing a trembling in your joyuts at the thought of a scepter,
you buselie creep under the protection of the club. The name of Parliament you
make but a pandar to countenance the wanton license of your Assemblies, and the
great seal you would have set to, nothing but an indenture of the Crowns
perpetual servitude to your Synods. The Prelares Cabin divinity* which sea
language you're in love with since your voyage into Holland) came often above
deeka with very innocent loyal intentions long before these times of confusion,
which your Consistorian divinity has wrought, And though you take your self
to appear as ominous as Caster without his brother in the shrowd^, it fears
no shipwreck by any storm you can raise, nor looks through your clear
prediction upon its ruin. You have not hitherto found such a fate in your
words as to produce a consequential necessity of the banishment of Marquisses
and Bishops from Court, though divine justice may hereafter inspire our
Sovereign to return this judgment upon your heads, who are ever breathing
murder, and exile into his ears. For while such popular Sicophants, as you,
are suffered to live in any Monarchs dominions, neither can the People be
secure of their peace, nor Princes of their lives. K. James spoke it plainly,
when he said, A Scotsh Presbytery as well agrees with Monarchy, as God and
the Devil* Such Reviewers who look but half way home into the Conf. at Hampt.
Court.
original of crowns, are clear everters of the first foundation of Kingdoms,
which made Kings some what more then fiduciaries of the people, whose solid
peace consisted in an humble active submission to their just commands, and a
Christian quiet passive obedience if tyrannically imperious. This to be sure
would keep the best part, if not the best party, from ruin, till the high
hand of heaven over balance their temporal sufferings with an aeternitie of
reward, where no malecontentment can be to come.

To the second challenged principle your answer is very slight, and
impertinent. And would I undertake a far more unpleasing employment then
Phocion had in chiping Demosthenes, for which he was called kopi^ ton logon, I
should make a slender instrument of your review, there being beside the
extravagancie of your railing language, your malicious enlargements in false
commentaries, diverting your Reader from the genuine orthodoxe meaning of the
text, drawing him into an intricable labyrinth of jealousies and fears, the
chimaerical brats of your own brain; which you would feign lay at other men's
doors, scare six pages in your book that are a direct answer to the Bishop,
which I can not impute to your ignorance, but your cunning, who feeling your
self held closse by the neck in the letter of your laws and Assembly Acts,
would very feign wind your self out of the controversy, or run away with it
into any Church, or Country but your own. In this paragraph the Bishops
citations prove The Disciplinarian doctrine and practice against the Kings
power to convocate Synods.*
what he intends (nor dare you, I see, deny what you are too conscious you
maintain) It having never been your practice, but when you could not do
otherwise, to wait the Kings, or Queens call for your Synods. In the year
1561. Knox writes expresselie, That gladly would the Queen and her secret
Counsel have had all the Assemblies of the Godly, (that is the Rebellious
Disciplinarian) discharged. They notwithstanding make a convention, the
business comes to dispute, Mr. Secretary Leshington makes a doubt whether the
Queen allowed it or no, to whom was this answer returned. If the liberty of
the Church should stand upon the Queens allowance, they were assured not only
to lack Assemblies, but also to lack the public preaching of the Euangel. In
the beginning of your late commotions the Historian that so officioussie styles
himself the Parliaments Secretary mentions a writing published by you,
wherein Page 41.
you affirm. That the power of calling a Synod, in case the Prince be an
enemy to the truth, or negligent in promoting the Churchs good, is in the
Church it self. And that the state of the Church of Scotland at that time was
necessitated to such a course. Nor does your Disciplinarian doctrine make the
Christian Magistrate any more then your Bayliffe to take up your rents, or the
Captain of your guard to defend you (Vedelius renders it ^n more De Episcop.
Constanst^ M. 2. B. of Disc. chapter 10
harsh language.......... faciunt ex iis [Magistratibus] mancipia, imo lictores
and curnifices Episcoporum seu Ministrorum Ecclesiae) To advance the Kingdom
of Jesus Christ...... To defend it against all that would procure its
hurt........ To ^ssist and fortify the Godly proceedings of the Kirk in all
behalfes......... To see that the Kirk be not invaded........ To hold hand as
well to the saving of the Ministers persons from injury and open violence, as
to their rents and possessions. Finally, not a word is there in all that
chapter or book that asscribes to him a syllable of this power, So that the
King may call a Synod when, and whersoever he think fit, and if the toy take
you in the head to anticipate, or procrastinate his time, you will assemble
when, and wheresoever you please for you tell him he ought to hear, and obey
your voice. And your friend Didoclave averres this to be a business that has
no absolute dependence upon him, Non absolute, and simpliciter Cap. De primar.
Reg.
pendere a Christiano Magistratu. If when you have a mind to meet he
prohibites, that must make no demurre, non cunctandum est, non cessandum ab
officio...... For this you pretend an intrinsecal power touching which I demand
what it is, when, where, and how far to be exerciz'd. What old or late
dutiful Christians did use it when any Christian King did forbid it. Who of
the Praelatical party they be that maintain it in their writings or practice,
for I know none that in either extend it to a like latitude with you. And how
manysoever you have of the Papists, all the Popes are not of your side. Leo
confessing that Epist. 43.
he had not power to call a Counsel but the Emperor, no^ durst Liberius call
one against Constantius pleasure. The necessity you frame of meeting for the
execution of the Discipline even in times of persecution may have reference to
an heathen Magistrate or Christian. If to the former, you do it either in
confidence of your power to resist him, in that rebellion, wherein how are you
justified? Or else you run desperately upon your ruin, which is self
murder no martyrdom, for Quis requisivit? by what praecept, or counsel is it
required at your hands? If to the later, there may be at least a fallibilitie
in your judgments, if not an obstinate perverseness in your will. Et quis vos
judices constituit? who made you, that are parties, Arbitratours? If at any
time the ancient Christians assembled, it was where no Imperial edict
restrained them. And then the learned Grotius tells you, Non opus fuisse De
Impersum Pot. cap. 8.
venia, ubi nulla obsturent Imperatorum edicta. What private conferences they
had in the times of heathenish persecution, you know by their apologies were
voy'd of suspicion, which yours never were, but anomia ergapiria the very shops
or Laboratories of rebellion. The Church is not dissolved where dissipline's
not executed: if it were, it should Constantin. De Ario.
be, where it is, at the pleasure of the Magistrate, suspended. To imagine a
final incapacitie of meeting, by perpetual succession of Tyrants has little
either of reason or conscience, it assaults the certitude of faith in Gods
promises, and advances infidelity in his providence. But to give you at
length your pass from this paragraph. Such as you, in a schismatical
Assembly, may, and have frequentlie in Scotland pinned the character of
erroneous upon an upright Magistrate, and a Disciplinarian rebel to save his
credit called a Royal moderate proclamation a tyranous edist.

The Bishops third allegation you find too heavy, and therefore The ultimate
determination of Ecclesiastike causes by the laws of Scotland is not in the
general Assembly.
let fall half of it by the way. You have too good a conceit of your
Parliaments bounty, though had they been as prodigal as you make them, it
little becomes you to proclaim them bankrupts by their favor: Their Acts were
always ratified by your Princes: any which, and whom tell me one wherein this
right Royal was renounced of suspending seditious Ministers from their office,
or if cause were, depriving them of their places. It were a senseless thing to
suppose that the Bishop would deny to the Church a propriety to consult and
determine abo^t religion, doctrine, haeresie, etc. Yet its likely His Lordship
allows it not in that mode which makes her power so absolute as to define,
consummate, authorize the whole business by her self. He has heard the King
to be somewhere accounted a mixed person, and thinks it may be that the holy
oil of his unction is not only to swime on the top, and be fleeted off at
the pleasure of a peevish Disciplinarian Assembly, but to incorporate with
their power. The laws of England have not No more then in the Convocations of
England.
been hitherto so indulgent of liberty to our Convocation, but that the King
in the cases alleged did ever praedominate by his supremacy. And the
Parliament has stood so much upon privilege, that if Religion fetched not her
billet, from West-minster, she could have but a cold lodging at St. Paul's The
book of Statutes is no portable manual for us whom your good brethren have
sent to wander in the world, yet I can help you to one An. 1. Eliz. that
restored the title of supreme to the Queen, and withal provided, that none
should have authority newly to judge any thing to be haeresie, not formerlie
so judged, but the High Court of Parliament, with the assent of the Clergy in
their Convocation. Where the Convocations assent, by the sound, should not be
so determinative as the Parliaments judgment, which (right or wrong) here it
assumes.

As touching appeals (because you will have somewhat here said, Appeals to
the King in Scotland.
though it must be otherwhere handled) No law of Scotland denies an appeal in
things Civil or Ecclesiastike to the King. One yet in force enjoines
subjection unto them, the Act of Parliament in May 1584. which was, That any
persons, either spiritual or Temporal, praesuming (...) decline the judgment
of His Majesty, and His Council, shall incur the pain^ of treason. What you,
call a complaint is in our case an appeal, what taking order, is executing a
definitive judgment, without traversing back the business to Ecclesiastike
Courts, or holding over the rod of a (...) power to awe them into due regular
proceedings. I confess this the Presbyters in Scotland never made good by
their practice. Their appeals were still retrograde from the supreme
Magistrate, and his Council to a faction of Nobles, or a seditious party of
the people. Such is that of Knox, printed at large. Or which in effect is the
same. The Scottish Assemblies, when they had no power, appeald to providence,
when they had whereupon they might rely, unto the sword.

In case of Religion, or doctrine, if the General Assembly, which Court of
Delegates against neither word of God, nor aequitie.
is not infallible, err in judgment, and determine any thing contrary to the
word of God, and the sense of Catholic Antiquity, the King may by a court, of
Orthodoxe Delegates, consisting of no more then two or three (Prelates if he
please) receive better information of truth, and establish that in his Church.
Or, which often hapens in Scotland, If the Presbyters frame Assembly Acts
derogatorie to the rights of his Crown, and praejudicial to the peace of his
people, the King may personally justify his own praerogative and keep the
mischief they invented from becoming a praecedent in law. This does not the
word of God, nor any aequitie prohibit.

The judgment of causes concerning deprivations of Ministers in the year 1584
you would have had come, by way of appellation, to the General Assembly, and
there take final end; but this you could not make good within yourselves, nor
do I find, upon your proponing and craving, it was then, or at any time,
granted you by the King. Two years before, you adventurd not only for your
privilege in that........ but against the Magistrates putting preachers to
silence.......hindering, staying, or disannulling the censures of the Church in
examining any offender.

Rev. In the Scotes Assemblies no causes are agitated but such as the
Parliament All causes agitated in Scottish Assemblies.
has agreed to be Ecclesiastike, etc. Ans: If any Parliament have agreed all
causes of what nature soever, to be Ecclesiastike by reduction, and so of the
Church cognizance, you have that color for your pragmatical Assemblies: but if
you admit of any exception, you have for certain transgressed your limits,
there being no crime, nor praetended irregularitie whatsoever, that stood in
view, or came to the knowledge of the world, that has escaped your discussion,
and censure, and not been served up in your supplicates to be punished.

Rev........ No process about any Church rent was ever cognosced upon in
Scotland Process about Church rent.
but in a Civil Court. Ans. Your imperious, though supplicatorie, prohibition
1576. I allreadie mentioned. In the Assembly at Edinburgh, April 24. 1576. You
concluded........ That you might proceed against unjust possessours of the
patrimony of the Church...... by doctrine, and admonition, and last of all, if
no remedy be, with the censures of the Church. In that at Montrosse June 24.
1595. About setting Benefices with diminution of the rental, etc. you appointed
Commissioners with power to take oaths, call an-inquest of men of best
knowledge in the Country about, to proceed against the Ministry with sentence
of deposition. Master Tho. Craig and the Solicitour for the Church to pursue
the Penssionars in Caitnes for reduction of their pensious. If in no particular
you actuallie proceeded to Church censure^, It was because you foresaw they
would not restrain the corruption no more of the laity, then the Clergy, and
then your menasing petitions sometime obtein'd strength from some partial, or
pusillanimous Parliament; or when you praevail'd not, you wrapped this up with
the rest of your discipline, and put all to the process of a Letter to the
Genesis Assembli at Sterling Aug. 3. 1571.
war. And this was, you know, the mysterious sense of Knox's method; upon
good experience, praescrib'd on his death bed: First protest, then denounce
vengeance, and then to the execution thereof seek redress of God and man. Of
God by fasting, as you did order for this very cause ( wasting of the Church
rents without remedy) in the Assembly at St. Andrews 1582. Of man, by
rebelling, which you practiced no^ long afterward. With which godly advice
that saint shut his teeth, and departed if not (after a minutes repentance as I
hope) in little better peace, then he had lived.

To what follows in the Bishops charge, the legislative power they Reviewer
declines answering about the legislative power.
praetend to, To make ^ules, and constitutions for keeping good order in the
Kirk. To abrogate, and abolish all statutes and ordinances concearning
Ecclesiastical matters that are found noisome, and unprofitable, and agree not
with the time, or are abused by the people. And all this without any
reclamation, or appellation to any judge Civil, or Ecclesiastical, we have not
one word in answer from Mr. Baylie. And indeed being taken up so much with his
seemings, and fallacious apparences, he may sometimes overlooke the realities
of what allegations he dislikes; for this indeed he had very good reason,
knowing the natural, and inseparable connection to be such between it, and the
power of jurisdiction, that to whomsoever belongs the supremacy of the one,
upon him necessarily descends the praerogative of the other.

For the fourth objection. If the Reviewer had minded the ill consequences
Danger in asserting the divine right of Ecclesiastike jurisdiction
upon the antecedent of Ecclesiastike jurisdiction by divine right, he would
not have held that conclusion at large without professing an infallible
assurance that it is haereditarie to the Presbytery. Some danger there may be
of drawing after it an adaequate right in that ominous Episcopal order, which
with no great difficulty may be proved from time, to time to have executed
this jurisdiction he means. Howsoever this inconvenience he gains by it,
That, if it be such, it is indispensable, and turns all the confessed
indulgence of the Scottish Assemblies into sin for Nulli homini licet cuiquam
juris divini Hug. Grot:. De Imper. Sum. Po^.
gratiam facere. What divines there have been in the world of another mind
(which are all except Donatus the haeretikes disciples among the rigid Papists,
Anabaptists Scottish and Scotizing Presbyterians, who demand as boldly as their
Master, ( Quid est Imperatori cum Ecclesia?) he Scottish D^natist.
may read (though I look not that he, nor all his brethren should muster up
abilities to answer) in the nineth chapter of the forecited famous Grotius's
book. Under the safe conduct of whom the Bishop may travail with the truth of
these contradiction^ about him through all the Assemblies highway men of the
Scots. That all Ecclesiastike power flows from the Magistrate...... (...)
Ecclesiasticos judices per Archiepiscopos Polit. Anglic. Ad Reg. Iac.
and Episcopos derivata a Regia potestate jurisdictio Ecclesiastica consistit.
That the Magistrate may praescribe a rule how Ecclesiastike censures should be
regulated, and in case of resistance, see them executed by his power.
Constitutum fuit eis ergon ta krinomena para ton episcopon agein tous archontas
kai tous diaconoum^nous autois Sozomen.
stratiotas. That all the officers praetended to be appointed by Christ for the
Government of his Church, if they govern it not according to his, and
Apostolic example, may be laid aside, and such a kind of Governers be put in
their place as the Magistrate shall be pleased to appoint, as more just, and
upright stewards in that trust. Non frustra gladium gerit potestas, sed vindex
est in omnes male agentes, Eliens.
ergo etiam in eos qui circa (...) delinquunt......Iurisdictionis enim est
re^egare e loco sive in locum...... That it is not yet universallie, and
unquaestionablie defined that the spiritual sword, and Keys are in any other
then the hand of Christ. Nor that ever his Apostles, and Priests laid claim to
an absolutely intrinse^al right to execute the power of either Vtinam
exscindantur qui vos perturbant. Videtur non imperantis sed optantis Apostoli,
That for the sword. Sacerdos quidem officium exhibet sed nullius potestatis
jura exercet. That he cites out of St. Ambrose for the Keys, him I cite, but
do not, being not obliged, assert any thing. Your difference herein. (I mean
the power of the Magistrate) from the Warner is Donatisme an haeresie so great
as deserved, it seems, to be anathematized by the Catholic Church your
practice schism, whereby you rend your selves from the Congregations of all
the Reformed, as Vedelius has showed you, And whether it be De Episcopat.
Constant. M.
not rebellion by your laws, I leave to the verdict of your 15. Godfathers,
who gave it in to be such against your differing brethren at Aberdene.

Had Mr. Baylie in his answer, to what he calls the last challenged
Disciplinarians call resistance against the person obedience to the office of
the Magistrate
principle, took upon him to alter that axiom in Ethikes, and make it, Nolenti
non fis i^juria, the dispute had been only whether his authority, or
Aristotle's; should have carried it, But when he deletes the commentary upon it,
he conjures the sense into a circle of his own by such language as none but
himself, and his spirits understand, Indeed for a madman to have his hands
bound, who, were they at liberty, would do himself mischief, For a sick man
to have physike forced into his stomach, which may work his recoverie,
otherwise desperate, if his aversion be countenanced, may be courteous violence
improved to their good; But to contervene a Magistrates commands praetending
punctual obedience thereby, if not an advancement of his power: To wrest the
sword out of his hands, and disarme him for the security of his person; is a
piece of invisible justice, and a favor left by all law and reason to be
wholly at the disposal of the Discipline. But in Scotland, you say, there is
no such case, etc. Which must relate to matter of fact, or right: If to the
former, I must crave liberty to aver, That scarce any one of your Synods
proceedings was ever freely justified by the consent of the Magistrate for the
time. That most were not, I have, and shall sufficiently prove here, and
otherwhere. If to the latter, your self confess that your book of Discipline
(which includes the jurisdiction you have) could not pass the Parliament 1590.
Nor can you make appear where ever after it did with an exception only
against the chapter* De Diaconatu. The Reviewer too bold with his Majesty.


In what follows, you praetend too much acquaintance with the King, to know
what His Majesty ^ontroverts in his thoughts, with whom, I have hear^, your
late treaty was not so particular and closse as to make what discovery you
wished, and aimed at, And what you did is not so authorized as to strengthen
your proof, His Royal, and too gracious concessions having met with such
unworthie, imprudent, refusal by persons, through habitual rebellion, not yet
disposed to their good. As touching the case which the Bishop intimates, I can
not wonder the account of it so odious as not to be met with by your answer,
since it sets in your sight the horror of your many years sin, with the
guilt of which you would gladly run into dens, and caves, or move the hills,
and mountains to cover you. In the mean The Disciplinarians no company for
the Primitive Christian.
time in vain you hope to have any the ancient Christians company, Who in
times of their persecution never held public Assemblies in their Edenburghs
Imperial Cities, never armed themselves to maintain the divine ordinance of
the Discipline, Though, had they done it, little would their praecedent avail
you, the just imposition of a Christian King being very unlike the heathen
Emperous persecution. Nor was the Presbytery, that divine ordinance of
Discipline, practiced by the perse^uted in the wilderness.

Mr. Baylie in this time, by his affected diversions, and devious The Revi^wers
cunning in passing over what he dares not, can not answer.
mazes, having run himself half out of breath, begins to think on the
shortest way home, to find which he takes a large leap over the hedge (and by
virtue of some Disciplinarian privilege passes, two whole pages of
consequence unanswered. Perit libertas nisi illa con^emnis, quae ^ugem imponu^)
yet not so clear, but that one bramble has caught him by the sleeve, and, if
the truth were known, I believe, many more have pricked him to the heart, for
one of most danger I advise him to seek out a timely remedy, and stand to
the charity of his aequitable comparers for the rest. it is that sharp
quaestion which the Bishope propounds. Who shall judge when the Church is
corrupted? the Magistrates or Churchmen? If the Magistrate^, why not over you
as well as others? If the Churchmen. why not others as well as you?

Mr. Gilespies Theorem. because prefsing such downright rebellion he, His
unkindnesse to his brother Gilespie whose theoremes are the doctrine of the
whole Presbytery
without any brotherly love, leaves on the shoulders of a single Presbyter,
and will not afford one fingar of the Presbytery to ease him, though the
tantamout be not so unconsequential as to need a stake to help it down in a
swallow, It being very well known that if Mr. Baylie should not tantamont in
this business, the Assembly brethren would give him a drench in the Scottish
horn, and send him to grass with the long-eard creatures, as being no fit
company for the late more rational rebels in a Synod. The consequence, if it
must need be such, from one particular, denied by none, to a universal
affirmative, as strange as it looks, may be made good by the new
Disciplinarian logike, Mr. Baylie himselve having more then once professed an
identitie in the Scottish with the Reformed disciplines abroad, in the harmony
of which I find such a canon as this. Si Minister donum habet aliquid ad
aedificationem conscribendi, illud typis non Harm. Sy^. Belg-cap. 1
mandabit, quin prius a class examinetur. and probetur. From the Class he
knows it takes a remove to the provincial Synod, and thence to the national
Assembly. Now if the Reviewer will not tell us in what Assembly, Mr. Gilespie
was censured, or this theoreme of his disavow'd, because it will be such a
singular case as never was heard of, Rebellion disclaimed in a Scottish
Presbyterian Assembly, otherwise then in a Catholic mist which never drops in
any particulars, he shall have the reputation of catching this unconsequence
for once. But as the Bishops says, Take nothing, and h^ld it fast if he can.
Beside he knows there are many other such theoremes of Mr. Gilespies upon
which the Bishop has built many high accusations, which the Discipline must
acknowledge, and must be meant to be of that number which had the approbatorie
suffrages of the Universities in Holland viz. Leyden, and Vtrecht, or else he
spoke little truth, and as little to the purpose in his Epistle. Yet to help him
to somewhat of better authority. He is desired to take notice, That the
substance of this theoreme was not declined in a protestation made (he knows
by whom) in Edinburgh Parliament 1558. In the dutiful letter to the Queen
Regent from the faithful Congregation of Christ Jesus in Scotland 22. May
1549. In another from the Lords of the Congregation, 2. Jul. 1559. In an answer
to the Queens proclamation by the Lords, Baron^, and other brethren of the
Congregation 1559. In a declaration of the Lords against another proclamation
of the Queens 1559. To all these it is undeniable that the Assemblies adhaer'd,
or indeed rather the Lords etc, to them. In the Church Assemblie's supplication
28. May 1561. In the vote of the whole Assembly 1563. In the Superintendents,
Ministers and Commissioners letter to the Bishops, and Pastors in England they
write, If authority urge you farther ye ought to oppose your selves boldly,
not only to all power that dare extol it self against God. but also against
all such as dar^ burden the consciences of the faithful (they mean'd the same
opposition themselves made in Scotland) In the seventh article framed by the
Assembly 1567. Beside what was very particularly pressed by Knox in Sermons,
Conferences, letters, etc. all acknowledge the sense of several Assemblies. But
all these authorities are absolet, the several ends of such speeches, and
actions being long since accomplished in Scotland. However, M. Baylie denies
that the maxim i^ hand was the fountain of any our late miseries, or the
cause at all of the loss of our Sovereign.

Fati ista culpa est, nemo fit fato nocens. If he had but in kindness
delivered his meaning at large, and Gilespie's theoreme the rule of the late
Disciplinarian practice.
quitted as well his independent brethren of their bloody performance in the
fifth act, as he does the Presbyterian properties that carried on the rebellion
in the four first of the Tragoedie they might have masked merrily together in
their antike disguises of innocence, and pointed out to some silly credulous
spectators the guilt of this horrid murder in the stars. But I shall reach
him a ladder, where by he may ascend to the top of this truth, (not aninch
higher then Edinburgh Cross) and what else he wants when he comes there, to
do justice accordingly as he shall be enlightened upon his own self for his
share in this maxim, and unpardonable mischief, The first step hereof begins
near the ground with the mean, and ^aser sort of the people, who on the 23.
Jul. 1637. when by his Blessed Majesty's command, the service book was to be
read in Edinburgh Great Church, fell into the extraordinary ways of clapping
hands, cursing, and outcries, throwing stones at the windows, and aiming at
the Bishop with a stool, Continuing this hubbub in the streets, bes^tting the
counsel house, whether the reverend learned, and worthy Bishop of Galloway was
forced to fly for his refuge. Their outcries being commonly such as this. God
defend all those who will defend Gods cause, and God confound the service
book, and all the maintainers of it, of whom the King must needs be mean'd to
be one, who had expressclie authorized it. Upon this follow two extraordinary
petitions, one in the names of the Noblemen, Gentry, Ministers, Burgesses
against the service book, and book of Canons, which being not answered to
their mind at Sterlin, and otherwhere, themselves in protesting did the same
thing which they had called the ^proare of raskals at Edinburgh. From
protesting they mount up to covenanting, and by that engage multitudes of
people to attend them at pleasure in affronting His Majesty's Commissioner.
With whom when they came to capitulate they gave this extraordinary answer,
That they would rather renounce their baptism then Covenant (good Christians)
or abate one word or syllable of the literal rigor of it. If Mr. Baylie has
any mind to go farther, I shall desire him to step up beyond the preachers
persuading the people to arm themselves and to meet in the streets
(dutifullie) to enter^aine His Majesty's proclamation. Their protestations
against that and the rest, *with such loyal expressions as this. That if the
King will not call a general Assemblic, which shall allow of their proceedings,
they themselves will. Their branding the subscription of their own confession
of faith with the most hideous, and horrible name of the very depth, and
policy of Satan. Their* pulpit imprecations, God s^atter them in Israel, and
divide them in Jacob, who where the authors of this scattering, and divisive
counsel, of whom (as s^range as it seem) the King again must be principal.
Their grand imposture in Michelson a maid, about whom their Ministers cosin'd
the people into an implicit faith that she was inspired by God, and while she
vented their devilish rebellion in her fits Rollokes blasphemous praetense for
his silence, That he durst not speak while his Master was speaking in her.
Another having these words in his Sermon. Let us never give over till we have
the King in our power. Another, That the s^arpest war was rather to be
endured then the least error in doctrine or di^spline. Their maintaining this
position among the rest. That Nec enim dissimulabant foederati, nimis di^ apud
Scotos regnatum esse Monarchis, nec recte cum illis agi posse Stuarto vel uno
superstite Hist. M. Montisros*
it is lawful for subjects to make a Covenant and combination without the
King, and to enter into a band of mutual defense against the King and all
persons whatsoever: Their laying open the true meaning of their protesting,
Covenanting, Arming, etc. That Scotland had been too long a Monarchy and that
they could never d^e well so long as one of the Stuarts was alive. Their
raising an army for their exti^pation, and meeting K. Chapter 1. to that purpose
in the field. Their renewing and continuing, the war when their first design
had been obstructed by His Majesty's unexpected, unwelcome grant of their
demands. Their reasonable dealing with the King when he unhappilie made their
Army his refuge, by cheating his pious facility of his strength, and
delivering up his naked person to their fellow Rebels, upon conditions little
coulorable in words, not at all justifiable in substance, and sense, Their
laying chains upon His Majesty, when a prisoner, and linking his crown with
iron propositions. Beside what was acted at Derbie house and otherwhere in the
dark, and not improbablie agreed on at Cynthia's midnight Revells, when
Cromwell was in Scotland. And all this under the fallacy of exstraordinarie
refisting, reforming.

And now let Mr. Baylie look not up to the stars, but down into the depth
of hell, where that maxim was hammered before ever Gilespie filled it over, and
see whether it were not the fountain of all our miseries, and the cause of the
loss of our late Sovereign.

The quaestion that follows about defensive arms (though there No defensive
arms for subjects.
has been no such thing as a free Parliament, and without freedom it is none)
I return on himselve, and demand Did ever his Majesty, or any of his advised
Counselors, I add, Did ever loyal Parliament in England, or Scotland,
declare, or intimate in what cases, how extraordinary soever, they thought it
lawful? I retort this. The unhappiness of the Disciplinarian Presbyters did
put the seditious part of the Parliament on these courses, which did begin, and
promote all our misery And were so wicked as to the very last to endeavor to
break the bands asunder of reason, justice, honor and a well informed
conscience, wherein His Majesty professed to the world the hand of God, and
the laws of the land had bound him. The peaceable possession of His Majesty's
Kingdoms Episcopacie no obstruction to His Majesty's peace.
depends not upon his Clergies conditionate consent to have Episcopacie laid
aside. A handful of Scots, with an hypocritical Assemblies benediction in
their knapsackes, could they hold their wind when they got over Tweed, and
swell up to the picture of Boreas in the face, would not be mistaken for
probable Vmpires or overruling Elders, in the quarrel. Nor can Mr. Baylie
possess any prudent men of the loyal lay party, that, that order obstructs
the King from his happiness. Why it may not be laid aside the unanswerable
reasons in the 9. and 17. chapters of Eik. Basil. His Royal fathers book will
abundantly satisfy any man, that will rest in what he can not deny. Where he
will find enough of such devout Rhetorike, and Religious logike as this I must
now in charity be thought desirous to praeserve that Government in its right
constitution, as a matter of Religion, wherein both my judgment is fully
satisfied, that it has of all other the fullest Scriptures grounds, and also
the constant practice of all Christan Churches, till of late years the tumul
^arinesse of people, or the factiousnesse, and pride of Presbyters [Reviewe
that Mr. Baylie] or the covetousness of some States, and Princes gave occasion
to some men's wits to invent new modells, and propose them under specious titles
of Christ's Government, Scepter, and Kingdom (which are the Scottish titles as I
take it) the better to serve their turns, to whom the change was beneficial.
The reasons that convinced the Royal Father have so confirmed the Royal Son
His Majesty now being, that Mr. Baylie dares not say (what he so
praesumptuoussie intimates) that he ever asked the consent of his Canterburian
Praelates to the alteration of that government. If, without asking they
spontaneoussie spoke their conscience in due, season, there was little boldness
in it, and as little in printing, which has been often as much, and more at
large, in volumes about the unlawfullnesse of See the learned and judicious
Digges upon this subjects.
subjects taking up of arms, where Parliaments have unanswerablie been proved
to be such, though the name of tyranny is very unhandsomelie, unjustie,
maliciously used in this case, and let him speak out if he means to
attribute it to the King.

CHAPTER III. The last appeal to the supreme Magistrate justifiable in
Scotland.
THe Bishop considered that the Kings supremacy is the same in Appeal in
Scotland from a General Assembly neither irrational, nor illegal.
Scotland, as in England, and upon that grounds the aequitie of ultimate
appeal. The al^issimo either of the Parliament, or Assembly puts them not
above the capacity of Courts, and so makes them not coordinate with the King.
What allayes you have for government I know not, and therefore can not close
with you in the term, till you give me an undisputable definition of the
thing, which you call a moderat^ Monarchy, and tell me in what part of the
world I may find it, I know of none any where yet that inhibites appeals to
the Kings person, If the Empire may be the standerd to the rest, the learned
Grotius, that had better skill in the laws, then you, or I, says. That in
causes of Delegacie semper appellatio consessa fuit ad Imperatorem, si ex
Imperiali jussione judicatum esset, aut ad Iudicum quemcunque, si ex judiciali
praecepto, which holds good against your general Assembly, if that judges
caregali jussione* and that it does so is clear from your Assembly Act, April
24. 1578. wherein it petitioneth the King to set, and establish your policy, a
part whereof is your Assembly judication. That it is, for the most part,
ordered to the King in his Courts, is not any way to confine his power, but to
free him from frequent impertinencies, and unseasonable importunities of
trouble, or, it may be, a voluntary, but no obligatorie, Royal condescension,
to avoid your querulous imputation of arbitrarie partiality, and tyranny in
judicature. Therefore you injure the Bishop by converting his assertion into a
negative confession, As if when he says it is to the King in Chancerie, he
must needs acknowledge. It can be neither to the King out of Chancerie, nor to
him there but with collateral aequipotential Assistants. Whereas Altar.
Damascen.
your friend Didoclave complains that our appeals are ever progress^ ab unico
ad unicum, wherein, whether he mean'd an aggregate, or personal unity, I leave
you to interpret. That an appeal is not permitted from your Lords of session,
or Parliament in Scotland, is because whatsoever is regularlie determined there
receives its ratification from the King. But if one, or other in their session
without him, should determine a case evidentlie, undeniablie, destructive to
the rights of his crown, or liberties of his people, whether His Majesty may
not admit an appeal, and assume his coercive power to restrain their license,
I think no loyal subject in Scotland will controvert, As touching your
Assemblies, King James tells you, It is to be generally observed that no
privilege, that any King gives to one particular body, or state within the
Kingdom of convening, and consulting among themselves (which includes
whatsoever they do when they are convened, and consulting) is to be understood
to be privative given unto them, and so the King thereby depriving himself of
his own power, and praerogative, but only to be given cumulative unto them
(as the lawyers call it) without any way den^ding the King of his own power,
and authority. This His Majesty alleged against the Ministers at Aberdene,
whom he accuses not only of convening, but acting after they were convened,
He particularly mentions their setting down the diet of the next Assembly,
and His Council adds their endavour to reverse, and overthrow all those good
orders, and godly constitutions formerlie concluded for keeping of good order
in their Church. If you allege that His Majesty's Commissioner was not there,
then you grant me their acts are not justifiable without him, And that all are
not necessarily with him, I argue from the language of the Commission, whereby
they meet, which limits them thus secundum legem, and praxim, against which if
any thing be acted, upon appeal the Kings praerogative may rectify it at
pleasure, if not, any judge may praetend to be absolute, and then the King must
be absolutely nothing, having committed, or delegated all power from himself.
What civil law of Scotland it is, that prohibites appeals from the General
Assembly, you should do well to mention in your next, I know none, nor did
King James think of any when he cited his distinction from the Scottish
Lawyers, as well as any other.

Where an Assembly proceeds contrary to the laws of God, and man, Which is
not impossible, while it may consist of a multitude, men neither the best, nor
most able of the Kingdom, the Bishop thinks an appeal to a legal Court of
delegates constituted, by a superior power, might be neither unseeming, nor
unreasonable. The law of old never intended they should be the weakest of all
Court; Where it has so happened, by your own rule, page 22. The Delegates,
not Delegacie, are to be charged. Such heretofore in England as employed
mercenarie officials, for the most part, were mercenarie Bishops, and if they
had been cut to the core, would have been found, I doubt, Disciplinarian in
heart, though Episcopal in title. The Scots way of managing Ecclesiastical
causes is not more just, because more derogatorie to the right of the King, And
the late Martyred King found it not 3. Paper An. 1574
more safe, and therefore told Mr. Henderson plainly the papacy in a
multitude might be as dangerous as in one, and how that might be Gualter writ
to Count Vnit-glupten in a letter. Emergent hinc novae tyrannidis cornua,
paulatim cristas attollent ambitios^ Ecclesiarum pastores, quibus facile fuerit
suos assessores in suas parts attrahere, cum ipsii inter hos primatum teneant.
He might have found the experiment of it in Scotland. Nor can it be more
satisfactorie to those rational men, with whom the Bishops arguments are
praevalent, beside what else may be effectually alleged against it.

Allthough the two instances, the Bishop brings, for stopping appeals were
accompanied with so many treasonable circumstances, as might have enlarged his
chapter into a volume, and deleted the credit of a Scottish Disciplinarian
Assembly out of the opinion of all the Cristians in the world; Yet His
Lordship thought good to furnish his reader with better authority from the
second Book of Discip. ch 12. which shall here meet you again to crave your
acquaintance. From the Kirk there is no reclamation, or appellation to any
Judge Civil, or Ecclesiastical within the Realm. The Rebellious, and
insolent disciplinarian proceedings against the too Rt Reverend Arch- Bishops
Montgomerie, and Adamson.


The reputation of the two Reverend Archbishops Montgomerie, and Adamson
depends not upon the sentence of a turbulent, and envious Synod, much less any
single malicious Presbyter in a pamphlet, with whom we know it is crime heinous
enough to be a Bishop, and shall not want his vote to make them excommunicate.
Their manifold high misdemeanors are mentioned in the censure of the
Presbytery of Striveling, for admitting Montgomerie to the temporalitie of the
Bishoprike of Glasgow, and his own for aspiring thereto. Assembly 1587. And
of the other for taking the Kings commission to sit in Parliament 1584. In the
last Act of which his commission is printed to register his guilt. The
principal of their evil patrons among the wicked Statesmen (I mean next under
the King, to whom Answ. to the Prosession and Declar. made by Marq. Hamilt.
1638.
you yield that praerogative at least) is said to be the Earl of Arran, who
deserves that character for being second, at that time, in His Majesty's
favor, and he is said by your brethren to have taken them into the Parliament.
So that, lay their commission, and Earl Arrans courtesy together (which
without the other had implied the pleasure of the King,) they took not,
without authority, upon themselves as you said) the Episcopal office, nor
place in that Parliament.

Whether the pride, and contempt of the Prelates, or Presbyters were greater
Vindic. Epist. Hier. Ph^ad.
may be judged in the case of Archbishop Montgomerie, by the Assemblies
slighting not only His Majesty's letters, but Messengers such as were two
Heralds at Arms, His Master of Requests, who in the Kings name inhibiting
their proceedings they send him word by Macgil Supplicum lib. ^rum Magister. Se
p^sse salv^ Reg^s imperio de causa t^ta cognoscere.
they can salve their obedience, and yet go through with the business,
Setting up Durie, and Belcanqual, two Edinburgh Ministers, to ^aile against the
E^ L^nox* and when they are accused, quitting them by their Ecclesiastike
praerogative. Putting their scholars at Glasgow in Arms, and occasioning
bloodshed in resistance of the Principal Magistrates of that place, against
whom they afterward proceeded His Majesty summous them to his judicature at
St. Andrews, they send their orators instead of coming themselves. The King
exchangeth a promise of security, for theirs of suspending the censure. They
admit the condition, but collude with His Majesty, leaving an underhand power
with some select brethren, to give sentence, as occasion should serve. When
they get loose they contest with his Majesty by a serpent-supplicate, which
when it creepes at the foot, wounds to the heart. Tell him boldly he plays
the Pope, and takes a sword in his hand, more then belongs to him. The Earl of
Arran demanding who dares subscribe such a paper; Andrew M^lvin answers
undauntedlie for himself, and some others, for have snatcheth the pen out of a
scribes hand that was near him, writes his name, and exhorts his accomplices to
do the like. By letter to His Majesty they show how far His Majesty had
been uninformed, and upon m^information pr^judg'd the praerogative of Jesus
Christ, and the liberties of his Church (what becomes of the Kings, when this
is pleaded?) They enact, and ordain, that none should procure any such
warrant, or charge, under the pain of excommunication. Where K. James did
acknowledge the aequitie of the Church proceeding^ in these cases I desire to
be informed, I am sure K. Charles 1. many years since Larg D clar. page 308.
has writ, That they did wickedl^e, and that which they could not do. And
that it is a very reproveable instance. Which to have been ever his fathers
opinion, I have under the hand of one of the most learned, Marg. not upon
Potest. of the Genesis Assemb. a^ Edenb. Cross December. 18. 1638.
knowing men, and eminent historians in your Kingdom, As likewise that they
did never confess their crimes, nor renounce their Bishop-rikes etc, but that
they were most cruelly persecuted by that firebrand of schism in the Kirk,
and sedition in the state. Andrew Melvin and his subscribing Associates, and
made so odious to the people by their excommunication, that they suffered most
grievous penury, and in the end were sterved to death, which did not quench
the malice of their merciless enemies, who after their death continued
persecuting their names, and memories, making them infamous by false
supposititious recantations, whereof they themselves were the authors, and
publishers. Others, that acknowledge a word, or two to this purpose, that drops
from Archbishop Adamson, say he did it, when set on the rack by his hunger,
being feign to beg bread of his enemies, who, glad of the occasion, sold their
charity by weight* for his Qui occasion laeti palinodiam ei per vim
expressam, sed in - numeris a se locis inter-polatam typis publicarunt. The
Bishops Appeal not derogatorie to the Kings personal Proerogative.
self seeming-conviction, and when they had it, being too greedy to gain
damnation to themselves, did sophisticate every syllable with a lie.

The Bishops in their Declinatour against the Assembly of Glasgow, (if you
remember well) appeal to no general Assembly, otherwise then as it shall
pleace His Majesty to constitute it, and personally be present, or by his
Commissioner, without whom, they acknowledge no authority it has. They
refer it to His Majesty to call one to repair their injury, by way of
humble desire, or direction, no way derogating from; nor impairing his
separate, absolute praerogative, to redress all personally, if he please.
Their expressions relating to Royal power in this particular are such as
follow -- So that they praeventing, and not proceeding by warrant of Royal
authority -- May we not therefore entreat my Lord Commissioner His ^race, in
the words of the Fathers of the fourth General Council at Chalcedon, Mitte
for as superflues. For discharge of our duty to God, to his Church, and to our
sacred Sovereign, lest by our silence we betray the Church is right, His
Majesty's authority, and our own consciences. -- And we most humbly entreat
His Grace to intercede with the Kings Majesty, that he may appoint a free, and
lawful General Assembly. -- to whom [Dr. Rob. Hamilton] by these praesents
we give our full power, and express mandate to praesent the same in, or at the
said Assembly, or where else it shall be necessary to be used, (where is that
Mr. Baylie?) with all submission, and obedience di^e to our gracious
Sovereign, and His Majesty's High Commissioner. All which are clauses
assertive of His Majesty's supremacy over General The Reviewer mistake^ the
scope of the Bishops warning.
Assemblies, and implie his power to take cognizance of their demeanor.
Though, after all this compliance with your method, and countenancing a seeming
pertinencie in your arguments, I must seasonablie put you in mind that you are
very much mistaken in the Bishops meaning, and here, as otherwhere, maintain a
blindeconflict which your self. For allthough His Lordship often take
advantage of your Assembly proceedings, as contrary to your laws, and
justifiable establishment of the Ecclesiastike power in your Kingdom; yet,
where there is a concordance of your practice, with your rule, if accompanied
with inconvenience of state, incroachment upon that just praerogative, which
Monarchs otherwhere do, or may, assume, if destructive to that liberty of the
people, which is given them by the Gospel, and Christian freedom sealed to
them in their baptism; if disagreeing with the primitive practice for the
first five, or six hundred years after Christ you lie open to the force of
his arguments, though you ward the blow from falling upon your Church in its
own peculiar, as constituded in your Country. For his Lordships endeavor is
not only (though in part) to show how tyrannical your discipline is to your
selves, but how praejudicial, and destructive it may prove to us in England, if
(through want of caution, or a facile yiedling to your insolent attempts,) way
should be made for you to propagate what you call the Kingdom of Jesus Christ,
but is indeed the tyranny of Satan, and the second practice of Lucifers
ambition, (To banish Gods Anointed from the earth, since he faild in his
project of turning God himself out of heaven) and we be ensnared in the like
Presbyterian slaverie with the Scots. Therefore you see he entitled his book,
A Warning to take ^ced of the Scottish Discipline, etc. And were it not, that
you would clamor in your next pamphlet, you were unanswered, this
advertisement might pass, with any rational reader, for a refutation of, at
least, half your book.

If I should prosecute you with the many appeals that have been made before
the Bishops declinatour of the Assembly at Glasgow I know you would run to
your cover of complaints page 20. of your book. What others have been since
will be brought to your remembrance in such a flying roll as the Prophet
Z^charie, mentions (unless a Chapter 5. v. 1.
gracious pardon be given you upon your knees) when His Majesty shall by Gods
assistance have power to chastise your rebelling, cursing, covenanting,
excommunicating, imprisoning, murdering, decreeing, the confusion of his Royal
family, and three flourishing Kingdoms in your Assemblies.

CHAPTER IV. Seditious, and Rebellious Ministers in Scotland seldom, or never
censured by the Assembly.
HEre Mr. Baylie lays faster hold upon the title, then the Bishops Sedition,
and rebellion not censured by the Discipline.
evidences in the Chapter, and because sedition, and rebellion are charged home
to the conscience of the Presbyters, and their usual indemnitie imputed to the
Discipline, he would feign step over these public enormities, to personal
vices; against which (by his leave) the Ecclesiastike rigor is not such, but
it can admit of very frequent indulgences, and many times convert the guilt, or
shame of such heinous transgressions, to the glory of their Gospel, and a more
certain sign of the sinners election by grace, according to John Knox's
divinity after proof made against Paul Meffane. The treason of Hist. of
Reform. 4. book.
Judas, the adultery of David, and abnegation of Peter, did derogate nothing
from the glory of Christ's Evangel, nor yet the doctrine which before they had
taught, but declared the one to be a reprobate, and the other to be an
instrument, in whom mercy must surmount judgment. Nay, if they find it
advantageous to their discipline, these declamers against adultery, and blood,
will make religious applications to any, as they did to Murray their
Regent-bastard and murderer (to say no more of him) whom they made the greatest
saint upon the earth, and the most eminent patron of their Church. That your
pulpits have been perduellionis plaustra, the common stages for sedition, and
treason. I have made appear upon an old item somewhere else. And because you
had not enough of them for the last old Comoedie you were to act, how you did
mount it in halls, schools, and other Scorish Presbyters mounting in halls
schools etc.
profane places, is delivered unto us upon Royal authority in his late
Maejsties large Declaration 1639. Where is to be found such loyal doctrine as
this. One in Edinburgh, upon his Majesty's urging subscription to your own
Confession of faith, said It was an Italian, and a devellish device, first to
make them renounce God, and perjure themselves, and then afterward there was an
intention to destroy their bodies; and so that this subscription imported no
less, then the destruction both of their bodies, and souls. Rollocke did as
much upon a scaffold in publishing a wicked, and rebellious protestation,
Another, That though there were never so many Acts of Parliament against the
Covenant, yet it ought to be maintained against them all. And Andrew Cant since
charged His Majesty thus to his face, Awake thou lump of day, thou wast not
sleeping, when thou gave out the bloody commissione to James Graham. Of all
which I desire Mr. Baylie to name one that suffered any censured from a Synod.
what privilege these, or any other scandalous crimes had in England, or
Ireland, the High Commission, and Civil censures can clear. But the Reviewers
conscience can tell how many such took shelter under the wings of the
Covenant, who were threa^ned process, if they subscribed not, and, having done
it, passed for very zealous, pious brethren in the cause. Their names, and
infirmities, if Mr. Bayilie has not, I have charity to conceal, Or, if I had
not (could their ordination be justified, and they accounted of our
brotherhood) I should think my self obliged to it under the penalty of the
An. 436. Ancient Canons against Ministers accusers of their br^thren.
55. Canon of the Council of Carthage. Episcopus accusatores fratrum
excommunicet and si emendaverint vitium* recipiat ^s ad communionem, non ad
Clerum. If he bear'd the like reverence to Antiquity when he speaks so
broadlie of the Bishop of Derrie, he might bethink himself of the 57. Canon.
Clericus maledicus, maxim in sacerdotibus cogatur ad postu^andum veniam, si
noluerit, degradetur, nec unquam ad officitsm, absque satisfactione, revocetur.
And to give His Lordship his due interest in the prudent provision of the
Church, I direct the reader to that in the Council of Constantinople, De
accusatoribus Orthodoxorum Epis^oporum non admittendis, which is to be found in
the edition of Chr. Iustell, where he shall see by how many clauses Reviewer no
competent witnsse against Bishops.
Mr. Baylie is excluded from being admitted to enter any accusation against
him, first, by the Religion he professes, adjudg'd as bad as haeresie by the
ancient Canons for decreeing in conventi^les against the authority of Bishops,
antisynagontas tois kano^ikois ^emin episcoposs.......... And whether upon the
several grounds that follow, an Oecumentical may not reject him, hoo^
kathybrisanta tous kano^as, kai ^n ecclesiastiken lymenamenon ^axian, as a
reproachful despiser of Canons, and a bane to the eutaxie of the Church; let
any of his aequitable compare^ consider. Yet, I think, I shall break no canon
by retorting his quaestion, his acts being so public* and himself
autocatacrit^s, convinced under his hand in his book, Did the Reviewer never
hear of a Presbyterian, sibb to Mr. Baylie, who to this day was never (but may
be in good time) called to any account for flagrant scandals of such crimes
(even the same the Bishop mentions) sedition, and treason, which (as well in
Scotland, as in any other Kingdom) are punishable by the Gallows? These
crimes, above any, deserve civil cognizance, from which as free as the Scottish
Churchmen have been, I dare undertake to prove out of their story, That there
was hardly ever Synod in Scotland (Presbyterian I mean) but was guilty of
Rebellion, or blood, having ever made their covenants with death, and their
agreement with hell having made lies their refuge, and under falsehood hid
themselves as they did Isai. 28. 15. So that Marian^, and his disciples,
whether in Italic, or Spain, or all the world over, can not in aequitie have
laid such devilish doctrines, such public murders of Princes, and Nobles to
their charge.

Foedus umbraru^s perit. As constant a Covenanter as you are with He will not
be at peace and chariti^ with the dead.
the living, I see the holiest league can not chain up your furious malice
against the dead. Your naming Bishop Aderson, For his sin, and that blessed
Martyr the L. of Canterbury for his patron, speaks you a son of neither
Christian charity, nor truth, If Presbytery had been as old as the Council of
Nice, I perceive your saucy fingars would have snatched the libells out of
Constantines breast, and your zealous tongues, that are made seven times hotter
otherwhere, would have runn the hazard to lick the Bishops faults out of the
fire. I wish you had helped me to a better bargain of your silence, and not
forced me to give you this, which I am loath to part with, in exchange for your
blabbing That if all be true that is in print (which for your credit I hope is
not) Your Discipline had no other then a Sodomite for its patron, some think
you may take your choice of French, or Scot.

How this abomination has been propagated with your Discipline, (though by it
no Disciple) I leave them to relate, who, to shame you into some speachlesse
civilitie, have had reason to be your Domestike observers, if they can frame it
by chaste language in a riddle. Yet because your Presbytery shall gain no
credit, if I can help it, by any counterfeit innocence, I will return you a
line or two in Latin, which may inform you that such an ill weed has grow'n
even where the sharp sickle of the Eldership has praetended G^alth. Epist.
Erast. Aug. 3. 1570.
to cut down all wickedness before it. Hoc tamen dissimulare non possum, in
Palatinatu nulla prius scandala ta^ atrocia incidisse quam ea sint quae
seniorum illic constitutorum culpa acciderunt. Et quis, obs^ro, eos postea
seret correptores, qui sceleratissim^m hominem Siculum Sodomitam, and eundem
pestilentissimum calum^iatorem (you inherit at least the upper half of his
qualities) impune elabi passi sunt, ne ad Iudices legitimos traberetur. If you
name Bishop Aderton in your next, you will force me to break the bond of
modesty with my Readers, and make me lay this horrid scene nearer home. If you
will show your self a better Christian, or Scholar, and strengthen your
arguments with the ruins of Bishops doctrines, where you find them, and not
take up the rubbish out of some few sins, or lapses in their lives, you may
write your pleasure, and without a blush expect the like ingenuitie on this
side.

Pseudon syncolletes....leptotaton leron hi^reus, Excuse me sir, if
Aristophanes Nor speak any truth of the living.
at praesent furnish me with no more honorable titles to salute you by, for
your ingenuous meritorious demeanor in the next paragraph. Wherein you are
pleased to pervert all that the Bishop mean'd innocentlie, and writ
temperatelie, and sacrifice your soul to the Father of lies to gain the
countenance of your brethren in Holland. Historical truth I hope is no slander.
Nor can it be their shame to keep peace in their Churches, and turn seditio^s
incendiaries out of doors. But while you plead for these your own brethren
among them, (the rest holding not that point of your discipline) what respect
you bear to their vigilant Magistrates, whom you tax for putting out of their
cities men zealous in their doctrine, pressing the true practice of pietic,
etc. I leave to some interpreter to tell them. But my self shall tell you, by
the way, that they join not with you in rejecting our Episcopacie, as
Antichristian Name you what book of theirs, or person of any note that has
done it. I am sure since you, and your English mates fell to work with root,
and branch Spanheim, their great divinity professor in Leyden, held up his
hands, and wished that all had been such Spanheims speech about English Bishops
as Archbishop Vssher, and Bishop Morton, and then the order with such men he
acknowledged would pass here well enough. So that it should seem in the rest
there wanted only a conformity in some such thing, as Calvin's opinions to
qualify them for a tolerable communion with the Dutch. What their zealous
Ministers have preached for The Kings book of recreations far short of what
other Reformed Churches tolerate on the Lords day.
practice of pietic, suppression of haeresie, and schism, the Bishop is far
from calling, or accounting any crime. But because you crowd into their zealous
preachments, the sanctification of the Sabbath Day in your Judaical sense, If,
they pressed it in the rigor of your discipline, their auditors use a large
practical license to confute them. To pass by their weeklie Sabbath mercatcs,
and many public faires, one of which you, and I met with at the Hague, I could
have showed you there the dancing on the ropes (if not a dutch stage play for a
need) and many other pretty sights, to which you were invited with sounding of
trumpets, and beating of drumes, which is their business at this instant in
another part of the reformed Provinces: where I am I can tell you of several
recreations I have observed (beside playing on the ice Vindic. Ch^. Phila^d.
ob^ected against the Ministers of St. Andrews that were spectatours) which I
little thought on when the poor Praelatical Clergy, not many years since, were
cursed with Presbyterian bell, book, and candel, for approving a narrower
toleration in our Country. Our persecutions have helped us to this, and some
other experience, whereby we shall be hereafter enabled to unmaske your
adventurous impudency to the world. Whether the stream of Presbyterian, or
Praelatical ermons have run clearer from contempt of pi^tie from silence,
flaterie, etc. may be seen by him, that will look into these last 12 years
current of the times. If the vigilant Bishops, such as their Lordships of
Derrie Blaire and his companions justly banished.
and Down, purged their channels from the filthy doctrines, and rebellious
obstructions of Blaire, Levingstone, Hamilton, Cuningham and others, they did
it for the more even passage of pure Primitive reformation. The zeal of these
men was eating out the foundation of Gods house, and their swelling waters did
overflow the banks of government, where they came. Their impious doctrines
made them first be turned out of Scotland, where Blaire had been before
expelled the K. Chapter 1. larg. Dec. 1639. page 324.
University of Glasgow by the Professors for teaching his scholars, in his
lectures upon Aristotle, that Monarchical government was unlawful, (the
lawfullnesse whereof Mr. Baylie accounts part of the Prelates profanitie, and
errors.) Upon the like misdemeanour the same justice overtoke them in Ireland,
but at a time, as it hapened, when Christ's Covenanting, Antimonarchical
Kingdom began to be reedified in Scotland which wanting such bold pieces to
supportit, and their blasphemous treasonables sermons to cement it, they were
very heartlie welcomed, and praeferred to places of greatest eminency in that
Church.

What a singular difference there is in the point of exemption from secular
jurisdiction between the Geneva Discipline, and yours the proceedings The
Discipline. in Scotland different from Geneva.
in the next paragraph will show. And what person convict of, or notorious for
those crimes, that you reckon was ever priviledg'd by the spiritual Court, you
are to mention. Your generals are air, the Bishop craves no favor of your
extraordinary charity to conceal.

The Declaration 1584 might be penned by Mr. Patrike Adamson and yet be King
James's, If his Majesty declined the acknowledgement King James Declaration
1584.
thereof the year after, when your Rebels had seized upon his person at
Sterlin, that may very well be imputed to his fear. Nor was that the on^lie
negative subscription, you extorted from your prisoner that year, who, when at
liberty, afterward, with the same hand, blotted out that which, when you had
the guidance of his pen, you had forced him to write against his own
inclination, and sense. If Mr. Adamson professed upon his death his repentance
for lies, and slanders (to which we have a contrary tradition from some that
were praesent) he did no more then your great Declaratour Buchanan for his that
were opposite to the other, And how both these sort of, lies that carried
contradictions could proceed from the same spirit, or their repentance have the
same grace, and truth to reform it. I leave to your discerning spirit to
reconcile, or, if you find them different, to distinguish. What the Bishop
asserts, Mr. Camden^ faithful register will justify. Ministri nonnulli in
Scoti^ e pulpitis, and per circulos Reginam indigniscimi^ Part. 3. An. 1684
calumni^s insectati ipss, Regi* and Consiliariis asperrime obtrectarunt* and
cor^m comparere jussi sastidioso quodem contemptu abnuerunt, quasi pulpitae a
Reg^ authoritate essent exem^a, and Ecclesiastici non Principisi mperio, sed
Presbyteri^ subessent. Tour Ministers rail against, Queen, King, Council with
contempt, and scorn, deny appearance upon summons, stand upon Ecclesiastike
privilege, are not censured by the Assembly, and what is that but protected?
and what both but as much as the Bishop out of the Declaration praetends to?

What nullitie in the law of your country you plead, can be taken The Bishops
consequence good from Commissaries ^o Civil Magistrates.
for no answer to the Bishops second proof, who tells you, the same reason may
exclude as well Magistrates, as Commissaries, because they have no function in
the Kirk, and they are so excluded out of the 11 chapter of your 2. book of
Discipline, which providing that all abuses may be removed, and dependances of
the Papistical jurisdiction abolished, regulates all by the Eldership of the
Church, and in silence robs the Civil Magistrate of his power, The strength of
which argument you wave, as you do the 3. instances that follow, and scowre up
an old rustie piece, of Logike of your own to fight with your shadow; The
Bishops consequence holding good. That if those, which have no function in the
Kirk, are not to be judges to ministers, no jurisdiction remains in the
Civil state whereby Ministers may be punished. In England the Commissarie, and
official, were no ordinary judges to depose, and excommunicate at their
pleasure: what reservations there were, and how limited was their power, your
friend Fucus ad fallendum simpliciores, vel potius illudendum Ecclesi^s page
404. Altar. Damas^.
Didoclave will acquaint you. Which integrity, and prudence he calls a fucus,
and fallacy, because he had found no such native beauty of holiness in his
Church, no such downright dealing in the discipline. The jurisdiction of
Commissaries was reestablished in Scotland in Ecclesiastike causes, to as great
a latitude as formerlie, by act of Parliament at Edinburgh June 4. 1609.

Presbyterian Assemblies are easily satisfied about any delinquencie against
Kings. And had not K. James at this time been absolute, and the brethren in
fear what should become of their Euangel, they had The Assembly juggling in
Gibsons case.
not proceeded so far as they did in Gibsons case. That many passed at other
times with less notice, nay with their authority to maintain them, I have
showed frequent enough out of their stories. Delinquents of the Episcopal
party could get no such opportunies for absence. When Gibson came about, he
praetended not only his fear for an excuse, but his tender care of the
rights of the Church. This, because more pertinent to the quaestion, Mr. Baylie
overlookes, as he does their purging him of his contumacic without acquainting
his Ma^estie, which the Bishop urges. He were better be take himself to some
other trade then that of reviewing. Two, or three such surveys will loose the
Discipline more ground, then Didoclave, and any other his unanswered Champions
ever gaind them. That no trial of Gibsons fault (...) perfected though a
fugitive was a testimony of their forward duty to the King. Others (beside
the Bishops by the Synod of Glasgow) have been excommunicated at as great a
distance for their loyal expressions, and actions.

The Bishops fourth proof I perceive has much troubled the The Bishops
relation of Mr. Blackes case vin^cated and enlarged.
Reviewers eyes, osper ^a s^k epi tous ophalmous. Mr. Blackes case may very
well seem odious, Odit, quod metuit, It turns his sto make so much that he
finds not confidence enough to wipe of that filth, which was spit upon the
reputation of the Discipline by his speeches. He is better imployd with his
sieve, and his scissours about divining how his Lordship came by so many
particulars of the story; but the guilt of his conscience makes his hand
shake, and so all his witchcraft falls to ground. For the Bishop, to my
knowledge, may have his warrant for that relation somewhere else, and, for
ought he knows, recourse to some vocal oracles of that time, beside some such
registers as have not been raced by the sword of the Disciplinarian spirit, nor
cancelled by the Clerk of the Assembly in the dark. Though that large, most
excellent volume compiled by the Rt. Reverend Arch Bishop having, no tlong
since, happily escaped the Scottish Inquisition, may hereafter be a printed
monument of the Disciplines shame, an aeternal disgrace to the Rebellious
Presbytery, and his credit, for all the Reviewers calumnies, a lasting pillar
to support the faith of all posterity, that shall read it. Yet to take Mr.
Blackes story from his hand, out of the register of truth, the Doomsday book
of the Discipline as it lies.

-- Veniat invisum scelus,
Errorque, and in se semper armatus furor.
If the Kings countenance were changed, his conscience was not, which, by his
own confession, so soon as ever his judgment was in the Hamp. Cour^. Co^s.
bloome, took check at the Religion, as well as at the Rebellion in the
Assembly, professing with our savior that though he lived among you, he was
not of you.

That you make no medium between Presbyterian, and Popis^, is a piece of old
Synodical malignancie, which the trial of the orthodoxe party in these times
has made out of date, since being rejected, and banished by the one, they
neither find, nor sue for reception with the other, (saving into a toleration
of their asyle) but by the hand of the Almighty are held up in their
constancy between you both: Yet your fears were not groundless; when the
Religious King went about to establish such public workship, as would have
informed ignorance in a discovery of your error, and draw'n of all your
conscientious, and rational disciples. His Majesty's civil favors to some
Papists, were not so strong evidences of his change as to wind up your
Ministers to such a free warning, nor gave them license to make such rebellio^s
applications. If that be the use it is time for Kings to search better into your
doctrine, and see whether the toleration of that have not been the great sin
of our age, which has pulled down such judgments upon their heads.

This grace in your pastor is that, which abounds by continuance in sin.
Romans 6. 1. Ephesians. 6. 16.
And this faith is nothing like St. Paul's shield, being beaten by the Assembly
into a sword, whereby they endeavor to subdue Kingdoms, but have no such
commission as had Samuel, and the Prophets. Mr. Blackes denial was too faint to
absolve him, and his honest hearers, if conform Hebr. 11. 36.
to their English brethren, might perchance be so wrapped in their night caps, as
their negative testimony could not be very current. When he showed himself so
willing to be tried by all the world, he little thought who might pass upon the
verdict. All the heathen had condemned him for the murder of morality, and he
had met with a scurvie pack of hardhearted Godfathers among the Papists. A
brother of yours Nescio quid nec quando, sed multo ante Vind. ep. Philad.
confesses that somewhat Black had said, though he has no great mind to
take notice, what, nor when. He complains of Rutherfort his accuser because
obliged for private courtesies, who deserves to be commended for praeferring
public duty, and in that appears to have been one of the most honest hearers
there. The Courtiers can not be blamed for intending to stop the mouths of
such Ministers, as laid the Devil with his bairnes at their doors, and put
them in afright that they should afterward be charged with keeping all the
black brats of the Assembly. The advice of the Brethren was adjudg'd treason
by the law of Scotland produced against the Abcrdene Ministers, and your
Edinburgh Bibles have not one text to justify that appeal. The words laid to
Mr. Blackes charge I hope will be confessed to be truly seditious. All the
quaestion you make is whether he spoke them or no, which though doubtful (as
it is not, being proved before the Assembly who gave this reason for his
exemption from punishment, They knew not L. 1. c. The od. de Relig.
with what spirit he was overruled) must be acknowledged a matter of civil
cognizance (because no point of religious) as well as the punishment, if proved.
Constat Episcopos and Presbytero^ forum legibus non habere, nec de aliis
causis......... praeter religionem posse cognoscere, The Brethrens reason, or
rather mis-apprehension must not be made the measure of the laws. If the King
yeided so much toward an amicable conclusion, what can justify the Presbyters
in continuing the breach? who, say what you will, were bound to subscribe a
band for that silence which was required, Pes^imus est mos suggestum in scenam
vertere, and dulcissimam De Imper. sum. Potest. circ. sa^r. cap..9
Euangelii vocem in Comaediam veterem. What the learned Grotius enlarges upon
this subject, I will not transcribe, but call upon you to answer, being that
which I assume to make good upon the same texts and proofs he produces. The
truth was you durst neither have advised Black to appeal, nor your selves
have showed such contumacie to the King, but that you had felt the pulse of the
people, Nam eo ^e^porc summa^ fuit Ecclae concordia and authoditas, ut aulici
ab ea, tametsi Regia gratia niterentur, timerent, Vindic. Ep. Chr. Philad.
and made it beat high in your behalf. This your brother confesses though in
Gypsy language, calling it the great concord, and authority in the Church,
such as made the Courtiers to tremble, though never so much in favor with the
King. Which concord, when so magnified in your story, we know, was ever a
covenant to rebel, and awe the King as well as the Court by your usurped
authority of the sword. Yet whatsoever is your practice, and profession, by
fits; sometimes you are more ferious (though seldom more loyal) and the result
of your council apparels it self in such a sentence as this Our obedience
binds us not only reve^entlie to speak, and write of our Sovereign, but
also to judge, and think. Which if the Edinburgh Ministers had practiced, they
had not come under that severc sentence pronounced against them for raising a
dangerous mutiny among the people.

If I would, like you, turn diviner, I might easily guess out of what Let to
the Q. of Engl. Iul. 16. 1561.
un printed register you have that pretty legend, that follows, which yet is
not so decently dressed as to make good the chaste credit of the discipline.
Who was this villain? By whom was he Suborned? A villain. They suborne,
without particular instance of either, will not pass upon public says. If
the Commotion was innocent, why not approved? If not approved, how appears it
to be innocent. The best way to have quit the Ministry from being authors, or
approvers, had been to be censurers, but here they could keep silence without a
band.

I can not yet let go this singular story, my duty forbids my charity any
where to favor you with my silence. And because you are so prae, udic'd
against unprinted traditions I will give it you for the most part out of some
printed registers I have met with.

King James, desirous to set off his Court with what luster he could The
Ministers guilty of the tumult. December. 17. 1596.
to foraigne Ambassadeurs, had, in a provident magnificence, retrenched some
allowance formerlie issued for his Courtiers attendants, and contracted their
tables to enlarge his own entertainments. For the managing of this, and
somewhat else concerning his revenue. he had appointed eight officers of State,
where of some were Papists, but of known intergritie. The Reformado Courtiers,
by way of scorn called these Octavians, and made an easy impression into
their Ministry by suggesting, that they had a design to introduce Popery,
and subvert the whole discipline of the Church. After private conference, a
fast, for the smiting with the fist of wickedness, soon after was kept at
Edinburgh. Balcanqual preaches, and spares neither, King nor Council in his
virulence, infuseth all the unpleasing particulars, he could think of, to
imbitter his Satyr, humbly be seecheth the Edinburgh Citizens at a certain
hour to meet in the New Church, tells them how much it concerned their
reformed, Eua^gel. His reservednesse sharpend their expectation, and caused
their punctual assembling almost to a man, where they found their Ministers in
a formal Synod, having chosen a violent Presbyter, Mr. Robert Bruce, their
Moderator. Here Mr. Blackes sufferings were aggravated: and the Kings violating
the praerogative of the Church. One Watson comes in, and adds oil to the
flame, remonstrates his late repulse at Court, and denial of access to the
King, being sent with some Rebell-supplicate from the Brethren. The Moderator,
with as much malice as my be, comments at large upon every instance in a
speech; Makes it Gods cause, and engages the people to assert the liberty of
his Gospel, if not by petition* by power. Some Commissioners are sent to the
King, then in the Tolbuith, who, receiving some check for their unjustifiable
proceedings, come back with their angry account to the Assembly. One
Alexander Vasius
Vaux being (as the Presbyters had praedesign'd) mounted up above the
congregation by a pillar, with stretched out arm cries, The sword of God and,
of Gideon, bid them to follow him in the vindication of God, and his Church.
They take it* out of his mouth, and in confusion clamor, Arm Arm, for God,
and the Church. They do accordingly, and rush violently into the streets
beguirting the place where His Majesty was. Mr. Thomas Hamilton afterward
Earke of Haddington takes an halberd in his hand, and with some of his friends
keeps the multitude* from entering. Alexander Hume of Northborvick, for the
time Provest of Edinburgh, and Roger Ma^kmath * (whom the King ordinarily
called his Barliffe) raise what power they can upon a sudden, the honest
Hammermen come in to their assistance, They demand first whether the Kings
person be in safety, and then by a mixture of fair words, and menaces make
the rowt quit the place, but not their riot, for they by, and by rallie in the
Mercate place. The Captain of the Castle turns some canon upon the Town, and
by that military argument praevailes with them to disband. The King is safely
guarded to his palace at Halyrud House. For all this Bruce sends abroad his
writs, to call^in the Nobility to their succor, some of whom had in zeal
abetted the late tumult. The Lord Forbes paid his fine for going into the
street, The Lord Hamilton has an invitation to be General, and should have had
his commission (from the Synod no quaestion) if he had signified his
acceptance. He very nobly, and loyally delivers up his letter to the King,
and detects the Rebellious project of the Discipline. Some of the Ministers are
sent for, and convicted, obtain pardon of the King, but no actual oblivion
from any his good subjects, who ever after detested that disloyal sect, and
branded the 17. day of December with the indeleble infamy of that prodigious
attempt.

How like this looks to an half hours tumult or petie fray, How ignorant
were the People, how innocent the commotion, How free the Ministry from being
authors, or approvers; Let the Reviewers aequitable comparers determine.

CHAPTER V. The Discipline exempts not the supreme Magistrate from being
excommunicate.
TVatim agis. The Bishop argues about excommunicating Kings, and you The Rev.
impertinencie or cunning in altering of the state of the quaestion.
answer about censuring officials, that pronounce sentence for non-payment of
money, wherein yet you are not more impertinent, then malicious: For you know
well enough that sentence was not executed for that, but for obstinacy against
the power, and commands of the Church, Wherein if any officials
inconsideratelie proceeded, it must not bring in quaestion the more deliberate
prudence of them, that made the constitution to that purpose. The rash
praecipitancie of the Scottish Presbyterian rule, and practice, though many
times very reprovable in the later, I find not here in the Bishops
allegation, nor of what magnitude the sins are, for which they excommunicate,
though we have known a desertion of the Brethren in conspiracy against their
Prince, or a glance through Let: of the Congreg. to the Nobles of Scotland 1559.
their fingars, an interpretative neutralitie, has been made the great sin,
and threamed with this censure. Neither the Praelatical party, nor any
orthodoxe Christians in the world come into your communion in the point of
excommunicating their Kings, nor comprehend them within the object of their
Discipline, by which, though they have kept the sons of the Church in a
filial awe, yet ever reserved a paternal privilege for their Kings, the
Nursing Fathers of the same Imperatoria unctione to^litur poenitentia. And the
learned De Imper sum. Pot. cap. 9.
Grotius assures us that the Kings of France for many ages have expresselie
challenged this exemption for themselves, Ne possint excommunicati.

Rev........ did never so much as intend the beginning of a process against
their Disciplinarian intentions never better then their words
Kings, etc. Ans. Christian prudence admits no such charitable glosses upon the
Scottish intentions, where is no color of ambiguitie in their words. In which
if the King be a man, or a Magistrate, he must be necessarily included, and
made subject as well to Church animadversion, as admonition. If Mr. Baylie has
a perspective for the thoughts of all his praedecessours, he may enjoy the
pleasure of such spiritual reviewes, or revelations to himself, but can have
no demonstrative evidence to propagate the like confidence among others.

True causes of citation of Princes to an Assembly is the peculiar language of
the Discipline, no such truth is implied in this truer text of Eccles. 8.4.
Scripture, Where the word of a King is, there is power, and who may say unto
him what do thou? The beginning of the next verse is not the Scottish
Assembly, in answer to that quaestion. What these true causes have been, No
th^nkes (...) to them for not excommunicating their Kings.
I have partly manifested out of their story, their own Registers justifying
their successive meekness, and indulgence; wherein though no King may be found
excommunicate, (because their spiritual sword wanted luster, and brightness to
strike such amazement into Princes, as to make them let fall the temporal one
out of their hands) yet not any one of them has there been since the
Assemblies were possessed of their infernal commission, but have been
personally threatened, imprisoned, deposed, or murdered, and they should have
tasted the meekness of the Discipline in them all, if the season had served,
and they could have caught, or kept them in their power; Against which
universal experience whether Mr. Baylie's single word may be taken for the
future security of His Majesty, and his successors, I submit with silent
reverence to be debated in their Council.

Rev. We love not the abused ground, etc. Ans. We are as little in love with The
Ancient Father^ quit peccan^ Kings of all humane censure
the Reviewers affronting of Kings, as they with, what he calls the Warners
flatering of Princes. To the quaestion he so magisteriallie propounds. St.
Ambrose, notwithstanding his Act to Theodosius, makes answer upon that speech
of David cited by the Bishop, and adds the reason in such language as Mr.
Baylie will not hear from any Canterburian-Praelate, Quod nullis ipsi [Reges]
legibus tenebantur, quia liberi sunt Reges a vinclis delictorum. The same is to
be found in Isiodore Pelus: And Tertulian to this purpose many hundred years
before Presbytery was hatched. Sci^nt [Imperatores] quis illis dederit
imperium....... sentiunt Deum esse solum, Apos. Gent. adv.
in eujus solius potestate sunt, a quo sunt secundi, post quem primi, ante
omnes, and super omnes Deos, homines. And because the Reviewer calls this
doctrine Episcopal, let him take St. Hieroms note too by the way. Rex ipse
[David] and alium non timebat. This Catholic doctrine praeserves the Majesty
of Princes, de j^re, inviolable from the insolency of Assemblies. Where the
abuse of it spurs them on to any dangerous praecipi^es, they are to stand, or
fall unto themselves. The poor oppressed people would many times work out
their deliverance by prayers, and patience, if the outrageous Presbyters did
not thrust them down, and with the hazard, if not destruction of their
persons, dash all civil government in pieces.

CHAPTER VI. Kings may sometime pardon capital offenders, which the
Disciplinarians deny. As they do their Royal right to any part of the
Ecclefiastike revenue.
WEre your reasoning as methodical as the Bishops, I should not The Bishops
reasonning not unconsequential.
be so in every Chapter at a loss to find out more to what, then what to
answer, having hitherto met with none, but Socrates's three dark principles in
your book, to chaos touti, kai tas nephela^, kai ten glottan, confusion,
clouds, and tongue: which among them have made such a mist in your own eyes,
and such a clatering in your ears, as you Aristoph. Nubes.
can neither see, nor hear a good logical argument brought before you. We,
that are above this disturbance, and at a distance, observe his Lordship laying
out the doctrine of your Discipline (for so I Will speak for once) received by
you all, and then illustrates it by your practice, where in if he had room
enough, he would muster up so many particulars as with an, etc. might conclude
an inductive universal. Though the other way of acconsequential arguing has
been thought tolerable in Mr. Baylie (no Doctor as I take it) as not long
since in his uncharitable mention made of Bishop Aderton, and his slander
against the two reverend Bishops of Down, and London Derric.

The Ministers rigor, and vindictive pleading has ever multiplied Blood the
seed of the Discipline.
in Scotland the widows, and fatherless, the deadly feuds having been ever
continued, and received by them, when they saw it tend to their advantage, so
that the blood shed by murderers of their making may be truly aesteem'd, the
seed of their Church. Which duly considered, demonstrable in their story,
should deter any cautelous Christian from their communion, who, by that
partaking in their guilt, can exspect from heaven no benefit of his prayers,
Gods curse in the Prophet concerning them nearer, then any ministry in the
Esai. 1. 15.
world, When ye spread forth your hands, I will hide mine eyes from you, yea
when ye make many prayers, I will not hear: Your hands are full of blood:

The history of that time, though very partiallie, and falselie related Mercy
Gods attribute, and so the Kings.
by the Reviewer, were it not, can not justify the insolence in their
discipline, wherein they do not occur to the inconvenience praetended, the
impunitie of murder procured then by some importunate and powerful
solicitours, but despightfullie scratch out the image of God in his Anointed,
and pull down his praerogative attribute of mercy, which has a season of
privilege above justice, if that pass with Mr. Baylie, for any of his works.
What I mean I collect from ^. Book Discipl. 9. head.
this clause. In the fear of God we signify unto your Honors, that whosoever
persuades you that ye may pardon, where God commands death, deceives your
souls. and provokes you to offend Gods Majesty. Where not only the act of
impunitie is condemned, but all power to pardon in any case denied. Which God
never practiced himself, nor exacted in the rigor from his Kings. Beside, the
case has been known, when the Presbyters Presbyters solicit pardon for
murder.
themselves became the powerful sollicitours to the King, and drew a pardon
for murder from his hand against his heart, as they did from K. Chapter 1. for Mr.
Thomas Lamb, a preaching brother, who stabbed a young man of Leith with a
poniard betwixt Leith, and the Abbey of Haliryd House upon the Lords day in the
afternoon, in the time of the Assembly, and Parliaments sitting. To whom the
King, used this speech Ministers must be pardoned though slaughter^rs. (...)
other men must suffer for a words speaking, reflecting upon one Mr. John
Stuart, who suffered for saying that Argile had spoken about deposing the King.
How they professed their Church to be reformed by the murder of David Rizio,
and the King called ^ weak man, because he would not vouch it, I have showed
more particularly in their story. Yet I hope Mr. Baylie (who is too rigid)
when he comes next in the Rebell-Commission, will be no sollicitour for any act
of oblivion. That if the King gives not what satisfaction they find
necessary, and due, he, and the other bloud-hounds will articulate their cry
into justice, justice, or lie down in their arms to execute it themselves
even upon His Majesty himself (for he has allreadie encircled him, within
the object of the Discipline) may be fairlie collected from hence, as from what
he told us in his Epistle.

That you may preach unto Rigor to be preached etc. under none but impious or
negligent Magistrates; so excommunication for impunitie.
Magistrates, that according to Scriptures murderers ought to die even Erastus
will grant you, Yea that in some cases you may rebuke, exhort, admonish,
threaten, denounce judgments, as well as preach promises according to the
examples of the Prophets. But he puts you in mind that this they did only
under impious Kings, no David's, no Sal^mons, no more must you assume this
liberty, under I^me's, and Charle's, pious, prudent, and just Kings. If you
should have an unhappie occasion to exercise it under other, you must go no
farther, no excommunication which is ordered in your Discipline. He calls for
your texts, he answers your arguments, he helps you to instances of Ioab,
whose murder could not safely be punished, of Absalom, whose, for some reason,
was neglected. He demands whether these men, went not into the Temple nor
communicated in the Sacraments with this impunitie about them. I have no way to
be rid of you, but as Mr. Seldom, they say was of the whole pack of your
clamouring brethren at London, who laid Erastus book open before them, and bid
them answer him. Which dismounted their tails, and put a gag in their mouths,
so that I hear he was never troubled with them afterward.

E. Huntley's case has been carried to the mint, and comes now out E. Huntleys
case wholly minted in the Assembly.
with a new stamp of the Assembly at a loss till their Father behind them
scatters his kindness among his prodigal sons, and bids them lavish out his
inexhaustible stock of calumnies, as they please. What the Bishop has granted
you about the guilt of the three Lords, I have no commission to retract. What
you aggravate about E. Huntley's apostacy, and, after seeming repentance,
frequent relapses, does at the worst, but argue his adhaerence in heart to the
Romish religion. This added to his banding with the King of Spain (which you
prick into some blanke papers subscribed with his hand, and the rest taken out
of Dr. Kerre's pocket, as he was shiping over, upon your excommunicating, and
banning; and pick out of some other, such as little could be made of at that
time, when it should have been most advantageous) is not enough to justify
that rigor alleged by the Bishop. The truth of what follows shall be left
to the ingenuitie of your judicious and aequitable comparers, by laying your
relation to that of more authentike historians, whose record is this

Bothwell, after many murders, and misdemeanors, having broke prison,
endeavors to get the King, and Chancellar Maitland into his power, to which
end he sets fire to both their chambers, and by violence makes his entrance
into the Queens. For this, some of his accomplices were hanged, the Kings
proclamation, published against him, prohibites any man to harbor him. The
Earl Huntley, upon the Chancellars entreaty, raises some power to surprice
him, with which he besets Earl Murray's house, where Bothwell was entertaind,
and Murray in defense of him slain. For this soon after was E. Huntley
Bothwells notorious crimes.
imprisoned, till having put in caution to appear at a public trial, he had
his liberty given him to go home. Murray's friends had not patience to wait
the leisure of the law, but work revenge upon all advantages they could get.
Bothwell having been this while concealed in England, enters Scotland in arms,
and assaults the King in his palace at Fawlkland, but, being beaten off, makes
another escape. The Assembly, failing of the success they hoped for in
Bothwells attempt, praevaile for the banishing of Papists, and confiscation of
their goods, Bothwell, finding no good welcome in England, gets away, and
gains a private opportunity by his friends to be secretly conveyed into
the Kings chamber, where he begs his pardon upon his knees, and obtaines it,
yet the next day makes a tumult in the Court, and caries away diverse of the
Kings servants; The King (which may seem strange) for the safety of his
person, was feign to put away his friends of greatest trust, the Chancellor,*
Treasurer, Baron Humes, etc. but within a month repents him, appeals to his
Nobles, and by their advice, recalls them, yet permits Bothwell to depart. The
Ministers are angry that the Papists are not persecuted by fire, and sword.
They assemble without the Kings order, and call together the Barons and
Burgers. Bothwell enters again with 400. Horse as far as Leith; makes
proclamation, summons all in to defen'd religion, and put away evil
Counselors; sends it to the Synod at Dunbar, which favored it; The same day
he marches against 3000. of the Kings forces near Edinburgh, faints in his
business, and gets away to the borders; Queen Elizabeth sets out a
proclamation against him, yet presses the King for proscription of Papists;
The Lords are but few that meet, and express some reluctance at it. The
Ministers, and Burgers are many, which vote it, take their arms down out of
the windows, etc. Argile is sent against them, and beaten; The King draws
toward them, and permits three of Huntley's houses to be pulled down, Huntley
escapes to his Aunt in Sutherland, thence into France.

These were Huntley's notorious crimes, and multiplied outrages which cried up
to the God of heaven; Out of which let the world judge what reason the
Ministers, those merciful men of God, had to give such warning, and cry to
the Judges of the earth, to shed his blood. That appearance with displayed
banner against the King in person, should be made an article against him by Mr.
Baylie, a loyal peaceable assertour of ten years armed rebellion in three
Kingdoms: I dare not adventure my spleen to discourse on but in Mr. Baylies
language, hope by his good advise, the Prelates will no more Lull' Princes
asleep in such a sinful neglect of their charge, but break off their slumber
by wholesome and seasonable admonitions from the word of God, such as that
Prove. 20. A wise King scatereth, the wicked, and brings the wheel over them.
Or what other texts, their Lordships better know applicable to the most just,
necessary chastisment of schismatikes, and Rebels.

About E. Angus, and Errol, you think your self not concerned to R. Bruce's
speech against E. Huntley
make answer because your brother Presbyter Mr. Rob. Bruce, gave King James
leave to recall them, but with this considerable sentence, against E. Huntley.
Well Sir, you may do as you list, But choose you, you shall not have me, and
the E. Huntley both for you. Pretty humble souls, who can weigh down the
chiefest Earls in the ballancing of a state. First fruits etc. witheld from
the King as much by the Presbyters as Pope.


In the next paragraph, you dawbe with untemper'd mortar, such as can never
keep the Kings right to any Ecclesiastike revenue, and the claim of the
Discipline together. For having comprehended in the patrimony of the Kirk all
things [without exception] given or to be given to that, and the service of
God; All such things as by law, or custom or use of Countries have been
applied to the use, and utilitie, of the Kirk. 2. book Disc. chapter 9 And called
them thieves, and murderers [without exception of persons] that alienate any
part of this patrimony. 1. books Disc 6. head you are the innocent dove that,
here bring us news, That the Church never spoyld the King of any tithes, while
those birds of spoil, your forefathers, have left him, neither ear nor straw
to possess. But to deal with you at your own weapon in your words. If the
King never had any first frui^, then, as the Bishop says, you are the Popes,
that withheld it, and by you, that were the Reformers, was that point of
papacy maintained; If he neither had, nor demanded, to what purpose took you,
such pains to obtain in favor of the Church to have it declared in
Parliament, That all benefices of cure under Praelacies shall in all time
coming be free of the first years fruits, and fifth penie, and the Ministers
An. 1587.
have their significations of presentation past, at the Privy seal upon His
Majesty's own subscription, and his secretaries only, without any payment or
caution to his Treasurer for the said first fruits, and fifth penie?

About tithes, you say, His Majesty, and the Church had never any controversy
Contradiction about tithes. page 57.
in Scotland. How agrees this with your Declaratour in his appendix to the
maintenanee of your sanctuary? When the minor-age of a good King had been
abused to the making of a law, whereby the most of these rents, first fruits,
Tithes, and the lands belonging to Bishoprikes were annexed to the crown, the
Church very earnestly do labor for restitution, and never gave overtill these
laws were repealed.

If you review your records, you will find in the year 1588. Patronages.
that you had a plea with, which you call an earnest suit to, His Majesty
about patronages, and such considerable opposition, as put you upon inhibiting
all commissioners, and Presbyteries to give collation, or admission to any
person praesented by authority from the King. And [to omit many] a greater you
had before with the Queen. Anno 1565

The Nobility, and Gentry were more beholding to your impotencie, then
patience for peace. What gracious men you have showed Presbyterian rebellion,
and tyranny.
your selves, since your Rebell-Parliament got that incumbent power into your
hands, your congregations would speak if they durst, whom you feed with the
bread of violence, and with that you cover them as a garment. So that whether
the Presbytery be not as good patrons of the people, as they are vassals to
the King, need never more be quaestion'd in Scotland. Rejoicing at the
sequestring the Church patrimony. Qui jactare non dubitarunt se Epis^. plygin
^airian inflixisse.


Whether by the wickedness of Praelates, or Presbyters the King, and Church
were cousin'd of the tithes, will appear by them, that bragged most when they
were most endangered by the sequestring the other patrimony from the Church,
which I find to be the Presbyters that could not keep council but b^asted they
had given a seasonable blow unto the Bishops.

That legitimate power in the Magistrate the Bishop pleades for King James
never declared to be a sin against Father, Son, or Holy Ghost, nor did ever
the patrons of Episcopacie oppose it. That changeling you here substitute in
the room calls you Father by the ridiculous posture in which it stands, your
friend Didoclave A^tar. Damasc. p. 3.
had more K. James anti-presbyterie.
ingenuitie then to infer a claim to the power of preaching, and celebrating
the Sacraments upon the power of jurisdiction over Ecclesiastical persons
derived upon the King from his praedecessours in England, and given them by a
statute. Verba statuti de jurisdictione, non de simplici functionum sacrarum
administratione intelligenda esse quis dubitat. The well grounded consequences,
which you call Castles in the air, will hereafter batter your Presbytery to
the ground, when Princes shall retract their too liberal indulgence, take a
courageous resolution to claim their own, and rely upon Gods providence to
maintain it. King James had given you the practical meaning of his wise
sentence, seven years before he spoke it at St. Andrews. For, as you may very
well remember, when His Majesty had put down your Presbytery by the head,
your Ministerial office was with the exercise of your halls, having, to the
time of your late rebellion, no other, then an ambulatorie Euangel, no
Disciplinarian legallie tolerated to officiate, but such as would conform to
the canons of the Church. If the King had said, Ego non possum erigere Ministri
caput, the heads of the Aberdene, and Edinburgh Ministers might have confuted
him upon the gates, but that his mercy [without the Synodical censure of
impunitie] interposed in that dispute. As great an enemy as His Majesty was
to such Erastians, as the Bishop, I No Donatist.
am sure he was no friend to such Donatists as you, unless infestissimus
hostis be significant to that purpose. He said, you were Ep. lector. A^tar.
Damascen.
the perfidious, bedlam knaves among the preachers, my dictionarie will help
me to no fiter English for his Latin* perfidi, and Georg. Con. De Dupl. Stat.
Relig. apud Scot. lib. 2.
^anatici nebulones inter concionatores; And you, or your profession he often
styled Calvinistarum Satanismum, a ^ect of lapsed spirits among the Calvinists,
whose malice* had metamorphoz'd them into Devils.

CHAPTER VII. The Presbytery cheates the Magistrate of his Civil power in
ordine ad spiritualia.
THe Bishop begs no belief of his Readers, beyond what he Their latitude of
scandal. 8. 9.
brings proof out of your Discipline to prevail for. When you have made all
offenses, more, or less scandalous, like the Prophet in Hosee, you become the
snare of a fowler, and with this counterfeit call catch all the unclean birds
in your net* If the Bishops official takes notice of more civil causes then
your Presbytery, the quality, and number had been Worth your noting for your
Readers satisfaction. To strengthen your evidence, I consulted with Didoclave
your brother Scout, whom I find to have made no such numerous discovery, and
I take him to be altogether as strict, and able an inquisitour, as your self.
That capital offenders, whom the Magistrate has spared, should be
excommunicated, is disciplinarian Malefactors pardoned not to be
excommunicated.
censure, which no society of regular Christians ever inflicted; Nor can any
ingenuous Divine deny such, access to the holy table, if otherwise qualified
then by their impunitie. He must distrust either the prudence or piety of the
Magistrate, conceiving him either too liberal of his pardon to a person showing
no remorse for his fault; or impious in countenancing instead of cutting off,
an obstinate malefactor with his sword. Erastus himself (whom you rail at so
often) puts in this caution (which Beza approves of) for whatsoever he has
asserted in his book. Quod meminisse t^ velim etiamsi non semper adjecero.
That the person you admit be supposed to understand, approve, embrace the
doctrine of the the Church, with which he desires to communicate; That he
profess an acknowledgement, and hatred of his sins (he adds not from your
stool of repentance (That a murderer, adulterer, blaspheme^, thus pardoned,
thus poenitent, thus supplicant for the seal of the Sacrament, should be, to
fill up the amphitheater of any proved hypocritical, popular presbyter, made
the sundays sport, or spectacle to the people, No Scripture commands it, no
orthodoxe Church ever practiced it, no law of Scotland imports it. If you
suspect his repentance to be but counterfeit, and his humble address, a
religious imposture; you may discourse with him in private, lay open before him
the heinousness of his fact, deter him by the extremity of the danger, tell
him if he discernes not the Lords body (which he can not through the black
unrepented guilt of that sin) he eats judgment, he drinks damnation; But
all this pertaines ad Consilium, a term used among the ancients in cases
somewhat conterminate with ours, to ghostly council, no spiritual execution,
ad legis annunciationem, non jurisdictionem, to the terrible declaration of the
law, to no jurisdiction or legal exercise of your power. Beside, here I must
put you in mind of what I otherwhere prove, and is un^eniable. That your
excommunicating faculty is not originallie in your Assembly, but derived to
you from the supreme Magistrate, with an implicit reservation of his own
privilege* to remit it at pleasure, it being no ^ure divino discipline, I hope
(for if such, what becomes of those Churches that use it not?) The malefactors
exemption from this, without quaestion, accompanies his largess of civil
mercy, and he stands acquitted from all spiritual, as well as temporal,
punishment: For to suppose the Magistrate takes him from the jailer, to deliver
him to Satan* exchangeth his shakles for chains of darkness, his prison for
hell, is inconsistent with reason, or charity, and gets no more faith, then
such a cruel sentence has the face to ask my opinion of its justice. The
learned Grotius tells you, how John a Bishop of Rome became intercessour to
Justinian the Emperor in the behalf of poenitent delinquents, that were
separated from the union of the Church, asscribing to him the authority, and
honor of their restitution to the communion thereof. Which argues him, and his
Presbyters, (if you admit him not to be single in his jurisdiction) at that
time to have had no independent Discipine, to cross the Emperors power, to
have been no countermanders of his pardons. That the Magistrates in Holland
have very often commanded the Pastors to their duty in these cases. And that,
by an old law in England, the Kings pleasure was craved before any of his
servants could be excommunicated.

Fraud in bargaining, false measures, etc. the Bishop takes to be matters False
measures, etc. matters of civil cognizance.
of civil cognizance; He finds them called abomination to the Lord* not any
where such scandals to the Church, as to require public satisfaction. What
Ecclesiastike rebukes are due, he thinks may be given by particular Ministers
in their several charges; without a summons before a Consistorian judicatorie.
Die Ecclesiae was no praecept of speed; There were two or three errands to be
done by the way; The offended brother has, after conference, a private
arbitration praescrib'd him: Nor does it appear that, in cases of this nature,
our Savior ^ing'd him a warrant to fetch his adversary to the Church, not a
word is there that does authorize the Church to command him out of the Court,
to anticipate, or aggravate the civil censure by the Reviewers Ecclesiastike
Rebukes. The Reviewers 30. years experience no argument of Presbyterian
honesty.


The Bishop speaks of Presbytery in the institution, makes no instance of it
in the practice; I Will take no man's word for disciplinarian honesty throughout
30. years trading. The saints, after that rate; will not be ready at
Doomesday to give up their account of compassing the earth, and getting in
their inheritance annexed to their dominion, which they will have founded in
grace; If the Presbyteries, wherein all that time you were conversant, were no
merchant adventurers, took no share ^f the purchase, they have kept some
Jubilee to lease out their indulgence; Or it was, not unlikelie, a piece of
your Kirke-policie to connive a long time at all petie larcenie, knowing who at
length would be caught in the great cheat, the 200000. pound sale of
damnation to their brethren, and yet keeping back whole viols of vengeance,
and wrath unto themselves.

For the many causes of Ministers deprivation, cognosced upon in your
Presbyteries, you have the good liking of neither Papists, nor Praelates, Their
Canons not the same with those of the ancient Church.
who find no canon, that gives commission to such a mungrel socitie of
lay-Clerical Presbyters to take away, what they have no power to confer. If I
give, but not grant, your usurped tyranny a privilege, by many years
rebellious praecedent, to cognosce of such cases, I must except against
clipping of canons; the coin that bears the Majestike image of the Primitive
Church, such as is the 67. in the fourth Council of Charthage, Seditionarios
nunquam ordinandos Victorem Romanum Epum circa annum Dui 200. legimus Coenae
usu^ interdixisse injurias condonare nolentibus T^. Erast. these. 7.
Clericos, sicut nec usurarios, nec injuriarum ultores. The first of the three
had met with your vertous Fore-Father Knox in the Castle of St. Andrews, and
saved all the mischief we have reaped by his call from abetting the murder of
Cardinals, to rebelling against Princes, renting the Church, and the
Commonwealth into Congregational, and Covenanting parties. The last, which was
your injust praetense, if not in your banners, at least in the Remonstrances,
which you brought in your hands when you invaded England (Canons holding as well
for depriving, as ordaining) had rid us of all the rabble of Rebellious
revengefull Presbyters without a stroke. For the business of usurie, I shall
not draw up my charge till I discover the Scottish Presbyterian Cantores; Yet
you were best have care (whatsoever becomes of the ancient Canons) that you be
not too severe in depriving for that, lest you get a rebuke from your brethren
abroad, who, it may be, desire not to shake hands with you in that point of the
Discipline.

The Bishop neither took out, nor put in any causes of Churchmens No canon
against rebe^lion, nor deprivation of rebellious Ministers.
deprivation, but merely transcribed, what he thought more concerned a Civil
Court, then a Synod. If he had been at the charge of reprinting all whereof
your book of Discipline makes mention* he must have left an etc. to bring up a
reserve (though you will not own it) of preaching, penning, practizing,
schism, sedition, Rebellion against moderate, just, and pious Kings, as well as
what your Assemblies were solicitous to prohibit, under the term of Schism,
or Rebellion against the Kirk. For the first, and last of the three sins you
draw out (because you will have the pleasure, at least, of licking Presbyters
as peccant as Bishops.
your lips at the naming) His Lordship knows no Bishop, nor Doctor but may
find a namelesse Scottish Presbyter to give place to* If he should be mistaken
(which he has not so much reason to hope, as charity to wish) he sees in St.
James the guilt of murder aequivalent Chapter 2. 11.
to adultery, and made as great a transgression of the law; He hears of
Isaiah's triel in Scotland, which deserves the same wonder* 29. 9.
and cry of the Prophets. Ye are drunken, though not with wine, ye stagger,
though not with strong drink, etc. And, since your last return ou^ of England
beholds sitting at Edinburgh, as well as London, the great whore [instead of her
blew] arrayed in purple, and scarlet color, and decked Revel 17.
with gold, and precious stones, and pearls, having a golden cup in her hand
full of abominations, and filthnesse of her fornication; And upon the forhead
of the woman drunken with the blood of the Saints, and with the blood of the
Martyrs of Jesus, a name written with a beam of the sun, Mystery, Babylon
the Great, The Mother of harlots, and abominations of the earth. For the third
sin of gluttony [which you will have produced, because in your canon, though
not much for your credit that your excessive gossiping comes to be cognosced by
your Church] all Bishops, and Doctors may freely bid defiance to your sect,
of whom so many are so often known to be as fed horses in the morning, and
though you flatter yourselves into a conceit that the noise is not heard, are
neighing as much 5. 8.
as those in Isai. So that you may in due time have, what you better deserve,
the same curse with the Priests in the Prophet Malach. 2. 3.
which will spoil your reviewing and singling out other men^ errors, or
secret sins to the shame of Christianity among the Nations, when your selves
are spiloi, kai momoi, the principal spots, and 2 S. Pet. 2. 13.
blemishes that are in it. God may corrupt your seed, and spread dung upon your
faces, sol^nitatum st^rcus, even the dung of your solemn feasts, and you,
more likely then they, may be taken away with it.

The Bishops third challenge mounts somewhat higher then your Their exercing
civil jurisdiction
answer, which pleades only for preaching upon texts, concerning the
Magistrates duty, and resolving, from scripture, their doubts, both which
reach up only to a judgment of direction: but his Lordship cites the clause
in your theorem, which makes difficult cases between King, and people subjects
of cognizance, and judgment before the Assemblies of the Kirk, And this, he
says, rises to a judgment of jurisdiction. Your second book of Discipline
is more modest in language, though as mischievous in meaning. The Ministers
exerce not the Civil jurisdiction, but teach the Magistrate how it should be
exerciz'd according to the word; whereas if you take cognizance of, and
pronounce judgment in, these difficult cases, Or call before you such as may
be more easy, but should be heard otherwhere; this is no other but exercing
civil jurisdiction, as spiritual as you make it. If you, with the terror of
your excommunicating Maozin, overaw the Magistrate into a servile submission to
what you praescribe, this I take to be no teaching, but commanding, and instead
of resolving by deliberate advice, and Christian moderation, cutting in sunder
with this sword of your spirit (no word of Gods) the knots, and perplexities of
his conscience.

What doubt-resolvers you are commonly between Master, and servant, Their
eoc^nomical superintendencie.
husband, and wife, your licentious demeanor in many families may inform us,
where (it is too well known) you have made your selves judges of the trivial
oeconomical causes in the hall, and dispensers of, or with, more private duties
in the chamber; So that, they say, the good man has many times met with a
consistorian censure at his table, and, if not with a Presbyter a Presbyterian
prohibition in his bed: I believe you mistake preaching Praelates, and Doctors
for some babbling Puritanical Pastors, and Lecturers in England, who have made
these things* their care, and gone about them, as the uncontr^verted parts of
their Ministerial function. The Bishops negligence herein was the silent
reverence he paid, which you owe, to Majesty at a distance; And His Lordships
modest declining domestike curiosities, a civil diversion from that, wherein
the word is so clear, as to need no interpreter, and the Husband or Masters
authority so absolute, a^ admits no superintendencie to praedominate.

Your license to preach personally against Princes, I find given Preaching
personalli^ against Princes. Knox: Hist. Lib. 2.
to your Forefathers in an answer to the Queens proclamation 1559 Your
tradition still continues the same, touching which (for brevities sake) I must
again send you (as I can not too often) to the famous Grotius. De Imper. Sum.
Pot, cap. 9.

What the Parliament propon'd to you about the late engagement, Their
proceedings in the late engagement.
included no such great scruple of conscience as to long for the comfort of
your resolution, nor was that, when they had it, the star by which they
steered their course, in the business. They knew your violence [call'd zeale]
to be such, as would force an entrance into the hearts of many poor people,
which, when it finds empty, swep^ St. Matthew. 12. 43.
and garnished for better ghests, would call in 7 wicked rebellious spirits to
possess them. This epidemical mischief they endeavored to praevent by
acquainting you with the plausibilitie of their enterprise, and if they could
have praevailed for either your consent, or silence, they should have the less
need* they thought, to look back in the prosecution of their design. What
conjunction soever you found to be at that time driven on, I can assure, you
there was a clearlie malignant party on this side, that found themselves
separated, and who trembled at the hazard of their religion, and the persons of
them, that were to be most eminent instruments of its praeservation, when they
saw such a solemn outward compliance with oaths, and Covenants, and with a
Committee of Estates, that declared so at large for the former joint-interest
with England, against the Liturgy, and established Declar. Iul. 21. 1649.
religion in our Church. Yet their warning against it made no other noise then
sounding of their bowels in compassion to the King* whom they desired to have
by any means, delivered out of the hands Isai. 63. 15.
of the merciless Independent, and a tenderness toward their swee^, and
ingenuous Prince, who with his loyal and generous Nobility, they feared might
be deluded, and fall into the hands of the dark mercenarie Presbyter, the
orthodoxe, untainted party being not intermixed in such a visible number, as
seemed likely to secure them from that danger.

The Congregational supplications were naught, but your Consistorian jugglings:
Your selves sowed the wind in some whispering Assembly instructions, and then
reaped the whirlewind. in tumultuous petitions from the people. So that your
own spirit first raised the storm, and then wrapped it self in a mistie
multitude for concealment. That the States of the Kingdom sent several
express messages for that end, viz. to receive an Assemblies reply in a
Magisterial Declaration against their proceedings; in pulpit banning* and
cursing; in Clamourous seditions, and, as you could make, militairie
opposition, I can not get within the compass of my faith, and take it to be
such a salving of conscience as none but a Scottish Classical Casuist will
profess, beyond what any Jesuit in ordine ad spiritualia will challenge with
all the rebellious circumstances, that accompany it. For that filthy
conclusion you cast upon the Bishop, we know as well as if we had seen it drop,
that it came from the corrupt praemises in your head. In the case you produce
His Lordship ties not up the tongues of Gods servants, but concludes the
counsel of the wicked to be deceit, Prove. 12. 5. Ps. 50. 16.
Gods law not to be taken from your preaching, nor his Covenant any more from,
then in your mouth. To apply your general to the particular in hand, The war
you thought unlawful, because it proclaimed Isai. 61.
liberty to the captive, and the opening of the prison to His Majesty that
was bound; And the law in St James, you had no reason 2. 11.
to submit to, who may, not uncharitablie, be thought to have resolved upon a
connivance at, or collusive neutralitie in the murder, that was otherwise
visiblie to follow. The greatest impiety, and injustice, I know, was in it (as
exquisite as you are in casting the fashion of uncertain evils) was the
advancement of your Covenant in the Van. And, if for that, the Engagers were
to* expect nothing but the curse of God, I am sure they deserved no anathema
from your Kirk. If your doubting Nation be put in the scales with your
resolving Nation that engaged, I believe we must give you at least a grain or
two to make it aequiponderate. They, that stated their souls by the council of
your Assembly, stayed behind to praevent all recruit, and oppose the retreat
of their more loyal Country men upon a possible misfortune. For the
lawfulness whereof they had somewhat, worse then silence, from the (miscalled)
servants of God, though, I am sure, no authority from his word. When Religion,
and Royalty lay panting under the talents of most cruel Rebels, the Civil
business of war was by the other birds of prey unseasonablie disputed. What
concerned the soul in it, had the clear sunshine from Isai. 8. 20*
the law, and the testimony to warm, and quicken it, That the Assembly spoke
not according to this word, was because there was then no light in them, the
lamp of the wicked was put out.

What the Church declared in their public papers to the Parliament Prove. 13.
had very litlie of modesty, or truth. It bound up your engagement in so many
knottie conditions, as had made it sure enough for vindicating the wrongs the
sectarians had done, when the only injured persons were excluded out of their
share in the promised success. To expect reason by Christian, and friendly
treaties from them that you acknowledge had bid adie^ to Religion, and
Covenant, when your zealous selves, praetenders to both, never offered any
heretofore, was like the fine-spun thread, or Covent garden paper Ianuar. 6.
and 29. 1649.
you put in afterward between the axe and the Royal head it cut off: If the
good people in Scotland were so willing to hazard their lives, and estates;
what good Pastors were you that held their hands, and forced then to sit
still. By whose cunning, and misperswasion the engagement was spoiled, or
impeded in the stating, we require no farther evidence then from your
pamphlets, By whose rash praecipitancie, or somewhat else in the managing (if
it may not be ascribed to the fortune of the war) is a mystery yet not
perfectly revealed. The number was large enough, though the most religious, as
you call them, were absent, and the armies courage, I think had not 1. Tim. 4,
2.
been much greater by their company. The lies spoken in hypocrisy, did but
cauterize the conscience of the wretched people that stayed at home. The
lethargy, called peace, which they slumber in for the time, may hereafter
break out into an active war, to the ruin of the Assembly spirits that
seduced them. The three reasons the Bishop touches upon, as the principal, may
be the test for the many more that went with them. So that we shall not need to
rake in your dunghills for the jewel that you promise, which, when we have
found, will not yield one grain of faythfullnesse in your Church. They, that
foretold the destruction that followed, were not unlikelie the instruments to
effect it. If the Kings friends should not march till the Assembly Zedekiahs
put on their homes, though 1. Kings. 22.
his person be more righteous, we look his success should be little better
then Ahabs, and the Independent Syrians pushed no otherwise then in mockery
and sport, while his loyal subjects should be too seriously scatered on the
hills as sheep that have no shepherd to enfold them. If the misbeliefe, and
contempt of whom you call the Lords servants, and the great danger, unto which
you make religion be brought, were the only losses sustained in the last
armies misfortune; let those workers of iniquity perish, that to the ruin of
souls, endeavor to repair them. What grief of heart, or repentance, has
showed it self in those persons, you say, contributed to the spoiling but must
mean, unless you condemn your selves, such as were forward in promoting that
design, whether in a politic hypocrisy, or (which can hardly be rationallie
afforded then) a misguided sincerity, will find it to be poenitenda
poenitentia, and a hard retreat from the guilt, and shame of that botomlesse
penance you praescrib'd them; unless their judgment be, as their sin, the
same with his who sold his birthright, as they theirs to their liberty, for a
morsel of bread, a poor Heb. 12. 16.
inconsiderable temporal subsistence, and may find no place of repentance,
though they seek it carefully with tears. Should all the Disciplinarian
hands be cut off, that were not held up to the agreement of bringing, by a
warlike engagement, the Sectarian party in England to punishment, David Lesley
would have but a left handed army, and His Majesty might rely upon half his
security as well for his crown, as his religion. They who, to gain their
arreares, so easily, I must say ^aitourouslie, parted with that Royal person,
are not to be credited as men so unanimouslie resolved, with hazard of lives,
and estates upon his rescue. Nor can any man, whose faith as not resolved into
air, and so, ready to engender with the faint breath of every dissembler,
believe that they would with such hazard make a long march to the Isle of
Wight, who would not, with less, conduct His Majesty, a day, or two from
Holmebie. But had you been at that trouble, and had Victory strewed roses in
your way, when you should have with pleasure regained the rich purchase you
went for, I preceive you had been at a loss for a chapman, and a great
uncertaintie where to dispose it until you had got one. For first you talk of
bringing the King to one of his houses to perfect the treatit, Then of bringing
His Majesty to London with honor, freedom, and safety, Next of bringing him
to sit in his Parliament with what honor, and freedom himself should desire;
And all these with in the extent of a few lines, which make three degrees of
doubt in the Saints, even after their debate of that matter, and universal
agreement, not to be quaestion'd. But let us suppose the last, and best of the
three in your purpose, and your avaunt Curriers on horseback to hasten it: I
see you are pleased to call them back with a quaestion, to which I pray tell
me where the Lords servants, or loyal subjects of Christ's Kingdom ever made a
like. Yet you, shall have your answer by and by, though you show not the like
civilitie to the Bishop, who seems to state his quaestion thus. Whether when
the Parliament, and Army of Scotland had declared their resolutions to bring
His Majesty to London, etc. without conditioning for a promise of security,
for establishing (at best a controverted) religion, any legitimate full Church
Assembly ought, an illegitimate imperfect Clerical combination or Conventicle,
could in ordine ad spiritualia, declare against the engagement; call for the
Kings hand, seal, oath, to establisp a cut throat covenant to the ruin of his
person, and posterity, Religion, Laws, Liberty, Monarchy, and whatsoever
His Majesty was, by a solemn oath, and indispensable peswasion of conscience
obliged, with the hazard of life and Kingdoms, to maintain.

In answer to yours take this. The Parliament, and army of Scotland in
declaring their resolutions, etc. did what they ought, and that according to
your own principles, for you had the security of His Majesty's Royal word
[more then once] for establishing your Religion in Scotland, according to the
treaties that had been perfected between the two Kingdoms; If you intended the
like courtesy to England, your Parliament, and Army, had it consisted of none
but the Saints, were in no capacity to take it, being no part of the
principals concer'd in the benefit, nor deputed by England to capitulate for
it, Therefore their rescuing His Majesty's person out of the Sectaries hands,
had been the untying of his, and putting him in a posture to give; The bringing
him to his Parliament in London, where likewise your own Commissioners resided,
had been the seting him in sight of such as were to ask, and receive. Which is
the same kind of Logike you used in your answer to both Houses of Parliament
upon the new propositions of peace, and the 4. bills to be sent 1647. Where I
find your opinion, and judgment to be this, That the most aequal., fairest,
and just way to obtain a well-grounded peace is by a personal treaty with the
King: and that his Majesty for that end be invited to come to London with
honor, freedom, and safety. For which you offer 6. reasons. 1. The sending
of your propositions without a treaty has been often essayed without
success....... Of those propositions this ever was one, To promise security
for establishing religion, And what better success could now be exspected?
2........ His Majesty's proesence with his Parliament must be the best, if not
the onelieiremedie to remove our troubles. This remedy the Parliament, and
Army intended to help you to. 3....... Without a treaty or giving reasons
for asserting the lawfullnesse, and expedience of the propositions to be
praesented, they may be aesteemed impositions. This proposition was to be sent
without a treaty, being neither lawful nor expedient for the many reasons His
Majesty had formerlie rendered. I remit the Reader to your paper for the rest,
and a great deal more of self contradiction (with somewhat worse,) which one
of the new English Lights has discovered in his answer. But Scot. Mist.
dispelled.
you shake of that like an old serving-man which had done your drudgerie in his
youth, and bestow your liverie on the Parliaments praecedent, which providence,
believe me, will save you but little. Your argument's this: The Parliaments of
both Kingdoms in all their former treaties ever pressed upon the King a number
of propositions, Ergo, The Church may desire the granting of one. I should be
too courteous in casting up the numerous account of their rebellions aequal to
their propositions, and keep out but a single unity for you. I shall choose
rather to tell you (cautioning first for the falsehood in the fundamental
hypothesis) That in cases of treaty the Church of Scotland is subordinate to
one, and therefore has no adaequate conditioning privilege with the
Parliaments of both, Kingdoms, especially in her peevish state of opposition
to both. Secondly, This proposition desired, is the Trojan horse into which
all the rest of your treason's contrived, there being no fraudulent
possibility, Ecclesi^stike, nor Politic, which your Sinon Assembly has not
cunningly lodged in the belly, the winding entrails, the maeanders, of the
Covenant. Your clause in the parenthesis, when the bolts are off, and set at
liberty, tells us your meaning is this.

Let the Kings person, and children continue imprisoned, His Queen, Prince,
etc. banished, His revenue sequestered, his life be irrecoverablie endangered,
rather then those of the Scottish Presbyterian party (for the rest you can not
excommunicate out of your nation, though not in your covenant) should run the
hazard of their lives, and estates; Which was the true result of your debate,
and agreement. That you heard no complaint, when many of the thirty
propositions were pressed, was, because your ears were stopped against the
lamentations of every English Jeremie that wept for the slain of the Ierem.
901.
daughter of his people, being such an Assembly as the next verse describes
you. That an out cry, as you call it is made when only one proposition is
stuck upon, is because that one streightneth the Isai. 58.
bands of your wickedness, lays heavier burdens upon the shoulders of
innocence, and will not let the oppressed go free; And then Gods Prophets are
called upon to cry aloud, not to spare, to lift up their voice like a trumpet,
etc. This one was that, the yiedling to which would most of all have violated
His Majesty's conscience, and in reference to which he tells you ' it is strange
there can be no method of peace, but by making war upon his soul. Yet let the
case be disputable, and your tender excusable, at least in respect of the time,
which you say was not to be before His Majesty's rescue, but only before his
bringing to London, etc. If so, why was not His Majesty first rescued, and
delivered out of the hands of the Sectaries, and then your proposition insisted
on? The Bishop tells you the reason out of Humble advice, Edenb. Jun. 10. 1648.
viz. lest his liberty might bring your by gone proceedings about the league,
and Covenant into quaestion. All honest Christians, and loyal subjects [though
heathen] are of the same belief with his Lordship, and whatsoever is their
opinion in general, expect that you prove the innocence, or justice of
conditioning in this particular with your confessed captive King. Concerning
the absolute soveraignitie of Kings you are otherwhere answered, and if not
satisfied, may find more work made you by the famous Grotius, whose book was
manifestly penned against you, and your usurping brother-Rebells of England,
and bids defiance to all your Didoclaves, Buchanans, and Brutus's of both
nations, till replied to. But away with your counterfeit inclination to
treaties, which you ever abhorred like death, fearing in that peace, there
could be no peace for your wicked selves, and therefore gave public thanks to
God for delaying your torments in the disappointment of that at the Isle of
Edenb. 12. May. 1649 posts^r.
Wight, as well by your plots, and devices, as by the Sectaries armedforce. The
holiness of this religious proposition was but the blind under favor of
which you stalked, and made safer approaches to His Majesty's murder, by
another, never hitherto repeald, immutablie designed; Nor are there many of
your public papers but forespake the destruction of his Royal Person, and
Family unless he submitted to the tyranny of your terms, and whether that
had quitted him as much from your judgment, as it assuredly had from his
supremacy, and crowns, may be guessed by the experiment he made in his first
too full, fatal concessions, which your own Parliament Acts have registered
completelie satisfactorie to the demands or desires of all sorts of people in
Scotland, which too indulgent paternal, goodness having turned into poison,
you regorg'd in his face by a foreigne invasion, and a base mercenarie
rebellion till, like evening wolves, you rent in pieces, and preyed upon his
person in the dark. Scottish mist Dispelled
The proposition I mean is that, for which one of your sectarian brethren
calls God, Angels, and Men to judge of your dissembling in pressing a personal
treaty, when His Majesty formerlie desiring one, you told him, There having
been so much innocent blood of his good subjects shed in this war by His
Majesty's commands and commissions,.... you conceive that until satisfaction,
and security be first given to both his Kingdoms* His Majesty's coming to
London could not be convenient, nor by you assented to. What satisfaction you
mean, we know by your Discipline, which makes murder unpardonable, and then I
pray, what security could be taken, but his life? If the granting this one
proposition you stand upon, concerning Religion, and the Covenant, had draw'n
after it (as it seems by your silence) the satisfaction for blood, and
security for your peace. We may clearlie conclude your Religion was Hendersons
Prophecy Pap. to K. Chapter I. I^n. 3. 1646. Esth. 4. 14.
murder, and no resting Canaan for your Covenant but in His Majesty's death.
Which in effect was thus foretold him by that bold Henderson. My soul trembles
to think, and to foresee what may be the event, if this opportunity be
neglested. He would not use, he said, the words of Mordecai to Esther, because
he hoped beter things. Whereas if his hopes faild him, we may well argue he had
used them, as you do, that survive him, in your endeavor that he, and his
fathers house should be destroyed.

But that you take confession to be the Doctrine of Antichrist, you Presbyters
Declaring against Parliament debates.
might, without an ironie, put an c^ce to your own being criminous, to the
purpose* in declaring against the Parliaments debates, which if therefore
needless, and impertinent, because you think, or will have them thought to be
so, the Great Council you make but a subordinate Eldership, or Class to the
supreme Assembly of your Ki^ke. You are not always so modest as to keep your
distance from your English Parliaments affairs; We have for many years found
you like loving beagles, upon eithers concernment, so closely coupled in the
slip of your Covenant, as if, when the game should be lost upon eithers
default, you meant to be trussed up together for company. If it be proper to
have any King in Scotland, The Kings negative voice proper to be debated in a
Scottish Parliament.
the proper place of debate about his negative voice is as well a free
Parliament there as in England. If your laws admit not of that, they admit of
no King, whose Regalitie consists in that, nor has he any legislative
authority without it. It is the argument of your own Commissioners, who use to
fetch their Syllogismes from the Assembly, therefore you that made it are best
able to solve it* Their, or your, words are these. The quaestion is where in
his [the Kings] Royal authority, and just power does consist. And we affirm,
and hope it can Ans: to both Houses upon the new propositions and the 4. bills
1647.
not be denied, That Regal power, and authority is chiefly in making, and
enacting laws, and in protecting, and defending their subjects, which are of
the very essence, and being of all Kings. And the exercise of that power are
the chief parts, and duties of their Royal office and function. And the
scepter, and sword are the badges of that power. Yet the new praeface compared
with other parts of these new propositions takes away the Kings negative voice,
and cuts off all Royal power, and right in the making of laws, contrary to
the constant practice of this, and all other Kingdoms. For the legislative
power in some Monarchies is penes Principem solum.... in other.... by compact
between the Prince, and the People.... In the last the power of the King is
least, but best regulated, where neither the King alone without his Parliament,
nor the Parliament without the King can make laws.... which likewise is clear
by the expressions of the Kings answers, Le Roy le veu^, and Le Roy s^avisera;
So as i^ is clear from the words of assent when Statutes are made; and from
the words of dissent, that the Kings power in the making of laws is one of the
chiefest jewels of the cro^ne, and an essential part of Soveraignitie.... somet
mes the Kings denial had been beter then his assent to the desires of the
Houses of Parliament.... If I had transscribed all, the Reader had found the
argument more full. Out of this, compared with what you write, he may rest
assured, that in declaring at that time against the Parliaments debate (which
in truth was vindicating the Kings negative voice) you were resolved against
Regal Government. And whatsoever since you have published in a mock
proclamation, had your Covenanting brethren kept their station in England, the
Crown and Scepter, if not condemned to the coining house, had been kept
perpetual prisoners in Edinburgh Castle, whither with funeral solemnity you
have carried them; nor had there been any Royal head, or hand kept above ground
for their investment, while your Rebels could catch them, and procure sword,
or axe to cut them off. But to follow you in your tracke. If your laws
admitted not absolute reprobation, by a negative voice, they did praeterition
by a privative silence, which was all together as damnable to your Parliament
bills, they being made Acts by His Majesty's touch with the top of his Scepter,
and those irrefragablie nulled which he passed by.

In what follows, you show more ingenuitie, then prudence, by Why opposed by
the Presbyters.
acknowledging the ground whereupon you built your censure of this debate in
Parliament as needless and impertinent, because of the power it might put in
the hand of the King, to deny your covenanted propositions. But alas you
graspe the wind in your fist, and embrace an a^ie cloud within your arms, and,
like some fond Platonike, are jealous over that jewel you never had. The King
of blessed memory told you, when he spoke it to your brethren, He Eic. Bas.
Chapter ^1.
would never foregoe his reason as man, his Royalty as King. Though with
Samson he consented to bind his hands, and cut off his hair, he would not put
out his eye^ himself to make you sport, much less cut out his tongue, to give
you the legislative privilege of this voice. That you, at best, sit in
Parliament as his subjests, not superiors, were called to be his Counselors,
not Dictatours; summond to recommend; our advice, not to command his duty. And
what pretty puppets, think you, have you made your selves for so many years
together to the scorn of all nations, when you so formallie propounded to His
Majesty to grant, what you profess he had never any power to deny.

What comes next is one of the many springes you set to catch The Kings
affirmative voice.
cocks, but your luck is bad, or you mistaken in your sport. I see if you
were to make an harmony of confessions, you would be as liberal of other men's
faith, as of your own. What the belief is of the warner, and his faction about
the absolute affirmative voice of any King, you had heard more at large if you
had fetchd your authority from any line in His Ld. book for that demand. Yet
to keep up your credit (that you may not mount to no purpose). I will bring one
who, in spiritualibus at least, shall take off this sublimate from your hands,
and pay you with more mystery of reason then you have, it may be, found in any
other of the faction. Nulla in re magis ^iucescit Hug. Grot. De Imper. Pot.
cap. 8.
vis summi Imperii, quam quod in ejus si^ arbitrio quaenam religio public
exerceatur, idque praecipuum inter Majestatis jura ponunt omnes qui politica
scripserunt. Docet idem experientia, Si enim quaeras cur in Anglia, Maria
regnante, Romana Religio, Elizabetha vero Imperante Evangelica viguerit, causa
proxima reddi non poterit nisi ex arbitrio Reginarum. Going on in the Religion
of the Spaniard, Dane, Swede, he tells you ad voluntatem dominantinm
recurretur. Though I shall only give you this quaestion in exchange for your
language of concluding, and impeding. If Parliaments have power ad placitum to
conclude, or impede any thing by their votes, what part of making, or refusing
laws is to the King?

If the Bishop had challenged you for nominating officers of the No such
vicitie need be used about mominating officers. Chapter 4.
army, you are not without some such parrot-praters abroad as can tattle more
truth then that out of your Assemblies. Nor need you be so nice in a matter so
often exemplified in Knox, and his spiritual brethren, who, as appears
manifestly by their leters, etc. Were the chief modellers of all the militia
in their time, and His Ldp. having showed you when your pulpit Ardelios
encouraged the seditious to send for (though in vain) L. Hamilton by name (and
Robert Bruce dispatched an Express for him) to be their head. You are here
charged only with not allowing such as the Parliament had named, because not
so qualified as you praetended. That the State ever sent the officers they had
chosen, to doc over all the postures of their souls, to discipline either
their men or affections before you, and to have your Consistorian judgment of
their several qualifications and abilities, is more I confess then hitherto I
have heard of. That you put it to the last part of your answer (relating to no
part of the quaestion) was but to show what you bear in your arms; That, as
plain as you look, the cross on the top of the crown is the proper emblem
of your Assembly, whom no civil matter can escape, having a birthright from
Christ (or deputation at least) to overrule both his Kingdoms upon the earth.
Your Ifs and Ands about the necessity of a war, in that moment of The
Presbyters destructive demurr^.
time, when the British Monarchy Lay gasping for life, demonstrates what good
meaning you had to praeserve the Person, or Government of Kings. The constant
proof of that integrity you required in the officers, must have been the
covenant-proofe of their rebellion, and wickedness, which, if blemished from
the beginning of the wars with no religious, nor loyal impression, no sincere
piety toward God, nor real duty to the King, had marck'd them out for your
Mammon Champions and Goliahs, men most likely to make good the interest, you
aimed at. This you were before practicing in England, where your Sectarian
Masters, that had set you on horseback, mean'd not to take your bridle in
their mouths, and be rid by your ambition to their ruin. Though you advised
them fair for it in your Papers March 3. 1644. requiring to have the officers
in their army qualified to your purpose... men known to be zealous of the
reformation of religion, and of that uniformitie. Which both Kingdoms are
obliged to promote, and maintain, etc. As in September, the year before, you
told them you could not confide in such persons to have, or execute place, and
authority in the army raised by them, who did not approve, and consent to the
Scot. Mist. disp.
Covenant. Which I find by one, well acquanted with your meaning, interpreted
thus. You desired to have zealous hardi^ men out of the North, whose judgment
about the Covenant, and treaty had concurred so as to introduce your Nation to
be one of the Estates of England, to have a negative voice in all things, who
would have pleaded your cointerest with the Parliament of England, in the
Militia of the Kingdom, disposal of places and officies of trust, etc. Having
faild there of your cointerest with the Parliament, you strain here for your
cointerest with the King, and would have the commanding power of his militant
Kingdom in their hands, that should have held His Majesty like a bird in a
string, which if he once stretched for recovering his own just liberties, or
his peoples, they could have plucked him in to clip his troublesome wings, or
cage him at their pleasure. The firmness of your Covenanting Commanders to the
interest of God, the Dispeller reveals in his experience of their striking
hands with hell, in cursing, and swearing, plundering, and stealing, which
might have filled the hearts of the people (had your poison not been
administered under the guilt of wholesome advice) with more rational j^lausies,
and fears then any by past miscariages, of them whose design at that time was
very hopeful, and honorable, otherwise then as it carried the fatal praetext
of your Covenant before it.

To let the world know how long your mystery of iniquity has been working in
the bowels of the State, the Bishop alleges ancient The Reviewers
impertinencie in the success of the Spanish Merchants.
praecedents of 80. years standing, from more impartial, more credible
relations then those in your Romance, falselie entitled, An Historical
Vindication. What you shovell in here about treacherous correspondence with
Spain, is but an handful of sand without lime, adhaeres not at all to the
Inquisitours troubling the Merchants in their religion, nor that to your
admonishing the people to be wary in their trade; nor all at all to the truth
which the Bishop tells you was a Synodical Act prohibiting their traffic
under the rigid poenaltie As. Dund. 1493.
of excommunication, which, all the art you have, can not melt into a friendly
advertisement. Those of the Merchants, whom (you say) the Inquisitours seduced,
required no relaxation; Nor were the rest so persecuted as to be discouraged in
their trade, when they petitioned the King to maintain that liberty, where of
your spiritual chains had deprived them. Therefore all your courteous mediation
was but a disguised Imperious prohibition, whereby you checked the King, and in
ordine ad spiritualia took it for granted, you mated him, by the Merchants
weak submission, to your Censure.

Could we but once take it your Church in agrieving fit for her The
Presbyterian zeal for the 4. Commandment hypocritical cover for their breach
of the rest. Prove. 11. 9.
own so public profanesse in the daily breach of the 5, 6, and other
commandaments that follow, we would tolerate her zeal though not commend her
discretion, in her will worship, and superstitious nicitie touching the
violation of the fourth. But when we find her enlarging her conscience to
laugh at rebellion, murder etc. We guess her crocodiles tears to be more out
of design then compassion, and her mouth open for the destruction of them,
that are not, through knowledge [of her hypocritie] delivered. The profanation
of the Sabbath is not so in conjunction with a Monday mercate, but that a
Saterdays, journey, with some sixpeenie loss, or a Sunday nights watch, and
labor might separate them. Your holy supplications were leven'd with
Iudaisme, which had not the Bishops in Christian liberty eluded, as your
advantage might lie, the Parliament might have next been importund to
Dositheus's folly, to erect a rediculous statuarie Sabbath in your Country.
Though I hear all were not so hard hearted as you make them, but that Patrike
Forbes Bishop of Aberdene did translate the mercates (which are none of the
least) in his diocese to wednesday, as the provincial records of that place
will testify, From the obstruction made Recreations resections to fit us for
spiritual duties.
by the rest to your petitions, you can not infer, what you have formd in a
calumny about their doctrine, and example on that day. What sorts of plays
(which were not all if you reckon right) the most emminent Bishops either used,
or tolerated, were such as consisted with, and spirited, the Dominical duty of
public and private devotion, wherein they had the authority and praecedent*
of otherguesse Christians, then any scottish Assembly praecisians, and seconded
with reason, such as hitherto, you never seriously, and solidelie answered. If
they endeavored to make the Sunday no Sabbath; they did it in a far better
sense, and on better grounds then Rob. Rob. Bruc'es motion to alter the Sabbath.
Bruce could have changd it, as you know he endeavored, to Wednesday or
Friday, and Lent from spring, to Autumn, on purpose to privilege the pure
brethren' in the singularity of their worship, and free them from a profane
communion (though not in the time) with Papists, and Praelates. If the Bishops
had a design to advance their Kingdom by such old licentiousness, and
ignorance as this innocent liberty might be feared to reduce; We know to whom
the Presbyters The Bruc'es Sunday toleration not so large as the Reformed
Church's abroad.
somewhere are beholding, at least for their Sabbath policy, though they
think good to enlarge it, beyond Episcopal sports, and plays, to public
mercates, to brewing, fulling, grinding, carrying beer, corn, dung, and indeed
what not? except opening whole shops, and wearing old clothes; For redressing
which I do not find your compassionate prayers to god, or advice to them*
(which I remember you used) so effectual as to make any amendment, or gain any
proselytes to your circumcised severitie. Therefore, till you praevaile I pray
let the Bishops be troubled no more with what all your flintie faced malice can
not appropriate to*the times, or places of their government. What has been
granted since you cast them out of the Parliament, was by them* that had no
more power in one sense to give then in another to deny. Yet had all your
demands meant no worse, then you spoke in that about the due sanctification of
the day, you might have let them sit still, have had the Souters your friends
reconciled, and made a better mercate of those Royal concessions, which met too
far (unless your gratitude had been greater) your unlimited reguests.

For the challenge that follows, The Bishop knows so well the histori^ The
monst^s impiety of the Presbyterians in prosecusion of their ends.
of that time, that he is feign to leave a mass of horror unstampt in his
thoughts, conceiving it incapable of any due impression by his words. And
whosoever shall look upon Scotland at that time, shall find it to be n^fandi
conscium monstri locum, a place that had bred such an hideous monster, as
neither Hircania, Seythia; no^ any of her Northern sisterhood would foster.
Not long before, when the Queen was great with child of that Prince, to whom
you profess so much tenderness soon after, not valuing the hazard, of that
Royal Embryo, you hale her Secretary, her principal servant of trust from her
side and murder him at her door; Because the King would not take upon him the
praerogative guilt of that cruel murder, according to the instructions you had
given him, you find him useless must have him too dispatchd out of the way,
which was done, though not by the hands, by the known contrivance of Murray in
his bed, his corpse throw'n out of doors, and the house blow'n up with
gunpowder where he lay. To get a praetense for seizing upon the young Prince,
you make the Queen and E. Bothwell (because her favorite) principals in the
murder of his father, possess the people with jealousy; of the like unnatural
cruelty intended to him. Having got the Royal infant in your hands, you not
only null the Regencie of his mother, you work all the villainy you could
think on against her person in his name, and make him, before he knew that he
was borne, act, in your black or bloody habits, the praevious parts of a
matricide in his cradle. In order hereunto the Queen (as you say,) was declared
for Pope^ie, which requires some Presbyterian Rebel glossarie to explain it,
there being no such expression to be found in the language of any orthodoxe,
loyal Christians in the world. In this conjuncture of wiekednesse, that no
other way of safety was conceivable for your Protesting, and Banding religion,
but a continued rebellion, no other to make sure of the infant King for your
prisoner, the Kingdom your vassal, but by such a grand combination in treason,
may be granted at sight of your several praeceding desperate exploits. For this
end your General Assembly might crave conference with such of the secret
Council who wereas public Rebels as your selves. That your advice was mutual
whose end and interest was the same, is not to be doubted, saving that we may
observe such godly motions to spring first from the virtuous Assembly, as you
confess touching this. Your call was in much more have then good speed, and
your considerable persons convened a great deal more frequentlie then they
covenanted. Argile, that did, slept not well the next night, nor was he well at
^ase the day after, till he had reveald your treason to the Queen Knox tells
you, That the people did not join to the lords, and diverse of the Lib. 5.
Nobles were adversaries to the business. Others stood Neuters, The slender
party that subscribed your bond began to distrust, were thinking to dissolve,
and leave off the enterprise a confessed casualtie gave up the Victory, with
the Queens person, unhapilie into your hands. This mixed, and extraordinary
Assembly had little sincere, 1560.
or ordinary manners to call that a Parliament, which was none, having no
commission nor proxy from their Sovereign and to make it one chief article
in their bond, to de^end, or endeavor to ^atifie those Acts, which their
Sovereign would not, when the lord St. John carried them into France. But they
persisted in the same rebellious principle, professing in ^rminis that tender
to have been but a show of their dutiful obedience And that they begged of them
(their King and Queen) not any strength to their Religion, which from God had
full power, and needed not the suffrage of man etc. They are Knox's words,
which, were there no Lib. 3.
other evidence, are enough to convince any your aequitable comparers, That the
just authority of Kings, and Parliaments in making Acts, or laws is in
consisten^ with the Presbyterian government. Which is the sum of the
controversy in hand.

No secret Council, especially, if in open rebellion, can empower an
Assemblies have no power to summ^n contrary to the Kings proclamation.
Assembly to issue letters of summons when their Prince's public proclamation
disclaimes it. The greatest necessity can be no color to that purpose,
Though, what frivoulous ideas of great necessities the Presbytery can frame,
we may judge by their late procedings in our time. Your religion, and liberties
seem then to have been in no such evident hazard, as you talk of; if they
were, you may thank your selves, who had the Royal offer of security to both,
the Queen only conditioning, and craving, with tears the like liberty of
conscience to her self The life of the young King was daily, indeed, in
visible danger from the hands of them, who had murderd his father, and ravished
the crown, or Regencie from his mother, but who they were I have told you. In
such an ambiguous time* men of any wisdom, other then that which is carnal,
and worldly, and so folly before God, would have betaken them selves to their
prayers, and tears; men of courage, and piety would have waited the effects
of providence, and not so distrust fully, deceitfullie peic'd it with their
own strength. From such lovers of Religion, as contest, covenant, depose,
murder; as rage, ruin, proscribe, excommunicate, Libra R^ges, and Region^s
Domme Cantic. 8. 6. 7.
Good Lord deliver Kings, and countries from them all; Fortis est, ut more,
dilectio; jura sicut infernus ^ulatio, Their love is strong as death, in the
letter* their jealousy is cruel as the grave; The coals thereof, are coals
of fire, which have a most vehement flame; No waters of widows or orphans
tears can quench it; No floods of innocent blood can drown it. It Is not
unlikelie the Praelates resolution may be, That when a most wicked company of
villains had deposed two Queens and killed one King; endeavored to smother
the ^potlesse Maj^stie of a Royal Son with the foul guilt of their injury
done to his Gracious Mother, which they cast enviouslie upon his name: And
after these to draw a Nation, and Church, under the airie notion of a true
Religion, never establishd by Law of God nor man, into a Covenanting Rebellion:
And a free kingdom under a legal Monarchy into an illegal oppressive
tyranny. That in this case there ough to be a general meeting of Church and
state, to vindicate Majesty, laws, liberty, and provide remedies against
such extraordinary mischiefs. That the Presbyterian Scots never were, nor
will be of this opinion, I take your Contradiction.
word, and believe it. Take this supplement with you That E. Bothewell should
kill the King to make way for Popery, and Murray before endeavor to hinder
his marriage with the Queen, under a praetense of a design by that then to
bring it in (which history relates) The Assemblies can reform only
according to canon, not the canon.
will cost some pains to reconcile* Errors and abuses in Religion, the
ordinary reformation whereof is referred to your Ecclesiastical Assemblies,
are such only as appear to be peccant against the ordinary rule or canon by
just authority established; But that the Canon it self should be alterable at
the pleasure of subjects in a combined Assemblies declining their subordination
to a superior power in King, and Parliaments; and making them selves not
only absolute to act, but supreme to praescribe, is contradictorie to all
law, and aequitie nor can any necessity countenance it. What you find wrong
in the Church, according to your method, must be no other, then that, which had
been formerlie decreed in some of your Assemblies, which must implie a
fallibilitie in their application of the rule; This error when you go about
to rectify from the word of God, you may chance to have no clearer evidence
then your praedecessours, nor the people assurance, that your eyesight is
better. So that, for ought they know, one blind Assembly may lead another by
the hand and both with their followers fall into the ditch. Beside It may so
hapen, that religious Acts, answerable to the word, may be offensive to some
wicked Assembly, that have not the fear of God before their eyes, These if
they have the power, to be sure they want not perverseness to abolish* for
which I find no cautionarie restraint in your discipline. For, after you have
praetended to rectify if upon your dissembling petition a following Parliament
refuses to ratify that you have power to abolish, and establish what you
please, I find every where confessd by your faction. And this indeed, as you
say, is your ordinary method of proceeding in Scotland, but in no other
Reformed Country, who every where attribute to the Magistrate and
Archirectonike power in the Church, and but a ministerical, or instrumental to
any Synod or Assembly, Videlius, and other your brethren of note on this
subject making you Bellarmines papists, though when your Kings, stand
publikelie in opposition against you for the maintenance of their right, it is
quaestionable whether his most plausible reasons w^l as well privilege you in
his doctrine. The legal method of England you know well enough is otherwise,
and therefore can not ad mit of your Discipline without altering the fundamental
laws, the most essential part of gouverment in our kingdom.

The three foolish, and unlearned quaestions that follow tell us you 2. Tim. 2^
23. 24.
are in the mind to gender strifes, rather then according to Saint Paul's
counsel, follow righteousness, faith, charity, or peace. To the first I
answer. Christians of old, before the Emperial laws for paganism were
revoked, Ancient Assemblies reversed no Civil laws. Eusebius.
were more or less hindered from embracing the Gospel, according to the zeal,
rigor, remissness or clemency of the Emperors that reigned* Those that
obeyed not their commands, suffered their punishments, resisted no powers,
reversed no laws. Nay, its as high a trial as can well be instanced, when
Maximilian, and Diocletian publishd an edict to demolish their Churches, and
burn their Bibles, because one was found that in great indignation tore the
paper in pieces, being condemned to die, all Christians that heard it approved
the sentence, and commended the justice of the pagan Magistrate in his
execution. To the second thus. The ecumenical and National Synods of the
ancients Reformed no haerefies with out the Emperor.
had ever the praesence or authority of the Emperor, without which they
reformed no haerefies nor corruptions in religion. Who by ratifying their
canon^ did cancel all the laws of state, which did protect those errors When
this could not behad but with praejudice to religion, the Emperors them selves
being draw'n in by the haeretikes to their party, they only declared their
different opinion, submitted to censure, were disspersed in exile, nor did they
countermand by the terror of excommunication, and cursing, but when summond by
the Emperor to rectify any abuses in the Church. This may be seen in the time
of Constantius addicted to the Arians. To your third I answer thus. The civil
laws in Britanie, I mean for our part in it, whereby Popery was established,
were annulled by the King, whom we make absolute in that power. If the
reformation begun by Hen: 8. be thought clogged with any seeming violence,
Henry the eight's reformation the occasion not the original of ours.
sacrilege, or schism (which some ties on his conscience that required a more
deliberate solution, and some indirect passionate procedings give the Papists a
kind of coloural argument to object) I see not how you are justified that
imitate it, nor we bound to sustain the inconveniences that attend it, who may
fairlie make the reign of K. Edward our epoch, and from him, in his first
Parliament, fetch our authority for the change. On your side of Britain,
Scottish Presbyterians from the beginning schism.
I find naught but a continued rebellion in the reforming party (as you mean
it) till K. James grew up to a judgment of discerning and some resolution of
restraining: Nor till that time (though I hope well of many thousand persons
under a Presbyterian persecution) can I in reason quit the praevalent part of
your Church from a succession in schism. For Germany and France I have no
more to do at this time to be their judge then their advocate, seeing no where
His Lp. joining with his brother Issachar in impleading then for rebellion. All
you can logicallie collect is such a major as thi^ They who reform according
to the Presbyterian Scottish met^od by abolishing Acts of Parliament in a
surreptious or violent Synod, by framing Assembly Acts for religion, and
giving them the authority of Ecclesiastical laws, without or against the
consent of the Magistrate cheat the Magistrate of his civil power in order to
religion. If you will needs be assuming in behalf of your brethren in Germany
and France, they must put you to prove it, or quit them selves of your
conclusion as they can. In the mean time I see your pasture is bad that you
turn your catell so often grazing abroad. For the fool in the next line you
send to the Bishop, I guess it may be his mind to have him returned by the
creature that caries None but they have declared Bishops and ceremonies
unlawful.
his brother Issachars burden, expecting a wiser answer by the next paper
Mercury you employ; which can not be without bringing to light that law that
praeauthoriz'd the Ministers protestation against the Acts of Parliament 1584.
And that Act of Parliament since the null Assembly of Glasgow yet standing in
force that made Bishops and ceremonies unlaw full; The former, beside the
contradiction it caries with it, devolving the legislative power upon the
Kirk, which according to you can keep the Parliament in awe not by petitioning
but protesting, and so ratify or null all laws declared at her pleasure; The
latter, beside the long perseverance in sin it imputes to the Latin and Greek
Churches, as well before as after the corruption in either, the late warmness
to all Reformed Churches abroad, which never hitherto in any National Assembly
declared regular Episcopacie and ceremonies unlawful, outdoing the very Act of
abolishing which his Majesty in Parliament ratified with reference to no
unlawfullnesse, but inconvenience, and retracted that too in his too late, yet
seasonable, repentance afterward. Though for what His Lp. objects, were there
too after Acts of Parliament to ratify the substance of what the Kirk
repraesents, no one of them thereby justifies the circumstance of Ministers
mutinous protesting against laws made in hours of darkness, upon what
misinformation soever, which is treason against man and excusable by no formal
obedience toward God. This for the Bishop to publish, being one of the
Governers of that Church which strangers plot what they can to seduce into the
same rebellion, with their own, is no contemning of law, but discharging his
conscience and duty in his place.

By the next story the Bishop will gain a more perfect discovery of your
resembling those grievous revoiters in Jeremie, who walk Chapter 6. ^8. Chapter 9. 3.
with slanders, being brass and iron; Who bend your tongue like a bow for
lies, and yet, when the true case is known be accounted by Solomon but a fool
for your labor. In King James's minority who stole his name (though they ner
had his heart) to act by it the most unnatural oppression Capt: I. Stuart
vindicated.
of that most gallant Queen his virtuous and gracious mother; to murder and
banish many noble assertours of the reformed orthodoxe religion, and laws,
appears upon public record in your story. This one Capt. James Stuart very
nobly with standing your divellish temptations to have him maintain a
distructive dissension at Court with Esme Stuart. E. Lenox, a faithful subject
and most deserving favorite of the Kings, and improving that little interest
you helped him to* to a more Christian conjunction in love and loyalty, and a
double vigilancie over the Kings person exposed too often to your treacherous
designs, is unlikelie to have any better character at your hands then what you
commonly give to persons of such fidelity and honor. His advancement to the
titles and estate of E. Arran and Chancellar of Scotland, was partly in reward
of his guardian care over him whom somewhat else beside sickness had made unfit
for the management of either. Yet were not these taken by force but on free
session, then desperate; to whom if the King were nearest in blood (not to
mention a third which your zealous professors commonly find him) his
Majesty had a double title to his lands, and a power undisputable to dispose
of the Chancellars office at his pleasure. What beside Capt. James's unheard of
oppressions (which dirt his zeal for religion contracts when it passes
through the unclean channel of any Presbyters mouth) troubled the Nobilities
Patience the reader may find somewhat more truly and impartiallie related not
only in the Apocriphal histories of the two Rt. Reverend Archbishops of
Canterbury and Saint Andrews; but even in the Canonical tradition of
Philadelphs Vindicatour, who praemiseth some repulse your Church Delegates had
about their querulous petitions; A difference that fell out between E. Lenox
and Gowrie about some point of honor, to revenge which he calls Murre, Glame
and diverse other disquiet discontented spirits into a confaederacie, whom you
call a number of the prime best affected nobility, which improper title he
more ingenouslie declines in a piece of Rethorical ignorance, The treason at
Ruthuer.
putting his hand more modestly before his eyes, as loath to look on their
sinful rebellious demeanor. Qualescunque fuerint plerique eorum non multum
laberabo.... qualis quisque little suerit nescio: applies the blind man's
speach' in the 9. of Saint John. to the authors of the Saint Iam: 4. 16.
miracle in this change; And beside the mere boast and no violence you rejoice
in, confesses diverse of the Kings servants were wounded among the rest
William Stuart, the news whereof brought Capt. James thither. Who was not
chaced away by their strong breath, but clapped up into a castle by their power,
the Kings guard being before removed from him, and His Majesty taken by Gowrie
and his conspiratours into custody; The E. Lenox banished into France, where
with in a short time he died, whether by grief principally, or his sickness,
he defines not, He adds, That the Heads of this faction sent the Abbot of
Paslet to your Assembly at Edaenburgh for their approbation, who what soever
they did afterward, at that time only thanked God for deliverance (viz from
the imminent justice of the law to which most of their Members were liable)
durst not approve the business, or appear to do it at least; put up a
non'sense petition to God, praying him it were well done after it was done, and
whether well or ill then unalterable by their prayers, or indeed by devine
power, whose omnipotency is not limited when denied to make good moral
contradictions, to pleasure an hypocritical Assembly; He speaks nothing of
the Kings sending to his Council or judicatories to declare the act of the
Lords convenient and lawdable, for which he expected no reasonable man's
credulity not patience, unless so far as to spit it back into his face;
Nor yet of His Majesty's entreating the Assembly, but of their sending
Delegates to him. The answer he gave them, if any, or such as the Vindicator
has helped us to, is much different from yours, and though not extorted by the
terror of death, which may well be suspected by the successive treasonable
attempts of the same Gowrie and his son afterward, gives little approbation of
the fact, being only his acknowledgement of a blessing from God for
delivering his person and the Commonwealth from mischief, by which doubtless
he meant the happy praeservation of his life. So that I again appeal to your
aquitable comparers, what historical truth we are likely to have of your
penning; when seting one Disciplinarian brother against another, without
consulting unprinted records, we can confute you line by line among your
selves. The letter His Majesty sent to Q. Elizabeth was forced. Regem invitum
compulerunt, says Camden, where by he allowed no more that act for good
service, then he would have done a thief for taking but his purse, when he
might likewise have had his life, But to proceed. Capt: I'ames shortly after
crept not in, but was called, Revocatur Aranius says your brother. Therevenge
(whether obtained by him or no) was but the justice of the law, executed with
little severitie upon any, but moderated by the mercy of a gracious King, and
tenderd to all upon submission* But traitourous Assemblies giving universal
allowance for possible misfortunes, had ever an aftergaime of treachery in
reserve. Therefore the Ministers running at this time into a voluntary exile
was upon the apprehension of their guilt, and diffidence, even in the word of a
King for their impunitie if not rather a design to make His Majesty secure,
and so to praepare for the treason at Striveling that followed few months
after, where not only Capt: James was cha^'d away, but the Kings life
endangerd, for which Gowrie very justly paid his own. These their actions
were ratified by no Parliament but a party, nor stand they justified by any
butsuch as were the actours. The action at Ruthuen being with the advice of the
three Estates Assembled in Council judge and published to be treason in
December 1583. And not only M. Baylie declared a Traitor, but all they that
disclaim not his book which justifies that treasonable attempt, by Act of
Parliament 1584. cap. 7.

If the Bishop had traced your Assembly rebellions by their annual succession,
and not jumpt from the year ^4. to 48, he might have made it 58. before he got
up to your Articles of Striveling. You have not hitherto kept such even pace
with His Lp. as that you can with credit say your self weary. If you speak
in good earnest (as I observe you in some journeys short winded) I despair of
your company in the 64. years travel still behind, for which I thought to
call upon you hereafter. In the mean time, since I meet with you at
Striveling, I will take you by the hand, till I bring you in sight (supposed
you are not peevishlie bent to walk blind fold) of the praecipice you tend to
in your entrance upon the justification of that article which referres the
work of Reformation abroad in England and Ireland to the determination of the
General Assembly of your Kirk. If you wet your foot by the way you may
thank your self, the Bishop opens no sluice, only turns that stream of
choler upon you, which you on the least occasion let go like a torrent upon
the Pope and his Conclave of Cardinals at Rome. The fraud used to allure you,
if any, was pia fraus, a devout slight to bring you into the concent of the
primitive Christians, and the violence offered by the English praelates was
only with the sufferance of heaven, which they S. Matthew: 11. 12.
thought peradventure to take by the force and servencie of their prayers,
which they often put up for your conversion from schism, and for your
communion in religion with themselves If a god'lie The King can not be said to
invade the Presbyter: Consistory.
Kings conscientious command, with the mature advice and fre subordination of
the Reverend Fathers of your Church, be no less then invading your
Consistory, the Bishops flood of choler ran somewhat too gently in asking you
whether old Edinburgh were turned new Rome, whereas he might have, in reason,
demanded whether your Presbyterships be not so absolute as to barracadoe your
brazen gates, Rev: 1. 18.
and not suffer him that has the keys of hell and death to come in.
Whatsoever was the yoke and by whomsoever imposed, between that and your
contented compliance (without any violence or invasion no quaestion) with the
earnest desires of the well affected in England, you should in honesty have
left some vacant room for a more ingenuous impartial hand to insert the time
of taking of this yoke from your hard necks, with the several Acts of
Pacification that followed it; And that clause in the public Act of Parliament
wherein the well affected in Scotland profess^d His Majesty parted a contended
King from a contended people; And then have put it to your aequitable comparers
what travail and pains it concerned you to take in purging ou^ the leaven of
Episcopacie and in the English and Irish Churches, when you should have been
purging the leaven of malice out of the Scots. The managing of which great and
good work became such a Parliament to instruct* Prove: 24. 2. c. 27. 20 Tert:
De Praeser: advraescr haere^. c* 42.
and such an Assembly to undertake, who study that destr^ction which, like
hell is never full; and so the eyes of such men are never satisfied.... ha^
magis gloriam Captant si stantibus ruinam, non si jacentibus elevationem
operentur, (...) and ipsum opu^ non de suo propri^ (...) venit, sed de
veritatis ^structione. The Arminianisme and Popery whereof Doctor Laud
Arch-Bp. Lauds Armenianisme and Popery the doctrine. of scripture and the
Fathers.
stands convicted, has had several appeals to Scripture and Fathers, which is
as much as you can show us for your Creed; his Tyranny, to the laws and
highest authority in our Church, aequivalent with the most your discipline can
praetend to A conviction of these I dare promise you will not stand long with
out an answer. In the interim, while your Northwinde is set to drive away the
first and the latter ^ine dropped down fron those clouds of heaven, the
Apostles, and Prophets, and successors to them both, to make good Solomon's
similitude, the Bishops angry countenance is seasonablie, though in effectu
allie bent^ against your back biting tongue. Your discoveries are your
unskilful Prove. 25. 23.
mistakes of rocks for firm land; your disappointment delays of Gods work,
who will in his own time accomplish it, And though too great a number in the
Christian flock follow such as you for their bellwether or leading ram, they
will fly as fast from you when they epsy you in your proper shape to be a
wolf. Photinus was served so who had a great deal more wit, learning, and
eloquence to seduce them. Nam erat and ingenij viribus valens, and doctrinae
opibus excellens, and eloq^io praep^tens, says Vincentius; yet this doom
befell Advers: hares: cap: 16.
him soon after; quem antea quasi arietem gregis sequebantur, eundem (...)
veluti lupum fugere c^eperunt.

What is answered by you before, is replied to and aggrovated. The two stories
that follow have those authors whose truth is more current with you then Spots
woods, though his hereafter will show it self more valide then yours or any
others whatsoever. The former is penned at large by John Knox, enough in
conscience to render him the author of that sedition here mentioned. He says
not Ariote under praeteuse of taking Priest at Mass.
his z^alous hearers understood of a Priest at Mass and immediately brake in,
but consulted how to redress that enormitie, and by agreement appointed those
to wait on the Abbey who, you say, with violence brake i^ and sez'd upon his
person and Mass clothes. That Madam Baylie, your Namesake, Mistress to the
Queens Dountibures as he scoffinlie calls her posted out with deligence to the
Comptroller the Lord of Pittarrow.... cried for his assistance to save her life
and the Queens Palace; That he took with him the Provost and Baylies; That
Armstrong and Cranston were summond to find surety (...) underlie the law
the. 24 October: for a fore thought felony, praetended murder, and for invading
the Queens Majesty's Palace of Halyrud house, and spoliation of the same. That
he writ to the brethren in all quarters, requiring their assistance Avetted by
Knox and improid to a rebellion.
on the day of their trial. That his letter was intercepted and sent to the
Queen, whereupon he was summond before the Queen and Council; That when he made
his appearance. His clients the Brethren of the Town followed in such number,
(...) the inner Close was full and all the stairs even to the chamber door
where they sat; That he confessed his vocation of the Queens leiger etc. That
if in the he had been guilty, he had ^st offended since he came last in
Scotland, demanding (Sawcilie) what vocation of Brethren had ever been to that
day unto which h^ pen had not served; That he told the Queen, If her Majesty
complained that this was done without her Majesty's commandment, so had all
that God had* blessed within the Realm from the beginning of this action,
meaning the Presbyterian Reformation; That he was a watchman both over the
Realm and over the Church of God gathered within the same; by reason whereof
he was bound in conscience to blow trumpet publikelie* so often as ever he saw
any appearance of danger either of the one or of the other. This Act, thus
related, the Bishop will have (what you can not disprove) to be a huge
rebellion, not only in the Actours, but also in John Knox, who was praesent,
if not in person, by full consent and approbation. To break open the Royal
Palace to bring any delinquent to trial is according to no law but what your
Rebellious Assembly has framed. That this Priest saying Mass within the
Liberties of the Court did contrary to law (the Queen having ever reserved
that privilege to her family) remains yet to be proved. You Vit: Eliz. Ao. r
563.
did the like to the Archbishop of Saint Andrews, which Camden tells you was
permitted by law, and, though you had Murrays authority for it, accounts you
no better then Rebels for your pains.... Servidi Ecclesiae Ministri, Mor^vij
authoritate suffulti, vim facerent impune sacerdoti, qui missam in aula (quod
lege permissum erat) (do you mark it) celebrarat.

John Knox's confession (which I gave you under his hand) may be the harbinger
to lodge credit enough to the next story that follows in any man that knows
what superstitious observers your Assemblies have been of all the principles
and praecedents he gave them; Nor need you be so coy in taking upon you here
the defense of their Convocating the people in arms, which you are forced to
do other where (as well as you mince it into god'lie directions and
conscientions advertisement) and upon less colorable occasions approve it
every where when done. Though Mr. Spotswood's testimony can not be refused in
the particular evidence he gives in, yet I Will be confined for once to your own
brother in Evil that confutes him. When Assemblie's summ^ning the people in
Arms upon the trial Popish Lords.
his Grace relates the Ministers commanding the people to arms. Your brother
plays the Critike upon the word, but grants the matter in controversy between
them, and justifies it from the danger that was at hand from the Popish Lords
whom he makes Conspiratours with Spain. Hortate sunt (nam juber^ a^ imperare
non poterant) quod cum in tanto periculo constitut^ essent and respublica, and
Ecclesia, ill^, viti^ vertendum non est. When his Grace says planilie, The
King praefixed a day for their trial, the menacing libells put up in the name
of a national Synod, the tumultuarie meeting of the faithful deferred it, and
made the only remedy a necessity of his remitting their exile. Your brother
denies not one clause of all this, but only moderates the terms, and
enlarges in some particular circumstances that aggravate the fact, viz. That
they appointed a fast this I hope was done by the Assembly) That they moved
the King to appoint a day for their trial, and the Barons those of Perth not to
admit them, which advice or injunction they followed till they had received
letters from the King, which because they obeyed the brethren took pet and
arms for the defense of religion (by whose advice let any man judge) That the
King commanded the Conspiratours to submit themselves in a small number to a
judical proceeding. That upon the 12. of November they met at Edinburgh; The
Conspiratours plead by their lawyers etc. Propound their conditions; The King
declares in a speech the inconveniences very likely to follow if the Lords
were not restored, That an Act of oblivion was voted, which offended the
brethren. What Seditious Sermons and actions ensued appears undeniablie in
your story. Let this be compared with the Bp of Derries relation. That the
King was forced to take arms, come upon a fatal necessity by your rebelling
when your importunity praevaild not. How far he pursued them. What acts of
grace he afterward vouchsafd them you there fore conceal because it confutes
what your imperfect history imports.

CHAPTER VIII. The divine right of Episcopacie better grounded then that
praetended in behalf of Presbytery.
HAd I any hopes to keep you in your wits when you were revived, I would here
sprinkle a little cold water and pity upon your faynting spirits, who any man
may see, are giving up the ghost by your grasping and catching at what you
find within reach, and not liking the looks of that spirit which appears
ready at hand to conduct you, would have, you care not whether, Antichristian
Bishop or Papist to secure you. His Lp. having remonstrated at large your
exorbitand power, here summarilie shows how by the divine right you praetend
to, this sore is incurable, your selves incorrigible, and how Princes must
necessarily despair of recovering or keeping thairs, while Christ's Kingdom
is yours, and you have Christ's Scepter in your hand. The stream of divine
Rhethorike and reason he brings for it, you and your Company, whom the prophet
Isai. Describes to be a troubled sea that can not rest, whose waters cast up
mire Isai. 57. 20
and dirt, hope invisiblie to swallow. To which if Mercurius Aulicus must be
initled Let Britannicus be more properly to yours, whom I have often heard to
be a Common lawyer, but must now take him for some classical divine, since you
have graced him so much as to serive most of his matter and language into your
book. How unhappie soever you make the Bishop in this challenge, as in the
rest, he carie^ fortune enough in his argument to confute you.

-- Miscro cui plura supersunt.
Quam tibi faelici: post tot quoque funera vincet.
Those of his brethren who stand for the divine right of the Discipline of the
Church* do it chiefly in reference to that power of order and the Power of
order and jurisdiction.
distinction they find of Bishop from inferior Presbyters in the text. They
that draw in the other power of jurisdiction, relate only to what they find
practiced by the Apostles, or by God in them, going under the name of
excommunication and the keys How many circumstanciais must pass for
substancials, when determind by the judicatories of your Church, and be made
adaequate in divine right to the general rules to which you reduce them need
not here to be numberd, being scatered every where in this discourse, and very
obvious to the Reads in your story. But in answer to what the Bishop objects
of geting both swords spiritual and temporal into your hands, the one
ordinarily by common right, the other extraordinarily; the one belonging
directly to the Church, the other indirectlie; the one of the Kingdom of
Christ, the other for his Kingdom in order to the propagation of religion and
(to let the Papist a lone whom, out of what mystery I know not, you very
often, me thinks call to your assistance) I pray name one of his Lp's learned
brethren that ever writ for it what concessions have passed from the elder
Edward and Elizabeth Praelates of England, or what from the later Erastian^, as
you style them, in diminution of the jus divinum The midd, l^ Apostolical right
of Episcop^cie.
of Episcopacie desends not to the jus humanum in your sense, there being a
middle Apostolical right participant of both, enough to constitute an
immutabilitie in their order, whatsoever change their jurisdiction may admit
of* at least such as they find aequivalent to the communicating of women,
baptizing of infants, observation of Sunday; which when you bring arguments to
unfixe, you may with greater confidence treat against Bishops wherein those
friends His Lo. has* about the King are so perfectly instructed that they
laugh at your silly stratagems to pervert them being such as, if at any time
they repraesent to His Majesty as you earnestly desire, will thereby, no
quaestion confirm his pious resolution in the continuance of that holy order
especially since the maxim you build upon, That conscience is bottomed only
upon a divine right, they find ruind by Saint Paul in his doctrine Conscience
not bottomed only upon a divine Right. Romans 1. v. 2. chapter
and practice, who convinces the heathen upon the right or principles of
nature, and argues from the testimony of conscience they had sufficiently
bottomed upon the work of the law written in their hearts; Nor had he ever
converted any of the nations without divine revelation antecedent, I mean in
them as well as in himself (which had made less effectual and pertinent the
ministry of the Gospel) if no moral arguments had obliged their consent. How
far this is applicable to Episcopacie (though were it not, it is to your
argument against it) I am not here to discuss only intimate I may that in
proportion it is possible as much to a sacred, as civil, Monarchy (I mean
not coordinate) and the later, had it not the law of God has the language of
nature importunate to commend it I will trifle with you no farther in this
matter, but lay down this conclusion Alteration unsate and sinful while
conscience (...) doubtful.
which you may take up to what advantage you can. That in a thing ambiguous,
such as you here seem to give, if not grant, Episcopacie to be, since no
command of God nor warrant from scripture enjoynes or tolerates the change:
since no Apostolical nor Christian Church for so many hundred years before
that single city of Geneva began it, since neither that nor any other besides
ever acted or at least publikelie avowed what change you demand in the many
particulars that have been, and shall be, inserted in this dispute, to the
inevitable subversion of Regal government; to the confusion of Christian
subjection in the enjoyment of just liberty; to the plain praejudice of
Parliament privilege in three dominions; to the seting up of much spiritual
and carnal wickedness; some grave reverend Divine might modestly speak a
word in season and say, His Majesty's conscience can not at the best but doubt,
and doubting ought not by the law of God and rule of reason to resolve on it.
Which indeed is the substance of his Royal Fathers printed profession. That he
found it impossible for a Prince to praeserve the state inquies, The reasons of
K. Ch 1. against a change* Peace. Antiquiti^. Vnivers^litie.
unless he had such influence upon Church men* and they such a dependence on
him as might best restrain the seditious exorbitances of Ministers tongues
etc. And this is only to be had in that government, which was one bottom for
his conscience..... That since the first age for 1500. years not one example
can be produced of any settled Church, wherein were many Ministers and
Congregations which had not some Bishop above them, under whose jurisdiction
and government they were. This was another bottom for his conscience. To which
such a divine, as I spoke of might add (with a due reserve of all humbly
revence to, and most unshaken confidence in that Holi^ Martyr, and his most
pious hopeful successor our gracious sovereign now living.) That he who for
any politic end suggested, or necessity most fond'le praetended of the
subtilest presbyterian of you all, shall adventure to take himself off from
this bottom, when Iudaisme or Turcisme (some part of your mixture) shall be
alike plausible praetended as more advantageous to his purpose, may be feared
to be found not well settled upon Christianity it self, but fall from it and
throw away one or both Testaments of Scripture, which upon the universal The
considerable approach of Church discipline to doctrine. Paternal government.
tradition of the Church (as the other upon the Catholic practice of the same)
he first rationallie received as the word of God, though afterward he found
other motives prompting a belief of it to be such, which at last be had
superinduced by (what too many vainlie praetend to) the instinct or plerophorie
of the spirit* His Majesty likewise found most agreeable both to reason and
religion that frame of government, because paternal not magisterial etc. Which
was a third bottom for his conscience, Nor did he think it any point of
wisdom or charity, where Christians differ;..... there to widen the
differences, and at once to give all the Communion with Christians.
Christian world (except a handful of some Protestants) so great a scandal in
point of Church government etc. of which wisdom and charity, the gifts of the
spirit of God, he made another very good botome for his conscience: Let Mr.
Baylie read the rest of that most excellent divine chapter, (...). chapter 17. Ius
divinum of Presbytery frustrates all treaties, excommunicates all Christians
threatens all Princes.
and answer it if he can.

The maine ground of the Bishops discourse being wilfully mistaken by the
Reviewer, his structure is weak about the Warners conscience* And the Kings
advantage. His cordial belief of the divine right of Synod^ and Presbyteries,
together with that of the Reformed Churches, which the Bishop shows to be
different, may come from a private spirit that misinformes them, and then is no
good interpreter of Scripture, nor any sure praecedent for Christianity
throughout. Their strict and inseparable adhaerence to his error (beside that
it antidates all treaties null, without an effectual complinance against
conscience and honor) excommunicates all the world but themselves, and
excludes them from all hope of fellow ship with this new select society of
Saints, who, could they multiply into a number large enough to fill the circle
of their ambition, and had they every one a drop Isai. 40. 23. 24. The
Reviewers perverting the Bishops doctrine.
of Scottish rebellious blood in their veins, would no longer labor the
conversion of Kings, but take Gods angry work out of his hands to bring their
Princes to nothing.... and be the whirlewind themselves to take them away as
st^bble.

He that looks not through Mr. Baylies glass of vanity and lies, can never
be able to view the Bishop clasped so close with the elder Praelates impairing
the divine right, nor then, with the consequence he makes, about the legal, or
expedient mobilitie of Bishops. Therefore as the ambition* greed, revenge; so
the dissimulation in conscience is his, who can not but know what texts
himself ^se the to c^te* for the divine right of Presbytery, and what the
Bishop expresselie says, that the same may with (...) more reason be alleged
for Episcopacit, and more consonable to the analogy of ^ayth* The agreement of
sundry* Praelatical divines with Erastus is here impertinentlie* mentioned.
What correspondence the Bishop holds* with them has been too often all-readie
acknowledged* and maintaind. Mr. Baylies urgent, illogical inference obliges
the Bishop neither in inge^itie, nor reason to untie the hands of the Kings
conscience, which his own assures him God has bound, if* not by the hands of
his son, by those of his Apostles and their successors through all
Christian, ages and Churches. Nor can his Lp, from the principle you press,
demonstrate any security to His Majesty from offending God in the change. Nor
yield satisfaction to his Erastu^'s Royal right abused in a Sophisme.
doubts. If Erastus's Royal right (which you so often have ^nveighd against)
may be us^d as a sophisme to delude the King into your presbytery, (...). I
pray, by your favor, let it stand as it is, a better argument to confirm him,
if he needs it, in Episcopacie. Yet that either here, or other where this Royal
right is induced by His Lordship to ratify the order, I say not to actuate the
jurisdiction of Bishops, I can not find upon my reviewing* and must therefore
desire a point by your ocular fingar to direct me.

Were not the Presbyterians more obstinate in resuming their errors* then the
Bishop forward to recapitulate his proofs, his Lp. had spared a good part of
this chapter, though the receiud rules of method required it. Weak, and
naughty are hackney answers* which, if spurrd too often, and reason holds not
up by the head, are likely to lay Presbytery in the dirt. Your Judgment of
his revenge is according to your practice, who, poor, impotent creatures, like
worms, or flies, by corruption, and filth support an useless corpse to defile
that hand, that cru^heth you to the death. The praelatical integrity makes
good the praesent disadvantage of their fortune, and their evidence in proof,
before any aequitable comparers, will praeserve still the principate in
dispute* Major est [si non fortun^] ratio, quam Sen: De Clem ^l. ^. c. 20.
ut tali solatio egeat, minifestiorque vis quam at alien^ malo opinionem sibi
virium quaerat. Your Canterburian challenges were but Scottish ^igges made
only for mirth to a rude multitude in confusion, the one very inconsiderable
in music, the other flat, if any thing, in the harmony of truth. If the
principles of Praelacie unavoydablie bring back the Pope, the practice of
Presbytery unquaestionablie g^er before him, and makes The consequences from
Episcopal principles not such as praetended
his Papacy hold it by the train. The Patriarchate of the west, and primacie
of Rome flows never out of the fountain of Episcopacie, but when some
ignorant Presbyter is turning the cock, or tampering with the spring.

Those English Praelates, that so freely gave away the Patrimony of Saint
Peter etc. were some singular Executours of Constantinus Donation* yet in that
nothing so liberal to the Pope, as the Presbyters are covetous, and griping the
common inheritance to themselves who, since his refusal that had the profer in
possession, take the mock spirit at his word, fall down and worship, and then
under the S. Matthew. 4. 9^
counterfeit of dominion in grace, entitle them selves not to Italy alone, but
to all the Kingdoms of the earth.

What difference there is in number, or nature between the ceremonies
Difference between us and Rome (...) ceremonies.
they used, and those in Rome will appear best by comparing their ritual with
our rubrike, and Canons. The ornament of sacred historical pictures, the name
of altars, and the adoration of God in uniformitie before them, have the
ancient Christians innocent praecedent to commend them, when commanded, or
Countenanced by our superiors in the Church, and to vindicate them inus from
the superstition, and idol^rie you impute so liberally to Rome. When the
Praelates, and Papists cope in the controversy there are several other
ceremonies they stick at. That these are the worst, as religiously put in
practice by the Bishops friends, requires more then your old see saw to
confirm it. Adoration of, or to the altaris that, which I never heard professd
by their mouth, nor read yet dropped from their pen. For me, let them that own
it recant it, and if none such befound. Let the mouth of him Prove. 10, 31. Real
praesence and corporal different. Hist: Mot. Justification. S. Matthew. 13; 45.
Free will.
that speaks lies be stopped, and the froward tongue be cut out.

The real pr^cence of Christ in the Eucharist on the altar, as I take it, was
never denied by our Church, a corporal never asserted by her, no^ any of the
Bishops friends, that I have heard of (though the 21. objection against our
Liturgy in your history of the Synod of Glasgow implies it.) The
^ustification they held was fetchd far beyond Trent, and if they that went
for it were not able to distinguish between Saint Paul's works and Saint
James's, they were very unfit to trade for that pearl, bad merchants for the
Kingdom of heaven.

Their free will was held no paragon of nature, but a privilege by grace,
which delivered them from the fatalitie of the curse, restoring them in some
measure to a liberty of choice; And, unless you will fetch back Tatians
error, make one God for the law, another for the Gospel, so long as the ten
Commandments oblige us, we have Deuteronomy. 30* 19.
as well as the Israelites of old, heaven, and earth for our record, that life
and death are to this day set before ^s, and, by the merits of Christ, the
grace of having them in the free election of our will.

Their final apostacy was seldom, or never entitled to Saints, or, if Final
Apostasice.
so, with caution enough to praevent calumny. They asscribed ever an
infallible praescence to God, an immutabilitie in his knowledge; But to make
him so peremtorilie, antecedentlie, spontaneouslie, irrespectivelie
praedestinate a certain number of men, called Saint before their resurrection
from sin; so irresistiblie operate by his power, as to praevent all
possibility of backsliding, offending, or, being fallen, forcibly raise
them, reenstate them in native innocence, and his favor; they found consonant
to none, dissonant from diverse positive texts, in, or inferences from
Scripture* such as these. Let him that stands take heed left he fall, which
excepts 1. Cor. 10. 12. Phil. 2. 12.
no more the last hour or moment of life, then the first in the exercise of
reason...... Work out your Salvation with fear, and trembling. (...)
importing an earnest endeavor unto the last against final apostacy, not
impossible; And the reason in the next verse A quaestion about David's case.
^mplying an hazard of the energie of grace, which only supports a Saint from
his fall. I demand yea, or no, a direct answer to this. Whether if a Phineas
had come and taken David (...) in the act with Bathsheba, the point of his
spear had been assuredly blunted, or his hand held by an Angel from heaven.
Whether, if so, this extraordinary miracle had not been wrought in order to
the accomplishment of somewhat praefix't to the oeconomie of Gods Royalty upon
earth in his person? Whether the like case or capacity can in such be
reasonably supposed incident to all that you call Saints, and what security
they have from all casualties, all attempts in the very moment of sin to
destroy them? The general promises can be no protection in such cases, and some
it may be, are not so general as to be made applicable to all, which, well
scanned, incline to the peculiar concernment of them, to whom they were made,
and of whom only they seem to be mean'd. But in points of this nature
whatsoever the Warners friends have avowed, you exception against them is the
same with that against the express words of the Church, in the Assembly at
Glasgow 1638 draw'n from what she professd. That infants baptized have all
things necessary to salvation. This you may Rubrike in the confirmation.
take as the sum of that which the Bishop knew to have been with much
moderation, and reason often answered to your sore challenge. Your slight
replies thereunto being indeed but squib^, and crackers for children to sport
with, had not the arms of sinful men, and the Kings ^rtillerie been
rebelliouslie used, as a more unanswerable argument to force them.

The following position His Lp. nowhere will dispute, nor does laugh at. That
Christ, as King of his Church, has appointed laws for* and governers of the
Christ as King of his Church appoints laws etc.
same. Who, and what these are, in the general Saint Paul has left in his
letters to the first Christians, which they and their successors have kept for
us that come after. He takes you for usurpers, and tyrants, who cross to these
laws, for pride, and filthy lucre, make your selves not only Lords over
Gods heritage, but commanders of subjection from Kings 2. b. Disc, ch 1. Pro
Rege Regum, and Domino Dominantium H. Grot.
preibyteria nobis, and Synodos supponen^es. The consequence hereupon, That
Acts of Synods must be Christ's lawe^, where Synods make themselves Dictatours
of his pleasure, and repraesentatives of his person, is no other folly, then
what the Logical rules of Relatives praescribe us, which, if your Sophistry
decline, I must refer the Reader to the like expressions so frequentlie used
in your public papers, in the several contests that Knox had with your Queens
and their Councels in defense of your discipline; And; to come somewhat nearer
in your very praeface before the book it self, where your Reformed Kirk is
called the spo^se of Jesus Christ, the rules of her discipline in the language
of Scripture The Lords laws and commandments.... the heavenly proportion of
divine discipline; And at last compared to the book of Gods covenant, that lay
hid in the Temple. Under the name of which Discipline, we are admonished, is to
be understood. Beside the two books, the Acts, Constitutions, and practices
agreed upon, and recorded in the Registers of the General, and provincial
Assemblies etc. And a brother plainly asserts, That your Discipline in the
general (which we deny to have any other authority then your votes) is as
immutable, as the Scripture.

I find you now here such a Master of Rhethorike, and language as Hanc none
magis licet Ecclae mutare quam mutar^ licet ipsam scripturam Vindic: Eplae
Philad.
to take your judgment in comparing of styles. If the Bishop has borrowed the
I^suites invectives, or any from the Pagan philosophers, he could not beter
bestow them then on you, that are neither good Protestants, nor Christians. His
declamations against your noveltie will be regarded by such as take
universalitie, and perpetuity for two discretive marks of Christ's Kingdom,
and government, which must not be limited to a rebellious schismatical Centurie
in one Country. The antiquity, you boast of, is founded upon as great a
mistake of the Gospel, as was the sadduces of the law, you both err not
knowing the Scriptures. Yet, that being your plea, I will urge the Bishops
argument no By whom his S^pters is to be swayed.
farther concerning the change, and difformitie of your discipline (which may
be proved in particulars not twice romov'd from your essentials themselves) but
appeal with you to Caesar, who calling to his Council the Primitive Fathers
the most public spirits, most unbyassed Interpreters, may, by the tributarie
assistance, if his Majesty please, of as many Bishops, or Doctors, as
sectarian Presbyters, after a fair scholastike discussion, discern the truth,
decide the controversy, and, according as he finds Christ's scepter was swayed
Vincent. Lyrin: advers: haeres cap. 14.
among Catholic Christians, by deputation of one part, or other, abolish the
Rebel Usurper at his pleasure. But Annunciare [or imperare] aliqued
Christianis, Chatholicis praeter id quod acceperun^, nunquam licui^, nusquam
licet, nunquam licebit. To declare, or command a belief of divine right, in
that which has not been received in Gods Church, never was, no where is nor,
will it at any time be law full. English Episcopacie ^t d^ by the more for ward
Presbyteri^.


Your dearth of matter renders you taedious in the rest of the paragraph, and
the course fair wherewith you entertain your reader, flesh, blood, and limbs
of an English Bishop, makes you suspected here to have been at a stand, to have
laid your spiritual scribbling aside, till you went to market, and fetched these
carnal expressions from the ^ambles. My Lord of Derrie* and his friends, in
citing authority, and pressing reason for their order have dealt so farilie,
and wrought so effectually, as for all the stripping your sleeves and the
other hocas poca^ tricks that he tells you of, you will find no cleanly
conveyance of your Presbytery into the heads of any your judicious comparers,
nor will their ears be chained by your brazen hypocrisy to maintain it. Your
too curious anatomy of English Episcopacie, touching which you interrogate,
will only countenance them in a demand, not otherwise intended, of a
Scripture warrant for Scottish Presbytery, as such, disciplining,
excommunicating, deposing, I shall do no wrong if I add what I prove,
justifying and praising God for the death, if not the murder of Kings,
renouncing the name, butacting every one a double part of a lord in Parliament*
not only voycing in, but imperiously overruling all Acts of State, all
elections of principal officers, in order to conscience, for praevention of
scandal, and keeping a lower Commission Court in every Town, and parish;
forcing every Bayliffe, and provest to be your creature; A Presbytery bold'lie
ordaining without a Bishop, and gulling the people into a foolish conceit of
Gods call in them, when it is their Iving spirit that has praepossess'd them,
For Iet the people call, or praesent whom they will, if the learned (the
privilege of B. Discipt. 4. head.
which title every covie of Dunces challenge to themselves) judge the person
unable of the regiment, he is set aside, and they forced to take ( without
violent intrusion they tell them) whom the superintended Council offers to
instruct them: A Presbytery exercing all jurisdiction without any appeal from
themselves; A Presbytery feeding their flocks like swine with grain, and
husks, such divinity, as every brewer, or hogheard can help them to, never
leading them through the green pastures of the ancient, learned, and devout
Fathers, nor to any other waters of comfort, but such as the very fountain
whereof the foot of schism, or rebellion has troubled. This is Scottish
Presbytery in practice and such they would have it in law too, if they could
with all their Scripture collusions but once corrupt. His Majesty's judgment,
or by their sharpe-pointed swords, and two edged tongues affright him from a
well grounded resolution, into what his Royal Father esteemed it, a faint
servile, ungodlie, and unkinglie consent.

The treasure you call, for has hitherto had God for its defense, The treasure
thereof to be found as well before as after the years 800.
who has made known, and distributed those talents in Scripture, which
maintained the little family of the Church, and discharged the itinerant
Gospel of that time. The greater mine has been often discovered by them whose
divina virgula has stouped, and put them upon the search of the vein that
carried the Episcopal government through the 800. years of your account. Your
soon-shot bolts in many frivolous quaestions have been better feathered with
many wise men's answers* and for all the horned impudence you hold out, returned
very often upon your heads, one of whom I shall send you Dr. Ierm. Tailor.
to, who (not to derogate from the happy endeavors of many others as well of
the learned Laity, as Reverend Clergy) has alone anticipated, and fully
with much acuteness, and judgment answered almost every particular you
object. Showing that Christ himself has made the office of Apostle or Bishop
distinct from Presbyters; Given them power to do some offices perpetually
necessary, which to others he gave not: Asof Ordination, and confirmation; And
superiority of jurisdiction; Bishops, by virtue of their office, more then
called. observed as Lords, in a more sublime sense, then you mention; And
commended to the service of Kings* Saint Chrysostom, and others employed in
Embas^ies; Saint Ambrose a Pr^fect, and Dorotheus a Chamberlain to the
Emperor; Many of them Councellers to Princes, and Judges as well in ordinary
secular affairs, as Chancllors in extraordinary by appeal; Treasurers at
least of the Church revenue, and undergoing what ever civil charge the
conscientious favor of Princes put upon them, which was not in grad^
impedimenti clerical^; Bishops with sole power of ordination, and jurisdiction,
otherwise then as they thought good to call into their subordinate assistance,
or deputed Presbyters in their Dioceses. Of offici^ls, and Commissaries I
think he makes little mention, because he bends his discourse against all
interest of Lay elders; yet I do not think he would deny that Civilians,
such as are our Officiali, and Commissaries, might be instrumental to the
Bishops, especially having some learned Presbyter authorized in cases, to
which the others lay property extends not; Bishops, when necessity may
require, using solitary ordination, which is good in nature Can. 2.
rei, as may betaken for granted by that Canon of the Apostles, which as it
enjoines no more then one Bishop, so makes no mention of any Presbyter, which
it had quaestionlesse done, if of absolute necessity to the business; Bishops
ordaining not with the fashional, but ca^onical assistance of any two
Presbyters that they please, by choice of their, own chaplains or others,
where are many, or taking any two that chance otherwise to be near; Bishops
principal pastors of their whole Dioceses, and when commanded, or countenanced
by the King to wait at Court, not obliged to feed their flocks in their
persons, which they do by many learned, and religious proxies, themselves in
the mean time feeding by word, or sacrament, or ghostly counsel, the great
shepherd, whose Royal soul is worth 10000. of the peoples. All this in effect,
and a great deal more then your Parkers, or Didoclaves could have answered,
has this one learned Doctor defended, as known long before the Pope gave
over to say his creed, which he did surely, when he became the Antichrist you
call him.

I could go up yet once again, and help you to a third turn from the top of
your demands, Show you that the Warner, and his friends give The Praelates
still of the same mind they were.
the King the same assurance, that e^they did, that what they stand upon as
unalterable in their order has Scripture, and Antiquity for its warrant* That
upon the conversion of England to Christianity, the Ecclesiastike government
there constituted, was not Antichristian; That a Bishop there is not a Lord in
Parliament by virtue of his office (as it may be to resolve spiritual doubts he
ought to be) but by Declar. B. 2. Dang. Posis.
the Baronie and call which the favor of Kings has annexed unto it; That in
Scotland, when it was decreed that Bishops should have no voices in Parliament,
these your selfe-denying men desired of the King that such Commissioners as
they should send to the Parliament and council, might from thence forth be
authorized in the Bishops places for the Estate; That not many protestant
English Bishops have been High Treasurers, not many Chancellars, some that have
you have little reason to find fault with; That they are not bound in law to
devolve all jurisdiction etc; That all which in practice did it, are not to be
condemned, where they found able and honest men to exercise it in their names;
That those, which err must not praejudice the care and deligence in government
of the rest* That sositarie ordinations were very rare, and therefore not to be
objected as so common; Nor did half the Bishops live at Court, nor most that
did half their time. All these particulars could I enlarge on, but that I
believe the Reader satisfied with the execution done before, and has some what
else to do, then to stay to see you stripped.

In what follows you take a great deal more, then is given you, Not the Court
but City Divines divest Bishops.
naming that a donation from the Court divines conscience, for which the City
Divines, chiefly of Edinburgh, and London, forced the temple of God by such
sacrilege to furnish the two tabernacles of robbers, that then prospered too
well in England, and Scotland. That Royal Saint that, upon, this most impious
violence, yielded up so great a portion of his Ecclesiastike inheritance, the
Bishops civil employment, Archbishops, Archdeacons, with the etc (which
might have been better spared) did it in angusto comprehensus, not upon any
compunction of conscience. Sed difficulter, sed subductis supercilijs.... and
vix exeuntibus verbis, And had not his paternal affection prompted him, to what
your unnatural disobedience little deserved, he had given you not only panem
lapidosum, as Fabius was wont to call a gift very Sen: De Benef. lib. 2 cap. 7.
S. Matthew. 7. 9. 46. 17.
hardly bestowed upon an hungry beggar, but pro pane lapidem, without out
saviors censure, a stone instead of that bread, which was never ordaind to
stuff the insataite stomach of every gaping Rebel that called for it. Yet,
whatsoever you had, was, you know, but for a triennal experiment, which being
exspired, in the year of liberty, that was to succeed, according to Gods
pattern in Ezekiel, if you could then praetend no better title then you had
done, it was to return to your Prince, and the inheritance of such an
inseparable right to be his sons, who of your adversaries gave this
unseasonable advice I know not, nor who have acknowledged, and recanted for
errors those divine truths ordained for peace, but encountered with troubles,
and their abettours exposed to susteime the envy, and obloquie of the world.
Therefore alas its in vain for you to invite them to come nearer, to hang
out like a dead cat in her skin, unless you mean to have every one of them
moral the rest of the fable with an (...). But to leave off speaking The
Reviewers detestable ingratitude.
in parables, I desire the reader in plain English to mark the base
ingratitude of an unworthie Presbyter: In that, when a most ingenuous
peace-desiring Prince (for him he means when he speaks of his Praelatical
adversaries) invaded by audacious importunity, encompassed with all external
visible necessity, placing himself upon the very pinnacle of Christi-an
charity, shall yield all that the softest, gentlest Casuist can indulge (and
that upon such conditions as, how easy soever, the perfidious contractours
little think to make good) he must be argued with upon the ominous advantage of
his own gratuitie, and praetended from his adventurous kindness to be
demonstrativelie convinced to give up the rest of that which rebellious
license, schismatical singularity, and degenerate malice have now so divested
into a new creature, as neither law, custom, nor honor can call that English
Bishop which religion instituded and reformation confirmed. But a crou'd of
guilty conjured malefactors presses shame and the proverb to nothing, so
that ingratum si dixeris nihil dixeris. Seneca knew it who had studied the De
Benlib: 3. cap. 16.
point and experienced the practice. P^dorem tollit multitudo peccantium, and
definet esse probri loco commune maledictum. But to send you back some of your
own logike and language; If this naked bird which you so pleasantly play
with, be a new creature because the feathers are plucked, then you must confess
that old creature revested with those Euaugelical beauties and Royal graces
which once it possessed, to be that known true English Bishop that in honor,
law, custom, if not in conscience (which I need not suppose) is to be
inviolablie maintained, when it shall be made to appear, as it may very
easily, and has been very frequentlie, that such an order not much
differentlie fashioned and habited, ever was and ever is to be in the Christian
Church.

To make good the mutual toleration indented for between your sectarian
brethren and your altogether as sectarian selves, you closely decline the
warners confidence which avowes those texts of Scripture you wrest against
Bishops, with as much color of reason and more truth the Independents may urge
against Presbyters, being resolved, since you find they can make you their
province at pleasure (if not command a transmigration of your Euangel) to argue
no more against them then to fight. The triumph you make in two painted
Syllogismes is very improperlie placed before the victory, where though you
^ide like a George on horseback in a pageant, you will pass for no beter then
a dumb show, and with your wooden lance be mistaken by none, but children and
fools, for that primitive armed Saint that killed the dragon. If you cast not
your The texts of scripture against Episcopacie discussed.
texts in a couple of better molds, your workmanship will bear as little the
image of Gods word, as your selves do of the reasonable men that he created.
Were His Lp. at better leisure his great promises would reengage him in more
necessary employments then answering every silie Presbyter in his folly; but
his Acolythus and servant (if not because he has taken up so much of the
similitude allreadie) Prove. 26. 4. and 5.
will for once, and it may be oftener, follow Solomon's advice in the next verse,
seeing you so very wise in your own conceit.

The first text you are meddling with is Ephesians: 4. 11. whence your imaginary
argument, not to be denied adoration, is this.

Maj: All the officers that Christ has appointed in his Church, for the
ministry of the word, are either Apostles, Evangelists, Prophets, Pastors or
Doctors;

Mi: But Bishops are none of these five, Ergo.

You plead custom for the free unquaestionable passage of your major, which
you must give me leave to obstruct* first excepting against the improprietie of
your terms (being such as may evacuate your argument) the Ministry of the
word, when the Bishops discourse is about the regiment of the persons to whom
the word allreadie is ministered, Secondly, demanding to have it under Saint
Paul's hand, whether the offices he mentions of Apostolate, prophecy etc were
by Christ's institution for the personal perfecting of Saints in a Church
established, and not as the word seems rather to signific. Pros ton
Catartismon toon hagioon for jointing or knitting new Saints to the Church, new
members to the body of Christ in the propagation of his gospel, so aedisying
the body of Christ by the work of the Ministry, which in the next verse
seems to end in the unity of ^ayth, that is the general conversion of nations
to Christianity. Thirdly, whether this enumeration of the Apostle's be
universal, to which J find more particulars added 1. Co. 12. 28. and among
them dynam^is and Kyberneseis. Powers and governments, the former of which
(that you may not cavil about superinfused gifts) he makes as much personal,
or persons, as that of Apostle, prophet, Teacher, (...). 20.
verse: 29. Besides that he expresselie calls the Elders of the Church of
Ephesus Bishops, and tells them they were instituted by the holy spirit, which
we know came down to fulfill the promise by the mission of the son, and so
they must pass upon account as officers appointed by Christ.

Three fifths of your Minor thus you prove. Bishops are not Apostles,
Evangelists, nor prophets, because they are confessed extraordinary and
temporary, Bishops ordinary and perpetual. To which I answer. First, That
Bishops Besho^p are* Apostles. Lib. advers. haeret. cap. 32.
are Apostles in their ordinary power of ordination and jurisdiction, though
not in their extraordinary of working miracles, speaking with diverse tongues
etc. And this Tertullian has said above 1300. years since, who, arguing with
the haeretikes about succession, bids them turn over their records, and show
that their first Bishop was an Apostle, or Apostolical, because personally
ordained by one of them. This the Apostolical Churches could do, as that of
Smyrna shows Polycarp, because placed there by Saint John. That of Rome
Clement, because ordained by St. Peter. And such Bishops as these he calls
Apostolici seminis traduces. If they be Apostolical grafes, good Mr. Baylie,
from what tree think you were they taken, and of what may they, without
arrogancy, bear the name? Other of the Ancients called Timothy Bishop of
Ephesus an Apostle, among whom what enterfeering there was of these two terms
you may read in Theodoret upon 1. Tim.

Jn the like sense may they be said to be Evangelists, (as well as in May be
called Evangelists. H. Grot. Proleg. ad Matthew. Should be prophets. In 1. Cor.
12. H. Grot. Why Pastors.
the Revelation they are called Angels) who praeside over the preaching of the
Gospel, and publication of it to them that have not heard, Euangelion and
Kerygma being the same.

And they either are, or should be, Prophets, in one kind according to Saint
Ambrose, Scripturas, revelances, the ablest interpreters of Scripture, or
speakers of mysteries in the spirit to aedification, exhortation and comfort,
though not foretellers of things to come. Nam quicquid later, sive id (...)
est, sive praesens mysterium dicitur.

The reason why your adversaries pitch upon the fourth is, to decline your
trivial objections against the other three.

Your syllogism that labors to prove Bishops no Pastors has no doubt but a
certainty of falsehood in the major which your argumentum a paribus comes some
what improperlie to make good, you having spoke of a confessed imparitie but
just before. But for once a bargain no bargain pactum non pactum fit, non
pactum pactum quod v^bis lubet. It would be a rare invention, surpassing
Aristoles Logike, if, without a reserve, you could get a conclusion to creep
out of a single proposition, for take it on my word your luck is bad in
majours, which whether you play at even or odd are all pariter fals^ sick of
a disease, and this here left desperate without any remedy to recover it.

No Apostle, you say, is superior to an Apostle. This is contrary to Apostles
superior to Apostles.
what one Walo Messalinus (whom under another name you mistake to be your
friend) has frequentlie asserted. That they were primi and secundi, majores
and minores, The second and less subordinate in spiritual power to the first
and greater. This he gathers out of Theodoret and others. The greater he
explaines to be the twelve, the less, those deputed by them for teaching and
governing. Nay, he discovers a third order inferior to them both, of which was
Epaph^oditus, subordinate to Saint Paul, who himself was but minor Apostolus,
being none of the twelve. So that here being three degrees, I tell you from him
what I might from others, or with them rather collect from the text, That an
Apostle is superior to an Apostle.

As much might besayd for Evangelists, whereof four were principal,
Evangelists Coadjutours.
or, if not, it is because they were by their office of the lower class, or
Coadiutours to the Apostles. Such were Titus, Timothy, Apollos etc. Saint
Hierom says all Apostles were Evangelists, but not all Evangelists Apostles.
And so likewise that all pastors were Doctors, but not vice versa. The
learned Grotius, That Doctors, were Bishops or Archbishops rather, the same
with Doctors Bishops. haeres. 75.
those called Metropolitans afterward. Paeteres Kai didascaloi are Epiphanius
titles for them. To prove majour and minor prophets under the new Testament is
needless till you answer what I have brought about Apostles, or strengthened
the majour in your argument which I absolutely deny. And besides remit you to
a learned Doctor Dr. Tailor Episcop: assert.
who proves the word Pastor to be the Bishops peculiar among the Ancients, and
frustrates that imparitie from which you argue.

Your second reason out of Saint Matthew and Saint Paul has a little
Philosophical Soul and form in the majour, but no divine one in in the minour,
and so, according to your similitude in the moment No power of Ordination in
the Presbytery,
of removal or separation must peri^h. The first text 1. Tim. 4. 14. puts no
power more then approbant or assistent of ordination in the Eldership, and a
Bishop is as much a Presbytery and no more a Presbyter (I mean in your sense
of diminution) then Saint Paul, who seems to make that act of ordination
solitary and personally his own 2. Tim. 1. 6. And the Greek Scholiasts say
the Elders here were Bishops, excluding interminis all presbyters from that
power ou gar hoi Presbyteroi ^heirotonoun ton Episcopon say both Theophylact
and Oecomenius. For the word which you will needs have to be classical not
personal, perchance some will say it may denote the order, or office, the
Episcopate they mean, and be put figurativelie here for the single person, of
the Apostle, comparing these words, together meta Epithescoos ^oon cheiroon ^ou
Presbyteriou, and dia tes epithescoos ^oon 2. Tim. 1. 6.
cheiroon mou. But let it be what it will, the power of ordination must
continue in the Bishop, so long as Christians keep to the New Testament and
Fathers, and fetch us not a fifth Gospel, or some newer Apostle from Geneva. No
power of Jurisdiction in the Church.


That the second Saint Matthew. 18. puts the power of jurisdiction in the Church
is gratis dictum, and your authority not so great as that your autos ephen.
will be able to carry it. First therefore you are required to prove, that
excommunication, the act of jurisdiction you mean, is here at all intended,
and not rather no more then the three degrees of fraternal correption, the
highest whereof is that elegsis enoopi^n pantoon, a rebuke before all. 1. Tim.
5. 20. Vt qui non potuit pudore Salvari, Salvetur opprobrij^ says Saint
Hierom, he says not damnetur or eijciatur ^nsuris. That he which could not be
saved by private shame might by more public reproach. Secondly, That the
Church here, was a judicial Assembly called to that purpose, or if met to
other, that a formal process was brought before it; And that they were not
rather some greater number then the two or three witnesses, upon what occasion
soever met together, which may very well be called Eccless^ with out the signal
meaning of the word. Coram multis Lib. Musar. Kata Koinon Justin: and tunc
multis dicendum est in Saint Hierom. Nor is it likely a deliberate judgment
in Court (into which a Christian Congregation, converted) should be after
process in hazard to be slighted or neglected by one Member delinquent ^an
paracouse. Nor that to be such which relates rather to the person of the
plaintiff then Judges estoo soi. Let him be unto thee... Thirdly, If it be
such a Congregation or Church as you would have it, whether the complaint were
to be repraesented to them in general, and not rather in their hearing to their
superintendents or praesident above them. Epi toon tes Ecclesias proedroon
demofiseoson to ptaisma says Theophylact. Fourthlie, That sit sicut Ethnicus
and publicanus, Let him be unto thee as an heathenman and a publicane is
undoubtedlie a sentence commanded to be pronounced by those superintendents or
that Church; or an injunction, rather then permission, to the party injured to
have no farther familiarity or friendship, to have no more to do with him
then with heathen and publicanes, a voluntary declination of whose company
was no scandal to the charity Christians professed, and any civil office out
of common humanity left arbitrarie, and not censured if tend'red. Fiftlie,
whether binding and loosing verse. 18. Be asserted Confirma. These. lib. 4. c. 5.
with reference to this Church, and not rather to the Apostles, as your friend
Erastus will have it, or more probably to any party against whom the
trespass was committed. Potestatem tribuit Apostolis says Saint Hierom. Ou
gar monon hosa lyousin hoi hiereis eisi lelymena, De Verb. Dom. hom. 15. John
Morell excommuni^cated for this doctrine.
all hosa kai hemeis hoi adikethentes and Theophylact. And si fratrem habes pro
Ethnico and publicano ligasti illum in terra: si correxeru fratrem, solvisti
eum in terra Saint Austin, which seems to be the proper meaning of the place.
After all which I expect you should make some apology for your brethren abroad
that in the year 1563. Sept. 6. excommunicated John Morell the Frenchman for
writing this doctrine, burned his book, and interdicted under a great
poenaltie the reading any copy of it that might escape them.

The third 1. Cor 5. appears not evidentlie to put the porter No power of
jurisdiction in a Company met together
of jurisdiction in a company of men met together, Theophylact taking it for a
modest condescension in Saint Paul to join the Corinthians with himself,
whose solitary power was absolute. Hina me doxe authades, Kai autous
proslambanei K^inoonous And the context importing the sentence, such as it was,
to be but declarative in them them by the vertual praesence of the Apostles
spirit; and judicial in Saint Paul, who had passed it before ede Kekrika says
he verse. 3. Though it will trouble you to prove that here was any jurisdiction
Delivering to Satan that.
exerciz'd, delivering to Satan being probably but a desertion of the party
peccant, using no intercession in his behalf, but leaving him naked for Satan
to assault him with corporal torments, which prodigious punishment was usual in
th^se times. Excommunication it can not be, because it limits his censure to
the destruction of the flesh, deprives him not of the Sacraments, the want
whereof is destructive to the spirit. The twelfth verse adds no strength to
your argument, the sense seeming to be only this. I have nothing to do to
judge them that are without, but leave them to God: I have to do to judge them
that are within worthy of deliverance up to Satan. And ye judge them that is
deliver them up when ye are gathered together, and my spirit. As he, had said
verse. 4. So it is Saint Paul's spirit that is principal in this jurisdiction,
and the company of men met together but his delegates or assistants,
convocated at his pleasure.

To Your assumption I likewise answer. That the Bishop is as much the Church as
Saint Paul in this case; and has as much of the ordinary power transmitted to
him.

So that you see it requires not the Doctors learning, but the search of his
Acolythus and servant to satisfy you, if you will be, with antiquity and
reason. Which being done you may send more scirptural arguments against
Episcopacie by your brethren of the next Commission. Touching those you have
brought allreadie, you need not be so confident in calling for their answer
unless they were somewhat better. The visible leisure is, in none but such as
you and your Why Blondel etc. are not answered.
courteous Disciples in England have procured to be imprisoned in several
goales of both Kingdoms; others having business enough by shifting from one
place to another to secure their persons and save their lives, from your
cruelty. The poor prisoners have few visible helps to that purpose. If you
will find courage or conscience enough to undertake their free access to the
Fathers and other authors that are visiblie necessary to that purpose. I have
enough left still to assure you in the name of them that have more learning
then they boast of, that whatsoever becomes of your punie Clerks Master Parker
and Didoclave, (who may be easily turned of with some careful quotations and
references to a multitude of books allreadie printed) Master Blondels magazine
of antiquity shall be seized on, and what in it is upsie Scotch (which is not
all) for the presbytery Somais fare well to the Pre^byterie.
you brag of, shall in spite of your power be rescued for the true owners,
that is, the Bishops. For your meracle of learning, the most noble Somais, we
wish he may work more such wonders as he has of late, and send his petie
advocate a new blew bonnet at parting trimmed with a distick, beginning if he
pleases Ille ego qui quondam -- for his fee.

Were public masters of fact as mysterious as the intrigues in your The
Scottish presb. may be contracted out of their own story. Revel. 20. 12.
spiritual Iunto; and Consistorian Caballs, some Endor oracle must perchance
have been consulted and one of your black guardant Angels been
superstitiouslie worshipped, or ceremoniouslie waited upon for revelation. But
when the books of the dead are before their day opened by your hands, and
their works of darkness registered by your pens, the warner may every where,
without an ironie, proclaim his knowledge in your story as great as his
strictest search, and as certain as your rash confession could create. King
James's 55, K. I.'s. 55. quaestions non plus'd them.
quaestions so troubled the Scottish divines, that they finding their plea of
divine right and immutabilitie of their discipline to be disputed, the Perth
Assembly indicted principally for that purpose: to divert the King, if not
otherwise to praevent his multiplving such problemes (to which David Blackes
process and the business about the banished Lords may be annexed) they raised
a desperate sedition on the 17. of December, which allreadie is discoursed on.
Their (if you mean the Synods) answer was not so round but that they first
protested and parlied about their privilege at the conference with His
Majesty and the Estates: required time to return, reason, vote and resolve in
all points. If thereafter the propounders were speachlesse in the business, it
might be because the Synod carried it for the King, and determined the problemes
in his sense, which (for ought I know) is that the Bishop means by yiedling
the bucklers without any opposition. The manner and time might very well
perplexe them being in a free Synod, and meeting with their bold contestation
for David Black. Nor were they troubled only at the Erastian and Praelatical
Counselors about the King, but at Patrike Galloway and James Nicolson, of late
Saints but now it should seem become Apostate presbyters in the Synod. The
quaestions put by the King were not captions and carping at the parts of Church
discipline, but a just controversy raised about the whole, fairlie propounded,
freely discussed, deliberatelie resolved, to the satisfying his conscience,
and silencing schismatical scruples for the future. I have often told you no
statutes of Parliament nor Acts of any but factious Assemblies authorisd your
Discipline* though were it ratified (as you would have had it) by any other,
set your jusdininum Episcopacie recovered ground in Scotland.
aside, and fetch not your praecedent from the Medes and Persians, a power
aequivalent to that which did it might reverse it.

The visible Church in your country at that time was not so far from
yeildino to Episcopacie, but that your brother confesses the cranie was then
made by which it afterward crept in, though I am at a loss for so much
daylight in your story, as to see the year when legallie it was thrust out.
Per hanc rim^m (says he) ad essentialia ipsa externi regiminis impetendum,
Vindic. Epist: Philadelph.
and extruendum Episcopatum aditum sibi patefecerunt. You can not deny but
that it brought them thus far on their way, to the title of Praelates and
voting in Parliaments. Wicked states men at that time bears the same
significancie with Court Divines and evil Counselors at this, and so does the
most able and saythfull Ministers with the Men of God that are Covenanters in
this age, of whom every man's experience can frame a character enough to scare
away his credit to the reputation you would give them. There need no question
be pr^posed when the Bishops were by full authority reinstated in part of
their unquaestionable right; To a great deal more in the year 1606. When by
Act of Parliament their government was styled the ancient and fundamental
policy.... Declared that they being the Third Estate had been indirectlie
Whence they had not been legallie ejected.
abolished.... That it never had been mean'd by His Majestic and His Estates
that they should any ways be suppressed: That they had been only brought
into contempt and poverty.... That His Majesty with express advice and
consent of the said whole Estates in Parliament do repone, restore and
redintegrate the said Estate of Bishops (it says not to their order) to their
ancient and accustomed honor, dignit^es, praerogatives, privileges etc. This
was completed in the year 610, when a kind of Episcopacie was set up as near
the primitive pattern as the growing reformation would bear in the Assembly
of Glasgow excepting the two Members I told you of, no otherwise corrupt then
as it may be flie-blow'n by your breath, and tainted by your naming; under
which not the Church but the Kirk of Scotland did heavilic groan, as it
always does when it has not liberty to vent sedition in the pulpit, and act
rebellion in the field which the best and most learned of your preachers, the
Aberdene Assemblers, practiced in part, and wished well to the rest Anno 1606
till the year 1637. when if they had met with an English Pharaoh for rigor as
they did with a Moses the meeker man of the two* he would have appointed task
masters that should have took away the straw, and spoiled their design of
fiering the house: set them making of brickes and building him treasure cities,
while they were pulling down temples and ruining Palaces; he had kept them
from shaking of the yoke of Ecclesiastike and Civil government, and brought
divinc justice to their doors while they brought him to bear the burden of a
most inhumane, most unjust judgment at his own; praeserv'd his Children and
subjects Psalm 137.
from sighing and hanging their harpes upon willowes in a strange land, while
they sat, under our vines, and keept us out of the shadow of our own fig
trees; cut up the root, while he lopped the branches, struck off the head while
he clipped the ear; cast out of Britain, what with regreet of conscience he
tolerated in Scotland, himself Psalm. 1.
then and his Church had continued like a treeplanted by the water side and had
brought forth more fruit in due season His leaf had not withered, and
whatsoever he had done had in all likelihood prosperd. But he has overcome
them if not in doing, in suffering being more then conqueror, and when Revel.
2. 7.
those briars and thorns are bundled up for the fire he shall have given him
to eat of the tree of life which is in the midst of the Paradise of God.

CHAPTER. IX. The Commonwealth is a monster when Gods Soveraignitie in the
Presbytery contradicts the Kings.
THe Reviewer all this while having made a poor shift to save the The Reviewers
slender shift.
credit of the Kirk, and spent his time in sewing a few figleaves together to
cover the shame of a sinful disobedience against Gods command in the Civil
Magistrate, which every puff of wind rends in pieces and scaters before the
face of innocence and truth; he here^ries his skill to patch contradictions
together -- pergit pugnaantia secum Frontibus adversis componere -- and makes a
parti colored coat for his two headed monster which may as well, in time, out
do the seven-headed dragon, if more crowns and scepters can befound wherewith
to invest it, as it has allreadie the hundred-handed Giant, in pulling down
as many powers and dominions as it could reach; metamorphozing the Paradise of
Kingdoms into the forest of Commonwealths; and changing men that should be
good subjects into scorpions, or in serpents Regulos, such serpents and
cocketrices Ier. 8. 17.
as will not be charmed into any obedience.

The Presbyterians ministry under Christ, being a tyranny over Christians,
The Presbyterians, not Praelates coordinate two Soveraignaties in one state.
quits them not of coordinating two Soveraignies in a state, Nor does the
Praelates maintaining an hierarchy in the Church make them at all guilty of
that fault since the former acknowledge no superieur in Ecclesias^icis but God;
and the later attribute as well a spiritual as Temporal supremacy to their
King. The spiritual Lordship, Domination etc the Bishops exercise over his
subjects in his name but the Presbyterians theirs in the name of the Prince of
all Kings, whose Minister he is as well as they, and call all opposition
against them a war against Jesus Two Kings in Scotland.
Christ. Nay, rather then fail, when they can catch His Majesty in a closet,
Andrew Melvin shall tell him he must know he lies at their mercy, Public Rex,
nos parcimus tibi, That there are two Kings in Scotland, fac. memineris duos
esse in Scotia Reges, one of the Church (which must have the praecedence too)
and another of the Commonwealth. That by his leave (which is, to say, without
it) they must meet at their pleasure, and have a care of the Church, whereof he
is no head but a Member, no nursing Father, as the Scripture vainlie calls him,
but the elder son or at most brother of the Kirk: And that this is spoken
with good authority too, summ^ cum authoritate, shall the Vindicatour
publikelie print that all may know it. The contrariety of commands, when
issuing from Masters aequallie to be observed, can not but breed distraction in
the servant, and where Ianus has not a ^oo-fac'd generation, must needs much
unfixe him in his advertence. Christ's particular and extraordinary commands,
if all, Not God only but his Anointed likewise to be obeyed.
to all, and at all times to be published with out special commission, oblige
not his Ministers publikelie, imperiously to prohibit others of his anointed,
which may be mistaken to contradict them If they unhapilie fall out contrary
one to other, the holy Scriptures no where command so to obey God, as
activelie to disobey, that is, to rebel against the man that is their King.
The Reverend Warners opposition here to the Presbyterians maintains no such
subordination of the Church unto the state as makes her servile in performance
of unjust commands. And where Christ is found ruling in this case. He St.
Matthew. 26. 25. St. Luke 9. 23.
bids Saint Peter put up his sword, and all his Disciples to deny themselves,
take up their cross d^ylie and follow him, When the Presbyterians have as
clear a Commission to prohibit festivals, to affront Ambassadous, proclaim
fasts at such times when their Kings solemnize feasts, as the Apostles had for
the publication of the Gospel, and teaching in the name of their Master that
sent them: Let them apply the text in the 5. of the Acts, and (I hope the
Reader makes, the incongruitie none of mine) disregard the High Priests
commands of a different Religion, and obey God rather then man. The contrary
ways taken in Scotland Contrarie^ie of Commands very frequent in Scotland.
by Church and state (so King or Queen may he accounted head or Member of the
later) have not been so rare, if the History of your four last Princes be
reviewed. Against three of whom Pope Knox personally and in his Synod made
very frequent opposition, which he bragges of in print. I shall not need to
number your rebellious Acts and papers against the fourth.

In the possibility of such cases, which you tenderly admit, your modesty
being great to acknowledge the fallibilitie of Assemblies, the common rule of
humane direction's very good, had it been not only known by you, but
followed. The difference upon disobedience to either is not fairlie
repraesented temporal inconveniences in seditious tumults, to the hazard of
life, often befalling men by the displeasure of the Church, And by terror or
force a rescue from punishment legallie to be inflicted, contrary to the good
pleasure of the state.

Your interdiction of festivals viz. Our S^viours Nativitie to be observed, and
Bishops to sit in Parliament, when summoned by the King, seems in your sense
to implie no contrariety of command, and are The Reviewers fallacy
therefore slighted as impertinent objections. The other two you speak to, but
not answer. Not the former but in a fallacy somewhat like that which Logicians
call of composition and division. The Magistrates that were to attend the
French Ambassadors being not excepted in your indiction of the fast, but
included with the people, and yet (as excusable) divided by you in the
observance. The truth of Church censure intended can be no calumny, the Major
and Aldermen being cited and convented for their feasting, nor had the process
fallen to ground but through the prudent delays interposed by the King, I must
here put you in mind that your Brethren in Holland indict no fasts but by the
Magistrates consent, and your discipline being praetended to be the same, you
could not do it at this time, when the King commanded feasting without
coordinating Soveraignities, or which is worse, abolishing his, to ordain your
own.

In your answer to the later instance, you must cut the tails of Humble
petitions etc full of threats.
your humble petitions and remonstrances, which were tipped and turned up with
defiances and threats, under the notion of portents to the Kings person and his
family; And throw your covenant into the fire which engaged the takers in
pursuance of your contrary commands by opposing Acts, and Persons of state
too, beyond a declaration of their dislike. The watchman in Ezekiel (whose
example you counterfeit, and whose authority you abuse) was to warn when God
brought the sword upon a land: not to arm nor remonstrate when he sent it out.
The falsehood The Churchchasing and excommuniting for the late engagement.
of your Church-chasing and excommunicating persons in the late engagement,
were it any, could at most be said but to be antidated by the Bishop, we since
daily conversing with such persons who live not very comfortablie in these
parts, yet dare not return home; And your public papers ranking them in 4.
classes or divisions, excluding them out of places of trust or power, censuring
them to sackcloth, banishing, excommunicating all that repent not for their
active loyalty as a sin. The Bishop charge no man with detracting from the
freedom of the Parliament that engaged them, He only anticipates by his
answer such ^ probable praetense. In the place where of since you frankelie
give us the advantage of your confession, in your next you must show upon what
sure grounds you protest, preach, warn, declare against the power of the
Kingdom in a free Parliament, in public Indicatories, and armies, which you
confess you did in your paper May 11. (as 1 take it) 1649. As likewise how
your declaring of, became censuring in judgment, and your dissatisfaction
transformed into a sentence.

The he^pes of untruths, when your spectatours wipe their eyes will The
untruths are the Reviewers.
be easily discerned cast on your side of the way. So that they will not
wonder at your falsifying Histories of old-times, when the relation of your
latest known practices, is by your fiery tongue branded with the ignominy of
a lie. The generation you speak of, who keep up their credit according to the
rate of too many men's idleness or in advertence, can draw no clearer pedigree
then from your Synod, whose words can no more weigh with truth in the balance,
then their teeth whence they are lightly flow'n can with the Silesian boys
endure the touch.

CHAPTER. X. No concord between Parliament and Presbytery.
THe harmony betwixt your Presbytery and Parliament, when any, is discors
concordia, and but still music at best, such as once was made between Parma
and Placentia by the concurrent identitie of the capital leters in their names.
So that when their Duke writ himself Dux P. P. and no more their ambition was
silenced about prioritie in his title. And if we look any farther into yours,
we are encounterd canina^ litera, wish that mastiue leter, which it may be,
mystically snarles as much against the name, as your power assaults the
authority of the other. And when you take upon you the writing both at large,
your humility and Courtship is such as here, ever to give praecedence unto
your selves. Your constitution must be looked upon as no other then a
caelestial quintessence. Your end known to be compassing a temporal as well as
a spiritual tyranny, and your daily practice, subduing, swaying both scepters
of Jesus Christ's. The Praelatical learning, you see, takes no higher flight
then the next instance to prove the conclusion in hand. And he whose faith must
be forced to credit such unanswerable arguments has indeed little or no common
sense or reason in him, but mistakes snow to be black because he lives in a
dungeon, goes upon hot coals, and fceles not his benumbed feet to Prove. 6. 2^.
be burnt: the light in him is darkness because of his evil eye, and quantae
tenebr^: how great is that darkness. S. Matthew. 6. 23. What perpetual ^arrings
has been between you I have otherwhore showed, which never failed but when you
tampered with the strings and tuned both instruments to your ear.

I see the late engagement often served up is enough a lone to take off The
Rev. ears not for hearing of the late engagement. P^. 69:23* The 8. desires of
the Church neither just nor necessary.
your stomach; yet that insipide colewort must be set upon your table, while
your table contimues a snare to catch your selves withal, and that bill of
fare, though but one dish repeted till it choke the rebellious guerts of the
Assemblies your paper of eight desires contained 8. very insolent demands, in
place of that submission which the Parliament sent for, I can not say expected.
What justice and necessity may be in them was not at any time by you, nor by
any at that time to be expostulated to the retarding that more just and
necessary design. If the Parliament counted upon any, it reckoned withal the
satisfaction it had rendered, Wherein it had been rather too lavish then close
handed, and promised more upon the necessity then thought on, then some
conceived in justice or conscience could he performed. Security upon oath
under hand and seal the Bishop tells you were harder terms then an Usurers to
a Bankrupt, and it may be you took His Majesty for no other, having gotten
(though by no morgage) his kingdoms in your possession. And knowing what he
had contracted with God before, you would not part with them but upon the
surest interest of his soul. If the quaestion were not for the thing, that it
should seem you took for granted. And then what methodical, and scrupulous
tray tours do you blazon your selves to be, to leave him languishing in a
jail, while the order and some particle of the security must be thought an.
The qualification of the persons to have the managing of the war being
approved by the Parliament, the highest Court in the Kingdom, no law intimates
an Assembly or Iudicatorie competent to reverseit. So that the Bishop has
sufficiently informed himself that the knot of the differtnce lies only in
some bulrush, which you The Chapter of Scotland has no liberty to declare against
King and Parliament.
look for to little purpose; And having attentivelie read your public
declarations, draws out of them no groundlcsse conjecture, but an infallible
assurance that no History mentions such Pharisaical Rebels upon the earth.

The Warner knows very well that what you call the liberty of the Church is
in truer language the license of the many schismatical hypocrites that disturb
it; who by long custom of blaspheming God in gilded rhetorike, and a
spiritual figure, translating his holy word, but perverting the sense to
sinful ends in public declarations, have withdraw'n poor people from their
duty to their King into such fears and confoederacies as the prophet Esai had
in the place that you cite warning from the Lord with a strong hand, and
instructions not to walk in. The three Graces you brag of had too many
snakes dangling about their ears to be mistaken for other then the three
infernal furies which they were Your humility was pride and arrogancy to the
height, attributing more to your private fancies, then to the public counsels
of a free Parliament, the undenied repraesentative of the Kingdom. Your piety
was but the will worship of your own imaginations that you challenged: And
your wisdom craftiness; Job. 5. 13.
where in you will be taken in the end, and by your froward counsel carried
headlong to your destruction. The visibilitie of this might encourage the
Engagers to run any adventure, rather then to follow you in your wayer. Such of
them as fince the disaster have crouched to an acknowledgement of their
loyalty for an error, are poor Spirited fools that have their eyes only
in the ends of the earth; are never likely Prove. 17. 24. Heb. 11. 39. Ephesians.
2. 2.
to be in the number of them who obteind a good report through faith in their
sufferings, nor receive the promise, of some beter thing that God had pro vided
for them. Did an Angel from heaven blow his trumpet, and proclaim God speaking
in your declarations, the Warner and his party were bound to stop their ears.
Or if the Prince of the power of the air should clothe such wicked language in
lightning, or pervert some Boanerges to speak it in thunder, by terror to
work in children of disobedience, we have Saint Paul's praescript to pronounce
a double G^l. 1.8.9.
anathema against him, Accursed, Accursed let him be and in submission to God
in his messenger the Apostle, such men of gallant spirits should we be, as in a
Christian constancy or Roman if you will have it, rather to perish with this
last breath in our mouths, then by hearkening to counsels or walking in ways
so palpablie pernicious to Lament. 4. 20. Cortradiction between the Revie.
margin and text. The l^vie was offered to be stopped.
Church and state, with the ruin of both let the breath of our nostrils, the
Anointed of the Lord, be taken in their pits. If the margin and text of your
following paragraph were not so near neighbors, in my have I might chance to
have made no comparison, and so escaped the contradicti on between them. No
offer to stop the leavie in the one, and opposition so coldrife and small in
the other, will I think be reconciled by no logike but that which makes
degrees vary species, or argues from the third to the second adject and
according to the vulgar proverb, makes that not to be at all which is little or
nothing to the purpose. To the substance of your answer. By inquiry I find
your oppsition as hot as your servent zeal and abilities could make it, and if
your actions drew in the same yo^e with your words, you that sweated it out in
earnest be seechments, exhortations, and threats, sat not still to see the
effects of your papers, but armed your selves to the work of retardment, if
not to the retracting the design. Some few lines in a Declaration and warning
from the Commission of your General Assembly, are enough to keep the Bishop
from ignorance, and a transscript of them as they lie to discharge him from the
malice you impute.... We do earnestly beseech and exhort all who live in this
land, that May 11. 1649.
as they tender their solemn obligation and oath both by the National
Covenant, and by the solemn league and Covenant, and as they love the honor
of Jesus Christ and the Gospel.... N^y, as they wish to eschew the heavy
wrath and indignation of the Lord, That they do not give any countenance, nor
connivence to these wicked men in their wicked way, much less to join with
them in counsel or in arms. And because it lies upon us to be faithful in our
station, therefore as we have allreadie given warning unto these men that
unless they do speedily destst from their evil way and repent, that we will
proceed against them with the dreadful sentence of excommunication.... if any
shall hereafter join with them, we will be necessitated impartiallie to
proceed against them with the highest censures of the Kirk... If this be
c^ldrife and small opposition, what tall fellows are you when you are warm? I
Know nothing you could well do beyond it, unless with C. Caesar you would be
so mad as in Homers language challenge Jupiter to an encounter e m' an^eir', e
ego se, which you are likely enough to do, if it succeeded with him as Seneca
Supposed. Non puto parum momenti hanc ejus vocem ad incitandum conjuratorum
animos Lib. De Ircap. ^lr.
addidisse. The Army gotten up so numerous and strong, (which the Commanders
thought sooner expedient, and had sooner levied but for you,) was probably
able to have done what service they professed; but the ^version of the hearts
of the Church declaring it self in diabolical curses and supercilio^s
discouragement, divided the hearts and enfeebled the hands of a faint people.

It was a strange sympathy in the hearts of your yeomen that in the midst of
their fright made them flee to the same corner of the land. Their consciences
are not commonly of such a tender touch, but when scarified by their Clergy.
So that it will b^ no calumny to conjecture what spirit gave them wings, and
directed their flight to the rebellious meeting at Manchlin moor. Their growing
number, and abiding there in a body for the security of their persons, made
no party for, nothing toward the deliverance of the Kings; and their danger
being only to be forced by the Parliament to go soldiers into England for
that purpose, the quaestion is what violence was therein offered to their
conscience, and, if any, by what law or praecept, divine or humane, the
Assembliecan countenance them in arms, though but in a defensive posture to
withstand it? In which had that part of the Army that suddenly came upon them
cut them off, it might have stood for an act of civil justice, more then
military fury, kept the rest in peace* and much conduced toward an after
security to themselves The communion at Mauchlin laid to the public. Fast
appointed in termi^is for the apostacy of the Parliament, might occasion some
of your Ministers coming thither to as good a purpose as his to the Kirk of
St. Andro, who prayed to Almighty God, that he would carry through the good
cause against all his enemies, especially against Kings, Devils and
Parliaments. Colored clothes and pistols were no proper accoutrement for your
Ministers in arms.
Kirke-men wherein to celebrate the Sacrament of Christian charity and peace.
Nor were they the good instruments with the people to go away to run away they
might be afterward) that had lead them in bands and troops into the battle.
For Presbyterian Scottish Ministers to protest against any rebellion wherein
they act, needs no eagle eyed Parliament man to discover it at the bottom as
a piece of effronterie very Not cens. by the Commissioners of the Kirk.
common among them and proper to their profession, which is very ridiculouslie
diss^mbled in this case, when diverse of them were taken prisoners, fighting
desperately for the cause, complained of to the Commissioners of the Kirk,
who were so far from inflicting any censure; or giving them admonition, that
they approved what they had done, and justified them in the fact. Which I see
here you dare not ex professo, but fawlter in your judgment about the meeting,
pleading the security of their persons as a fair apology for the yeomens a
biding in a body, and yet mentioning the Ministers protestation, which is
little beter then a condemnation of their convening and fighting in the field.

The Bishops parallel betwixt the General Assembly and Parliament casts S.
Pet. 2. 16. v. 13. Presbytery makes Parliaments subject to the Assemblie^. 2.
Book. discipl. 1. chapter
the cloak of malici^snesse upon your own shoulders in the abuse of your
liberty, whereby you refuse to submit your self to the ordinance of man for
the Lords sake, otherwise then as it is ratified in your Synods for when the
Presbyterians lay the authority of both Courts upon a divine foundation, they
make themselves the chief corner stone, usurping the proper place of Jesus
Christ in the one, and of his anointed in the other, telling him and all
Magistrates (among whom Parliaments are to be numbered) he ought to be subject
to the Kirk spirituallie and in Ecclesiastical government.... that he ought
to submit himself to the discipline of the Kirk if he transgress in matters
of conscience and Religion. So that when they talk of obedience for conscience
sake to their lawful commands, they take cognizance what is conscience and
law, and at their own arbit^ement many times oblige subjects on the same
principles to rebel, calling this the justifiable revenge of the Magistrates
contempt against the authorite of God resident in them. The Bishop (...) as not
at Ministers that cari^ themselves a^ the Ambassadors of Christ, that deliver
not more the^ is in the Commission or instructions they received; but thinks
they have no privilege above the Angels, who are not d^inantes but
ministra^tes Heb. 1. 14. Ps. 104. 4.
spiritus. That they are a (...) rather to warm indiscreet zeal and devotion,
then consume in the fervor of violence and passion. That God rarely tempers
brimstone with the breath of his messengers, Ier. 14.
That he sets the time, and names the extraordinary case, when his words shall
be fire in the mou^es of (...) prophets, and his people (...) that it should
devour them. He likes you should judge according to the rule of Scripture, so
you follow that rule, and keep in subjection to good laws. He commends your
caring for life aeternal, not your leaguing and covenanting in order to that
for the death temporal of your brethren. He judges you according to the rule
of Scripture to be sh^sselic impious that counterfeit a care of life aeternal,
whither blood^hirstie Presbyters are never likely to enter, but have a portion
with their fellow hypocrites otherwhere. That make holy Scripture not only
of private but perverse interpretation, and God the author of all the
wickedness you act by the authority of his word who boast of Isai. 42. 1^.
an Ambassie from Christ, when who so blind as these servants, who so dea^e as
these messengers (you say) he sent? who are lead by a Spirit that does the
works of the flesh from top to botome menti^'d by St. Paul Galat. 4. Who would
gull the world out of all but a form or property of religion; who make your
selves not Ministers but Masters of Christ, commanding imperiously the spirit
he sends down; who make a trade of Scripture, and for wordlie gain parsel out
eternal life to whom you please.

The second part of the Bishops parallel, I see, puts you to a stand, and
Ministers power with the people dangerous if seditiouslie bent.
the quaestion What shall be made?... argues you some what suspended in your
thoughts whether as much should be made of it as you mean, and the people
commended for obeying their Ministers (how seditious soever) more then their
Magistrates that command them. If all the power such Ministers have with the
people be built on their love to God, what pity is it that rebellious
structure should have such a religious foundation? When it rises high he is no
good states man that does not demolish it, knowing that what God and conscience
constrain (...), but persuade, to employ to his good, the Devil without any or
with one that is erroneous may tempt them to aedifie to his ruin. It is not
amiss Th. Capanel. cap. 18.
said and applied by him that writ of the spanish Monarchy Primum instrumentum
been imperandi, ling^ est; secundum vero gladi^s. The sword is but the left
hand instrument in the governing Kingdoms: The tongue, of the preacher is
dextra te^ibilis, that of the right hand (...) Ps. 45. 5.
teaches terrible things, that by the menace of death, which the sword can not
reach to, keeps subjects in obedience to their Sovereigns. Therefore when
once it has a power with the people such as that of St. Ipsis Cardinalibus and
^. P. max^ormidabilis suit, diremita aut unyt principes and subditos suos
arbytratu. Ps. 12. 4.
Bernard it had need be endued with the spirit of Saint Bernard, for there is a
tongue. Quae conteris spiritum, the perverseness wherein is a breach in the
spirit Prou* 1^. 4. And the proud me^ in the Psalmist, promise themselves a
victory over Princes by the tongue, ^e will praev^le Who because they are the
m^n that ought to speak, just like you, deny all supremaci^. Their first
language is this. Quis dominus, Who is Lord over usi. The Politician I spoke of
has a discourse worth your reading, wherein he shows you how Mahomet stirred
up the people against Heraclius the Emperor. He says as much for Calvin your
protoplast, which whatsoever may be apologiz'd for him, I am sure is
inexcusable in Knox and you that are the workmanship of his hands.

This made Charles the good so prudent and resolute, who being become too
unhapie in nothing more then in suffering your Babel building to be finished in
Scotland, when he beheld the like work E^k* Bas: cap. 17.
of your fellow Rebel Architects in England, would not exclude himself out of
doors, nor part with that power whereby he might best restrain the seditious
exorbitances of Ministers tong^s, who with the keys of heaven have so far
the keys of the peoples hearts as they praevaile much by their oratorie to
shut in and let out both peace and loyalty. While the Warner scoffs at your
threats his meaning is to have deluded people to scorn them and know in your
words that the thundrings of (the Scottish as well as) that Roman Antichrist Sc.
Liturg. p. 87.
are but vanity and ^inde. To tell them in a figure that hell and death are no
more in your keeping then the jail in the prisoners that walks abroad in the
streets with his sha^els about him, but must render himself at the end of his
covenant: The Praelates proclamation of V. 18.
such Atheis^e as this is a printed copy out of the original writ by the
fingar of God in the 10. S. Matthew. Whereby is to be banished out of the hearts
of the people all fear of them which kill the body but are not able to kill
the soul, for all their kirke-bulls and censures that threaten it* To the
quaestion you close with I answer, That Satan has driven allreadie the first
instruments of his Republike in Britain into a very narow room in the North,
where Cromwell and other his more useful instruments at praesent, are likely
to keep them, till, if God neither convert nor by a miracle otherwise confound
them his work being done he may lash them with whips of their own making,
topt' with Serpents heads, and Scorpions tails, and at last deliver them to
the worm that shall not die, cast them into the fire that shall not be
quenched, Is^. 66. 24
and make their stinking*memorie (...) ab^orring unto all flesh.

The third part of the parallel has been in every particular justified, and
were more instances requisite to evidence the truth, they might be a
numberless number of such imputations as you are never able to refute.

The charge which the Bishop subjoines is not so poor but that it enricheth No
in haeren^ right in Courts to nominate Commis^ioners for intervalls.
his proof with the best argument of your spiritual supremacy. The daily
practice of the Parliaments of Scotland, such as have been of late and
heretofore when your Reformation took place, constitutes no right, confirms
no power of nominating commitees for intervalls. Nor is there any inhaerent
right in Courts to nominate interreigning Commissioners but by Royal favor in
such as (except their intertearming vacations) are perpetual and standing, not
called by fits ad placitum Domini Regis, no not in the Parliament it self.
Which (to omit other proofs) was the ground of this clause in their Act of
oblivion 1641. That the peace to be now established may be inviolablie observed
in all time to come, It is agreed that some shall be appointed by His Majesty
and the Parliaments of both Kingdoms, who in the interim betwixt the sitting
of the Parliaments may be careful that the peace now hapilie concluded may be
continued etc.... And it is declared that the power of the Commission shall be
restrained to the articles of peace in this treaty; As likewise of that fatal
Act for perpetuating the last black Parliament in England, which had probably
^e'r been required if it might have nominated a Commit of state (that idol to
which it now sacrifices, in blood) to sit till the next summons upon any
inhaerent right in that Court. For the Iudicatories of your Church. I am tired
with telling you that no law of the Kingdom does privative authorize them to
meet, their Assembly being illegal without the King or his Commissioner,
neither of which are to come upon course or at call. And their power of
appointing Committees has as often been quastion'd (and how often is that?) as
it ever was executed without or against the positive consent or command of the
King or Queen for the time. And truly the committees in the times, of your
late troubles were the Ambusc^do wherein you lay closely in wait to disturb
both Church and state, while your armed body in Parliament retired. Whose
frequent meetings were forced no otherwse then by the incessant zeal in their
Members to persecute Religion and loyalty. Whose diversion from their
particular charges (for attendance on the public rebellion) was joined with so
great fa^cherie and expense to fulfill their lusts at other men's cost, Which
with all their heart they will in Sempitern^m continue, if fear of their
necks make them not at length slip out of the collar: or their gray hairs and
withered carcasses (after many a surfeit) call them not to some other account,
or their Chief in whose service they made these necessary meetings pay them
not their necessary wages in pertusum sactulu^, into a bag full of holes,
which Haggai 1. 6.
shall never be filled, no more then was the measure of the iniquity they
acted.

CHAPTER XI. The Presbytery cruel to particular persons.
IF King and Parliament be (as they may very well) incenced against the The
Presbytery a tyranny over the consciencies of thepeople.
Presbytery at fight of the Bishops reason, more then out of sympathy with
him in his anger, his warning has taken in part the effect that he wished and
aimed at. Yet in vain shall they vindicate all just authority to themselves,
if the people be kept in a servile observance of a tyrannous discipline, and
pay their blind obedience to the Kirk. Therefore the Warner excedes no bounds
in his rage, but en largeth his bowels of pity to them, who for the most part
having disarmed their souls of that judgment which should dictate their
freedom from Church censures upon acts indifferent, or sinful in an inferior
degree, their due submission to an arraignment of thoughts only in the Court
of a poenitent conscience, or hereafter before the tribunal of heaven, where
sits the only Judge of hearts, the discerner of perverse inclinations; expose
themselves naked to the boundless fury of merciless Reviewers; to the sharp
scrutinie of malicious Inquisitours; to the arbitrarie sentence of most sinful
Judges, and therefore most suspicious surmisers. The Bishop mentions Censures
upon slight grounds.
no faults but such as toward which your Discipline mentions no favor limited
to the privacie of the care. Nor yet do all those give occasion for that which
you take to show the infinite extent, the interminate divisibilitie of your
power. In the book that he cites is the greatest Scot. Lit.
censure of the Church praescribed, and more methodicallie then mercifully
showed how a small offense or sclaunder may justly deserve excommunication by
reason of the contempt and disobedience of the offender. Page 60. And lest any
should think that the offenses named are not so heinous as that of the
Corinthians incest (whence you take your pattern and Saint Paul's authority for
your process) you give such to understand that mercy and favor may rather be
granted to any other sin then to the contempt of wholesome admonitions, and
of the just and law full ordinances of the Church* Page 80. Which if (as you
say) it never procured the smallest censure, you have been a great deal too
profuse of your pardons. Where you profess your obligations so great to the
performance of the commandment of God. Or, if you think it not such may be
justly required by any Romans 8. 15.
Erastian to render a reason, why that ignis fatuus, that foolish spirit of
bondage walks in your Discipline from generation to generation, Prove. 1. 26.
while they laugh at the calamity you threaten, and mock when your fear
comes upon the people. But he that knows you will never mistake you for such
meek lambs in this mimike disguise of lions, when he finds you as well
preying as roaring. And how any, the most charitable man will have just cause
to complain of your rigor, let your aequitable comparers judge observing with
me but one passage of multitudes in your form, that one which speaks
Spiritual cruelty i^ the prayers of Presbyters. Sc. Lit. p. 196.
you the most savage petitioners that ever invocated the name of Christ, whom
you humbly beseech (for fear his mercy that is written to be above all his
own works, should be above that of yours, the inhumanitie you are about) that
whatsoever in his name you pronounce in earth (meaning the sentence of
excommunication, though but for susspicions and jealousies, if not confessed to
be as real faults as any peevish brother shall construe them) he Would ratify
the same in heaven. Which can not be paralleld in the Turkish Alcaron, nor
among all the superstitions rites and cruel offices of the heathen per formed
to the most bloody, most insatiate of devils, who does nothing else 1. Pet. 5*
8,
but go about seeking whom he may devour. Where as if this be your slacknesse
wherewith sectaries charge you, which you are sorry you are not able to refute.
it should seem you are sorry there are no more hells then one, no plurality of
souls in your single Impaenitents, no imaginable protraction of punishment
beyond aeternitie for the execution of your Our Sabbath recreations shorst of
those in other Reformed Curches.
censures. The Sabbath recreations, which the Bishop says are void of scandal,
are likely to be, at most but those mentioned in the book of toleration so
much decried by the brethren of your faction; among which were no stage plays,
nor, in my memory, any allowed to be acted on Sundays, and so not frequented
by his friends.

The greater license on the Sabbath K^rmasses you slide over without any of
that zeal, which His Lordship prophesies, though your self have been a
spectatour of it in these Countries, So that in your own words (which I am a
frayd will too often be mistaken for mine, and bring upon me the imputation of
a sloven) If the Apo^eme in your lowest gut had not changed places with your
brains your words had been wiser and your unsavourie breath (which you too
often eructate) somewhat sweeter. The debate among some of your sect. Whether
in Scotland or no, which is not expressed, about starch and cuffes, may very
well pass upon the credit of the Warner that asserts it, and your putting him
upon the poofe makes me guess you are not in a readiness to deny it.
Howsoever we know the curses of the Laundrie have been Trivial debates ^and*
articling against habits.
through two or three descents a traditional legacy to the brethren of your
order in England for the counterscuf^es they made about the former. And the
debate on the later has produced an injunction to your Society somewhere else
to cast away those little idolatrous rags, which could scarce be taken for any
relics of Rome, and their gloves too, it may be upon better reason, le^t the
cleanliness of their hands might beget a jealousy of some superstition in
washing them before their public officiating, on their unhandsome distributing
of the word. What little latitude of discretion you allow and how your
superiors must be your slaves or pupils in the attire as well of their bodies
as sules is evident by your preaching and articling against the apparel even
of the Ladies of Honor and that waited upon your Queens Kno^ Hist.
Majesty three sundry days when the rode in great state and solemnity to
the To^buith in Parliament time Ao. 1563.

Of the second oppression, which the Bishop objects you give up a very The same
fault under a different formalitie not to betwice punished.
imperfect account, leaving the greatest weight to lie as heavy as it can upon
the head of your Synods in calling the Magistrate fool for his mercy, and
knave for his b^iberie, which you only suspect because he is not as rigid as
your selves; In enjoining public satisfaction after the Defendant has given
it at an assize etc. What you bring is little to the purpose, and, if it were,
has been packt away with its answer long a go Wherewith yet if gou will not
be satisfied, you must be set to reviewe Erastus and answer him. When he tells
you, of old no notice was taken of your double formalitie viz of crime and
scandal, so as to subject the delinquent, for the same fact, to the censure of
two distinct Courts, Civil and spiritual. He calls Lib. De Fi^. and Op. cap. 2.
ad raucedinem usque* for one text or example in Scripture to justify it; He
proves out of St. Austin etc. That the Church used the spiritual sword only
when the temporal was not in Christian hands. He puts you to make good your
(...) consequence. That if the Magistrate does not his duty, an Assembly,
Court is required to constrain him* or as your Liturgy speaks, to admonish
him, and that too, as the Bishop urges when he has discharged it according to
his Judgment Offenders quitted to be admitted to the H. Sacrament without
public satisfaction in the Church.
and conscience. From your proceedings of this kind His Lordship draws 3.
observations, which you cannot deny, and yet dare not acknowledge, and
therefore say nothing; but work in a whimzie of his excursions upon his own
friends, not any of whom approve the injustice, the irrationalitie, much less
imitate the cueltie of your practice. The Popish Praelates are not so near
allied unto the Doctor, nor do they need to be taken into his protection: The
English are, and can vindicate themselves against you for admitting to the
holy tub^* with signs of repentance, without Ecclesiastike public
satisfaction* murtherere that are either quit by their jurie, or have their
pardon sealed by the King, whore^ that either are spared out of hope^ of
amendment, or have had the whip at Bridewell, and thieves burned in the hand at
Newgate or saved by the benefit of their Clergy; And this upon beter grounds
then the Presbyters deny them communion with those, who as much as they make
up their mouths, dare not take up a stone to cast at them. The Docto^r knows
his own meaning* and plainly speaks it. And they must be very ignorant or
worse that are not of his mind, or rather of St. Paul's which I take to be
this. That when a man shall without visible hypocrisy 1. Cor. 11.
say, be has examined himself, he is not to be again examined by the Class,
but may eat of that bread, and drink of that cup, That when he has judged
himself, he should not be judged; That when he is judged, he is chastened of
the Lord, not condemned and executed by the Kirk. Your interrogatorie or
argument a minore ad majus in case of Scandal is defective until you render a
just definition of scandal applicable to all where in your discipline does
instance; After which having made your scale of degrees, your antecedent
requires your proof viz. That small scandals are to be purged away by that
repentance that The Scottish practice touching Excommunication little lose rigid
then their Canon.
here is in quaestion between us. Had I ever read of any Presbyter in Scotland
what I have of ^abian once Bishop of Rome. That he was chosen by the
extraordinary descent of a dove upon his head. I might charitablie hope sor
some spirit of meekness among the brethren of the Discipline, and have some
little credulity that the want of gall in any one of the number might qualify
the exuberance and overflowing biternesse in the rest; But when I meet with
such tragike Histories of their implacable fury, and see every where their
unjust judgment running down like a torren^, and their unrighteous rigor
like a mighty stream; I can put little trust in the slender bank of Master
Baylies professions in behalf of his Presbytery, from whom expect as little
mercy as truth, and as little Christian righteousness as peace. The Warner can
not be ignorant of your Scottish ways, while his eyes are open to read them in
your books, or his ears to hear them in very credible reports. He that lives
in Scotland, and never sees the execution of that censure, must betake
himself to the mountains, and converse in some corner with those creatures,
who know as little of excommunicating by, as they ever did of communicating with
a Church. For the 47. years halcion days that you have seen (of which from
your birth which you so superstitiouslie mention you must give us leave to
abate at least one or two* as praegnant in knowledge and as quick an
Intelligencer as you could be in your cradle, and about 30. of 40. more,
wherein the cursed black cowes had short horns, the Presbyterian severitie
being regulated by the Bishops, who carried the badge of clemency as well as
innocence on their arms* the great city you lived in must be taken for the
only bright Mercy seat in your Country, while the sun of righteousness
did never arise otherwhere, but turned his face away from it as a land of
darkness, full Ps. 74. 21.
of cruel hibitations. As touching the two censures you acknowledge, had the
profanesse in the papist, and the horrible scand^t in the Pr^lates been
priviledg'd as much in the punishment with a proxy, as, they say, the more
true and more horrible scandal in a br^her of the Commission, the rod of that
fury had passed upon the backs of the fools in your City; as for the lusty
Presbyters delinquencie (I have heard) your excommunication was executed upon
the Nodie-Innocents in his parish. If you go no farther then Saint Paul's c^and
2. These. 3. 14. You should denounce no public excommunication in the Church,
but diates epistoles semeiou^thai, by private leters signify his fault. You
should have no company nor familiarity with him that he may be ashamed, not
forbid every man to sell him bread, that he may be sterved. You should admonish
him as a brother, not count him as Sc. Lit. p. 100. Master John Guthri^ Bishopp
of Murcay. The following in convenients to be charged rather upon the Church
then state.
an enemy, commanding him to be reputed as accursed and delivered to the
devil. Much less should you arrogate the praerogative of God, if not a
greater, in visiting the sin of the father upon the children, such it may be
as hate you not, denying them baptism till they come to be of age etc. And, to
show what good Angels you are, after sentence pronounced, you dismiss not the
Congregation before they have sung with you the 100. Psalm, a Psalm of
exultation whereby as much as may be, you rejoice at the confusion of a sinner.
Nor is your reserve of little kindness very constant in permitting the
excommunicate the company of them that are ^ied by natural bonds unto him,
when the sharpness of your censure cut' these bonds, withheld this
indulgence from Master John Guthrie Bishop of Murray, to whom, when he lived in
Angus you denied the comfort and conversation of his brother though a preacher
of a parish thereabout.

For the inconveniences that follow, how powerful has been the influence of
the Church upon the State in such Acts of Parliament as are made consequential
to their Acts of Assemblies may be guessed by the frequent servile submission
to the tyranny of their papers. In the Parliaments where your Princes were
ever praedominant it can not be thought they would ratify an Act so
destructive to their own strength in the diminution of their subjects, as to
set the Qui^ a tempore quo ut lagatus est caput g^rit lupinum, ita quod ab
omnibus inter fici pos^it and impune Bracton.
heads of wolves upon the shoulders of men, and for such trivial faults as the
Bishop mentions antecedent to your censure, with leters of horning expose them
to be worried by dogs. For this cruelty may your Church be deservedly
challenged, and that by Proelates, who gave no such customarie allowance to
their officials to excommunicate as appears by the caution in the Canon 1571.
Nullus horum, nec Cancellarius, nec Commissarius, nec Officialis in cognitione
causarum procedes usque ad serendam sententiam excommunicationis, nisi tantum
in causis instantiarum. And in the Canon 1604. If the delinquent made his
appearance, and after process was to be censured the official was not to
pronounce the sentence but the Bishop nullam ejusmodi sententiam pronunciari
volum^s praeterquam per Episcopum etc. Nor were the civil inconvenients like
those after leters of horning. And how easily all for great crimes, was
commuted for, your brother Didoclave complains at large. Where as you run
again from the severitie in your laws to the clemency in your practice
(though that be no answer to the Bishop who presses upon your Canon) your
diverse late years cruelty, which still is continued confutes you in the face
of the world. In which if your sentence took place in heaven as it does to
their confusion on earth, so many have paid the price of their souls for
observance of the first and fifth Commandments, their duty to God and
obedience to their King. Your parenthesis that hooks in the greatness of
sins is convict by the slight peccadilloe forementioned. And the length of
your process shall be cut short by one instance in the forenamd Bishop
Guthrie, who was never so much as admonished by a brother, nor summond by a
messenger unless to yield up his house to Rob. Monroe, being carried to
Edinburgh not to have trial, but to hear that sentence had passed upon him
before he came.

In the case of fugitives your Discipline makes no distinction not Cruelty
toward fugitives.
arbitrarie between the contumacious and timorous. And he that stands to your
account shall come short of his reckoning on mercy, if your flying roll can
reach his soul at a distance as well as to be sure it shall consume the timber
and stones of his house that's at hand.

CHAPTER XII. The Presbytery a burden to the Nobility, Ministry, and all
Orders whatsoever.
YOu know what Constantine said concerning the Arians.... The Presbyterians as
outrageous as the Arians. Bryehatai epipriusae ten odonta Rescript ad Arium and
Arian.
Christ, Christ, Kyrie, Kyrie, ti depote hem^s to lesterion hosemeran
titroske^ He complaind that when their heinous crimes whereof they were accused
had wounded their heads, and the deformity of Shame spread over their faces,
their violent boldness stood fiercely in opposition to the truth, They wept
not in Sorrow, but roared in madness with a grinding of their teeth. The
Presbyterians I see by many passages in this chapter want neither impudence nor
rage to outface and rail as much as any haeretikes whatsoever, when once their
discipline is touched to the quick. The Praelatical malice seems no way
exorbitant by this supplement of the Bishops, wherein his just indignation
chaceth all the remaining eccentrike motions of these planets, these stars
that wander from the fixed beauties in the firmament of the Church. If you can
but find patience, or your stomach will serve you to return to your own
vomit and lick up your language the air will be cleansed which was become
unfavouri^ only by the uncomelinesse of your speech. The Nobility and
Gentry in all Presbytery more oppressive to the Nobility and Gentry the
Praelacce.
parts of Britain have had too long and unhapie experience of the difference
between the fatherly counsels or friendly correction of Bishops (whom
Religious Princes in honor of their function have dignified with the title of
Barons, and privilege of Peers) and the unsufferable insolences of
Presbyters, whose peacockes tails that train it daily in the vulgar dust,
and sweep together the raskalitie of the people, are poudlie spread and fanned
in their faces. Those in England, (which were none of the best) that refused no
hazard to shake off that easy yoke which was laid upon them by the hands and
institution of Christ, have broke their necks in their have, and you see their
honor buried in the grave. The Scottish Nobility that lead them the way,
having served almost a double apprentiship at the trade, alas groan for their
freedom yet dare not ask it from him, whose mercy they fear must not be so
injurious to justice, as after so many rebellions and murders especially that
unpardonable parricide) to redeem them from bondage and to quit the for feit of
their lives and estates. Therefore they choose rather (unhapie choice between
necessity and nothing) to renew their slaverie, Were the British Bishops se^
down again and (which they may be in beter earnest then you mean it) well
war^ed in their repaired sees, as they would look to receive a filial respect,
so they would doubtless repay a paternal Christian care of the Nobility and
Gentry in their charge; Those that heretofore did not (if any did not) had no
natures nor principles befitting their dignities, and till they have changed
what they had for such it is pity, if they survive, they should be reenstated.
You should do well to name those that set their feet on the necks of the
greatest Peers, but withal to set down how long they could keep their
footing there when a just appeal had been made to the capital power that was
above them. If the public too scandalous license of any Peer, how great
soever, received at their mouths a friendly rebuke; If after that his
untractable confidence in sin some legal restraint or fatherly chastisement
at their hands; when Gods impartial and irrespective commandments are altered;
when Christian laws that are consonant repealed, they may be then, and not
till then discharged of this duty, and visited by Master Baylie (when he
shows his commission) for their arrogance in the exercise of any oppression or
tyranny in their Courts. The Reviewers co^nterfeit of Presbytery inverted.


In the pretty piece that follows Master Baylie has played the part of Pauson
the painter in Plutarch, and artificially draw'n the Presbyterian horse in his
full career, giving as he thinks every limme its due proportion to grace him in
that posture; But when, with Pausons customer, we turn the table and lay the
beast on his back, his design is spoiled, and that uglie spectacle of a
foundered jade draws contempt and laughter from all judicious passengers that
behold it.

That every small Congregation in Scotland can furnish your Elderships Wisdom
piety, and learning not so common in Elderships. The Nobility and Gentry
abused when chosen Elders.
with wise, pious, and learned men by the dozen, will never be credited till we
get some Historical assurance that when all good parts, piety, and prudence
were divorced from Canaan Athens and Lacedaemon they made a voyage to Scotland
to court the wild affections of the Presbyters in the North.

For the double portion of discretion and learning in your Classical
Presbytery, which draws in by fifteens the Nobility and Gentry you run
the adventure of losing a beter inheritance, if you take St. Paul's to mean
that in the leter (as you sometimes tell us when you are angry with Court and
our Academical Clergy) Not many wisemen.... not many noble 1. Cor. 1. 26. But
it is in truth your own carnal wisdom not so much to add worth, as to
arrogate power to, and make absolute the authority of your Consistory, that
in other men's names you may Lord it over not only the Common people but the
Senate as he told some of your kindred that had searched Schulting Steinwich
Hierarch Anacris: Lib. 2. Deuteronomy. 22. 10. Doctors at law more fit judges then
unstudied Nobles or Gentlemen.
every secret corner in your spiritual house. Consistorium ut dominari possit
Senatui asciscit pro senioribus Consules, Senatores and Optimates.... Where if
persons of quality be wanting to complete your number, you go to plow with an
ox and an ass, yoke a Count and a Cobbler together, while your prickeard
Pastor keeps the goad in his hand to quick en their dull pace and drive them
into Rebellious Covenants* and so to their shame and destruction. The Judge in
our Officials Court is to be no petie mercinarie lawyer, but a Doctor that
has approved his skill in our Civil laws before one of our learned
universities, and thereby supposed to have beter abilities to judge then any
Nobleman, Gentleman, Burgess, one or more, except some select persons who by
study may have attained to some excellence in that faculty, where with
neither by birth nor education they are known to be ordinarily qualified,
unless Dame nature in Scotland has some faeminine moldsin every parish for
your Elders, or some Seraphical fathers to breed their children by the rod or
institution of the Spirit. But to return to our Doctor. From his single
sentence appeal may be made to a Court of Delegates consisting of a number the
most learned, and in humane opinion the most up right law yers in the land.
Which can be taken for no miserable relief, being the highest Court
constituted by the authority of the King where if not His Majesty in person,
his immediate Commissioners are Judges.

Your twice a year Synods seem somewhat unnecessarie if intended Synods ^ot to
besummoned to receive lay appeals.
principally for receiving appeals, your Classical Presbyteries consisting of
persons (as you praetend) of such sincerity and honor, and somewhere (as I
remember) Didoclave tells us they have little work which, if well examined,
hapeneth not so much by reason of the aequitable proceedings in inferior
judicatures, as from the assurance which persons oppressed have to meet with
the same measure from the same men that are the Members of your Synods, who
know well enough how to gratify one another in the mutual ratification of the
particular sentences passed before. The Primitive Synods found other work,
praeserving in their Provinces the purity of doctrine and uniformitie in
practice, trusting Bishops in their Dioceses except in singular cases with the
censures of persons and redress of grievances. Yet whatsoever convenience may
be in it our Episcopal twice a year visitation may parallel. If the chief
Noblemen etc have decisive voices in your Synods, they gain that privilege by
their birth or estates to neither of which is inseparably annexed wisdom,
pieti^ and learning, the three gifts or spirits you require in your Judges. How
far private instructions and interests praevaile with your Presbyteries in
their elections to exaucto rate all the good qualifications in the competition
of Candidates, the records of your Edinburgh Tables at the beginning of this
Rebellion can justify: Though were their Honorable heads gaged and concluded
capacious to hold no less then a tunn of wisdom and learning, and their arms
clasped upon the embrace of the whole sisterhood of zeal, virtue, and grace,
with all other abilities requisite to your Elders, your Presbyteries full
approbation and choice could not authorize them to suffrage in a Synod, whereto
of old they had no admission, but as in the Second Council of Orange, when sent
thither by the King. I shall not insist upon the comparison or disparitie
between them and inferior Civil Court Judges, in whom no parts are wanting to
the execution of their place in whose choice the Canon of their institution is
observed. Collusion and violence in the choice of Members for the Assembly.
All hopes of redress by appeal from your Synods to a General Assembly are
crushed in the shell by your underhand violence in election of Members, and
praelimitation of them that are chosen in their votes. You remember the seven
private directions sent to your Presbyteries before the Assembly at Glasgow
1638. the fourth of which was. That such as are erroneous in doctrine or
scandalous in life, be praesentlie processed that they be not chosen
Commissioners, and if they shall hapen to be chosen by the greater part, that
all the best affected both Ministers and Elders protest, and come to the
Assembly to testify the same. By this trick you not only praejudg'd or
praecondemn'd the legal freedom in choice, but caused to be process'd all
suspected to be of a different sense from that which you praedesign'd or
praescrib'd to the Assembly. Thus the Presbytery of Edinburgh put very many
of their Ministers under Master David Michel* Lord of Dun. L. Carnaegie.
process, beginning with Master David Michel, their proceeding against whom His
Majesty's Commissioner could not get deferred until the meeting of the
Assembly. Thus the Lord of Dun chosen Lay Elder for the Presbytery of
Brechen by the voice but of one Minister and a few Lay Elders, was accepted,
and the Lord Carnaegie a Covenanter too, but somewhat more moderate, more
lawfully chosen by the voices of all the rest was rejected. There was another
paper of instructions dated August 27. 1638. which is mors in olla, the
Collaquintada that spoils all the pottage you bring us in this paragraph, the
Second of which is this, Order must be taken that none he chosen ruling Elders
but Covenanters and those well affected to the business, so that parts for
judgment, wisdom, piety etc are no considerable qualities in your Members of
Assemblies, when the Covenant and good inclinations to the business (of
rebellion) can be found though but in Idiots and Atheists. The multitude of
Burgesses and Gentlemen is so great Why so many Burgesses and Gentlemen.
to some such good intent as this, that you may praeponderate the Parliament in
your laike votes, and anticipate any just exception they can make against your
Acts. The ground of their admission in your first reformation was a defect of
Clergy, which, when once supplied, had for 40. years possessed all the places
till exchange was made at your Glasgow null Assembly to do the work in hand.
The prime Nobility are not always the men, but such among them as are The
laity to have no decisive voice.
first in popular opinion, and for that in your favor. Your choice of them is
many times illegal, when to serve your turns you call them from one
Presbytery to another. Yet when all is done, you can plead no praecedent from
antiquity for any more then a declarative consent, no definitive sentence no
decisive voice, the subscriptions in the Ancient Councels, distinguishing the
Clergy and Laity in this manner. Ego N. definiens subscripsi. Ego N.
consentiens subscripsi. Those that at any time had greater privilege, (if the
words cited by your Bishop of Brechen must needs give it them) Gloriosissimi
edicunt and Gloriesissimi Perth Proceed.
Iudicos dixreunt, were special Commissioners sent from the emperors not from
any Presbyteries, as he tells you, and more to this purpose which you may
answer, as likewise what the Reverend Bishops objected in their Declinatour,
about Theodosius the younger, Pulcheria the Emperesse, and Martinius in the
fourth General Council of Chalcedon. Master Andrew *Ramsey undertoke an hard
task Master Andrew. Ramsey.
upon the top of his stool offering to prove the lawfulness of Lay Elders by
Scripture, Antiquity, Fathers, Councels, and the judgment of all the Reformed
Churches. And therefore, when His Majesty's Commissioners offered to bring one
into the pit that should encounter him, the cock crowed no more, and, with the
Brethrens good liking the controversy ceased. Till afterward, on good
occasion, a Member offering to prove there was no such thing in the Christian
world before Calvin's days, the Moderatour learnedlie confuted E. Argile. The
King or his Commissioner has little power in Assemblies Protest of Genesis Ass.
Nov. 28. and 29. 1638.
him, saying, His father while he lived was of another mind. The E. Argile,
who was surprised, as he said, at the sudden rupture of this Assembly, held
the Members a little while by the ears with his argument of convenience,
telling them. He held it fit the Assembly should consist of Laymen as well as
Churchmen; Take this with you. Your Assembly Ministers are chosen by the lay
Elders your Moderatours some times are laymen, a course not justifiable by law,
praecedent, or reason. The Kings Majesty's person, or in his absence his high
Commissioner is there only (you tell him) to countenance, not vote in, your
meetings, and proesides in them for exernal order, not for any intrinsecal
power. So that when you go on *calmelie in your business he finds little to
do without Domitians flie-flap, of more use by far in a summer Synod then a
Scepter among you which you often times wrest out of his hand, and continue
your meetings after he has dissolved them. You can deny him or his
commissioner the sight of public papers brought into the Court* which liberty
the meanest subject may challenge.) Nov. 28. sess. 7. E. Rothes.
And *when he has any thing to object against suppositions, or, at best
suspicious Registers, the E. Rothes can tell him boldly in your names he must
speak it praesentlie if at al, and because he does not you wait no longer;
but, pro imperio, vote them to be authentike. Beside, to deminish as well the
Kings state as authority* you send Assessours, or Assistants to your Elders,
and invest them with power aequivalent to his Council. This meeting thus
disordered sits too long by a month when no more, and Assembles, too often
when but Necessity of appeal. Exodus 23. 2. Prove. 10.
once in a year. The number of such Members no more hinders an appeal, then
a multitude of Malefactors can sentence a necessity of becoming their
followers in doing evil. Their wisdom is such as his to whom, a wiser man
tells us, it is a sport to do mischief.

Their eminency like Saul's, head and shoulders higher then the common people
in Rebellion, And their honor somewhat like Absoloms mule, bears them up to
the privilege of the great oak in the wood 2. Sam. 18. 9.
for their hanging in beter aequipage then their fellows. So that beside the
justice there is an absolute necessity of appeal to the Parliament, or in that
to the King from himself to himself, who sits there as Pap. of 10. prop.
before M. Hamil^ arriv. 1638. Why Knigts and Burgesses so numerous.
supreme, here in no other capacity but of your servant. Which is far more
justifiable and necessary then vour appeal from both Parliament and Assembly
to the body of the people, which I tell you again is the final appeal you
make when Assemblies are not modeled to vour mind.

The number and qualification of Knights and Burgessesis therefore large and as
great in your Assembly as Parliament, that your power may be as large and
great in the State as the Church, and the Nobility sit in one by election,
because they sit in the other by birth, and so in a condition to unite the
counsels of both according to the instructions of some few Presbyters that by
Sycophantike insinuations have got possession of their souls and by their
Spiritual Scepter dominion of their suffrages. Headie zeal, craft, and
hypocrisy got in commission or Covenant together, we find by experience can
fit them to judge in Ecclesiastike affairs, when age, wisdom and piety are
sentenced. If ihe hundred choice unparliamentarie pastors make up the odds of
some absent Noblemen, it should seem you and the Nobility are even pares cum
paribus, Peers alike in your honorable Assembly. Which they must not
disdain, since Christ himself. I mean not his Anointed, (that you take to be
out of quaestion) goes but for a single Elder or Moderatour at most. So
Cartwright and his Demonstratour cajoles them together, when he says, If they
(the Princes and Lib. 3. demonst. c. 14.
Nobles) should disdain to join in consultation with poor men, they should
disdain not men but Christ himself. So that Christ being in his name made
your Assembly Praesident or Prolocutour, the King in his Commissioner your
protector, the Nobility your aw^full subvoters or suffraganes, I see nothing
wanting can concilia^e a tyranny to your Presbytery, nor keep your foot of
pride from trampling as basely as may be upon the people. But not to forget at
last what you set in the front as first to be answered. The Presbyterian
course, as you, or I more truly, have described it, is not much more ready
then the Praelatical, because the benefit of appeal is to be had ordinarily
but once or twice in a year; not much more solid, because most of your Judges
can reasonably be thought neither good Civilians nor Casuists, not much more
aequitable, because, as you order them, many more of the laity then Clergy.

In the second hurt your Nobility sustain, the Bishop looks not upon the
judgment of foreigne Reformed Devines (you do not say of Churches) nor yet on
their practice, which I have known some time a great deal too saucy with
Princely Patrons, but upon the aequity of the thing, upon the privilege our
Nobles in England enjoy, and the right yours have to the same by many years
praescription and the laws of your land.

The first will be found if the original be searched. The right of The original
of patronage.
patronage being by the due gratitude or favor of Kings and Bishops reserved to
such as either built Churches or, endowed them with some considerable revenue,
as likewise for the encouragement of others to propagate means and multiply
decent distinct places for Christian conventions. Hoc singulari favore
sustinetur, ut allectentur, Laici, Coras. Glass.
invitentur, and inducantur ad constructionem Ecclesiarum. The exercise hereof
in Justinian is expressed by the terms, Epilegein or onomazein, which
signifies an addiction or simple nomination, to stand good or be nulled at the
^ust pleasure of the Bishop, and therefore accounted no Temporale spiritualli
annexum. Altar. (...)*
spiritual act in the Patron, but a temporal annexed to that which is spiritual
in the Bishop, and therefore not simonaical as your brother Didoclave would
have it. Nor is there that absurdity he mentions of arrogating to one what
belong to all the Members of the Church, as is praetended, but can never be
proved, Nor that danger in transmitting this right from one to another, if the
care of the first patron descend not with it, which defect the care of the
praesent Bishop must supply. Nor is it requisite he should be a Member of the
same parish to which he praesents, since the Bishop is head of the same diocese
to whom, That this is contrary 2. B. Dis^ch. 12.
to the liberty of the Primitive and Apostolic Kirk, to the order which Gods
word craves, and good order, is only said but not argued in your Discipline,
no more then by you when and to whom it became a grievance. Your patience in
enduring it goes for no heroical virtue, being peevish enough soon after the
Act of annexation had passed, as appears by your carriage in the Assembly at
Edinburgh 15^8. and turned into a Rebellious Conspiracy, allthough painted
with the name of a Parliament that now at last (because it could not at first)
has taken it away.

The Nobilitres loss of their Impropriaetions and Abbey lands is very
confiderable, when they bethink themselves upon what false pleas, and to what
unconcerned persons they must part with them. Touching which as Sycophantike as
is the Bishops accusation, he will not abate a fig of his right for the
Presbyters answer, nor I a leter (take which he will) in exchange for his name.

Pl. in Carcul* A. 5. sc.
Aedepol n^gatorem lepidum lepide hunc pactu'st....

Calophanta est qui honest quidem loquitur, sed ^ujus facto ab ora^ione
discrepant. Par. Alciat etc. The Praelates title to Impropriations and Abbey
lands beter then the Presbyters.
Calophantam an sycophantam hunc magis esse dicam (...).

That the whole generation of the praelatike faction (as your style it) did
hyperbolize in zealc against that which they call sacrilege, is an argument
they were all true bred, no bastard children of the Church, not so mean
conditioned as to sell their spiritual birthright for potage. Were your title
as good, (which can appear to be nothing but your rough hands, and red souls
with the blood of the Martyrs of your own making,) Genesis 25. 25.
we should commend so far as we act our selves your struggling as well for the
inheritance as primogeniture. But when we compare our professions or evidences,
and find our brethren to say that the benefactours and founders of these
Ecclesiastike possessions were true Christians, though mistaken, we think, in
many matters of doctrine and worship; yours that that they were Members of
Antichrist undoubted Idolaters and haeretikes; Ours that the Churches which
they endowed were Episcopal, such as we continue them or to our utmost
endeavor it. From which you degenerate, schismaticallie separating, and arming
your selves with all resolution and rage to demolish, (beside what other
advantage we may use of a nearer union and uniformitie in religion, more
consonant to the mind of the doners, at least if such as your malice does
render it, little thinking it may be to have it so unhapilie retorted in that
which is the chief drift of all your rebelling and covenanting) when we think
of no other restitution but by the possessours consent, when it may be
transferred to us by the same supreme hand that confetr'd it on them, out of
which you no sooner get opportunity and power but you violently ravis^ it;
calling Princes and nobles sacrilegious robbers while they overpower you and
deteine it; I believe all our Religious and prudent Nobility will unanimouslie
grant our plea more just, our* proceedings more moderate, and when God shall if
ever, touch their consciences (not we the skirt of their estates and
livelihoods) with an humble fear that such an inheritance withheld from such
a Church, may be sacrilegious indeed; with assurance that if it be so it is
finfull; they will not value their lands at so dear a rate, as to pay their
souls for the purchase, but with courage and confidence in a blessing from God
to be multiplied on their undevoted temporal possessions return them to him
(the King I mean) from whom they received them, and be beter content that
Episcopal Christians then Presbyterian counterfeits should repossesse them. But
if such of them as are not persuaded in conscience they are obliged to restore
them upon the arguments we bring (which would never be convictive if our plea
were no beter then yours) shall adventure to leave the suit depending till the
Court of heaven give final sentence upon it; at their peril be it, the
Praelates and their followers use no violence nor course of law here below to
put them out of these their possessions, no threats but those against
sacrilege in Scripture, searing this may be such, no activitic but that of a
swift charity to catch hold of their souls and snatch them out of the snare
when they find them devouring the bate, and to put them ^nte vota, before
vows upon Pro. 20. 25.
making inquiry, or if post vota to retract them. Therefore such of the
Nobility and Gentry as were nakened hereby to take heed of their rights, were
best have a care they slumber not in the wrong, and take Solomon's counsel
intended Prove. 16. 8. Beter is a little with righteousness, then great revenues
without right. But (which requires the Readers advertence) The Revi^wers
praevaricati^n. 6. head. Chapter 9.
for you here to call those the rights of the Nobilitce and Gentry, which so
many Assemblies have declared to belong jure divino to the Church, which in
your first book of Discipline you tell them they had from thieves and
murderers, and hold a^ unjust possessions, or indeed no possession before God;
which in your second you hold a detestable sacrilege before God; For you to
twit the Praelates with violence and threats, who are bound in John Knox's bond
not only to withstand the mercilcsse devo^rers April 24. 1576. Sc. Decl.
1642. Append.
of the Church patrimony... but to seek redress at the hands of God and man;
That declare the same obligation upon you to root out of the Kingdom as well
the monster of sacrilege as that of Episcopacie, and so as well the persons of
most your Nobles as the Bishops; For you to object a ^ourse of law and
activitie, who by incessant demands and praeter legal, devices never gave over
till the laws that annexed lands to the crown were repealed. For you to
brag of your last Parliament's confirmation of titles, because your last
Assembly power could not reach beyond the destruction of patronages; What is
this but apertlie Sucophantein and calophantein, to fawn and accuse, dissemble
and destroy, Prove. 26. 28. 129. 5 Noble Elders slighted by the Clergy.
flater your with mouth, while you spread a net for their fees and work the
ruin of their persons and estates?

If Noblemen once abase themselves to be Elders of every ordinary Presbyteri^,
it is not to be doubted but evey ordinary Presbyter takes himself for their
fellow if not their superior, which they find to their grief, Therefore all
or most respect that they give to their gracious Ministers, is ala^ a little
Court holy water cast on the flame of their zeal, a sacrifice made for their
own security from your tongues and pens, and from the arms of the people
that serve your warrants often times in tumults upon their persons, For the
honor you pay them they are feign, like wretches to morgage their conscience,
See Let: of the Congreg. to the Nobil. of Sc. 15^9.
those that do not, gain the honorable titles of Traitors of God, are
cashiered your company, and then pass for no beter then honorable heathen,
publicans and sinners. If they become not Truchmen between a single Presbyter
and a Prince* when he comes with his I require you in my name etc. Before every
charge, (no very humble form as I take it) they shall be called abusers of the
world, neutral livers at their pleasure, if not shedders of Scotoh blood. And
some that draw on themselves their Prince's displeasure for a Rethorical
liberty used in their behalf, shall be paid for their pains with the
honorable essay of men sold unto sin* enemies to God and all godliness, the
L. Sempils L. Sempil. Lib* 2.
reward which he had from John Knox as this grateful Presbyter has registered
in his story. They that bridle the rage of their Princes, (the phrase usd) as
occasion serves, will not stick to halter the heads of their Nobles, if they
will neither lead nor drive, but molest the progress of their Presbyterian
designs. Your Historical Vindication I hope is no new named Logike, to prove
negatives of Calderwoods rediculous reverence of Bruce's ghost Cujus anima, si
ullius mortalium, sede^ in coelestibus. Ep. Ded. ad A^tar. Dam.
fact; your detraction from the credit of many irrefragable authors that
Historize that insolent speech uttered by Bruce, looks more like a calumny
then their relation to a f^ble. And yet such a superstitious reverence is paid
by your fond brother Didoclave to the memory of his name, that he could be
content to pin his faith on his sleeve, and hang his soul at his girdle. Anima
m^a cum anima tua Bruci, si ex aliena fide esset pendendum, and were there to
be but one privilege of aeternal residence in heaven he thinks neither
Patriach nor Prophet Apostle nor Martyr, no, nor the Virgin Mary her self were
likely to carry it from Bruce. Which compared with King James's opinion of him
as a perfidious madman that had a whirligigge in his head, delivered after to
many experiments of his rebellious zeal, and frantike restivenesse, is enough
to condemn both saine and votarie to some bedlam purgatory, before imposture
can fix, or facility of fancy find these new imaginary lights among the
stars.

Your following invective is writ with Arrius's quill, and by such Manias
Ca^amo Constant: in Rescript
scribbling you gain the title that Constantine gave him, patroctono^
epieiceias, discovering your self to be a parricide of aequitie, murdering
truth in your relation, and justice in your parallel. His Lordship takes
himself not concerned in this case to recollect 800. years History of
Europe, to pick out of the piety and humility of many Reverend Bishops the
pride and passionate errors of some few; No^ has he malice enough, with you;
to make that the nature of Our Bishops contest not with King and Nobles.
their office which has been some little monstrositie of mind, by ill habits
accidental to their persons. Beside, what among the Papists the nobility by
birth of many Bishops concurring with the received dominion and large revenve
of their Spiritual praeferment; may elevate their thoughts, and enhaunce their
own opinion of themselves, if impardonable, adds little to the condemnation of
ours, which partake in little with them but their titles. The universal
supremacy, which the Pope arrogates as well over Kings as Bishops, may puff up
a little Cardinal, that is near him, in his purple, and possess him with a
conceit that he may Write himself companion to a King, whom he thinks (but is
mistaken) obliged, in Spiritual humility, to lie prostrate at his holiness
foot, and kiss his slipper. But the same Kings soveraigntie in Ecclesiasticis
at home secured him from all such contestation with his Bishops, Though, had it
not, the argument from a Cardinal in Rome to a Praelate in England will hardly
find a topike. Those in Scotland take themselves as capable of honor Their
praecedence, and place near the Throne.
conferred upon their order as their Popish praedec^ssours; Nor are such legal
establishments (if not of right) of Princely favor to becast away in
complement, Nor were they to make an unnecessarie distance out of form, when
the material meaning of their vicinitie to the throne, was the near
concernment of their counsel to the King. Orthodoxe Monarchs, as well as
Papists, having doubting consciences, and orthodoxe Bishops as good abilities
to resolve them. I have not heard they crowded much; or quickened their pace to
get the door of the Earls etc. Their Provincial that with much humility and
respect unto their H. H. tookeit, was lead to it by the hand that had exalted
them or their progernitours. But for the reason of praecedence, which I guess
to be your meaning, you were best review the Heralds office and reform it.
Poorp^dants are not to be reproached for making a little diocese of their
Schools (Priests being charged to make such of their houses) and from the
experimental 1. Tim. 3. 4. and 5.
regiment of boys raising their abilities, by honest endeavors, to the
meriting an higher Episcopate of men; Nor their conscientious demeanor in that
office to be aesteemed the arrogancy of their order, if it move Kings to
commit the white staves to the crosiar, Offices of state.
and great seals to be under the keys of the Church. The most capricio^s of
them all, and most contentious for the honor, (which I think were none but
such as did you too much service when they had it) were many strains below
your Presbytery of Knoxes, Bruces etc. Who have contested with Kings for their
Scepters, which with white staves and seals they brought under the pedantike
jurisdiction of their rod. Never have Bishops so ruffled it as many base borne
Presbyters with the secret Counsel. To whose Consistories all Courts of Justice
were feign to do homage and the greatest Lords of the land, become subordinate
Elders to the parson of their parish. It Is not so How the difference hapened
between the E. Argile and Bishop Galloway.
long that yet it can be forgoten, since a most violent and malicious man
called the Goodman of Earlstounne, aclient of the E. Argile for interrupting of
divine service, forceable overturning the Communion Table in his Parish Kirk,
th^eatning and abusing the Minister with many other such enormous crimes, was
fined (but the fine never exacted) by the High Commission and confined for a
season. The E. Argile complained of his hard us^ge to the Lords of Counsel,
and informed against the Bishop of Galloway that he promised to him somewhat,
which he had not perf^rmed; The Bishop denied the promise, and gainsayd what
the Earl alleged, whereupon said the Earl. If you say so it is as much as if
I lie. The Bishop modestly replied, I do not say so, but I beseech your Lp.
to call your self beter to mind, and you will find it as I say. This is
giving the lie because he would not take it on himself, and ruffling with a
great Lord, because he would not be ruffled out of a just vindication of the
truth, and yield his consent that a Counsel Table should approve turning the
communion table out of the Church. The Reviewers should do well to bring in
his accounts fuller, when he reckons with Bishops for braving of Noblemen.

All Presbyterians are heterodoxe to all good Catholic Christians, with
Presbyterians heterodoxe. Tert. De Praescr. cap. 32.
whom Episcopacie is so necessary a truth, as next to the divine institution,
Universality, Vbiquitie and perpetuity can render it. Confingant tale aliquid
haeretici -- nihil promovebunt, Could your invention feign such authority to
Presbytery, yet your doctrine would diversifie you into a sect. What the
Bishops following words clear, shall not one whit be clouded by any obscurity
in my reply, though the strongest eradiations that come from them would finke
themselves silentlie in the deep, played you not the malignant Archimede (though
no such exact Mathematical Divine) to reflect them into a flame that may set
the ship of the Church on fire about our ears some coals of this fire I shall
heap on your head and cast back into your bosom, which if you mean not to
quench, you may blow up to what farther mischief you think good.

The Apostles were Bishops, who did, undoubtedlie delegate the 1. No Ordination
but by Bishops. 2.
power of ordination to none but such as were constituted Bishops by them to
that purpose.

This power appears not undoubtedlie to have been exerciz'd by any but Bishops
in the History of the Scripture.

This power was exerciz'd canonicallie by none but Bishops in the 3.
History of the Primitive Church According to the second canon of the
Apostles. Presbyter ab uno Episcopo ordinetur, and Diacon^s, and reliqui
Cleri^i.

The laying on of hands of the Presbytery, both in Scripture and 4.
Ecclesiastike story was only for external form, no intrinsecal power, the
efficacy of the act being in the Bishops benediction, which I never find
attributed to the Priest. As in the third Canon of the fourth Council of
Carthage, Episcopo eum benedicente, nowhere benedicente Presbytero. Therefore
your friend Didoclave is feign to acknowledge Altar* Dam. cap. 4 5. No
comfortable assurance but from Apostolical succession and Episcopal ordination.
De Praescr. cap. 32. Reliq uos vero qui abs^stunt a principali successione, and
quocunque loco colligunter sucspectos (...) etc.
a great difference, Magnum discrimen, between St. Paul's imposition of hands
and that, at the same time, of his Presbytery; whatsoever is mean'd by it. Nam
per impositionem mannum Apostolorum Deus conserebat charismata, non autem per
impositionem mannum Presbyterorum, distinguishing in the ordination of Timothy
between dia and meta, the former relating to Saint Paul, the later to the
assistent Priests. Which is another interpretation of the text then you were
pleased to make of it chapt. 8. So that I see the brethren agree not upon the
point.

Succession through the lineal descent of Bispops from the Apostles, and
ordination by the hands of Apostolical Bishops have been ever used as strong
arguments to uphold Catholic Christians in a comfortable assurance of their
Ministric as lawful. And haeretikes have been pressed by the ancient Fathers
with the want of nothing more then these to justify their profession. Hoc enim
modo Ecclesiae Apostolicae census suos deferunt, says Tertullian And Irenaeus
before him joines the gifts of God required in the Ministry, if he means not
the sacraments with the Apostolical cession of the Church. Vbi igitur
charis^ata Domini posi^ sunt, ibi discere oportet veritatem, apud quos est ca
quae est ab Apostolis Ecclesiae successis etc. The Presbyterians praetending
divine institution, must likewise prove such an uninterrupted succession, or
evidence their new extraordinary mission, otherwise they can minister little
comfort less assurance of their calling to be lawful. The former they can not
do for Saint Hierom's time at least, who makes ordination a propriety of the
Bishops. Quid facit excepta ordinatione Episcopus quod Presbyter not facit?
where a friend of theirs fails them when he says, Walo Messal.
ad morem jusque suae aetatis respexit. That he had respect to the custom and
canon of his time. Nor can they do it for above 200. years uncertain story
after Christ, in which they have as little light to show their Presbytery was
in, as that Episcopacie was out, which they would feign persuade us to take
upon their word dispensing with themselves for the use of unwritten tradition
to so good a purpose. If they will plead an extraordinary mission, they
should do well to name the first messenger that brought the news of their
Euangel, and what miracle he wrought which might serve him for a leter of
credence to us, who it may be otherwise* shall be no such superstitious
admirers of his gifts or person. 6.


That therefore the orthodoxe Ministerimust want the comfortable assurance of
their undoubted ordination in the Ministry, which words yet bear a much more
moderate sense then that you give them viz. That they may very Kakos hermeneus
a^tochrema eikon te kai andrias es^ to^ (...). Rescr: ad Ar. The Praelates do
noe annull the being of all Reformed Churches.
well know and be assured that their calling and ministry is null, the
distance being (as I take it) not so indivisib^e between the negation of one
assurance to the position of the other. Such a malicious interpreter bears the
image and may stand in Constantines opinion for the statue of him who is the
father of calumnies, and cares not what p^yson he casts to spot other men's
names, and crack their credits ta tes (...) ita motetos (...) apheidos
proballon, as true of an A^rian as A^ian.

Your divination about the deleted words will succe^d in some strange disoverie
by and by. In the interim you set too sharp an edge upon the doctrine of the
Bishops friends, and do act violence where it may be they intended not so much
injury as the ut most extremity of justice, allthough they held the axe in
their hand in Christian charity disputing the sentence, not so hasty to
execute it, (or beyond it) in the rigor, and cut off at one stroke the Clergy
from their calling, and so many, lay societies of Christians from the Church.
Until I meet with some particular more forward instances then I know of, I
shall answer for them to the Churches of France, Holland, Zwitzerland and
Germany, as Pope Innocent writ to the first Council at Toledo, about the ill
custom of the Bishops ordination in Spain That it is very requisite somewhat
should be peremptorily determined according to the true primitive tradition
might it be without the disturbance of so many Churches. For what is done, ita
reprehendimus, ut propter numeru^ corrigendor^ ca qu^ quoquo modo facta s^nt
non in dubium vocemus, sed Dei potius dimitt^nus judicio. We so dislike it as
not to startle so great a number of delinquents with our doubt, but refer the
judgment to God who stands in the congregation Ps. 82. 1.
as well of Presbyters as Princes, and is a Judge as well among Ministers as
Gods. The Sophisme of the Jesuits, because so popular, should They use ^ot the
Sophisme of the Jesuits.
have been refuted, or else not recited. allthough the similitude it brings
runs not upon all four even with the doctrine of the Bishops prime friends.
Some of whom I believe will acknowledge there may be resident many Members of
the true Church, where are no true Sacraments, being well praepared to receive
them when they may have a true Ministry to dispense them. That one of the two
Sacraments is true, though not This word duly was lest out by Henderson in his
recital of K. Chapter (...) words to this purpose Answ: to 1. pap. Ep. 7. Ad.
Symrn. 1. Pap. to Henders.
duly administered, when, in case of necesstie, by lay hands, where is no true
Ministry to do it, which may consist with that of B. Ignatius if applied, to
this purpose, Ouk exon esti choris to^ episcop^ out baptizein, out
prospherein. Exon at most but illegitimating the outward visible act; not
nulling the inward invisible grace, That the other's effectual, when had but in
voto, if it can not in signo, through want of any or (which is as bad) a
lawful true Ministry to make it. In the third clause I hope you will shake
hands with the Jesuits and them. Where is no true ordination, there is no true
ordinary Ministry, or lawful Priesthood as His late Majesty called it. As
for the fourth the Bishops friends, whatsoever they may, do allay it thus.
Where are no Bishops can be no comfortable assurance of a true ordination, And
so in whatsoever reformed Country are no Bishops, being no true Apostolic
ordination, no comfortable assurance is had of a true visible Church in the
public administration of the Sacraments, though they hope well the invisible
Members have an invisible true Priesthood Heb. 7. 25. 26. Romans 14. 23.
among them, or such an high Priest as being himself holy, harmless etc is
able to supply what their Presbyters want, able to save them ^is to panteles
very completelie, and make intercession for them who sin in submission (out of
more good meaning then faith) to their discipline, who can give no comfortable
assurance that Saint Paul's rod or St. Peter's keys everwere committed to* their
charge. Those of the Reformed, which I hope are not all, if any, that concur,
if you mean covenant, like your selves, under praetense of self praeservation
(being endangerd by nothing beyond the frequent ineffectual power of good
advice, and plea of Apostolic example) with seigned words to make merchandise
as well of Bishops as Kings, and like the insolent Abaddons at Edinburgh and
London, to assault their persons and then abolish their order, declare
themselves such as Saint Peter's false teachers. or worse because more public
in bringing in dam^ble h^resies, denying the Lord (at least in his Ministry*
which they (...) Antichristian) and (what they have allreadie in part)
bringing (...) on th^selves.

Your officious informer that drew the curtain and made the discovery The
Reviewers malic^ in publishing what the Bishop had deleted and perverting it*
of what the Bishop deleted, had little good manners, though, it may be, not so
much malice as you in your uncharitable (not so for^mate) conjecture. A
d^ngerous question being mistaken when called a tru^ judgment, and doubting
whither it be within the pale, not actuallie excluding all (...) Ministres etc.
out of the line of the Church. Remorse of conscience has commonly antecedent
evidence of science, putting all out of question and doubt, without which the
vaniti^ or pusillanimitie of repenting had been little commandable, how
condemnable soever had been the iniquity of erring. What His Lordship lest
behind unscraped out, does not show his mind only* but the mind of all good
Catholic, orthodox Christians. And why his fear to provoke should incline him
more to delete the following expressions, then his care for their comfortable
satisfaction had moved him to pen them* I know not. Nor need I be curion^ to
enquire the reason of a line blotted in his book more then if I had seen it
expunged in his papers being not concerned to give account for more then was
his pleasure to have published. Though, were all the Protestant Churches (what
they are not) They may be doubted to be un-Christian that call us
Antichristian.
as unconscionablie cruel to us as the Presbyterian Conventicle of the Scots* I
see not why, in reference to the Religion we profess, it should be more unsafe
why more unseasonable (since they give, I hope, the same liberty they take)
out of a pious sollicitud^ to have a union of both, some what ambiguouslie to
^christen them, then they out of malice, to make an aeternal separation, very
affirmativelie antichrist^ us in all the peevish pamphlets they put out. So
that whether stands upon the more extreme pin^ole of impudence and arrogance,
the Praelate that doubts your being in a Church visible true for succession and
Apostolic ordination, or the Presbyter that denies our being in any but what
is visible false by a Satanical Priesthood and Antiapostolical investiture, let
your aequitable comparers impartiallie decide. The The Church of Rome not most
true.
Praelatical tenet is not to ^verre the Church of Rome, as the stands this day
etc to be a Church most true, who praeferre that of their own for a truer, and
condemn many Canons in the Counsel of Trent. That they h^ld she is true in
respect of undoubted succession and Apostolic ordination (our business now in
dispute) so much concerns them, as the truth of their own derived from that.
Nor can you deny, what you so shamefullie dissemble, that in the retrograde
line your last Priest (for a last there must be, unless you have been
Autochthones or Autor^ni ^i rather, coaeternal with the Priest that is in
heaven) had his ordination, and you thereby succession from them; and so both
prove as Antichristian as ours. An easy way of salvation in the Romish
Church, is no Nor has she the most easy way of salvation. Romans 11. 33.
second tenet of the Praelates, who meet with her stumbling upon many errors
in doctrine and worship, going somewhat about by Lymbus Patrum and Purgatory,
whereas we think if she walked with us, she might have a more easy and
shorter journey to heaven. Yet withal knowing that the ways of God are
anexichniastoi not to be tracked and his judgments anex^reuneta not to be
searched; we dare not damn at adventure all that go with her, (no more then
you can assure a ship to be sunk so soon as ever you lose sight of her sail,)
but leave the issue to him who is great in Counsel, and mighty in work, Ier.
32. 19.
whose eyes are open upon all the ways of the sons of men, to give every one
according to his ways, and according to the fruit of his doings. The
separation from Separation from her in many things needless.
her, Which they hold to be needless is such as that which you fondly make
about copes and surplices, Church Music and festivals and that came not in
with the Counsel of Trent. That which is made upon higher points, (though not
yet, God be praised, in the highest of having one Lord, saying one Creed, using
one baptism in substance however different in ceremony) they impute to them
who kept not their station in conformite to the Primitive Christians of the 5.
or 6. first Centuries* with whom a reunion not only may, but ought to be much
desired on just conditions, and that which is, continued, rather then the
division made greater by our fruitless compliance with morose and humourous
Reformers, whose preaching being not with entising En apodeixei pneumatos kai
dynameos. 1. Cor. 2. 4.
words of man's wisdom, they tell us of aspirit, which can not be the same with
Saint Paul's, because thereof they never gave us any demonstration, nor of any
power but the sword.

Could your bold praecedent privilege or excuse me in comparing, judging,
censuring or approving, the public transactions of our Royal Sovereign, I
should with much modest and innocent freedom profess more justifiable,
according to Christian Religion and prudence, His Majestie^ late graces and
securities granted unto the returning confederated Irish; then any like future
concession unto the persisting, covenanting Scots: They gratefully accepting a
limited toleration of their public worshp to those of their own division in
that Country; you endeavoring to extort an absolute injunction of yours in
all His Majesty's dominions, denying liberty Artic. 1.
of conscience, so little as to his family or person. They only craving in
much humility, a freedom from being bound or obliged by oath to acknowledge
the Ecclesiastike supremacy in the King* you arrogantlie binding by solemn
league and covenant (wherein so much is implied) Him and us to attribute it to
the Kirk. They renewing in the oath of allegiance their recognition of Royal
right* and swearing, without restriction, their defense of his person etc to
the uttermost of their power, you by proclamation admitting Febr. ^ 16. 9.
Artic. 3.
him to the exercise of his power, but in order to the Covenant, And
covenanting his defense no otherwise then in the defense of (what you call) the
true religion and liberties of the Kingdoms. They subjoining in that oath
their best endeavor to disclose to His Majesty etc all treasons and
traitourous conspiracies etc. You having not a syllable to that effect in your
covenant, lest you should be obliged to betray your selves, who are resolved to
continue principals in such practices against him and his Royal family to the
last* They charitablie forgeting all revenge against any of His Majesty's
party that had fought against their confoederacie; you cruelly combining,
expresselie to bring to public trial all such as had been any way
instrumental opposers of your Covenant. They embracing in the arms of
Christian communion, their quondam enemies, now fellow subjects of a different
religion, you baselie butchering them with unexemplified cruelty 1. with your
material sword, axe, or halter in their bodies, your civil in their estates,
your spiritual (what may be by your excommunication) in The Presbyterian Scots
more bloody then the Irish.
their souls. The aggravations you bring against His Majesty's agreement are,
First, That it was with persons so bloody which as it can not be wholelie
excused in them, so ought it of all men least to be objected by you, whose
religion has passed from the Castle of Saint Andrews to the House at
Westminster in a red sea path, made for you neither by Moses's rod, nor Eliah's
mantle: under the conduct of no civil, no prophetical power, fenced on both
sides with blood of different complexions, the blood of Popish and orthodoxe
Praelates, the blood of Princes addicted to several Religions, So that Chapt. 4.
God doubtless will have a controversy with you, who as the Prophet Hose
speaks, by swearing and lying have broke out into rebellion, and blood
touches blood. The blood of the Cardinal has touched the blood of the
Archbishop. The blood of Queen Mary the blood of King Charles, and more then
that, which you may hear of otherwhere Touching the cruelty of the Irish I
remit you to what our Royal Martyr has writ with much Christian indifference.
Chapter 12. of (...) where you may take notice principally of these clauses. I
would to God the Irish had nothing to allege for their imitation against those
whose blame must needs be the greater by how much protestant principles are
more against all rebellion against Princes then those of Papists..... I believe
it will at last appear that they who first began to embroyle my other
Kingdoms (and who, J pray you were they) are in great part guilty, if not of
the first leting out. Yet, of the not timely stopping those horr'd, effusions
of blood in Irland. To omit what His Majesty intimated before, That their
oppressive fears rather then their malice engaged them, and you know how
profuse you are of blood when you treat of the doctrine of self
praeservation. Secondly, you are Whose Liberty of religion was limited.
troubled at the full liberty of Religion he granted them, which if you e^ saw
the articles, extended no further them the remission of poenal statutes, not to
the restitution of Churches and Church Livings, but what they had then in
possession, not to any jurisdiction but what they exerciz'd at that time, for
which an express caution was taken in the very first article of the treaty.
And in the last but one their Regular Clergy were restrained to their
pensions, and confind to the praecincts of their Abbeys and Monasteries, which
are explained to be within the Walls Mures, and ancient fences of the same. No
charitable benefactour having liberty to exercise one maine point of their
Religion, by laying a foot of land unto their Convents. But had it been as full
as you fancy it (because you make your own case many times the same with that
of your brethren abroad) I pray directly answer me, Why a Papist may not have
as free liberty as a Jew? And Whether, according to your conscience be more
Antichristian, a Cloister or a Synagogue? Thirdly, You object the Arms,
Castles, and Places of trust saffer in the hands of Papists then Presbyterians.
prime places of trust in the state he put in their hands. Whereas if the case
were politicallie disputed, Whether the Militia were safer in the hands of
Papists or Presbyterians. I believe the former would carry it upon the greater
security (though not generally the greatest) they give in their principles,
and the greater experimental assurance in many places of trust they have often
rendered Princes in their discharge. And had the prime Castle and place of Trust
in that Kingdom been theirs, and no arms nor command in the Army been the
others (a tolerablee freedom of religion being granted them) it is not
improbable that Noble Marquess last year had either not been forced to hazard
a siege for his reentrance, or at least not betrayed into an inevitable unhapie
necessity of retreat, What they demanded, or had the 9. Article of agreement
will inform you. That upon the distribution, conferring, and disposing of the
places of command honor profits and trust... no difference should be made
between them and other his Majesty subjects. (Here Is no exception against
Malignants nor persons disafected to the cause) but that such distribution
should be made with equal indifferency, according to their respective merits
and abilities. By which qualification all disloyal demeriting persons are made
obnoxious to a just exception at any time. Those that continued in possession
of His Majesty's Cities, Garrisons Artie. 29.
and within their quarters are to be commanded, ruled and governed in chief
upon occasion of necessity, as to the Martial and militaire affairs, by such
as His Majesty or his chief Governer, or Governers of that Kingdom for the
time being should appoint. And where any garrison etc. might be endangerd by
restoring to their possessions and estates the Litizens, freemen, Burgesses,
and former inhabitans, they were not to be admitted, but allowed a valuable,
annual rent for the same, as in the ^7. Article was provided touching those of
Cork, Youghall, and Dungarvan. Finally in all that agreement no condition is
found, That His Majesty or His Lieutenant should be governed by a Popish
Parliament at Dublin when it might be in Civil, nor by a Clerical council or
Assembly Kings cannot ratify too well what they promise, if just.... Sed qui
juramentis sudunt sicut pueriastragatus Pet. ad. Alter. Dam. Parliaments not be
stayed for in extremities if they can not be called at present.
at Kilkennie in Ecclesiastical affairs. Fourthlie, That the King gave
assurance, of his endeavor to get the articles ratified in the next Parliament
of England, was to ratify at praesent their confidence in him, for which he
can not be blamed, unless you would have Kings sport like boys with
changeable knots in their treaties or (what you scornefullie charge them all
with when you think on it) like children play at checkstone with their promises
and oaths. That His Majesty did this of himself, is false, if mean'd
exclusive of his Council. That he did it without a Parliament, which he could
not have, and before it, which his urgent necessities could not stay for, is
justifiable by that law which will never plead for your pardon. Salus populi
suprema lex. Nor is that current law contraire to any standing law in such an
exigence as his unless there be one (as there is none) that injoines him to
follow the misfortune of his father, to lot the Presbyterians bind his hands
from laying hold upon any advantageous assistance from the Papists, till his
head be cut off by your bloody Executioners the Independents. Therefore
whatsoever passed in this agreement, if persuaded by the gracious party, no
faction, of the Praelates, they exonerated their conscience, if opposed by
them, they were no antagonists to their duty; if with moderation and patience
heard, their passionate zeal did not so transport them as to reject salvation
from God, when he gives it by the hand of Papists unto their King. Who think
it neither loyalty nor prudence rather to deliver him up to the hazard, if not
assurance, of the axe, then he should by such means be delivered from the
peril of the sword. The Kings inclination The King never expressed his
inclination to Covenant ers.
toward covenanting protestants has never hitherto made such an uglie
appearance as to scare them in a dream or awaken their art and industry in a
fury. Nor have you heard, I believe, His Majesty complain that his sleep was
broake by their midnight disswasions. If in sermons by daylight they laid
before him the mischiefs that lurk in your Covenant they did but bring him a
message from his Fathers Ghost who it, may be heard the lowed cries of those
tongues that had took it, as he passed from the skaffold to Ahrahams bosom. Or
were sent from some other Ancients that were dead to tell him more truth then
he ever will hear from the Scottish Interpreters of Moses and the Prophets.
That temporal death with any misfortune ought much rather to be embraced His
Kingdoms ruin rather to be embraced then his souls.
then the loss of his soul in the hell of the Covenant they could not beat
too often in His Majesty's head, unless they infalliblie knew his Martyred
Fathers instructions to be engraven with the point of a diamon'd, or
unchangeablie set as a seal on his heart. And where as our Savior assures him
the whole world can be no proportionable profit for that damage mentioned in
the 16. S. Matthew. the ruin of his three Kingdoms need never be grudged in so
good an exchange as he Verse. 26.
afterward speaks of. Though His Majesty's conscience (or such of his Council
as looked well about them) could not hitherto tell him he has been by any
necessity tempted to one of those two immediate extremities, between which
providence ever maintained a visible pass (it may be none of the easiest) nor
ought is it but sloth and Athiesme (except some treason may be in the
composition) that would scare him with fancies of prodigious monsters, worse
then Solomon's lion in that way. Your forsooth, with a feigned lispe and a Prove.
26. 13.
courtesy, will win your Mistress (the Covenant) no favor in wisemens
eyes, who can not be caught with such red and white painting and patches as
where with you so often praesent her. Since their dear bought experience has
tought them that her crown of pride can as little brook a society with the
Goddess Regalitie, as Prelacie. Nor does she oblige in sense, how fair soever
she speaks, her takers to less in their station, then to the abolition of
them both.

If I conceived my self in danger, instead of answering, I would More learning
under Episcopacie then Presbytery.
cut out your next paragraph and wear it for an amulet or special guard
against magical enchantments, having read that things most rediculous or
filthy are the best security that can be in such cases. That you should
appeal to Reason and Experience for your Judges of Presbyteries praeeminence
before Episcopacie in learning, honor and wealth, who stand self condemned by
the frequent invectives you with your partisans make against the vain
philosophy, which is the sciential learning, of Prelatical preachers, against
the dignities of Praebendaries, Archdeacons etc. Against plurality of their
livings, which doubles their revenues, is as if you were practizing with your
pencil upon the first verse in Horace; Poetry, rather then disputing by Humano
capiti cervicem pictor qui^m.
your pen in divinity or Logike with the Bishop. The Severest of your Trial
before ordination is about cutting to the root some Hebrew word, and corrupting
it in the sense; graffing some young vowel upon an hopeful stock, or in
oeulating with a prick to make it bring forth fruit pleasing to your taste,
though, in all likelihoo'd, never intended by the Holy Spirit that planted it
in the Bible. Your all sort of learning here, called gifts utterance and
knowledge in your first book of discipline, were it not reduced, as it is in
your liturgy, to tatling The Bishops trial before he ordains more serious
then the Presbyters 4. head page 14. they propose him a theme or text to be
treated privatelic, whereby his ability may the more manifestly appear unto
them. 4. Head.
half an hour beside a text, would put his Lay, if not his Clerical, Judges
to a nonplus when they were to give their verdut of his parts: And though here
you talk of disputations upon controversed heads, and there of the chief
points of controversy betwixt you and the Papists, Anabaptists, Arrians etc.
We know what discouragements you give your young students about looking into
Schole Divinity, the most authentike Ecclesiastical History, and Fathers,
without which they are proper champions for such an encounter. It is not David's
sling, but in David's hand, and with David's God to guide the stone which goes
out of 't that, without other weapons, can make these Goliaths fall upon their
faces to the earth. Our trial is personnallie by the Bishop or his Archdeacon*
unless in his absence some other learned Minister be appointed. We have
nothing to do with lay Elders nor people in the examen, who have no interest
by the Catholic canon in the election. Peri tou me tois o^klois epitrepein tas
eclogas poiersthai toon mellontoon Cathisasthai cis hieratcion is the 117. by
Iustells account. Our practice is seldom so remiss as yours, if our rule be
more, it may be imputed to the necessity of that time, when learned men, I
mean reformed, did not swarm in a number aequal to the cures to be served.
Against which what you argue in your own case 1. Book: Discipl. may be replied
to as in ours. 1. That the Bishop His Deane, and Canons, or Cathedral Clergy,
may supply the imperfections of others in his Diocese (for if the lack of
ablemen be real, your straight and sharp examination may disparage by
discovering the infirmities, not one whit enable your Proponents or expectants
for their duties) 2. The rarite among the Gentiles in the beginning of the
Gospel was recompensed with the extraordinaire diversity of gifts. 3. Un
preaching Ministers Neither judge we that the Sacraments, can be rightly
Mistred by him in whose mouth God has put no Sermon of exhortation. 1. B.
Disc. 4. head.
are no idols, having ears to hear what the Church praescribes and mouths to
utter, as her prayers for, so her wholesome doctrine unto the people. But what,
I can not pass by since it meets me in the way. That efficacy of the
Sacraments, as well as power of the word, which you call of exhortation, should
be limited to the abilities of the Minister. And as the Papists directly, so
we by inference, be disabled in both, I think will help you to a share in the
Jesuits Sophisme, whereof we lately discoursed, and set you upon the pinnacle
of arrogance and impudence, who hereby unchurch the greatest part of
Christians, and contract this Sovereign excellency to your selves. Your Latin
disputations when they come by course among the ignorant or younger fry of your
Ministry, do but multiply haeresies, and make them now and then, in their
heat, blaspheme God more learnedlie then in their weeklie exercizes and
Sermons. As occasion shall serve, I may help you hereafter to more instances
then one The ^apistical Priests have nei^er power nor authority to Minister
the Sacraments of Christ Jesus, because that in their mouth is not the sermon
of exhortation Ib. 9. head.

Alter. D^masc. Schoti^h heterodoxe divines not comparable to the Orthodoxe
English.

Admittunt ad Ministri^m indignis^emos sartores, subulcos. and infimad^ faec^
homines, modo sint togod^dali etc. C. Schulting. Hier. Anacris. Lib. 1.

Tert. De Praescr. cap. 1. Quod non ide^ scandalizariopo^cat, quod qui
prudentissimi odificentur in rumam.

Bishops commended by the Reviewer to be suspected.

Presbyt^rie how the cause of ignorance, contempt and beggary.

Provision under Episcepacie in England against the beggerie etc of the Priests.

Puritanical Bishops make an ignorant Clergy.


of the like practice among some of your brethren abroad, where every
boardlesse boy (for with such your Presbytery every where abounds) has
liberty to talk (for I can not called disputing) upon the highest mysteries
the Trinity, Praedestination etc. As confidentlie* to the shame of your
religion, as the gravest Doctor can determine in the chair. What of this may
be tolerable among the learned, super to^am materiam, ^s little beter then a
form, and little decency in that, which approves not much, improves less the
abilities of the longest liver among you all. Our aequivalent to this (let it
be what it will) in our Archdeacons Visitation, your friend Didoclaves turns
off with a jeer, making as if the abilities of our Ministry were inquired into
after they were constituted leaders of the flock. Primum creantur ductores
gregis, d^inde fiunt discipuli, where as it is principally to discern the
advancement by study of what abilities they had at their ordination, whereby
the election of rural Deanes may be regulated, and persons known that are
enriched by gifts befitting them to be Bishops. Your experience shall not draw
me into an unnecessarie comparison between our English Clergy and the French
or Dutch Divines, whose ordination, yo^ are not ignorant, has been impeached
by their adversaries (whether deservedly or no they are to look to) and their
abilities resolved just like yours, into an effusive* readiness of words. But
I bid defiance to you and your Countrymen of the Discipline, to show me among
you all, a Law'd, an Andrews, a Montague, a White, to whom the English you
name must give the guerdon of learning (which I believe Reynolds carried not at
Hampton Court Conference) unless Perkins had more in his Chain of
Praedestination, or Parket in his silie Arraignment of the Cross. But how
solid and singular soever was their learning, their defection from the
doctrines and practical praecedents of so many years standing among Catholic
Christians makes their faith in many things, and their good parts
comparitivelie in all, but as chafe to be blow'n away with the wind, and the
memoire of them to be winowed by our breath that the truer grain may be
visible in Gods Church. Av^lent quantum volent pallea levis fidei quocunque.
Affltu (...), eopurio^ mass^ frumenti in horrea Domini reponetur. It Is well
your conscience can be enlarged in some little charity toward any of our
Bishops, though we may be justly jealous of this kindness, and fear (if we
heard their names) it may be placed upon persons inclined to your interest,
rather then commended to your good opinion by their merit. But whose'er they be
you mean, we know you never prike any in the list of the learned but the best
read men in Synopis's and system^ in Common place books, and Centurists*
orgenerallie in your select Reformed Fathers, whom, in a fallacy, often times
you persuade your Disciples to be the more proper men because standing (you
tell them) upon the shoulders of the ancients, when, if set on even ground, the
longest arm they can make in true learning and eloquence, will not reach half
way up to their girdles. But to proceed in some answer to your quaestion. The
Warner therefore speaks to you of ignorance, because your Presbytery parts
with the greatest incentives and encouragements of study* Therefore of
contempt, because it quits those dignities which give praecedence to their
persons, and draw reverence to their function; Therefore of beggerie, because
it diverts the Ecclestastical revenue, and makes you but stipendiaries of the
people. Of this very conciselie, yet fully has his late Majesty admonished
you Chapt. 17. of (...).

He that surveyes impartiallie the multitude of good Livings and other Clerical
praeferments in England which might serve as a supplement to the bad, will
find little reason for any, none at all for the greatest part of our Priests I
mean those that had a title, that were eidicoos cheirotonoumenoi (as it is
Can. 6. Council. Chalced) to be begarlie and contemptible for their want,
especially since those Pluralists, you confess were scarce one of twenty
that lived in splendor at Court; or were Nonrefidents in the Country. Such as
were apolelymenoos ordinat, ordained at large, without title to any benefice or
cure, the Bishop was charged with them till provided for. And they that
complained of their poverty had no cause, there being as you tell us, such
plenty in his palace. The ignorance of our Clergy (which it may be was not
incomparable if we bring yours into the light) was never greater then when
Calvin and Knox had some heirs and successors that crept into the praelacie,
degenerating from the austeritie of their Fathers, who because they loved not
the office, never mean'd to discharge it. Yet could dispense in their
conscience with the title and lawne sleeves into the bargain, that under them
they might take the revenues of our Bishops* But when and where we had Austins
and Chrisostoms, Lawds and Andrews's never cloud was dispelld with the rising
sun, so as ignorance at their asscent in the Episcopate of our Church. And they
that heard not of the great study in th^se Praelates to remedy the evils,
brought in by the Cho. 7. v. 10. 11. 12.
other, are such as Zecharie speaks of that imagine evil against their brother
their heart, refusing to hearken, and pulling away the shoulder, and stopping
the ear that they should not hear, and making their hearts as an adamant that
they may not etc. Those some that were most provident, you mean (I think)
most penurious in their families, were those I told you of that made a trade of
their (...), and would dispense with any thing among the puritans but their
Purses. Such as those (...) other that ^ named, as they were after to r^ach, so
were they known to be of Our Bishop ^o Purchaser by h^ parsimonie.
(...) behavior and (...) to (...), the requisites of a Bishop and
accomplishments of our^, whose parsimonie or (...) for (...) (...) was not that
which advanced him a sum to make a purchase. If the sulplusage of his reven^e
could ^e it in a cheap and plentiful Country* I know not who have beter
title to (...) the^ (...) (...). Though as I am informed, where I may trust
((...) with a professed enmity against his office, whatsoever reserve of
kindness was for his person.) This great (...), you (...), was the recoverie
of lands (...) taken and (...) from the Church, in the (...) whereof, ^t he
^pared no endeavor, so it should ^eem he was well rewarded with (...).

Allthough prating and praying non sense in the Church may well pass for Little
knowledged about or conscience showed in Presbyterian pr^ching. Eccles 5. ^.

1. S^. 15. ^2.


a paraphrase on that which the preacher (...) (...) of (...). Yet I wish that
were the worst which Presbytery brings when she sets her foot in the House of
God, and not another * of bewitching rebels mentioned by Samuel, or
treacherous. K. K, which the prophet Habakkuk calls (...) (...), the (...) ^o
the not (...), ^king men as the (...) (...), ^s the (...) things that have no
(...) 1. Habak. 14. In whose praying or preaching (whereof doubtless we had
the quintessence sent us by the Reviewer and his brethren of the mission) what
knowledge there is beside that con^ing of texts of the Concordance helped them
to; What (...) but of the lips and the lungs, neither matter nor method
requiring their study; What conference, when no doctrine was proved but by
Scripoure wrested, I am sure not to the salvation of the hearer, and I fear to
somewhat worse of the speaker, I leave to the testimony of any knowing, (...),
(...) person that at any time was there. And for my self, that was sometime
seting a^e all (...) and pr^judice, I will in the word of a Priest profess
that I found (...). But what else in the place of it is best known to God and
my conscience, (...) ^etit be to the world to be that which makes me tremble to
think of their danger that shall adventure their (...) in the (...) of such
hypocrisy and ignorance. To the calumnies which this (...) ^shekal casts on
our Church, I answer 1. That a read (...) (...) the Reading Ministers useful
and justifiable in our Church.
exerciz^ of few, and why it may not be of some, as well as a read chapter and
Psalm is of many where the Discipline takes place I know not. Since care is
taken that where they (...) no necessary (...) is wanting. Since none that are
not in orders may read it the office of prayer in the Congregation being as
much a (...) the ordinance of preaching. Since all that are have thereby no
commission to g^ preach in your (...), and why they may not (...) (...) and
administer the Sacrements, conferring with and catechizing the ignorant
according to their talent I see no reason. Ite and pradicate sending not all
the Disciples up into a pulpit to make an hour or two's continued discourse.
New had Nations eves been converted, nor Christians improved and confirmed, if
pradicate had been no otherwise ordered, not one of an hundred having abilities
to draw arguments out of sermons convictive of their judgments, not all
Presbyterians so good Logicians as to frame them. And he that yields himself
up to be carried with the stream of their words and wind of their fancies, may
have as many changes in faith as their are points different in Christianities
compass, being like a child Clydonicomenos and Ephesians. 4 14*
peripher^, as St. Paul speaks, tossed to and fro, and carried about..., by
(...) ^right of men.... who are many tha^ (...) in wait to deceive him.
Secondly, Your first Reformers made the same use of Readers as we do of ^n
preaching Ministers, and continued them as long as necessity required, nor
shall we any longer, if you can furnish us with as many learned preachers as we
have pulpits, and them with stipends where are not tithes but impropriate
proportionable to their abilities and pains. To the Churches where no
Ministers can be had praesentlie must be appointed the most apt men that
distinctlie can read the Common prayers and the Scriptures 4. Head. for
Readers. Preaching without book approved by our Praelates. That within book
not to be disparaged.
says your first Book. Disc. It was the late labor of no (...) of ours to
disgrace preaching without book, who ever respected and cherished men whose
praesence of mind and memoire served them to deliver gravelie and readily
what they had at leisure deliberated on, and for the true benefit of their
hearers digested into the clearest method, and a domed with selected
significant language before they came into the pulpit. Those who having taken
that pains yet wanted the other ability not in their power, or some little
confidence to command it in public, they were at least to excuse, and condemn
such itching ears as would hearken unto no sound doctrine but when taught
after their lusts and luxurious desires, more for their pleasure then their
use. That they disparaged those of your tribe was no wonder, who like your
self (that go for one of the best) consulted little before hand with their
books or thoughts, only whet their tongues like their knives for a meal,
with which so they cut out bread for them selves, they cared not what
contemptible fragments they cast among the people. Of their best kind of
speaking We may say as Seneca of one not much unlike it. Haec popularis
[oratio] Epist. 4. Lib. ^.
nihil habes very, mouere (...) turbam, and (...) aures impetu rapere, trac^ s^
non pr^bet aufertur.... multum habet manitates and v^ni plus (...). It has a
great deal of vanity and emptiness in it, more found then substance, you may
read the whole epistle, and learn I Will warrant you to preach better by it if
you afflect it* For praying The Liturgy why read.
without book (all though without a command it may be indifferent, and you can
bring no more for it then for praising and you sing not all without book as I
remember) they thought best a conformity with Catholic Christians, whose
liturgies were ever read in their Churches, and that I guess (besides some
decency it seems to carry with it) because they had great variety of prayers
in the exhibition of which a constant order was to be observed, between and in
them some variety of gesture and ceremonious worship, for direction in which
they thought humane infirmity, subject to mistakes, might have cause some
times to consult by a glance the rubrikes every where inserted. As for you that
have naught else to do but to turn over the tip of your tongue what comes
next in your head and up the white of your eyes, as if the balls were run in to
look after the extravagant conceptions of your brains a booke's of no use,
though I wish we had one of all the profane and vain babbling amongst you, that
we might make such unskillfull workmen ashamed; 2. Tim. 2. 15. 16.
and show our selves approved as well to the world as to God. The Praelates
never cried up our Liturgy as the only service of God. Who think him served
in some other Churches that have it not. Their opinion of it as a most
heavenly and divine piece of writ, does those holy men that comp^ld it but
the same justice which a beter comparison will then yours of it with the
Breviarie and Missal of Rome. Your pains had A parallel of it with primitive
forms beter then with the Brevia^.
not been lost in a parallel of it with the solemn services disspersed in many
parts of the Bible; with the Greek and Latin Liturgies where they are not
interlin'd or corrupted with any superstition or idolatry of Rome. That you
have made does but magnify her and oblige you, had you any Christian charity
or justice, to thank God for praeserving so much of his word and worship in
her service what the Bishop intends when effected, will warrant our Church,
upon your principles, in most parts of her Liturgy; when showed consonant to
the most public forms of Protestant Churches, though it is hard for Fathers to
ask advice or borrow authority of their children, and for Ancients to hear
wherein Job was mistaken. That with the young men is wisdom and with the
shortness of days understanding. The Praelatical Doctors not yet so much for
preaching a* Presbyterians. 9. head.
King and the many well minded men, I believe were never deceived by our
Doctors, who I can not think ever affirmed they were as much for preaching in
their practice and opinion as the Presbyterians. So much as to set aside
praying for sermonizing as your ^. Book Discipline does, telling us. That what
day the public sermon is they could neither require nor greatly approve that
the Common prayers be publikelie used. I require the name of any that said the
life and soul of the Liturgy was preaching, without Verbi praedicatio de bet
esse quasi anima liturgiae. Alter.* Dam. c. 10. Ibid. Esa. 56. 7.
which it could not be entire in its parts* That he must never go in and out
of the, House of God without ringing his bells (a fit alussion) the word of
exhortation Interpraetation and praeferring the nams given the Temple by some
of the Jews Domus expositionis, before that by God Domus Orationis. Though it
may have been the fruitless practice of some, to quit themselves, as they
hoped, of the disreputation you brought them as ignorant and lazic, to preach
somewhat more often then formerlie, till they found their ringing the bells was
to scare the people from Church, and doubling their pains reformed not their
opinions nor reduced them to their duties. They that prayed without book
before Pucrile est ut mihi vide^ur aliter facere Ibid.
and after their sermons came not up to the Presbyterians opinion, that it is a
childish thing to do otherwise. Nor to their practice, To bawlk^ the first and
second service of the Church. What they either affirmed or did in this kind
might bemore to show your gross dissimulation at all times; in making if such
a difficult business to talk then to personate their own in this of their
affliction, which, when you have brought them to the lowest, shall never seduce
them so to decline the envy of the people, as by profaning the House of God,
sooth them Gal. 5. 10.
in their error, styling those divine ordinances which in your manner or
frequencie of use (being both without praecept) are but humane Canons and Acts,
and for most part in the matter consist of strife, scditions, and haeresies, the
works of the flesh, or the Devil that dictates them. So that you may see, if
your eyes be not full of somewhat else while you are sporting yourselves with
your own deceivings, their tenet remains the same that it was, and themselves
ready enough in this season, as unfit as you think it, to ring as lowed as
you will in the ^ares of the world, Divine Service.
That for Divine service in public, people need no more but the re^ding of the
Liturgy. Which is beter furnished with pious petitions, occurring to all
visible necessities (and for others emergent the Church keeps a reserve, and
in due time ever affords a recruit) then any set or extemporarie prayer that er
came out of Presbyters mouth. 2. Sermons Careful Christians will find little
leisure on week days to hear sermons.
on week days (if not festivals, whereon a commemoration of Saints departed is
necessary for Historical instruction, and for imitation exemplarie) man belayd
aside by Christians that have no more time to spare from their honest callings
then they ought to spend in the application and practice of what they heard on
the Sunday; in meditation upon God, his attributes and works etc in the
serious examination of their lives, and very particular scrutinie of their
actions, secret, public, good, bad, indifferent or mixed, in sorting or
parselling their sins of mission, commission, weakness praesumption and in
private repenting, weeping, praying, praising, In conferring closely with
holy men, chiefly their Priest and pastor of their souls, laying open
before him their doubts, distractions Q^ ^d cr^ina quae (...) declara^
Ministry ^b illis qui pe^nt (...) a^t consolation^m, relinqui^ conscientijs
Ministrorum etc. Disc. Eccl. Reformat. Regni Fran^. Can. 25. Catechizing beter
then preaching in the afternoon found. 9. Head. (...) sermon con venient but
not absolutely necessary See Hook. Eccles. Pol. 5. Book. Sermons not to
exceed an hour.
infirmities and perverse inclinations and Invisiting the sick, strengthening
the weak; considering the poor and placing charity with prudence; condoling
with and comforting the afflicted; Composing controversies, reconciling
differences, designing and enterprising Heroicke exploits for the just
advancement and honor of the King, and public advantage of Country, City or
Parish whereof they are Members Finally, acting all (of which th^se are not
half) that concerns them in their public and private capacity. And when all
is done, not before, in what leisure's redundand, let them in Gods name, call
for a weeklie or daily sermon, and (where the Priest has discharged as much
more of his duty, and finds in himself abilities to compose such an one as
with confidence or rather conscience he can speak it) let them have it. 3.
That Sundays afternoon Sermon is well exchanged for catechizing children,
instructing them in their principles of Religion and acquainting them with the
doctrine and discipline of the Church, to which they ought to adh^re when they
come to their choice at years of discretion which is the custom of some
Presbyterian Churches abroad and either has or should have been tongue since of
the Scots. 1. Book: Disc: Before (...) must the word be preached and Sacraments
ministered, and afternoon must the young children be publikelie examined in their
Catechism in the audience of the people. 4. That on the Sunday before noon
sermon is very convenient (abuses being redressed) and must be while and where
enjoined. Yet in Nations converted to Christianity by the preaching of the
Apostles or Apostolical men* and so fully confirmed as no reasonable fear may
be of their apostacy, since the infallible spirit is not cooperative with all,
if with any, and where, as among the Presbyterians, the noxious spirit of
delusion in the mouths of very many preachers, it is far from being
necessaire to salvation, that care must be had left it bring damnation to the
hearers. 5. That where some learned Scholars, or honest industrious Ministers,
not at pleasure, but public appointment, on festivals days make a sermon, or
have an (...) (for little difference need be about the name, and ^t may be it
were beter to have less in the thing) it would b^ (...), not exceeding an
hour, according to the C^rt pattern, which is likely to be the best in the
Kingdom, and for the most part has come nearest the most approved example of
the primitive Fathers, as may be seen by their sermons and homilies that are
ex^tant. And it should seem Presbytery, as well as Episcopacie, has found some
inconvenience in Sermons that were longer which produced the 34. Canon in the
(...) Synod at (...) 1574. (...) ^, ^.
since extraordinary superinfusions were rare, have been (...) attributed to
such discourses principally wherein the Canon of Scripture has been
interpreted by no private enthusiasme, ^o partial addiction to one man's opinion
how eminent soever for his gifts or good life, but by the Catholic tradition
of the Church, that it the consent of most holy men in it throughout all ages
and places as much danger having been from the Jews (and may be now from
Iudaizing Scots) by bad glosses, as from haeretical Christians by Rhetorical
discourses on Scripture... * H^ide ^ (...) graph^on* ^apei (...).... (...) de
p^ides di^ tes (...) cai (...).,.. But what spirit o^ life has been found in
^at lectures consisting of noncohaerencies, haesitancie^, ^autologies etc
(notwithstanding all the gapings and groans or other ar^tifices used to put
them off for divine (...) and raptures) let them speak that were aedified,
which I was not, I assure you, by What I heard from you and the brethren (...)
of bidding prayer be^ (...) ^ap. (...).
that brought the Scottish Euangel to us in this Country. 7. Though the Canon
be^trict, the practice was not, so much as at Court, for bidding prayer before
(for after Sermon that for Christ's holy Catholic Church and the Collects
appointed, are not such, if you remember) some it may be knowing his Majesty's
mind, which now is published, That he (...) (...) against a (...), ^odest,
(...) and (...) use of Ministers gifts even in public.... the bet^r to fit and
(...) their (...) and the (...) (...) the pr^sent (...). Those (...) t^ke
themselves obliged to keep to the leter of the rule were satisfied as well in
the reason as law fulness of the command. Being therefore well assured that
the Lords prayer i^, as the Fathers call it, (...) (...), a complete prayer
comprehending the sum of what petitions soever were (...) to be praesented to
the Father, (which none knew beter then the Son) That the people might be
informed what at such a time they are to a^ke, and what, asking in faith, they
might hope to receive, the Minister commands them in the name of that
particular Church ^o which they are to submit in all public duties or so
renounce her (...), to pray for her after (...) Catholic Church, for the King
and his Royal families His Council, all inferior Magistrates etc. And because
after the Litanie and so many several prayers relating differentlie to those
particulars he mentions, it is neither necessary, nor convenient at all, to
doubt the time in repeting or (...) the ^ormes ^ he calls upon them to join
with him in that (...) prayer which very (...) (...) all can be asked, saying
(...) Father etc. But as touching the Church; limitation of us to the Pater Vt
non inveniamur discordes in ingressu ad preces ante ^oncionem faciendas, visum
suit utileuniformibus verbis uti... Concio etiam fin^etur uniformiter verbis
Marc. c. 6. No prayer for the dead in our Canon.
noster before, and her approving the Gloria patri etc after the sermon, I see
no more in it, then in the 33. Canon of that Council of Dort which I even now
mentioned Praying for the welfare of soule^ departed (a controversy yet
depending between Protestants and Papists) has ever impudentlie and falselie
been attributed to that Canon on purpose to delude poor people so rashly
opinionated of their Presbyters that told them so, as they thought it
derogatorie to their credit to search the truth: Or so grossly ignorant as
unable to distinguish between praying God for the welfare of, and pra^sing him
for the exemplarie lives of and the heavenly reward conferred on the souls of
the Saints departed. Wherein nothing need be argued when those of a seeptical
conscience will not be convinced, and those that are praejudic'd will not be
reformed, and to such no more is to be said, but si decipi volunt decipiantur.
For private prayer, if personal, the Praelates never hitherto praescribed any
form, leaving people to themselves who are private to their own wants, and to
the direction, not injunction, of their Priest. But if congregational, though
but in Parlour or Closet, no color can be brought why an house should confute
a Cathedral, or extemporarie non sense take place of the ancient and well
advised prayers of Holy Church. The Church of Scotland has had a liturgy not
only for help but practice.


You can not be more loath to confess then I am hard to believe that you ever
were guilty of more conformity to ancient Christians in your public worship
then opinions; Yet when I consider what establishment our Religion received in
Queen Elizabeth's reign, and what advancement your schism unhapilie had by her
miss placed assistance, I can not satisfy my self how in policy or
conscience a Princess so famed for devotion and wisdom could profess and
prosecute such seeming contradictions, and without some humane assurance of
your conjunction with her so liberally contribute toward your praetended
reformation to the utter demolition of her own. Therefore upon good inquiry,
I am feign to lay my diffidence aside, and have where withal to confirm the
Warner in his belief, discovering first your negative Remonstrances and
ren^nciations Knox Hist. 1. B.
of Rome coincident with (though more violent and particular then) ours; Your
superintendents aequivalent to our Bishops; And which as all in all, upon
Buchanans record, your subscription to a community with us as well in
Ecclesiastike as Civil affairs. This your Maintainer of the Sanctuary tells
us was done in the year 1560. in the infancy, or before it rather, in the
first conception of your Discipline. Yea, two years before that, not long
after your Lords and Barons professing Christ Jesus had subscribed your first
Covenant in Scotland, they convene in Counsel, conclude on several heads
whereof this is the first. It is thought expedient, advised and ordained, That
in all parishes of this Realm the Common prayer be read wecklie on Ib. B. 2.
Sunday, and other Festival days publikelie in the parish Churches etc. In the
first oration and petition of the Protestants of Scotland to their Queen Regent
this was the first demand.... That they might meet publikelie or privatelie to
their Common prayers in their vulgar tongue. And that this may not be set to
the account of your Temporal Lords, or some imperfect Members of your Clergy,
because I. Knox your Holy head was 1. B. 9. head.
at this time disjointed from that sanctified body, the same care is afterward
taken for Kirkes in your book of Discipline it self without any intimation of
your purpose to tolerate it only for help and direction, being a form
praescribed, as liable to the peoples superstition as ours, otherwise then as
you approved the omission of it Decl. Chapter Sc: Praes. The hypocritical use, of
the Common prayer book in Scotland.
on public sermon days. And your Maintainer says, without doubt it was the
very book of England. Your Church having none of her own a long time. I would
not have you mistaken, no more then you would have the Bishop, whom you so
carefully inform (I fear against your conscience) as if I imputed this to
you for any more then a politic compliance, to effect your own ends by Q.
Elizabeth's arms, which being in a good part accomplished you altered your
Liturgy both in substance and use, changed our prayers for worse, and those
you neither injoined by law, nor supported by the generality of your practice.
Thus from petitioning for Common prayer to your Queen you came about at length
to condemning it among your selves. This for the History of your hypocritical
conformity with us to work your own design, and inexcusable defection from
us when that was done. Touching your feigned approbation of set forms for
rules, and for use in beginners, I am to ask you 1. What institutions their
can Set forms of no use to beginners that pray by the spirit.
be for improvement of supernatural gifts. What forms for progress in
extraordinary graces 2. If there be such why they serve not a^well for the
benefit of tongues as utterance, and whether the Apostles before the day of
pentecost had any praeparative to that descent of the spirit upon them, if they
had not (the difference of persons not diversifying the donation where or to
whomsoever God intends it) why we are to look about for helps unto this
purpose? 3. Whether this sword of the spirit can not as well cut the tongue as
pierce the heart? Whether God can not without helps as well indire words as
matter, and make the tongue become the pen of a ready writer. That The gift of
prayer in the Pater Noster.
your set forms were published only for Ministers that are beginners thereby
endeavoring to attain a readiness to pray in their family, not in the
Church. I take for an evasion scarce thought upon before now. The gift of
prayer which you take gratis without a proof, I can afford you to be
ordinarily no other then the form which Christ bestowed upon his disciples.
The use of that has ever hitherto been continued by their successors in the
frequent repetition of the words, and analogy of all their enlargements unto
the sense. The greatest comfort that can be had by this is in a cheerful
submission to the judgment of that Church in whose communion I adventure my
salvation, and the greatest liberty in the exercise of her words; which in
Christian humility and common reason I am to conceive more apposite then mine
own. Herein I rest the beter satisfied, when I see my common S. Iud. v. 13.
Presbyterians divided about prayer. Hist. 4. B.
adversaries in this duty so to fluctuate in their senses, and like raging
waves in a conspiracy to shipwrake others, breaking mutuallie themselves by
the uncertain violence of their motion, and so in the end forming out nothing
(...) their shame. Master Baylie renouncing as well forms composed by
themselves, as praescribed by others. Master Knox praescribing such a s^ prayer
unto himself, and so praemeditating the words he was to speak, that when
quaestioned he could repeat what er he said. Their brethren abroad sometime
Synod Holland. and Zeland 1574 Artic. 38. Herm. Synod. Belgic. cap. 11.
strictly enjoining a form compiled by others Omn^s Ministri (...) formam
publicam in Ecclesi^ precandi ^bunt.... ideoq^ alia forma brevi^r post
concionem recitanda composita est. At other times leaving their Ministers to a
liberty of a set prayer composed by themselves, or one depending on the
dictate of the spirit* Minister preces vel dictante spirit^, v^ certa sibi
proposita formul^ con^ipies The 4. wrong^ that are pr^tended from our Liturgy
to redound upon A Giver, A Receiver, A Gift, and A Church, being Relatives in
this business are inseparable by nature, and must fall to ground with the
falsitie of the supposition upon which they hang: But what injuries are
multiplied upon all by the extemporarie license of Presbyters in their prayers.
Our Blessed Sovereign. The injuries by extemporie prayer; (...) cap. 16.
K. Chapter 1. has enumerated, the affectation, emptiness, impertinence,
rudeness, confusions, ^latnesse, (...) and ridiculo^ repetitions, the
se^clesse and often times blasphe^us expressio^, all these (...) with a most
taedious and intolerable length.... Wherein men must be strangely impudent and
flaterers of themselves, not to have an infinite shame of what they so do and
say, in things of so sacred a nature before God and the Church, after so
ridiculous and ind^d p^fane a manner. Nec potest tibi ('it is Master Baylie I
mean, Sen. Ep. 40 l. 1.
who has been guilty of most in my hearing) ist^ res (...) (...) quam si te
p^dere desieri^: perfrices frontem oportet, and ipse (...) non audia^. But I
refer him to the rest of what K. Chapter 1. Briefly but solidelie has 5. B, of
Ec^l. Pol.
writ, and what more at large Master Hooker, to whom I may challenge all the
Scottish Presbytery for an answer.

So great a cloud of witnesses encompassing the Scottish Presbytery, and giving
in evidence against her as the mother of mischief too many Heb. 12. 1.
years in three Kingdoms, your arm is too weak to lay aside the ^eight of
those wicked actions that must be charged on her back, and the sin The
Parliament of Scotl. in no capacity to demand after the murder of K. Chapter ^.
of sacrilege Royal that so (...) besets her. The Parliament of Scotland, sure
aequivocates in denying that they have stripped the King of his just rights (I
speak to His Majesty now reigning His Father having unanswerablie argued for
himself) because they never hitherto acknowledged him invested with any but
the name, to which bare inheritance they knew him borne without the charity of
their breath, and which he must have had without their sounding trumpet,
proclaiming this for their alms as hypocrites in their markets. But to come
close to you. This Parliament of Scotland, had it been such, as it was not,
upon the murder of the Father ought to have been stripped of all it self, then
no just rights, (no more but such as a deadman has to his robes) and being a
breathless carcass could require nothing at the hands of the Son. The
courses to which he was stirred up and kept on, out of natural duty, by no
factious advice, were (howsoever they succeeded) praeservative of his Fathers
and himself, and destructive to no people but the workers of iniquity that
with their own Ps. 51.
hands plucked down misery upon their heads. The bloodshed brings blood
guiltiness upon them that first opened the vein, from which he had no need to
be purged with hysope that was clean, nor washed, Habak. 1. 13.
whose conscience, in that particular, was whiter then the snow. Yet being by
your scarl^t Parliament imputed to him, (whose impure eyes can behold nothing
but iniquity in others, and whose wicked mouths are wide open to devour the
man that is more righteous then themselves) the satisfaction they required
could be in order to no exercise of his Royal government, nor dare they take
any by the rules of your Discipline, which must have blood for blood, but a
slavish subjection of his li^e and crown to sentence without mercy, which had
been, though fewer in number, yet as full in your meaning, and as effectual
aequitable, demands. Allthough this be a reply unanswerable to your praetense.
Review changes the words of the Procl. The original of the oath for security
of disscipline.
Yet I must not leave you without discovering your dimin^tive forgerie in
Parliament Proclamations, putting parts of his Royal Government where they the
whole without exception. His (...) portract and seal being not his, when new
stamped, and set to public writings by your hands then in actual rebellion
against his person. The security to your Religion and Liberties required, were
first enacted for an aequitable demand only by a Convention of Rebels at
Edinburgh 1567. who had been partly solicited, partly scared into a dubious
consent with, and by a Traitorous Assembly, (who had in vain posted away
four Caitiffe-Cursitours, miscalled Commissioners, to the more loyal Lords
delared for the Hamiltons, as likewise to the Neuters, to depose Knox. Douglas
Row, Craig. Kn. Hist. B. 5.
their Queen, and clog their future Princes's succession with this impious
condition. That all Princes and Kings hereafter in this Realm, before their
Coronation shall take oath to maintain the true Religion now professed in the
Church of Scotland, and suppress all things (even their souls and
consciences) contrary to it, and that are not agreeing with it. This I take to
be the fundamental law your Proclamation reflects upon, foralas the other
foundation of your solemn league and covenant lies not fathom deep, a
stripling of twelves years old can reach to the botom; and evert, both, when
he calls for that invisible law of God, which approves much less enjoines this
praerequiring satisfaction from a King, For it Dial. De Iur: Regn* ap. Scot.
The choice of a King originallie not justifiable in any perpl.
is not Maitlands idle concession to Buchanan in his cursed dialogue upon
Homers authority, That there was a time when men lived lawless in Cottages
and caves, and at length by consent took a justifiable course of creating a
King unto themselves that will reduce Royalty to popular restrictions. Such
stuff as this may be put off among Pagans that will hearken to the fable of
Cadmus, and be won into a belief that the serpents teeth were sowed in so
good a soil as that they all sprung up proper men of whose race we might have
had some at this day, if they had betoke themselves to the election of a King,
when for want of one they fell to civil dissensions and destruction of
themselves. I demand as a Christian, and as much might a Jew* Who was the first
King! Whether he was not instituted by God? Whether not with a decree touching
primogeniture in the right of succession, by the first borne to propagate his
authority and office? Whether any people in the world, more or less in a
body lawfully assembled, have been at a loss for a King to command them? and
what law beside that of nature which if such as Saint Paul describes it, is
somewhat hard to distinguish from an original law of God, (and yet shall be
sequestered from our praesent dispute) constituted them in a full capacity to
choose one? Who? When? Where? Cum sit and ordini naturae consentaneum, and
omnibus prop^ omnium gentium Historijs testificatum. De Iur. Reg.
Open Buchanans pack, as big as it is, begirt with no less then the cingle of
the world, and with out Ambiguons peradventures, or affirmations involved in
quaestionable circumstances, lay me out one clear instance to this purpose and
when you have, purchase a parallel among your selves. Transmigration of
Nations, Navigations of discovery, designed or contingent, New plantations
upon necessity or pleasure, Spontaneous secessions, though by supreme
authority approved; Relegations and exiles, Extinctions of lines. Finally
whatsoever to be thought on that can separate a medley of men from a settled
societe, or make an Anarchie among People, will when all are combined, I
believe, little disorder me in my hold. So that to use the words of that valiant
General, or take the Kings from his mouth. You declared him to be your King,
but with such conditions and provisos's M. Montr. Decl. 1650
as robbed him of all right and power. For while you praetend to give him a
little, which he must ac^ept of as from you, you spoil him of all that power
and authority which the law of God, of Nature, and of the Land has invested
him with by so long continued descent from his famous praedecessours. For the
nature of your Abolition of Episcopacie will not give the Scots satisfaction.
demand, the abolition of Episcopacie, which you confess to be a great one (so
great indeed as not to be granted but with a devastation of his conscience) the
Praelates were very unworthie of their miters, if they pressed not his Majesty
(were it necessary where is so free an inclination) to deny you, though they
know well enough, were your great demand yielded, you have one no less behind,
security of liberties, and when both were had (which God forbid they ever
should be) your cruelty and guilt would admit of no less after-satisfaction
from him for England, then from his Father for Scotland, nor your raging Devil
be otherwise satiated then with his blood. Therefore the advantage you take of
his denial (though you confess upon other men's importunate instance) makes
your Praedestinarian Godships no less peremptory in the immutabilitie of your
decree, to form Commonwealths of Kingdoms, and according to you Divinity the
means being as unalterablie destined as the end, you resolve what you can (and
do well to tell us so) that he and all his family shall perish.

-- Levia sed nimium queror Sen. H^ fur.

Coelo timendum est, regna ne summa occupet
Qui vicit ima......
For you that thus capitulate with Kings, have nothing next to do but to
article with God. Presbytery admitting no Rival Regent, much less any
superior, will make way to its solitary supremacy by ruin.

I ter ruina quaeret, and vacuo voles
Regnare mundo. --
Your patient surplicates were your Hage papers, which most inquisitive men
have heard or seen before this time. Wherein you tell His P. Iun. 1. ^ay 22
Majesty his denial will constrain your people... to do what is incumbent
unto them, we know what you mean, that fatal word being scarce to Henders. 1.
Pap. to* K. Chapter 1.
be met with but having Rebellion and Murder at its heels. Your Evangelist of
the Covenant did not cant it to his Father, but said plainly Reformation may
be (though he wished it not) left to the multitude whom God stirs up [to
kill and slay without quaestion] when Princis are negligent, as they are when
they yield not their aequitable demand^, grant their patient supplicates, lay
their heads on the block, and (not do but) suffer as they would have them.
L^sa patientia fit furor, Even in such meek men as you, patience upon denial
can become furre and supplicates after some continuances commands.. And then he
may have an offer of his or their Kingdom, as you think fiter to style it,
but it must be with a resignation of his crown, their Lives and estates shall
be Oretenus for his service, when aurium tenus they are up to the ears in a
good bargain, taking money with one hand, and delivering him up with the
other; which is the issue to be expected upon the grant, and nothing worse can
be feared (nor that if well thought on) from the denial of your demands.
Therefore, to conclude, no misery of King nor people should be so
impolitikelie declined as to be desperately embraced. And till the essentials
of Scottish Presbytery be changed, which are undisputablie destructive to all
Monarchs that come among them, true Praelatical hearts can not be truly
considerate or loyal, if they be not obstinate in this persuasion and belief.
^. R. Disc. 9. head. Nature robbed of her Praerogative by Presbytery


The place cited, to which you send us for a view of your tender care in
providing the parents consent to the marriage of their children, gives us a full
prospect of your tyranny over Nature, whose throne is usurped, whose
praerogative trampled down, and her Paternal Princes enthralled to the
dominion of your spirit. For your public inhibition of private marriages there
mentioned, is not so much to carry the stream of childrens obedience to their
Parents and Curatours, as to make sure that the water go not by your mill,
that due homage be paid to the consistorian powers that are above them.
Therefore in some cases (and we know no^ which you except) it is said. The
Minister or Magistrate to whom, (though not you, your Discipline gives the
pr^cedence and praedominance) may enter in the place of parents.... may admit
Inclina tions to marry not all ways devine motions.
them to marriage. For the work of God ought not to be hindered etc. This work
of God is there called the touch of the heart with desire of marriage, As if all
hearts so touched had Gods hand laid upon them, and the Scotsh climate were so
cold as all natural or carnal inclinations were frozen until fire came down
from heaven to dissolve them. As if then, good souls, they were melted in a
minute, and had outrun the bounds of all self moderation, all rational
persuasion, all love martyrdom in a passive submission to the just rigor or
unjust wilfulness of cruel parents contradicting their sudden affections and
amourous violence, For if these Flames warm by degrees at a distance Consent
of parents.
(and some danger draws on of being scorched without screening) their du^ie
should prompt them to withdraw in due season, and repraesent to their parents
the first sense they find of that heat, the increase of content or comfort
they take in it, and with* their approbation farther cherish these desires, or
upon their dislike in gratitude and justice to their sufferance of many infant
troubles, and elder petulancies, endure a little hardship for their pleasures.
For to change the allegory, if children first set sail of themselves, and
then call to their parents at shore for leave to take shiping, this mock
respect would relish more of scorn then good nature or duty. And as well may
they bid adieu to relations, as when before a strong* gale of wind look for a
nod or waving hand to encourage that course wherein they themselves are
steering, and necessity carrying then not to be resisted. Yet no other is that
honor which your Discipline says they are bound to give to their parents, the
parts whereof you make these. To open their affection. To ask their counsel
and assistance how that motion.... may be performed, it speaks not of asking
pardon for entertaning it before approved. Vt cun que in Scripturis
determinatum sit and jure Civili de consensu parentum; In Ecclesiasticu tamen
curijs obtinet jus P^pale Canonicum qu^ definitur consensu^ parentum de houe
^ate non de necesitat^ Et quod Matrimonia deben^ esse libera, and non pendere
exali^ no arbitrio Assert: Pol. Christ.
You know the Civil and Canon law are divided, that standing much upon the
necessity, this only on the decency or honesty of having the parents
consent. A friend of yours, that is hugged for his pains in opposing our
Church, presses hard the coincidence of the former with the determination in
Scripture, and objects her concurrent practice with the later To tell you how
Lib. 2. De Regn. Christ.
Bucer plays the strict Civilian in this business, whose authority is very
oracular when for you, would it may be render him but a private opiniatour now
against you. And as little might it avail to produce the Acts of your Brethren
in Holland, who seem to declare for a necessity in their provincial Synod.
Nemo proclamabitur de contrahendo nisi prius attulerit testimonium de consensu
parentum, No more then a convenience in their National, and that determinable
by their Presbytery when controverted.... Siquis autem irrationabiliter in his
c^s and refractarie se gesscrit, sic quod nullo modo velle^ consentire....
presbyterium constituit quid in talibus casibus sit faciendum. In this division
you do well to quit your selve of all wonted interest, and appeal even from
Scripture it self to the Tribunal of reason and aequitie. Where yet you will
scarce get your hearing before you prove that the authority of Parents is to
be restrained by the many times unreasonable (though lawful and honest*)
desires or motions in their children. As if a Kings daughter should be taken
with a beggar borne under an hedge* With which instance your Presbytrie is
scarce to be trusted, who it may be, are ready enough to justify the match by
the eminency of his virtues, to which they may beter dispose daughters then
distribute crowns, saying Regna virtuti, non generi deberi. Epictetus that was
a very good Master of his reason, gave this general rule unto his disciples*
That all obligatorie offices are measured by the relative habits Dordorac.
1574. artic. 81. 1578.

The injury done to Parent ^ by Presbytery not justifiable in reason. Buchan.

Ta cathec^nta hoo^ epipantais schesesi parametreitui.

Enchir. c. ^7 Terent Andr. act. 1. Sc. 5. Act. 5. Sc. 3.


of the persons. He begins with the Father as most absolute in his power, all
whose injunctions and actions are to have an active or passive obedience from
his children. Pater estin; hypagorenetai epim^leisthai, para^horein hapantoon,
anechesthai laidorountos, paientos If you talk to him, as Bishop, to the of a
cruel parent, a^using his antgoritie etc. He will tell you Nature has not tied
you to a good father, but a father, and your duty must bepayd him in his
natural capacity, not moral ^ete ^un pros agathon patera phys^i ok^iothes,
alia pros patera. There is indeed somewhat in humanity it self, which may be
called the office of a father to his son. To moderate sometimes his
autocratical power by affection, and run his iron heart into the same molds
with the softer metal of his childrens at least not t^ make it the hammer and
anvil whereby to fashion youth to the humourous morose severitie of age. It was
upon some such advantage that Pamphilus argued in the Comoedie. Hoccine est
huma^m factum aut incoeptum? Hoccine officium Patris?.... Pro Deum atquchomi^m,
quid est, si non haec contumelia est? Vxorem decreverat dare sese mihi ho^ie,
nonne oportuit praescisse me ante? nonne prius communicatum oportuit. Yet
afterward Simo contrapones his improper choice of a match misbeseeming him,
against custom, law, and his duty as a son. Adeon impotenti esse anime ut
praeter civium Morem atque legem, and sui voluntatem patris. Tamen hanc habere
cupiat cum summo probro? In fine Pamphilus convinced in likelihood by his
reason, made a filial exemplarie submission in our Case. Ego me amare hanc
fateor, si id peccare est, fateor id quoque. Tibi Pater me dedo, quidvis oneris
impone, impera. Vis me uxorem ducere? hanc amittere? ut potero seram. Yet among
Christians, when such submission's not found from a frenzy of love which will
take no advice from Nature or Reason, I confess the Magistrates and Ministers
shall do an act of charity in their mediation with his father by complying
with to cure him of his madness, and restore him to his senses. But when their
Discipline makes it an act of power and jurisdiction, 1. B. 9. head,
and that as much, if not more, concerning the Minister as Magistrate, I take
it to be very empty of oequitie, as full as the Reviewer thinks it, and see
not where, after the Scottish mode, any Church or State does practice or approve
it. In the behalf of them that do, he is to repair the breach of the 5.
Commandment by the disobedient child, or show us where in this particular it
was dispensed with. No obedience due to parents requiring a injust marriage,
In case of sin I confess a just apology may be made. As if the Father
would admit of none but an incestuous marriage, or, to save his estate, with
one in open rebellion against the King; The child must not obey, nor yet is
bound where is fear of incontinencie, to live single. The supreme Magistrate
ought here to take the place, and do the office of the parent. And the
Minister must execute all lawful commands of this Kind in his function. But if
the case be so rare of the child's complaint, and not heard of in an age, the
Dawbers of the Discipline might have saved this patch; and need not have found
their fingars with such untemper'd stuff, as ha^ng neither Scripture nor
reason in its mixture, was never intended to cement any building of Gods, not
the corrupt affections of wilful children to be called his work. Yet that
the Reader may neither be unsatisfied nor del^ded (as he will be very often if
he observes not your fraud in mistating the case) I must admonish him that the
Bishop's may be frequent though yours be (...). His Lordship objecting your
admission to marriage the parent gai^standing. And you reponing an authoritative
Sentence so enforce consent. His additions about compelling the parents to Ep.
S. I^a. v. 9.
give portions was fastened upon your practice not your canon. Your railing
accusation, an impudentlie which Michael would not being when disputing with
the Devil, will ^ little grace, as strengthen, your controversy with a better
Angel of the Church In such matters of fact truth can be justified no otherwise
then upon inquiry, whereby will best be discovered her faithful witness; and
the false one too that will utter Prove. 14. 5. 2. Cor. 12. 14. ^. Tim. 4. ^.

Po^itent A dulterere not to be put to death. ^. John, ^. 2. Cor. 12, 7.


lies. Yet in the place alleged your cano^ ordering out of the text, without
quaestion a dowry to a daughter that is destoured, he that at a distance has
any good opinion of your conscience will praesume your care can be in justice
no less of her who you say, has committed no such ^shinesse before, but kept
the Virgin*(...) at that commends her to your super*paternal powers to be made
a bride. The passage against sparing of the life of (...) (which you here
substitute in the room of a beter answer to the other) is not so consonant to
the law of God, a^ dissonant from the milder Gospel of Christ, who neither as
King commanded stones to be c^st at the poenitent brought before him not as
Priest retracted by exco^unication his signal mercy showed in her dismission.
A Presbyter may have a thorn in the flesh as well as a Praelate, allthough for
want of Saint Paul spirit he will abate no measure of his pride in ^oclations*
And if he take it out to no-better purpose then to thrust it in other men's
sides* (if he look not to it) will pric^e his own fingar, in his have. The
falselie praetentled (...) (...) and lovers of so severe discipline make it as
little consistent with Christian liberty (...) and (...) (...), to discipline
their bodies and subdue them by Apostolical correction* as to subject their
spirits, according to Apostolical doctrine, to just powers ordained by God, And
a piece of tyranny they count it to chasten and mortify (which by p^aecedent
they (...) into reproof) ever since David did it that was a King. For want of
which (whatsoever they fancy of I know not whose biting and spurning) the
Presbyterian Iesuruns have kicked as much as before, nor since this great
severitie was threatened, could they have the face to expunge the clause that by
their own confession occasioned it, and still stands thus in their book..
Whoredom, 1. Book. Discpl. 9. Head.

The Bishops cautelous in their warrants for claudestine marriages.

In nuperis constitndinibus anni 1603. videntur praesules Anglicane abunde
cavise Alter. Dam. c. 70 Ao. 1588 S^hulting Reprehens. Synod.

Middelb. The Reviewers shameless denial of a known truth about impeding
civil proceedings.

Contr. E. pilam Phi^adolph.


fornication, adultery are sinnet most common in this realm.

The Bishops warrants for elandestine marriages were not without this
particular caution against spoiling parents of their dear children. Quod
parentum, modo sint in vivis, vel alias Tutorum sive gubernatorum suorum
expressum consensum in hac part obtinuerint. And how abundantly otherwise was
provided let your brother Didoclave bear witness. If their mercinarie
officers prostituted to their profit this indulgence granted upon very good
reasons to noble personages, whose praecontracts, or impediments if any, were
not very likely, and it may be not so fiting to be discovered, upon publishing
their bannes) this can fairlie be charged neither upon the Bishops order, nor
their persons, unless you would have them ubiquitarie in their Courts, and
omni-praescient in the actions of their instruments. Their after-dispensations
with marriages without warrant I hope are not culpable, except you would drive
them to a necessity of divorce. Among them whom you call brethren heretofore
those of Middleburgh did invalidate all private marriage. About which their
adversaries, though consenting in the substance, call upon them for a text of
Scripture, which I never heard was hitherto produced.

If he that fixes his eyes upon the sun, till the strength of the beams and
luster put them out, should declare before the witnesses of his misfortune that
he never saw the least glimpse or brightness of that luminarie, he were more
to be credited then Master Baylie in his gross selfe-confounding denial, that
ever any such matter was attempted in Scotland as drawing civil causes upon
praetense of Scandal unto a Synod of Presbyters, or that he ever heard alleged
by their adversaries their impeding or repealing any civil proceedings.
Whereas the first has been proved allreadie by the Bishop out of the very
words in their discipline; And the two other objected in numerous instances by
most, if not all the adversaries that have published any thing against them. By
Archbishop Spotswood in the different cases of the Bishops Montgomerie and
Adamson, A Melvin, Black, the spanish Merchants etc. So that in general he is
feign, to allege against them in this language.... Ministrorum eo crevit
insolentia, ut non contenti sua functione, lites and reos omnes (what and who
is here excepted?) ad suum tribunal revocare niterentur, concilii publici
(which is more then the meanest civil Court) placita rescindere, Ordinum
decretis (which rises high (...) aed sioma^um non facerent intercedere, etc.
Which is worse then Synodical impeding or repeating, populum ^nem contra hostem
in armis parat^ esse jubere. And which includes all in all. Nihil denique erat
quod istos fam severos censores effugeret. The Answerer by leter... How
inconsistent Presb. Government is with Monarchy objectts their interposing in
a case of debt between J. T. and P. T, determined by the Lords of Session*
Their discharging Monday mercates against leters Patents under the Great Seal,
professes that like infinite instances might be produced, and one more of them
he brings with the several circumstances about a decree and judgment obtined
by Master John Grahum. In general your judicial Usurpations are censured by the
Author of Episcopacie and Presbytery considered. Whereof he brings no
particulars because he says nobodie can be ignorant that has looked into the
known stories of this last age. Somewhat to this purpose is in him that writ
the Trojan Horse... unbowelled. K. James's Declaration against you in the case
of the Aberdene Ministers is in print. Beside many other of this nature that I
have not seen, or do not think on. Where Master Baylie has slept out all
this noise, J can not guess, if above ground. So that a less the Curtisan
Bishops may pass away unquaestion'd with a few innocent prohibitions in their
pockets, when the Traverse is draw'n and the Palliard Presbyters discovered in
multitudes at the business, heaping up such loades of repeales and
protestations, as crush all iniquity into scandal, and make Civil Courts,
Parliaments Council and King responsable for their sentences to the Synods.

The next injury against Masters and Mistresses of families as it stands in
Public catechizing of Masters and Mistresses indecent.
your discipline (not as you subtilie, yet vainlie, advantage it) is criminal,
at least so far as it is a transgression of Saint Paul's rule, which requires
all things to be done euschemonoos and cata taxin, decently and in order, 1.
Cor. 14. 50. Whereas for them to be brought to such a public account, who at
all other times, without personal exception, are constituted instructours of
their children and servants, is not eushemonoot; it caries little decency with
it, it too much discountenanceth their authority, it levels their natural and
politic Dominion for the time, nor have those different lines as they are
draw'n in your Discipline, such a just symmetrie, as to produce an handsome
feature of one person. It is not cata taxin, take it in what sense you will, no
man will say there is a due order observed, nor any such praescription in
Christ's Holy Catholic Church. The same Apostle that gave particular directions
in the case made no canon for this. An antecedent examination he appointed, but
the Ancients 1. Cor 11. 28. Lit. Chapter c. p. 215.
interpret it more of the will and affection then the understanding and mind.
Or if he meant it of both, he made every man judge of himself (as you do when
he is praesent at the ministration of baptism) that had before renderd a
reason of his faith to the Church, neither Presbyter and inquisitour of course
nor parishoner a witness of his unworthiness and ignorance Ourh heteros ton
hetecon... all autos heauton says Oecumenius which put Cajetan upon the
thought that confession was not at this time required, for which he is taken up
by Catharinus. And Chrysostom referres us to a text in St. Paul's 13. 5.
second epistle which tells us what discovery may put the examination to an
end. Examine your selves whether ye be in the faith. Omnem prolationem
quaerendi and inveniendi credendo fi^isti hunc tibi modum statuit fructus ipse
quaerendi, is intended, I believe, as a gloss upon it by Tertullian. So that
the knowledge how to pray was no praerequisite of St. Paul's. Nor De Praeser. c.
10.

If they know not how to pray neither wherein their righteousness sands or
consist^, they oughs not to be admitted to the Lords table.

1. Book. Disc. 9 head. Ibid. Excommunication of the ignorant without war^*
(...).


can we hear from him that the ignorance of other your disciplinarian articles
exclude a man more from the Sacrament of the Lords supper then from the
communion of Saints and Christianity he professes in his Creed. Beside it is
easy to conceive what discouragement it brings upon such good Christians as
hunger and thirst after this spiritual nourishment of their souls, and how
much it derogates from that reverence Antiquity rendered to this Sacrament and
the high degree of necessity they held often to participate hereof by such
clauses as this. All Ministers must be admonished to be more careful to
instruct the ignorant then ready to serve their appetite, and to use more
sharp examination then indulgence in admitting etc. Which has a different
sound from the earnest cry of the Euangelical Prophet Isai 55. 1. and the free
invitation made by the High Priest of our profession in the Gospel S. Luke ^4
you accounting profanelie the loss hereof no more then the miss of a meal,
and the disappointment no other then depriving an hungry appetite of a diner.
Our Fathers of old were otherwise minded, and excommunicated those that were
peevishlie averse, not those that (being engaged in no penance) humbly desired
the benefit hereof. Apostrephomenous tea metalephin tes cucharistias cata fina
ataxian toutous apobletons ginesthaites ecclesias. was part of a canon at the
Council of Antioch A. 341. I could add, That you declare not what may pass
among you in the Master and Mistresses answers for the sum of the law, what
for the knowledge wherein their righteousness stands. without which you say
they ought not to be admitted. So that the sharpness of your examen and
acceptance of their answer being arbitrarie, much room is left for private
spleen, antipathie and passion no justifiable causes of separation from this
community of Christians, and therefore made the ground of inquiry and
cognizance Ex^taxestho de me (...) ephiloneikia e tini toiaute aedia tou
episcopou aposynagogo egegenentat.

Can. 5. Chr. Iustel. Family visitations commendable as well in orthodoxe
Priests as Presbyters.


in every half years Synod by the Nicene Father, that such partiality might
not be tolerated in the Bishops, But whereas you excommunicate the parent and
Masters for negligence when their children and servants are suffered to
continue in wilful ignorance. Why not as well the God Fathers and Pastors
whose subsidiarie care should not only* be restaurative but praeventive? Why
not such aged women as are not teachers of good things, That the young women be
sober, love their husbands and children etc. Tit. 2, 3? Why not all those in
whom the word of Christ should dwell richly in all wisdom, and they teach and
admonish one another Col. 3. 16. Which being a like duties of the Text alike
require your inspection, nor does i^ appear any more that you are left to a
liberty of discrimination in your censure, then that for any of these defaults
you may exercise it at all. Your family visitations, if sincerely intended
for the inspection of manners and conversations is commendable, if done with the
spirit of discretion, moderation and meekness. When this was practiced by the
most conscientious Priests of the Episcopal party (your knowledge whereof to
deny by oath would look little beter then perjurie) it was calumniated by many
of your brood for gadding and gossiping, defamed by some for more sinful
conversing. And when the generality of them (the Episcopal Clergy) remitted
the frequencie of preaching, the study for which they found inconsistent with
this more necessary more beneficial catechizing the people, it was nicknam'd
suppressing the word. And when at such times as the sacramental solemnities
they entered into any private spiritual communication (though advised by the
Church) they were put to purge themselves from the imputation of Popery in
practizing auricular confession and injunction of penance. Your order and
practice is to keep off from the holy Table not such only as conjunctive are
grossly and willfullie, but divisive (intoo strict a^ sense) grossly or
willfullie ignorant. Touching which allthough their negligence is inexcusable,
and their dullness pitiable, yet that your act of cruel jurisdiction is
justified by no divine command nor Catholic example. If never any for simple
ignorance were excommunicated in Scotland. You must be rebuked for
transgressing your rule and failing in your Ib. Disc. 9. Head.
duty as your Kirk pleases thus to declare it. In sufferable we judge it
that men be permitted to live and continue in ignorance as Members of the Kirk.

Whether greater tyranny were exerciz'd in the High Commission Courts Riot in
Scotland to get down the High Commission.
or your Consistories, your aequitable comparers by this time, are not to
seek. What excess on your side has been evidenced is here resumed only to
aggravate your flood of boundless cruelty by the many heads from which it
issues, and the cataracts it powers upon the poor people in every parish. The
Bishops played indeed the R^x in that their Court, because they acted in it by
authority and deputation from the King. But you and your Brethren played the
Rebels to the purpose, when you first rioted, then rebelled and covenanted
before, er you supplicated to suppress it. K. Chapter 1. by his grace and too
fluent charity praevented the violence intended by your Parliament, though he
found no thanks nor yet acceptance at your hands His proclamation Larg. Decl.
The Kings palace and Parliament fallen with that in England.
being rudely encountered with a rebellious protestation read by Iohnston. The
King and Anticlerical Parliament in England that alas joind hands in a manner,
yet scarce agreed, to throw down the other about their ears (without which
the Praelates had no power, less then no reason (if it might be) to let it
fall) have not only covered the poor Bishops with the ruin of that Court,
but since hands and hearts were divided, the laborious Lords and Commons,
without him, have pulled the Fabrike of both Houses, and of Monarchy More
comfort because less rigiour in the reformed Elderships abroad.
upon themselves. The Congregational Eldership, a thing wheresoever more to be
jeerd at and less endured then a Commission, is enjoyed with so much more
comfort among other of the Reformed then in Scotland, as we are eye witnesses
of less authority and rigor in it. And while I am writing this Reply one of
the Reformed Presbyters, your Countreyman ingenuouslie confesses to me that he
thinks in his conscience the praesent Kirk tyranny in Scotland (he speaks
it indeed rather of the practice then rule) is far beyond what ever could be
alleged against our Bishops, or the Pope. And that if he and others of his
mind took the constitution of that government every where to be the same as
it is executed in Scotland they would not continue a day longer in that
communion. The laws of these Scottish Elderships taken out of Holy scripture
can not be very particular in many cases. Their Acts of superior judicatories
do not, can not, so specify interpretative Scandals, nor in all occurring
possibilities proportion corporal punishments, or pecuniarie mulcts, in the
arbitrament of which lies the tyranny of this petie Aristocratie, and most
ridiculouslie many times used in cutting half the hair, shaving beards etc.
as before now has been objected by others that having I believe Answer by
Letter.
seen it, better know it. In the abuses by such censures, and difficulty of
some cases, when appeal is made to a Synod, the Bishop tells you (which you
observe not) that the shortness of its continuance can afford, the condition
of the persons will afford little relief. Your dozen of the most able pious
plowmen in many parishes, with an unexperienced illiterate Pastor praesiding
in their Council are no very reverend Judges Many of those in Scotland have
very unfit, unable Judges.
in many cases. And what pitiful creatures they must be of necessity in some
places may be guessed until this quaestion be answered which is sent you from
another Countreyman of yours an honest able Divine. Whether you have not heard
of Country Churches in Scotland, especially amongst the Saints of Argile,
where not three, hapilie not one in the whole parish could read. Amphictyonum
consessus. A very honorable bench. A Senate that no doubt would strike greater
amazement (but upon other reasons) then the Roman if any foraigner should
Episcopacie want no aequivalent in Discipline.

Oeconomis testibus Synodalibus and Collectoribus in Ecclesiastcke paroeciana
rudera quaedam functionuu^ diaconorum and seniorum relicta vel potius imposita
sunt. Alter. Dam c. 12.

Synodales aestes, quos sidem eavocant, qui in inquestionibus morum and
visitationibus adjunguntur Oeconomis Oeconomi sive Gardiani Ecclesiastikae
quorum minus est pro eo anno.... inordinateviventesinquirere, monere
scandalos^s, ordinario praesentare etc. Ibid. E^. Angl. Pol. Isai 53. 7.


behold them. In that you say the Episcopal way is to have no discipline at all
in any congregation, you are somewhat more hard hearted then your brethren, Who
acknowledge some of the functional rubbish of your Temple building, Elders and
Deacons, upon the shoulders of our Church wardens, Sidemen and Collectours,
part of whose charge is to observe manners, inquire out il^ livers, admonish the
scandalous, and praesent them to the ordinary. To direct them in this duty
the Bishops articles are disspersed, and an Audit held of their account at
every visitation. The officials pleasure regulates not their information, which
is to be as impartial as an oath can make it. His conscience commonly is not
to large, though his learning and wisdom be of greater extension then the
Elders. What power he exercises is by law and custom. In correctionis
negotijs alia quidem facient omnia (excommunication is more ^iselie and
conscientiouslie excepted) quae de jure possunt and solent fieri. Constit.
1571* To the Presbyterian tenderness of meddling with domestike infirmities
somewhat is said allreadie which the Answerer by leter thus avoucheth. It is
certain that a foolish man revealing foolishlie his faults to his wife, the
zealous wife upon some quarelling betwixt her and her husband, has gone to a
good Minister, revealed what was told her, and the honest impertial Minister
has convented the man, charged him with his sin, and made him confess
satisfy, and do penance publikelie. Here the flagrant scandal was only the
fire or fury that broke out of a weak woman's breast into a pragmatical
Presbyters ears, whose head is no sanctuary for spiritual secrecies, but his
curiosity the mine that under works the foundation of private families, and
palaces too (whereof that of Mary Queen of Scots may be a formidable, and
lamentable example) and when jealousies fail of material truth in the
discovery, to blow them up with malicious calumnies what they can. For suits
and differences incident between Pastor and flock, Lay Elder and his
neighbor, the passion upon which perverts, and blindes the eyes of the wisest
men that are your Congregational or Classical Judges you pass quietly by it,
as having nothing to say for it.

These are the great injuries and hurts which make the Scottish Discipline,
Scandalous to all the Reformed world being proved destructive to the just
praerogative of Kings, the power of Parliaments, the liberty of subjects:
enslaving all orders of men, where it takes place, to the arbitrarie
jurisdiction of a corrupt Synod, and that commonly moderated by the usurped
Papacy of a Knox a Buchanan, a Melvin, an Henderson, such meek lambs as no
misbeleeving Jew can misdoubt, them to be fore runners of his Messiah who has
prae-inspired this good principle into their heads. To bring their Kings rather
then go themselves to the slaughter. And wheresoe'r they get power, to tear
out the throat of the ^hearers* and make them dumb^, never more able to open
their mouths against the known D^itie of their Presbytery.

CHAPTER XIII, The Bishops exceptions against the Covenant made good, and this
proved That no man is obliged to keep it who has taken it.
IF I had not found the Reviewer a pretty round and plumpe Gentleman Reasons
why the Reviewer is so much in^lined to the metaphor op a vomit Tous ischnous
kai evemeas ano pharmacevein... tous de dysemeas kai mesoos eusarcou^ cato. 4.
Aph. 6. and 7. G. moching Compend. Insti^. Med disc. 5.
in black, I might have misse-thought the habit of his body and conformation
of his parts, facilitating with some pleasure the operation of his physike, to
have enamourd him with the otherwise undecent, metaphore of a vomit; But
Hippocrates praescribing to his constitution (as J take it) the other method
for dejection of his humors, I recollect with my self a triple cause that
might at this time create his distemper, and in his penning force out this
flood of gall upon his paper 1. His late fruitless voyage by sea might still
stick in his stomach, having before been for many years accustomed to none
but land waves of his raising, the raging tumults and madness of the people.
2. A violent agitation of his body, the six Scoti^ Iehu's in zeal to the
cause coaching it much too furiously about the Country. 3. The abominable
sight of his Majesty's hand to diverse papers, denying the very subject of this
chapter, the taking, injoining, or tolerating of the Covenant. So a Doctor in
the faculty nearest hand instructs me.... vomitum vulgo concitare
traduntur.... violenta and vehemens corporis agitatio, insueta per mare
navigatio.... imaginatio and intuitus rerum abominabilium. Beside the pleasing
sent of an Irish design then in hand might offend him, which is a fourth cause
he adds and I end with, Odor rerum faetidarum etc.

As to the substance of the chapter, wherein his Lordship has taken the
Palladium of Presbytery, (without which the success of his other attempts had
been nothing) the Reviewers stratagems (for strength of reason he brings none)
are unlikelie to rescue it, The Bishop Un lawful Covenants not to be keept-Ou^
epiorkein phobe^ menous t^ute para to^n the^on timorian, kai ten para tois
anthrapois aischynta.
is very sensible how deep the conscience of an oath sticks in men whose
hearts are not hardened against religious impressions. And how perjurie is
abhorred among heathen, who have conscientious fear of punishment from their
God, and a politic one too of shame before men. To undeceive therefore such as
fondly fancy because their hands were lift up, that their covenant's with
heaven: And because their eyel^s are open, that they walk not in darkness
and the shadow of death, He brings them first the relief of several
propositions, which when draw'n out, will appear to be these. All oaths,
vows and covenants are not binding, it being customarie among men to make the
same bonds serve for iniquity as justice and tie up secret conspiracies with
the public liguments of community and peace. 2. Those that are not
obligatorie may be broken, viz where a greater judgment solveth the fallacy
of a less or a beter conscience seeks to Egar ou^ omeitai, e hotan omnysin
euorkesei.
reduce and rectify a worse. With what other false knots men are foolishlie
entangled he demonstrates by the slight wherein the Covenant has caught them.
Their deliverance is this, if they will accept it from the hands of
unquaestionable truth* That Covenant which is devised by strangers to the
dishonor of a Nation, imposed by subjects wanting requisite power, and that
as well upon their Sovereign at aequals extorted by just fear of unjust
sufferings, is not binding. But this is that Covenant. Ergo. The majour Per hoc
jurament^m spirationes and conjurationes and pleraque in iqua and aequa
confirmari solent Cardan. Terein au^ ten chreian on tois anagcalois ham^ kai
timiois. Hiorocl in Carm. Pythag. Prove. 30. 19. Covenants ordinarily minted in
Scotland not in England. Nor can such aftercontracts devised and imposed by a
few men in a declared party without my consent and without any like power or
praecedent from Gods or man's laws etc. E. x. Bac^. Chapter 14. proque bus arduis
and urgentibus neg^tijs s^atum and de^ensionem Regni nostri Angl. and Eccles.
Anglie concernentibus.... Cum Praelatis Magnatib. etc. colloquium habere and
tractatum. The extract of a letter-shewing by whom the Covenant was devised.
thus put in form the Reviewer will hardly grant, and yet dares not deny,
but sets his foot upon I know not what weakness and falsitie of the Minour,
the Commissioners of the Parliament of England, as he calls them) being among
the number of the first and only framers thereof. He must be wiser then
Solomon that can know the way of a Serpent upon a rock. Yet the Presbyterian
Scottish subtilitie is not such, but that we may see whence, if not by what
gyres and uncertain sinuations, it came about, and he that meets it at
Westa^inster may welcome it from Edinburgh, if he likes it. Leagues and
Covenants are no usual abasement of English allegiance, such copper coin has
been no where so current as since Knox was Mintmaster in Scotland, whose
original inscription With the image of his rebellion is propagated in this
counterfeit, as he that delights in such medalls may see if he compares them.
This for the thing. For the persons I deny them to be Commissioners on either
side, no King, nor Clergy legallie assembled deputing them to that purpose nor
indeed any of the Laity but Rebels. They that gave life to it, Lords,
Commons, or what you will, or wheresoe r assembled, were in the very act
Traitors against the King and so no part of a* Parliament in the Kingdom
Whither they are called by His Majesty's writ to consult about the defense not
to covenant the destruction of the Kingdom and Church. The lawfulness of
whose constitution and authority was no farther acknowledged then it was
lawfully used, and in that act absolutely disclaimed, the King sending for
them only to discourse and treat with himself, not to dispose and ordain,
or enact any thing without him. Therefore these men, thus acting upon the
praecedent advice and praescription of strangers, foysted a Covenant devised by
strangers, how soever factiouslie denison'd in that Court. But how strange the
advice was will appear beter by true story then probable divination, which
being sent me in a leter from one well acquainted with these affairs of his
own country. I will faythfullie communicate as it came unto my hands.

When the Commissioners came down from the Parliament with their letter
subscrived be some Ministers showing that their blood was shed like water upon
the ground for defense of the protestant relligione and the letter being red in
the Assembly had no uther answer bot this. Gentlemen we are sorry for your
case, bot there is one thing in your letter, Ye say ye fight for defense of
the reformed relligione, ye must not think us blind that we see not your
fighting to be for civil disputes of the law, wherewhith we are not acquante.
Go home and reconcile with the King, he is a gracious Prince, he will
receive you in his favor; You can not say it is for the reformed relligione,
since ye have not begun to reform your Church, ye had thryven better, if ye
had done as we did, begun at the Church, and thereafter striven to have gotten
the civil sanction to what ye had done in the Church, we can not meddle
betwixt his Majesty and you.] Few days after, Sir W. Ermin, Master Hamden
with the rest were invited by some of their friends to make a new address to
the Assembly, their friends in the Assembly (after a second desire of a more
gracious answer) propounded this. [ Will ye join in covenant with us to
reform doctrine and discipline conform to this of Scotland and ye shall have
a better answer,] Sir W. Ermin and the rest answered (that they had not that
in their instructions, bot thanked the Assembly and said they would represent
it to the Parliament of England) the friends in the Assembly told them [ there
would be much time loosed ere they could go to the Parliament for their
resolutione and thereafter to return to Scotland and draw up a solemn league
and covenant the danger was great and they were not able with all their forces
to stand two months before the Kings army bot we shall draw it up here and
send up with you some noblemen gentlemen and Ministers that shall see it
subscribed,] which was done.

To proceed your Rebel- Parliaments desires, beside what may be The Rebels
desires were impositions.
gatherd from your papers, were not, as I have heard, very humbly praesented
by the persons many times that brought them* And when your smoothest language
is glossed upon (as best it may be by your rude military Interpreters at more
distance your negative will not hinder them of being impositions rather then
supplications. Religion and liberties in all the three Kingdoms were very
sufficiently secured by the laws. Scottish Presbytery is no religion but
rebellion in the principles, and the liberty taken by it is license befitting
no subjects, and therefore not to be desired of a King. For which if such a
covenant or oath is but one maine piece of security (as you confess) I leave
to be judged if any judgment can comprehend the other maine p^ices of
vassalage, for your safety, you yet farther expected from the crown. An
Nullum privilegium Parlamenti concedi potest proproditione felonia aut ruptu^a
pacis. 17. Ed. 4. Rot. Pa^l. number. 39. The Covenant (...) urable to the English.
authority to crave many leaves a liberty to resuse, and be of no sufficience
to impose upon the subject so long as during the contenuance of the Parliament.
Nor can you show that uncontroverted law which gives validity to an ordinance
controverted by the King, who assumes no power of politic impossible
concessions, such as treason, felony and breach of peace are by name with us,
and covenanting is such when against the Kings consent.

The last part of the demonstration is too true, and so far dishonorable as
it blazons the cowardice of men well principled in their religion to God and
loyalty to their King, who for the benefit of a little fresh air out of
prison, and a titular interest in an estate, the revenues whereof must be
excis'd, contributed, fifth parted, twentieth parted and particulated into
nothing at the pleasure of the blew-apron'd men in the City, and Committee
plowmen in the Country, would desperately cast their souls into the guilt
and curse of a covenant which they utterlie detested, and their persons into
the slaverie of proud, sinful unreasonable men, whom before it may be they fed
with their charity and commanded. The nullitie of this oath upon The nullitie
of it.
the difference of heart and mouth, is demonstrable, The very taking it being
so far from obliging to be kept, as it subjects them to the judgment of God,
because not done in truth nor in righteousness. Isai 48. Nec vero ultr^ quam
consensum est juramentum operatur secundum ipsum, quae tunc actus deficit in
substantia, deficiente consensu, quem defectum juramentum minime supplet Say
the lawyers. And he that swears to commit sacrilege Joan. Gutierrez De Iuram:
confirm. part. 2. cap. 2. ex Al^iat* The Reviewers. Abominable falsehood.
and murder is as much bound by his oath, which I would feign hear Master
Baylie dictate from his chair against them when they tell him, Iuramentum non
est vinculum iniquitatis. The especial aggravation which he draws from the
Bishops ground is as especial a lie, and as evident a falsehood, as ever came
out of the mouth of man, and an irrecoverable shame to the whole Presbytery.
That a Minister, Professor, their great champion and commissioner should utter
it, when not only the penalty of two pence has been threatened, but of
sequestration and imprisonment has been executed upon thousands, and beside
these, (because some particular must be instanced) upon near 100. fellows of
Colleges in one week banishment out of the University of Cambridge, this I
can best justify being one of the number. Which was a leading case to Oxford,
when in their power, and the Iudic. Oxon De sol. lig. sect. 2.
fear of unjust suffering they threatened, her first argument against their
covenant. Therefore let us leave the dishonor we were speaking of where we
found it, upon the head of our Nation in part, who degenerated so far as to
take a covenant from the hand of strange rebels* no otherwise their brethren
then in the in quitie of maintaining hypocrisy and license, both which they
see with their selves now in thraldom to Atheism and a mercenarie, sword, And
bear about them the mark of Gods vengeance in the sight of us who survive to
Ps. 145. 1. 7. Covenanters take the Discipline for Christ's institution.
magnify him in his justice, saying, Iustus Dominus in omnibus vijs suis and
sanctus in omnibus operibus suis.

The Bishops second demonstration need be no beter then the first whereby you
are convicted, as bad as it is, you dare not venture upon half of it, but like
a cunning old rat that has before been caught by the tail in a trap* will be
nibling at the bait, but not enter too far with his teeth for fear his head
go for it next. This makes you so tender of dealing with the majour, which if
not well cautioned why do not you deny it or attacke it on that side which
you guess weaklie guarded? You pervert the minour, though little to your
advantage. The Bishop says not that in the Covenant you swear the lately
devised discipline to be Christ's institution, but that you gull men with ^it,
as if it were so imposing upon them the strictest oath to engage their estates
and lives in the praeseruation and propagation of it, which is as much as can
be required for Christ's institution or Euangel, a title as strange as you make
it, often given your Discipline which allreadie I have touchd at. Yet because
here you so confidentlie put us upon the words of the Covenant, somewhat not
much unlike what the Bishop imputes I find in the praeface... having before
our eyes the glory of God, and the advancement of the Kingdom of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ.... whereby I charge your meaning to be the Presbyteriall
Government of your Kirk, if not, I require you plainly to deny it, and to
send me this proposition subscribed by your hand. The plat form of Discipline
to which we swear in the Covenant, is not Christ's institution. Especially
since your General Assembly 1642. has said. That the Reformed Kirkes do^ hold
without doubting their Kirk officers and Kirk Government by Assembles Ans. to
the Declar. by the Parl. angl. Aug. 25. Let. to the Genesis Assemb. S. Iul. 22.
it. 42. Vindic. Ep. Philadelph. Protest of the Noblemen, Barons etc. 1638.
According to the word of God, a more dubious and frivolous limitationing the
Covenant then hereto fore in the oath for Episcopacie.
higher and lower etc to be jure divino and perpetual. Your brother-Presbyters
in England. That Presbyterian Government has just and evident foundation both
in the word of God and religious reason. And the praeface to the English
Directorie telling you, That their care has been to hold forth such things as
are of divine institution in every ordinance. Were it not to tire out my
Reader, I could show this to be your language ever since your Discipline was
framed, and thought so necessary a truth that your denial must make Christ not
so wise as Solon or Lycurgus; if he left it as a thing mutable by men, or now
after so many ages of his Church to be put to the vote in their Parliaments and
Synods. So says a friend of yours in these words. Equid^m non novi, neque
credam Christum, qui Dei sapientia fuit, remp. suam que omnium 'est
perfectissima, arbitrio stultorum hominum religuisse agitandam.... quod ne
Solon quidem aut Lycurgus aljusve quis pium Legislator pateretur. For that and
the rest of your religion your Confession of faith says. That you are
thoroughly resolved by the lord and spirit of God, that only is the true
Christian says and Religion pleasing God etc.... Gods aeternal truth and
ground of your salvation.... Gods undoubted truth and verity grounded only
upon his written word. Nay afterward you protest and promise with your hearts
under the same oath etc that you will defend the Kings person and authority in
the defense of Christ's Euangel and liberties of your Country, which is (or if
it be not speak) the same with Religion and liberties in your league. Besides
all which otherwhere you blasphemouslie compare both your confessions with the
old Testament and the New. That which follows wherein you moderate the first
article of your Covenant, imposing an endeavor to reform only according to
the word of God, with out introducing Scotes Presbytery or any other of the
best reformed, unless it be found according to that pattern, though it served
to palliate all blemishes and deformities that were in it; To invite possibly,
some well meaning people into your fraternity, who like harmless bees
relishing that sweetness, little thought what poison they left behind for
other venomous insectiles to suck out; To furnish others withan excuse (a
petiful one) for using so bad means to so good an end and when it undeniablie
proves the contrary (the same it may be they intended) cry they were mistaken
1548. Ministri Regia authoritate compulsi aut subscribere Epali tyrannidi, aut
in carceres aut exilia abir^* Multarum ministrorum tuncse prodidit imbecillitas
instauratae Ecclae ty^annidi homonymus subscribentiam adjec^a limita^ione
am^igua vel potius suti^ nempe secundum ^erbum Dei etc. Ep. Phil. and. ^
Gutier^ez De Iu^am. Con-^rmpar.* 1. ^ap. 71. ^ium. 5.
though now they can not help it; Yet it may be showed to be a dubious and
frivolous limitation, the same commendation your friends gave it when
translated into an oath tenderd in behalf of Episcopacie by the King, First
infirming that member, and so f^r disinabling it from bea^ing part in the matter
of an oath, as subjection is required unto the reforming power in a Church.
Secondly, Quitting all that swore it of their engagement every moment, if they
see clea^lie, or judge erroneouslie, your reforming Principals to digress from
that path. Thirdly, either supposing your reformed religion in Scotland to be
allreadie conformed to that pattern, or else enjoining to swear
contradictions. Lastly, If leaving every man to judge what is according to the
word, and to endeavor according to that judgment, imposing an oath productive
of confusion there being as many minds as men, scarce two united in one
touching Doctrine, Worship, Discipline and government. The first might be
illustrated and argued from the fallibilitie and uncertaintie in the Reforming
power, a maimed Parliament and an illegitimate Assembly then siting, whom I
could not be assured to have the spirit of God so illuminating their minds, as
whereby jointlie to judge the same reformation according to Gods word.
Secondly as uncertain should I be, set^ng aside all partiality and passion,
that they would* declare what they so judged, against many of whom, if not the
most having a well grounded praejudice, whether just or no matters not if not
known to me) I could not swear de futuro a conformity to their acts. In
which cases wisemen advise us to abstain.... Ten apochen tou omnynai
prostattei peri toon end^chomenoon, kai ^oriston tes ^baseoos ^chontoon to
peras. Hierocl. in Carm. Pythag. and ^urans praesumitur certioratus and
deliberatus accedere ad ^ctum super quo ^urat, says the Lawyer. The second is
strengthened s^fficientlie by your words which oblige the Covenanter no farther
then he finds your great work proceeding according to Gods word. The success
whereof if no beter then in your Discipline and the Directorie, will keep no
man in his Covenant, Gods word praescribing many parts of neither. The Third is
evident from the very clauses in the article, where first an oath must be taken
to praeserve the reformed religion in Scotland, which if not according to Gods
word, is contradicted in the next that enjoines reformation only according to
the word And if it be then that is ^t wherewith a uniformitie must be made, and
yet you tell us there is no such word, nor any such matter in the Covenant,
About the last let every man speak his mind as freely as I shall mine. That
I See Surv* of the praet* holy Disc.
hold no Presbyterian government, Scottish or other, according to Gods word That
I have read of much dissension among your selves in former times, and heard of
some in later. That all Papists; all orthodoxe persons in the Church of England
are jointlie for Episcopacie in the order, as according to Gods word and
separatelie for it in the jurisdiction and discipline, neither holding all
parts of it exemplified in the word, and so not applicable unto it, and both
not the same extensive particulars in the ordinance and exercise of the Church.
Vid. Discus. Eccles. Disc. R^pel* edit. 1584.
Besides such as you call Socinians, Sectaries, and separatists, whether
individual or congregational. All which having distinct opinions of Doctrine,
Worship, Discipline and Government according to the word, if not concentred in
the sense of the House or Assembly but left to their several endeavors, are
sworn among them to delineate a pretty implicated diagramme of a Church. But
for a farther answer to this article of your covenant. I remit you to the
solid judgment of the University of Oxford. As likewise to that of several
learned men in the University of Cambridge, who joined in one mind, and
published their refutation of the whole treacherous league A. 1644. Only I
must add what persons of knowledge and integrity say they will make good.
That your Covenant came into England with some such clause as this. We shall
reform our Church in doctrine and Discipline conform to the Church of
Scotland. Whereof Master Nigh and his Independent friends fairlie cheated you,
making that be rased out and this inserted which we treat of. By which trick
they have packed Presbytery away, and yet plead with you in public, That
they still keep the Covenant and go on to reform according to Gods word.

The second ground of the Bishops demonstration is no evident error, it being
The Covenant how the same with that of K. I. 1580.
an evident truth, That the principal Covenanters, Noblemen, Gentlemen and
Ministers in Scotland protested to Marq. Hamilton His Majesty's Commissioner
1638. when it was objected that their Covenant with their new explication was
different from the sense of that 1580. because it portended the abolition of
Episcopacie. That is was not their meaning quite to abolish it, but to limit
it, holding out in the most K. Ch: 1, Larg: decl^ 1639: page: 177:
material point an identitie between them. That they assured many who made the
scruple, and would not have come into their covenant, unless they had so
resolved them. That they might swear the same confessi^n, and* et not abjure
Episcopal government, which the three Ministers in their first answer to the
Divines of Aberdene positivelie affirmed. That thus they abused many, with an
appeatance of identitie in the matter and similitude in the end. And themselves
frequentlie confessed that this Covenant was nothing but that general one
applied to the particular occasions at that time. It is as certain that the
Covenant of the Rebels in all the three Kingdoms 1643. was held out at least
to them in Scotland that took it, to be the same with that they took before,
otherwise then as it must be again applied to a conjunction with their
brethren of the other two Kingdoms. Nor was there any other new emergent
cause, nor was that one for any new Covenant (and you are not to multiply
solemn oaths and Protest. ag. Kings Proclam. 1638
Covenants, you said, without necessity) Nor is there in this the sense of any
one clause that is not in the other as it concerned your own Nation. And the
enemies with their practices, against whom and which you framed it, you
profess to be the same, though now increased, in your praeface. All which have
elements enough, beside an airie fancy, to make up your gross error or
affected falsehood in denying so demonstrable a truth. Yet that notwithstanding
this imposture How it differs from it.
there is a real difference in the triplie respect which the Bishop speaks of
was never hitherto denied (as I know) by any Episcopal writer which are many
that occasionallie have mentioned it. So that his Lordship (...) not his own
vine but your fingars that will be meddling with his work, for which he may
expect and will have due thanks from his friends that rightly understand him.
For howsoever indeed that short confession was at first not only draw'n up by
the Kings command, nor freely subscribed with his hand, but obtruded
violently upon him being devised by a party of seditious malecontented
Noblemen and Courtiers (made such by the Clergy that were worse) against Esme
Earl of Lenox, who they hoped by this test would be discovered to be a Papist,
Yet the King made a very good virtue of necessity, and since he must impose it
first upon his family and afterward upon his subjects, being supreme could and
did it in his own sense, though it may be, oppositie to theirs that made it,
the ambiguitie of the words tolerating both. To which, in that sense, he
praefixed his Royal authority, whereas your later Covenant in yours was
absolutely against his sons. That in his sense was for the laws of the
Realm, the praeservation of Episcopacie, This against them for its utter
extirpation. That to maintain the religion established, which he did to the
uttermost of his power. This to its destruction which it is in effecting,
though it spoils in the casting that golden calfe you intended to set up. So
that the words themselves which do not more flatly contradict the Bishop,
then they are contradict by your works, are not so express for the Kings
authority, the law of the realm and religion established, and wherein they
are, such an abstruse meaning have they, as he that takes your league is ouo^
ag^n mysteria the dull creature that ignorantly caries all the mysteries of
your iniquity on his back.

In the next paragraph is nothing but a branch or two of your former
Epiphyllides taut esti kai stomylmata chelidonoon momseia.
wild discourse, and therein a nest of small birds chattering what we often
hear to no purpose, or never to less then here having no significancie at all
in answer to the Bishops Memento, which recognizeth Q. Elizabeth's indulgence,
to whom your praedecessours scraped and whined for military assistance and (to
say no worse) undeservedlie had it without imposing the Discipline of England.
Whereas you (to use (...). Chapter 14.
the words of K. Chapter 1.) are not to be hired at the ordinary rate of
auxiliaries [much less borrowed or bestowed] nothing will induce you to engage
till those that call you in have pawned their souls to you. The Discipline and
Liturgy (which you quarrel with some times because different from the English)
was obtruded upon you by no other craft and force then a plain legal
injunction, Deliberated on from the time of K. James's investiture K. Chapter 1.
Larg. decl. p. 15. etc. The English Discipline long since settled by law in
Scotland, and the Liturgy there used
in the crown of England, approved in a general Assembly at Aberdene 1616.
(the Liturgy I mean, the Discipline having been received long before) read
publikelie in the Kings chapel at Haly-rud-house ever since the year 1617.
not only without dislike but with frequent assemblies of the Council,
Nobility, Bishops and other Clergy, Judges, Gentry, Burgesses, women of all
ranks. In several other places in the time of K, Chapter 1. The alterations (which
were not of such moment as to be met with opposition) were partly made
generally approved by the Bishops and principal Clergy in Scotland, who in
the exercise of it were injoined to proceed with all moderation, and dispense
with such for the practice of some things contained in the book, as they
should find either not well persuaded of them, or willing to be informed
concerning them, or did The Pr. Scottish never so in England, but obtruded. Mot.
Brit.
hope that time and reason might gain a beter belief of them. How otherwise
your Discipline was obtruded upon the English, what free long and deliberate
choice they used (beside the sighs and groans of many pious souls hurried
into prisons or disspersed in a miserable exile) your own Scots Cushi shall
bear witness. Who, out of no ill meaning to your cause, reveals the truth of
your tyranny from the beginning.... That upon your second coming in it was,
when some of our Nobles took occasion to supplicate for a Parliament, Vix
audebat rex eis de postulato ab nuere propter Scotos etc. p. 28.
which the King scarce durst deny for the Scotch army, nor the perpetuity of
it afterward for no other reason.... That when it came to arms the Scotes
could not sit still in conscience and honesty whereupon they sent a
Commissioner from their Synod to the English Parliament 1642. to move them to
cast out Bishops, Then others to the King at Oxford to sign all propositions,
which because he would not do, they resolve to assist their brethren against
him, whom they call the common enemy. The formalitie of an invitation was used
to this purpose, but their inclination and resolution had passed Vocationem
lubenti animo amplectuntur ut pote ^d idem prius proclives. page 4. Answ. to
the let. sent by the Ministers of Engl; Aug* 5. Ps. 62. 9.
before. And indeed your Assembly 1642. confessed an obligation lay upon them
to encourage and assist so pious a work, but not as you do here only out of
brotherly concernment, but for security of yourselves, because without it you
could not hope for any long time to enjoy your own purity and peace, which
had cost you so dear.

The Bishops following grounds, which he makes good to be de monstrative, do
not therefore betray the weakness of because they add strength to the
praeceding. What wind is in them you f^llow too fast after, and feed as
greedily upon as Ephraim on the East, which turns to the same bad nourishment
in you both, increasing lies and somewhat else which you may read Hose 12. 1.
And were the softest hand insensible of their substance, they would
praeponderate your answers which are as deceitful upon the weights as he that
made them, and altogether lighter then vanity it self. For not a proposition
is there in prosyllogisme or syllogism that is seems you can deny, though
you scarce any where show ingenuitie to grant. For the second, which you The
power of the Militia is the Kings.
think so hard to prove let it be adventured thus. He that by covenant
disposes of himself and arms contrary to the established laws, which by
the Kings right in him he is obliged to maintain, disposes of them against
that right. But every Covenanter disposes etc. For the established laws
enjoine him to defend the Kings person without limitation or reference to
religion, at least not to fight against it, which the Covenant by your practi^e
interpretation does oblige to. Where the power of the Militia refides His
Majesty's unanswerable Declaration for the Commission of array will best
satisfy you. And himself tells you truly it is no less his undoubted (...).
Chapter 10.
right then is the crown. In the exercise of it though the Parliament be not
excluded, yet their power is never legallie considerable but when they are, as
the body with the ^oul, in statu conjunct^ with the King. Defense of liberties
has no law to arm them against pr^rogative, nor is there a cause imaginable
impowering them to take up arms against a partic countenanced by the Kings
praesence which can be according to no law but what is called such by
rebellious people that offer violence to Royal right If any such there be, let
us have but one impraegnable instance and we'll shake hands. I believe you are
not much in love with that old custom of the Frisians, long before they became
Presbyters, who chose their Earl carrying him upon their bucklers, and crying
alowd, Haec est potestas Frisiae. You can now adays H. Grot. lib. De Antiq.
Reip. Batav.
beter indoctrinate them according to the custom of your faction, when
praevalent, which is to admit no new King but at the swords point and there to
keep him, crying after this manner, or somewhat like it, in your proclamational
libells, Haec est libertas Presbyteriales Scotiae. Yet your Commissioners when
in the mood can praesent Answ: to both Houses 1647.
the hilt to his hand, and argue with both houses, as they did upon the new
propositions, why the power of the militia should be in the crown asking. How
Kings otherwise can be able to resist their enemies and the enemies of the
Kingdom, protect their subjects, keep friendship or correspondence with their
allies.... asserting that the depriving them of this power roots up the
strongest foundations of honor and safety which the crown affords, and will
be interpreted in the eyes of the world to be a wresting of the scepter and
sword out of their hands. So that the Bishops friends may take from yours
as well as from him the same demonstrable conclusion he laid down, And this for
all the Kings acknowledgement* which was never any of the Parliaments joint
interest in his authority against his person, which is the true case though
you shamefullie conceal it. Nor did His Majesty so put the whole Militia in
their hands as to part with his right when he bound his own from the exercise,
Nor was he sure he was not or might not seem to be perjured for his courtesy
(which all Kings will not hazard) though he laid the guilt or dishonor at
their doors, whither God has brought allreadie a portion of their just
punishment (...). Chapter 10.
that constraind him, saying. I conceive those men are guilty of the enforced
perjurie (if so it may seem) who compel me to take this new and strange way of
discharging my trust by seeming to desert it, of protecting my subjects by
exposing my self to danger or dishonor for their safety and quiet. Therefore
what thoughts he had of your parties meddling with the Militia may be best
judged by his words. How great invasion in that kind will state rebellion in a
Parliament, when there is any (as there was none, at that time nor since) shall
be told you when the Bishop gives you occasion to demand it. Or if you can not
stay so long, I must send you again to the judicious Digges to satiate your
too curious and greedy appetite of such fare as will no^ well be digested in
many stomachs. To the nulling your Covenant by His Majesty's proclamation you
say nothing because it separates him from the party to which you attribute all
malignance, and you know you can not securely meddle with him but in a crowd.

In the Bishops second demonstration we must be beholding to you for giving
what you can not keep with any credit which more awes you then conscience. That
where the matter is evidentlie unlawful the o^th is not binding. The
application of which up to your covenant will be justified when brought to the
touch by Gods law or the Kingdome's. But you first summon it before reason,
which helps you with no rule. To lay aside what might be otherwise rectified,
were there cause for it. Nor any evidence that the burden of Bishops and
ceremonies was so heavy as to press you into the necessity of a Covenant.
This his Bishops and ceremonies no burden.
Lordship need not offer to dispute, since the King ever offered a regulation of
that order and those rites by the primitive pattern wherein it otherwise
differed then in a necessary, innocent compliance with the politic
constitution of his Kingdom. And the Church had rendered See Treat. of Cerem.
before Com. prayer book Hookers Eccl. Polit. Dr. Tail of Episc. Bishop Andr.
let. to Molin. etc. To paronaci bari tois hypecoois. The. Salusi. Bell Catil.
Parliament can not reform without the King.
all rational satisfaction as well for the ceremonies retained as those
abolished* And both by particular men most eminent in learning and judgment
had been unanswerablie maintained in every grain or scruple that could be
quaestion'd or complaind of. Yet the praesent government, how light soever, is
burdensome especially to men that look for advantages by the change, And the
worst of men can seem as serious in complaint as if their virtues had been the
only martyrs to cruelty, and the very common hackneyes for oppression. Quid
reliqui habemus praeter miseram animam came out which a sad sigh from Catiline
before his bankrupt Comrades, who had left no such subject for rebellion to
rhetoricate on, if their lives had been as good pawnes in the midst of their
prodigality as their lands. This your method of reformation, whereof the
Bishop complains for which you plead custom, fails not only in the manner
but of the power, the most material requisite to effect it. And the high path
way is no^ so ordinary as you can name the Parliament that ever trod in it
before, We in England having no such custom, nor indeed any where the true
Churches of God as to alter religion and government without the King. To your
quaestion which ever shelters fraud in universals, I particularly answer and
to our purpose 1. That the Houses of Parliament are not to begin with an
ordinance for a covenantor ^ath, to change the laws of the Realm to abolish
the Discipline of the Church and the Liturgy lawfully established, by the
sword (which are the Bishops words) before the Kings consent be sought to that
beginning, much less when his dissent is foreknow'n of that and all
proceedings in that kind 2. An ordinance of the Lords and Commons (without and
against the King) i^ no good warrant to change such laws during the sitting of
the Parliament 3. No law nor lawful custom of England debarres the King by
dissenting to stop that change* Until which three assertions be refuted in
law, it will be needless to debate the qualifications and exceptions, which
can be none of moment in this case against the Kings consent requisite to turn
an ordinance into a law. But you take His Majestics concessions to have
praevented all can be said in the praesent case. Behold you that kindled the
fire in his breast here compass yourselves Isai. 50 11 The concessions of Chapter
1. not so larges praetended.
with the sparks of his consent which charity would have suffered to exspire
with the breath that brought them forth, or buried in his ashes which they
made. Yet can not you walk by the light of thi^ fire unto the full
accomplishment of your ends, His successor being not yet conveighd into any
such place as Holmebye or Carisbrooke Castle K. Chapter 2. not obliged to confirm
them.
where you would have him, some such fatal haereditarie confinement being the
fairest apology (if any) when he should subscribe so many of your
unconscionable desires, and write after his Father in the extremity of
misfortune, who as little intended what himself accounted his failings for his
copy, as he desired his undeserved miseries should be a patrimony transmitted
to him by your hands. As to the obtaining of what i^ lacking, your way is not
so fair, in which visiblie lies the same Scripture, Antiquity, law, reason,
conscience and honor, which heretofore hindered your journey to the end of your
hopes, the obtaining His Majesty's plenarie consent. Who did not agree to, if
you mean approve of the rooting out Episcopacie in Scotland. That he gave so
much way to such wild boares as were in your Presbytery to do it, he
afterward repented, and you rewarded him not so well, as that his Royal son
should be encouraged to purchase sorrow at so dear (...). Chapter 17.
a rate. 2. He was not willing allthough he yielded to have them put out of the
House of Peers in England and Ireland, out of a generous scorn of your
uncharitable susspicion that he would have them there only because he was to
make use of their votes in State affairs. 3 He divested them of civil power,
hoping to persuade such as your Lay Presbyters, by the objections made against
them, out of the Ecclesiastical which they Ibid.
more irrationallie usurped. 4. He joined Presbyters with them for ordination,
because he found it before seldom administered without them. But he never made
them coordinate in, nor aequiparticipant of that power. He joined them for
spiritual jurisaiction, as being a fit means to avoid.... partialities
incident to one man. And tyranny which becomes no Christians, least of all
Churchmen. And thirdly to take away from them the burden and Odium of
affairs, which was a courteous diminution in such times. How sacrilegiouslie
you rob the Temple of Memory of the pillar he set up in the period of your
Treaty, and erect in the place an impious calumny of his abolishing
Episcopacie totallie, name and thing will be seen by part of his inscription or
ultimate answer to the Rebel Commissioners Nov. 18. 1648. at Newport. K. Chapter
1. immove^ble from Primitive Episcopacie.
paper about the Church. The words are these.... His Majesty does again
clearlie profess, That he can not with a good conscience consent to the total
abolition of the function, and power of Bishops, nor to the entire and absolute
alienation of their lands, as is desired, because he is yet persuaded in his
judgment that the former is of Apostolical institution, and that to take away
the later is sacrilege..... And if his two Houses shall not think fit to
recede from the strictness of their demands in these particulars, His Majesty
can with more comfort cast himself upon his Saviors goodness to support him
and defend him from all afflictions, how great soever, that may befall him,
then for any politic consideration, which may seem^ to be a means to restore
him, deprive himself of the inward tranquillity of a quiet mind. And some of
his last words were* I am firm to primitive (...). (...). Chapter 17. Answ. Nov.
18. 1648 Newport. Nov. 20.
Episcopacie, not to have it extirpated, (if I can hinder it) He said indeed,
that by his former answer he had totallie* suspended Episcopal government for
three years, and after the said time limited the same in the power of
ordination and jurisdiction. Which the Commissioners he dealt with so little
thought Tantamont to a perpetual abolition, that they said it met not with
their fears, nor could praevent the inconvenience^ which must necessarily
follow upon the return of Bishops, and the power which he reserved to them
after that time. For that a Bishop so qualified as ^is Majesty expressed
should rise again then they declared wholly in his choice unavoydable by
Parliament, if they agreed not. But behold a pretty piece of aequivocation
(called Antichristian Iesuitisme by these Rabbi Presbyters of old) to draw
their dull Commissioners out of the mire and as good as Vna opera ebur
atramento cande^acere postules. Pl. Most^l. The Reviewers sophistry.
ink for ivorie to wash them clean. His Majesty suspended it till he and his
Parliament should agree. All and every one in both Houses had abjured
Episcopacie by solemn oath and Covenant and so in no hazard ever to agree with
him. Ergo He must either agree with them, that is likewise abjure, which is
abolition, or coutinue perpetually his suspension which is Tantamont unto it.
This is very well orderd, especially if you call to mind somewhat else that
was conditioned for viz. That twenty Divines of His Majesty's, nomination
being added unto the Assembly were to have a free consultation and debate,
whence it might be determined by His Majesty and his two Houses how Church
government etc should be settled after the said time or sooner if differences
might be agreed. A very free debate when all demonstrative reasons should be
forespoken to be silenced by an oath. And a very conscionable treaty, That a
faction in both Houses should be (without the restitution of the rest that were
beter tempered) the men that should continue siting not only 3. years but
300* if they could live so long, because sworn not to yield a syllable of
their own terms. Yet because you think your self so witie in your
sophistry let me ask you* What assurance these all and every one in both
Houses had to be immortal, If they were not, what you have that the new elected
would be Covenanters and if they were not, by what law they could have been
excluded the Houses whither they should be sent as Repraesentatives of their
Electours. If admitted and so reasonable as to hearken to a possible result of
the Divines debate in condemnation of Presbytery, and vote according to it,
what then were likely to become of your perpetual abolition, or the Tantamont
unto it. Such measure may you have if ever it come to treaty between you and
your sectarian brethren now siting in one House, who having as much abjured
Presbytery that praetends for Royalty by the engagement that has renounced
it, as you Episcopacie by the Covenant, may they condition for their own
confused Jndependencie thr^ years and as much longer as till you and they
agree, and may they tell you that can never be because they are engaged and in
no hazard to reerect the roten stools of English Scotizing repentance, and the
corrupt classes of your Presbyters, which the same sword has ten times more
justly cut down then it set them up* But I see your full and formal consent
finds no such good footing in your fallacy, and therefore falls at length to
a possibility of defect, which you praesume with much facility K. Chapter 2. much
beholding to the Reviewer*
to have supplied His Majesty that now is has much to thank you for, that at
the first you will make him as glorious a King as you made not his Royal father
but after so many years experience of his reign. That being at liberty not
only in his person from your prisons, but in his reputation from the clogges
of those calumnies you cast upon the guiltnesse innocence of his Praedecessour
you will advance him beyond all those sufferances that were Solemn
praeparations to his murder, and in primo imperij momento, as in ultimo you did
before, hold him by the hair, only not as yet permit the Independent hand to
cut his throat, until forsooth he has taken breath to supply that wherein
his too scrupulous too pusillanimous father fainted, And then crown him with
ribbons and flowers for the fater sacrifice of the two by the giving up his
honor and salvation beyond a life, the only lean oblation of Charles the
first.

But may His Majesty say you, easily supply what his father travaild for, He
can not so easily, will not so readily grant what his Father denied.
without satisfaction to the uttermost limits of reason and conscience, beyond
the farthest excusable adventures of any Praedecessours in his three Kingdoms
or out of them, hazarding, almost to despair, his memory with pious
posterity, especially at that distance as shall not repraesent distinctlie
every angle of the necessity he was driven to, and his soul to no other
assurance of pardon then what the integrity of his repentance (not so
infalliblie haereditarie as his miseries) and his glorious martyrdom afterward
helped him to? Would he think you so readily but for a whisper of pernicious
counsel in his ears, pass by unregarded his fathers charge to persevere in
the orthodoxe (...). Chapter 27.
religion of England, and hearken to the Devil of Rebellion whom he knows
well enough though turned into a Angel of Reformation? Can he so easily, after
three or four weeks conference at the Haghe with two ignorant Presbyters, and
but twice as many leaden headed Laikes, have his reason convinced, and his
consience satisfied, which is Royal Father could not in so many years
conversation with the ablest Divines, and devout consultations had with the
Living God himself by his prayers, and his dead, Yet livelie oracles of the
Holy Word in his watches? Or would he so readily, without it, give up his
Fathers invincible reserve to the irreparable injury of the Church, his
people, and Ibid. Ib ib.
his heir or successor in his Kingdoms? Was he required and entreated by
Charles the first as his Father and his King (in case he should never see his
face again) not to suffer his heart to receive the least check against or
disaffection from, the true Religion established in the Church of England. And
can he so easily, even while that precious blood has dyed his garments in
purple, and being the Defender's of the faith speaks the same language Ibid.
and calls every morning he puts them on for the same vengeance as once did the
first borne, of the faithful cast such requests and requisites behind him,
quit the true Christian guard he is charged with, and desert all his constant
subjects that must persevere in their religious profession according to the
purity of our canon? Will he, rather then want, wear a crown which is not
worth taking up or enjoining upon such dishonorable Ibid. Chapter 17.
unconscionable terms? And will he so readily bear the infamous brand to all
posterity of being the first Christian King in his Kingdom who consented to
the oppression of Gods Church and the Fathers of it, exposing their persons to
penvrie, and their sacred functions, to vulgar contempts? Will he Chapter 14.
so easily because his treasure exhausted, his revenue deteind, be tempted to
use such profane reparations, if not acting, consenting to perjurious and
sacriligious rapines? Or will he so readily instead of hu^kes give holy things
Ibid.
unto swine, and the Church's bread, not only the crumbes of it, unto dogs?
This his Royal Father durst not for fear a coal from Gods alter should set
such a fire on his throne and his consience as could hardly be quenched; Nor,
in all likelihood, will this ever obsequious son (whom you call I hope in
expectation of no such concessions, the most sweet and ingenious of Princes)
unless such furies as you fright his conscience away, while his tongue
doubleth in an uncertain consent, having from your pens and practices nothing
but insuperable horror and inevitable destruction in his sight. Wherein if
ever you unhapilie praevaile, may the same Royal tongue be seasonablie touched
with a coal of a beter temper before the unquenchable fire of despair catch
hold of his soul, or that of vengeance of his throne. May it call for the
fountain of living waters to (...). ^9. 1.
wash away the blood of his slain subjects whose souls lie under the altar
crying aloud for judgment, and quaestioning its delay. May that ountaine
derive it selve into the head and heart of this otherwise innocent King, and
day and night flow out at his eyes in torrents of tears for himself (in no
soloecisme) the Virgin Father of his people. Rev. 7. 14. 17.
And may at last his robes be washed white in the blood of the Lamb, and God
wipe away all tears from his eyes.

Having paid, in duty, this conditional devotion, which I wish as frivolous
and needless, as your praesumption is malicious and unlikelie. I proceed to
vindicate the Bishops discourse, which J can not see how in sense may be said
to fright the Kings conscience, by asserting his right and undeniable
praerogative the sinews whereof you The King supreme Legislatour
would shrink up into nothing. The Legislative power is not here stated or
determined by his Lordship only the King called supreme Legislatour, which he
is, What commentaries have been made of it, to the praejudice of the right and
custom of Parliaments, shall be spoken to when you tell us which of his
brethren, and what in their writings it is you mean. No right nor custom can
be adjusted to them in your case, which is vowing to God, and swea^ing one unto
another to change Answ. to both Houses 1647.
the laws of the Realm etc. by the sword, without and against the King,
different from the sense of your Commissioners, who would have the Legislative
power, as well as the Militia to be the Kings. For that power that can not
constitute can abrogate no laws, But they will tell you in constituting the
King can not be excluded, And we infer that no more he can be in repealing.
If your mind serve you to engage farther in this dispute you were best answer
the learned Grotius 8. chap. De Imper. Sum. Pot. to which I promise you my
reply. The Bishops protestation not injurious to Kings Lords nor Commons.


In the next place* as if you were moderating a matachin dance, from seting the
King and Parliament at odds, you turn both their faces and powers against the
Praelates, whom I do not find His Lordship putting in competition with the
King about the right of making laws, but aggravating the injury done them by
your party in the Parliament, and appealing to their conjcience with what
justice they could covenant against the rights of a third order of the Kingdom
without either their satisfaction or consent. If the whole Repraesentative of
the Kingdom have thus priviledg'd the Bishops, one lame part can not deprive
(...). Chapter 9.
them of it. Their prioritie and superiority has been so ancient that no
Lords no Commons would scruple at it, but such as likewise at the original
supremacy of their King; And therefore you may know the bill against their
privileges was five times rejected in the upper House the beter Court of
honor of the two, and when the sixth time it was carried by a few voices, it was
when the most honorable persons were forced to be absent. Their share in the
Legislative power has been so great, that since any was allotted them your
forefathers never heard of a law made in Parliament without them. The King may
pass what he pleases, and what he does so is a law. The two Temporal States
with his bare name without his power, can make none, nor yet having it, as they
account it derived from his Regalitie, not H. Grot.
his person. Ius enim ferendarum legum, sive generalium, sive specialium, summa
potestas communicar^ alteri potest, ^ se abdicar^ non potest. What one or the
other pass to the injury of persons fundamentallie concerned, be it law, can
not be justified in conscience, which is all J take to be urged by the Bishop.
But what would you have said if there had been such a law in behalf of
Episcopacie in England as there has been in spain. That no King could reign
(which is more then a Parliament sit and vote) without the suffrage of the
Bishops? Which made Ervigius upon the resignation of Bamba, that turned Monk
call a Council of Ano. 681.
them at Toledo, to have a confirmation of his crown. And the time has been
in England when a difference fell between Edward Lud. Aur. Peras.
and Ethelred about succession to K. Edgar and a devolution of it unto the
arbitrament of the Bishops. The humble protestation of the twelve Bishops
rudely menaced and affronted did not pronounce the laws and acts after their
recesse null and of none effect in derogation to the praerogative of the King
either solitary or in conjunction with what persons soever he pleased to make
his Legislative Council; but in saving to themselves their rights and interests
of siting and voting in the House of Peers, the violation of which they
conceived to invalidate a Parliament at least without the Kings passing a
rescissorie Act and an Act of new constitution. Because in law and practice it
is usual to any who conceive themselves praejudg'd (even in those things where
Acts of Parliament pass against them) to protest, Which, if you remember, were
the Sea True Repraesent. of the Proceed of the Kingd. of Scoth. since the late
Paecif. etc. page 31. 2. Book Discipl. 7. Chapter
words, and part of a long plea to another purpose (though upon the same
advantage of the Bishops right in Scotland) used by those your Countrymen that
alike intended their ruin, but could not colourablie offer at it without the
Act anext the constitution of the Parliament. Whether the Bishops being a third
order of the Kingdom, and by that craving their share in the Legislative
power, be more humble then the Presbyters who take themselves to be absolute
without King and two states in making all Ecclesiastike laws, and against King
and two states in abrogating all civil statuter and Ordinances concerning
Ecclesiastical matters that are found n^ysome and unprofitable, and agree not
with the time.... And censuring, punishing all persons, King and Parliament not
excepted, I file up with the other references to your ^quitable comparers, let
them be the Lords and Commons you here plead for.

You may choose whether you will grant what the Bishop takes as demonstrable.
That his brethren had harder measure from the thing called King and Parliament,
then the Abbo^s and Friars from Henry 8. When The Reviewers belief is no
confession of the Bishops.
he divested them of their estates, Your consecu^orie Belief has no article
made up out of any of the Bishops words, Who though he could not keep
intruders out of his palace and possessions, means to have no such troublesome
inmates in his mind. And since you have sequestered him from his gardens,
keeps out of your reach a Tarasse to exspatiate in his thoughts. He commends
your eyes that can see so distinctlie such Platonical Idea's as never had
existence, yet when you draw too near commands you to your distance with the
same answer that Bacchus did Hercules in the Comoedie for all his club. Me ton
emon oikei noun, echcis gar oik^ian. Aristoph. Ran. Scottish Presbytery is that
meant in the Covenant ^bongh dissembled.


The Bishops last reasoning is as sound as those before, and in all is there a
connection of those parts which any demonstrative integral can require. To your
first impeachment by quaestion I answer. That article of the Covenant bears
the seting up of the Scottish Presbyterian government in England which is for a
uniformitie in both Kingdoms, if taken with the next that extirpates praelacie
viz. Church government by Bishops. For when Praelacie is down, I pray what
remains, according to your principles, but Presbytery to set up? As for
Scottish Presbytery, you have often told us it is the same with that of all
Reformed Churches. And if altogether be not according to the Word of God,
after so many years Synods, Conferences, and Letters, what blind Covenanters
you are to swear a league of life and death upon the like or more uncertanitie
of future discovery by a few unskilful persons whose peti^ phantastike lights
put together must be made a new imaginary milkie way surpassing in a fermed
singularity of splendor any among the greater and truer luminaries in the
firmament of the Church. But I have allreadie showed how in vain you
aequivocate about that clause, which has cost your friend Rutherford and
others so much pains. Which detracts from the Kings supremacy.
What the oath of supremacy imports is evident by the words in it. (The
variety of senses to catch advantages like side winds in paper sails which
are subject to rend in pieces being the poor policy of Presbyters that dare
not stand to the adventure of plain dealing) supreme Governer of this Realm
etc. As Well in all spiritual or Ecclesiastical things or causes as temporal.
Which the Bishops you see conceald not, though you gratify your self with the
observation only of the other title supreme head, and accept his explication
of it, which yiedling you in your contracted sense (that might securetie afford
him more capital privileges without encroachment upon Christ or his Holy
Curch) supreme Governer takes in what your Presbytery will never grant him,
all power imperative, Legislative, judicial, coactive, all but functional,
Imediate and proper to the ordination or office of the Minister, which, for
ought ^ know, if he find an internal call ^ a supposition drawing near a
possibility then likelihood and assurance to have a double portion of Gods
gracious power and assistance in both administrations, he not only may, but
must exercise as did Moses and Melchisedech, saving that without a divine
institution in this spiritual function his supremacy exempts him not from
submitting his head under the hands of holy Church and taking our Saviors
commission with the benediction from her mouth. That Scottish Presbytery is a
Papacy the Bishop requires not to be granted upon his word, but to be taken
before Public notaries upon your own the political part whereof consists in
the civil primacie which (at least by reduction) you very confidentlie assume.
The Bishops contradiction, which is scarce so much as verbal, will be easily
reconciled by the words of the oath which he reflects on, and his argument good
against you, until without reserves, limitations, or distinctions, you simply
acknowledge the King supreme over all persons in all causes, which would be a
contradiction to this clause in your book of Discipline. 2. B Disc. 1. Chapter
The power Ecclesiastical flows immediately from God and the Mediator Jesus
Christ and is spiritual, not having a temporal head in the earth, but only
Christ, the only spiritual King and Governer of his Kirk.

Lastly, No Presbyterian is there in Scotland but counts it sacrilege to give
the King what belongs unto the Church. And whatsoeu'rit is Statutum
Parliamenti esse solum quid accessorium, and civilem approbation^m esse tantum
Christiani Principis officium subjectionem suam Christo and Ecclesiae debitam
testantis Phil. Eplae Vind. Foraigne Presbyterians ashemed to justify the
Scottish Covenant, The Scottish Pr. never serious^e asscrib'd any good intention^
to the King. Natura insitum est omnibus Regibus in Christum odium Altar. Dam.
praet.... Cosque Deo Creatori non Redemptori imperium accept^m debere non
obscure praedicarunt. Refut Epil. Ph^. Siquis non obscure praedicavit.... Non
long aberavi^ Vindic. ejustd..... Non solum ^ longinquo non impediens,
connivens, vel plenariam potestatem..... concedens... sed coram intuens and
tali^ facinoris asspectu d^lectatus.
they quit in Ecclesiastike causes is not unto the King, but to King, and
Parliament, and the power in both when it informs an Act or statute called but
accessorie by the Aderdene Assemblers, and (that we may no longer doubt whom
they account supreme) duty and subjection from the Prince) which though spoken
by them but of their meeting, must be meant of all causes consultable in their
Synods, and is as sensible a truth as words without ambiguitie can render it.

Out of all which has been said it must necessarily follow, that your
Covenant has all the good qualities computed which needs no arithmetical
proof by weight or measure, the praemises ever being coextended, with, and
counterpoiz'd by, the conclusion. What you rashly, if not praesumtuouslie,
pronounce of the Bishops judgment does but vilify your own. Qui cito
deliberant facile pronunciant. Had you brought a judgment to the contrary of
any learned Casuist to whom his Lordship appeals, or any Divine of note in
Europe, which he calls for, your answer had been somewhat more serious and
solid, But here your oracles of learning are all silent. We find it not
avowed by your especial brethren of Holland and France, by no approbatorie
suffrages of Leyden and V^recht.... Omnium flagitiosorum atque facinorosorum
circum se tanquam stipatorum catervus habet. A guard is has, but a blake one,
such as Catilines league, and how can it have beter, wherein is sworn a
conspiracy as bad?

The Bishops following vapors meeting with no suneshine of law o^ reason to
dissipate them, will not so vanish upon a little blast of your breath but that
they 'll return in showers of confusion upon your head. Your secret will to
asscribe good intentions to the King has by some of your pack been very
strangely revealed in their expressions touching Kings, whoss very nature they
have declared originallie antipathetical to Christ. This Didoclave avowes as
planilie as he can* And when objected by His Grace of Saint Andrews with your
proverbial, yet mystical appendix of their obligation to the Creatuor, not to
Christ the Redeemer for their crowns, is so slovenly answered by Philadelphs
Vindicatour, as any man may read your good will in his words, and measure the
sense of your Synods by his lines, your good opinion of the intentions of K.
Charles 1. (Beside what you imputed to his Praelates) may be guessed by what,
sometimes in print you have asscrib^d unto his person* An unworthie fellow,
your Country man that comes running in have with the message of your good
meaning in his mouth, says; His infamous and Barbarous intentions were
executed by sheathing his sword in the bowels of his people; And this not
only himselve not impeding, conniving at, and giving full Commission for, in
Scotland and Ireland, but in England looking upon with much delight while it
was done. And that so fair were negotiations and treaties from retracting him,
that it was in public declared he says not by any Praelatical party) that he
would never desist from this enterprise of persecuting Church and Commonwealth
so long as he had power to pursue it. Concerning the good intentions of Charles
the second, beside what jealousies you express by the scrupulous conditions in
your proclaemation, your Haghe papers are instancis of your willing
asscriptions, which call his answer strange whereby the distance is made
greater then before, and far less offered for religion, the Covenant, and
the laws and liberties of your Kingdom then was by his Royal Father even at
that time when the difference between him and you was greatest..... So that it
will constrain you in such an extremity to do what is incumbent to you. I
have allreadie told you the usual consequences of that cursed word, and what
good intentions you are in hand with when you utter it. Tyranny and popery
are twins engendered between your jealousy and malice, to which Independencie
is more likely to be the midwife then praelacie, and if by that hand they get
deliverie at last, will besure to pay Presbytery their duty when they can
speak. The painted declarations caries beter sense to them that rightly
understand them, which I am sure is not praejudic'd by any paraphrase of the
Bishops. Though agere poenitentiam. Be good council where well placed 'yet
egisse non poenitendum requires it not. If the conscience of the Court continue
to be managed by the principles of the Praetates, the hearts of the most
understanding shall, if they will be satisfied withal moral and fiducial
assurance to have that Religion praeserved which shall by reason and
authority, as well divine as humane, in every particular justify it self
against all right or left handed sects and factions guilty of superstition or
profanesse, and those laws observed which appear now to have constituted the
most indifferent innocuous government in the world. Whereas if the conscience
of the Court be deluded once into Presbyters hands it will need none of our
angry wishes to be made sensible of the change, when to be sure, it must take
religion, like a desperate patient, from a sullen physician in doses of
Covenants and propositions not to be disputed, and like a bedlam have laws
given it with a whip.

The Bishop drawing toward the end of his discourse puts all the The Reviewer
dares not speak out to the Bishops quaestion about taking arms for religion.
controversy upon trial by that quaestion which if once categoricallie
answered would spare much oil and ink for the future, giving the Magistrate
to know that it is not the pen but his sword whereby this difference must be
decided. But these spiders of Presbytery will as well be spinning webs as
spitting poison, though so thin as cannot conceal the uglie shape of their
souls, nor that bay which contines the intrinsecal venom of their cause.
Though had they the reputation of no better Artists then Master Baylie, the
Pallas of Praelacie need not enter on the encounter, but that of Magistracy
might in scorn more then envy, tear such wicked work in pieces before their
face, and in justice mixed with some little mercy to beget repentance -- Vide
quidem. pende tamen improba, dixit Mot. 6. fab. 3. The ambiguitie in the
Covenanters words leaves religion to the liberty of their conceits. Se short
Causes. begin. Nulla unquam gens in quovis seculo.... Opus Reformationis
feliciore prudentia animo and successu administravit, quam Scoti in sua patria
Mot. Brit. Ver. Custin. Vincent. advers. haeres. c. 14. Their allegiance
conditional. They fight against. (...). Chapter 9. Their Creed in words the same
with ours but not in sense.
execute Arachne's condemnation in the fable upon the authors. Of the
multitude of untruths which the Reviewer here recriminates upon the Bishop,
(that we may be one take a judgment of the rest) the want of charity is very
unjustlie made the first, which he should have done well to have supplied in
himself, and not so senselesselie to intimate a non realitic of religion in
those reverend Fathers, who, beside the visibilitie in their practice
heretofore, and of their Christian patience in being Martyrs and Confessors
for it of late, ever made a profession of that faith which was consonant to
Scripture as interpreted in the primitive purest times of Holy Church. Whereas
the censure his Lordship makes of the Presbyterian phantasme is principally
because in their very covenant appears no reformation intended but according
to the word of God, without mentioning any rule or authority for the
interpretation of that word, beside their own humors and conceits. And the
example of the best Reformed Churches, which best must be that which seems so
unto them, whether the rest yield to it as such or no, if indeed they mean
any, as it may be well thought they do not, but themselves, who are so
superciliouslie singular from them all, as they disdain to hear of a
inclioration to be had from their example, and such Tyrants over us as they
give us no other law nor reason but their pleasure for the reformation they
impose, speaking to us in the language of the Pelagians to the Catholics.
Nobis authoribus, nobis principibus, nobis expositoribus, damnate quae
tenebatis, tenete quae damnabatis, reijcit^ antiquam fidem, paterna instituta,
Majorum deposita, and recipite, quaenam ill^ tandem? Horreo decere sunt enim ^m
superba, ut mihi non modo adfirmari, sed ne refell; quidem sine aliquo piaculo
posse videantur. The second untruth he says is. That Covenanters bear no
allegiance to the King but only in order to Religion, which notwithstanding
is the particular limitation in the Covenant, and when all was granted them but
a particle of that by Charles I. they denied to return to their allegiance
without it. And the Crown of his successor, our gracious Sovereign, still
hangs out of his reach by that thread, which their proclamation tells him in
effect shall for ever keep it off till he consent. To the third I reply. That
the Rebel Parliaments verbal denial makes the Bishop speak uo untruth, who
will tell them as the King himself did, That his person was in vain excepted
by a parenthesi^ of words, when so many hands were armed against him with
swords, and the Canon knew no respect of persons. The praetenses of a Popish
Praelatical, and malignant faction are wiped away by His Majesty in that
chapter, to which I require a Scotich reply. The fourth is grounded upon a
very false supposition, which sometimes they will not grant us, nor should we
(though too many have out of mistake too often) grant it them, viz. That saving
Bishops and ceremonies, the religion of Scotizing Presbyterians and Catholic
English Christians is the same, whereas there is near, if not fully,
fundamental difference in the acception of several articles in our Creed, (so
that though we say the same words, we can not truly be said to be of the same
belief) in these at least, Christ's descent into hell* The Holy Catholic
Church; The communion of Saints; The forgiveness of s^nnes; Besides several
other accessorie tenets, wherein we think they detract from the mercy, if not
the justice, of God, reveled in Christ and the ordinary use of his graces
restored by our redemption, without respect of persons, unto men. But if here,
for their pleasure, they will have the true Church and counterfeit Kirk be the
same otherwise then as they are differenced by the corruptions of Bishops and
ceremonies, why tried they not the experiment of pu^ging these with the
alteration of the rubrike and their persons, without change of the Liturgy for
a Directorie, and the abolition of their office, As their great Pope Henderson
once confessed in the Earl of Henderson and the Reviewers speeches about
Bishops.
Arundel's tent, when General in the North. That Bishops might have been
tolerated in Scotland if their persons had been such as they ought. And the
Reviewer himself, when he wondered why the Doctors of Aberdene would not
subscribe the covenant, being asked by a friend of his if he thought
Episcopacie and the articles of Perth unlawful made this answer, He never
thought, nor ever would think them so. Whence may be conjectured their modest
meaning to be this; That had the Episcopate in Scotland been seasonablie
entailed to their tribe, so far as they could have hindered what they pretty
well promoted, their covenanting tables at Edinburgh had been taken down, and
no army raised to purg^ M^lignants out of the Kirk 5. The Reviewer says,
Religion and liberty no good praetenses for taking arms. Simons's ^indicat p.
30.
their ^rmes were taken for defense of just liberties, whereof religion was but
one. But then it wa^ one, and that the (...), or e^e when ^hey had the Militia
(...) (...) to defend (...), why stood ^hey upon that, which is an argument
that merely for that, were there nothing else in controversy, they might
as well take, as ke^pe up arms But what shuffling was in this business has
been discovered by another. That about liberties M^ster Digges (...) learned^ie
confute^. N^r will the Review^ and all his accomplices be able ^o (...) in any
one law of the three Kingdoms that justifi^ the subjects against the supreme
power in defense of any liberties by their arms. Saint Austin and all good
Christians were of another mind. I^a a ple^ibus Principes, and a servis domini
ferendi sunt, ut sub exercitatione tolerantiae sustineantur ^emporalia and
sperentur aeterna. Which I therefore cite not, as if I took it to be the
Covenanters case, who did, and might have continued to enjoy all just liberties
witho^t any such defense, Yet had they not, they should have pondered many
beter politic maxims among the heathen In Bru^.
such as this i^ Plutarch cheiron^inai monarchias paranomo^ polemon emphylion
and that of Pliny in his Panegyrike. Quanto liberate discordi servientibu^
situtilius, unum esse cui serviant.

The other horn of the Bishops dilemma is as sharp, and it need be no sharper
then the former, The danger whereof makes the Reviewer keep his distance, first
not daring positavelie to assert the lawfullnesse of taking up arms for
religion. And then muffling himself in his cloak, invaine hoping he shall not
by this argument de gored unto the quick. His spitting Atheism in the face of
Reason the native image we bear of God, will set no wiseme^ on gaping for
extraordinary revelatio^s, nor his false translating the Bishops sense into
mere apprehensions and uncertain conceptions make him, or theirs of his mind,
worse then Pagan Sceptikes in Religion. His Lordship I believe, grants no such
p^stvlate as the The Scottish Presbyterians as enthusiastike a^ the Anabaptists
and no more excusable by their religion for taking arms.
Reviewer seems to look for. That every Scottish Mas. is a Moses, and every
persecuting Presbyter, before Gods judgments have humbled him to his
conversion, a Saint Paul. He conceives their Catechism or Directorie can pass
for no Pentateuch nor Apostolical Epistles and says they beg the qu^stion that
take it to be the Gospel. He argues, That in asserting the lawfullnes of
taking arms, they justisie the Independents that supplanted themselves, whose
new light shines as much like that from Moses's face as they Presbyterians n^w
doctrine sounds like the oracles he received in the mount. That the Anabaptists
in Germany were no more Enthusiasts then the Anabaptists in Scotland, who null
the powerful operation of the sacrament, and for ought we know, may be nulls
in the missionarie power to administer it. That John of Leyden and his ^rue
could not be more mad then John Kno^ and hi^, nor could they have less reason
for their military proceedings. His Lordship is so far from placing the
sum of Religion in every simple apprehension, that he desires the authority
of the Chuch should take place of his conceptions until the truth, if
different from tha^ doctrine, which is unlikelie were sealed to him by some
internal impression of Gods spirit. What every man is persuaded in his
conscience to be divine truth he would have him praeferre before other men's
apprehensions of a contrary religion. Yet if that persuasion be dissonant from
what was generally among the primitive Christians, he would not that he should
mistake himself to have a singular infallibility, nor a transscendent
commission, above that of Christ and his Apostles, to take arms and Fay^h
(...) so common, if such as commonly defined.
force all men to his belief. The most certain truths, even these divine ones
in religion, if His Lordship does not, which I did not ask him, I do think
to be in many men that praete^d to that supernatural grace called faith, were
uncertain conceptions, or inadvertent praesumptions, finding few so
considerate of their very principles in Religion as to build them upon any so
much as that subordinatie moral certaniti^ they might do with good endeavor,
fewer live so devoutlie as without it can reasonably suppose God miraculouslie
infuseth his revelatious to assure them. Therefore though all the truths of
Christian Religion, wherein controverted, are revealed from heaven. Yet I
think we are to look a great way back for the persons by and unto whom,
immediate inspirations being now adays very rare, nor do we live much like
the holy mortified men that were wont to have them of Sulpis. Sever in vita.
old. You know what Saint Ma^tin told the Devil when he appeared arrayed like a
King, and would be taken for Christ come in triumph upon the earth. Ego
Christum, nisi in ^o habitu formaque qua passurest, nisi (...) stigmata
pro^rentem venisse non credam. He would not believe ^im to b^ S. Matthew. 10. 16.
The Pr* S^ots must bring beter marks then their ba^ words for revelations*
Advers. haeres* cap. 14.
come till he saw him in the habit of his sufferings. So when we see you
qualified like his disciples, wise as Serpents not crafty as foxes, harmless
as doves, not rapacious as harpies, patient like sheep, not ravening like
wolves. Delivered up to Councels, not excommunicating in Synods, scourged in
Synagogue^ not disciplining without mercy in your Churches. Brought before
Governers and Kings for Christ's sake, not bringing Governers and Kings to
mocke-tribunal^ for your own. Then tell us of Divine truths, the belief of
Moses and Saint Paul^ revelation from h^ven, and we will hearken to you as
Angels, whom now we take to be no beter then the haereti^es who Vince^t says
are ranequaedam and cyniphes, and muscae mori^urae, such contemptable creatures
as croking frogs, gnats, and dying flies that would buzze what mischief you
can before you leave us, and make the ointment of the Apothecarie stink with
the corruption of your writings when you are dead; The second part of your
apology is most false both thesei kai hypothes^i 1* Because subjects have no
arms, while the Magistrate is in being to hold the sword, put into their hands
to defend their religion and liberties how legallie so ever established, They
have only pleas by that law to claim them, and petitions of right or
aequitie to put up unto the Magistrate to maintain They are ^ut ^hrotes of
Magistrates and planters of Religion by arms.
them. 2. If they go beyond defending themselves in their religion and force
others to enter into their league and covenant though contrary to their
conscience, this is no other th^n planting of religion by arms. And if the
difference in any point of religion be such as to state the Magistrate in a
condition to be put to death by his subjects, as it does, in your sense, when
he joines in worship with Papists and Praelates, whom you make idolarers. and
idolatry death unpardonable; this is cutting the throats of all Magistartes.
And this is maintained to be just and to have the ground of Gods ordinary
judgment by your Patria^ch Knox. And to be imitated of all those that
praeferre the true honor of the true worship Hist. Lib. 4.
and glory of God to the affection of flesh and wicked Princes. Your hypothesis
is false, because the religion and liberties of your Covenant in England were
never established by law, and what was so established was never usurped by
Papists Praelates and Malignant^, And if it had been, from so good a King
redress had probably been procured upon just complaint without taking arms.
To your third I reply, That the Bishop We say nothing to foraigne pro^estants
taking arms. till they justify yours and and theirs by yours
gives no judgment, makes no mention of the Protestants Arms in France
Holland and Iermanie, compares them not with the Anabaptisis in Munster or
Sectaries in England. If you can once persuade them to espouse your quarrel,
(for which you have begged long enough at their gates by this time) or publish
a parallel between your taking up arms and their own, the praelatical party
will make no difference between you, but give alike judgment against you all.
In the meanetime the maxims they give are rational and divine, and they are
brutes or Atheists, divested allreadie of all religion and reason, who
praeferre them not to the Presbyterian enthusiasmes, who give out for Michael
the Archangels revelations what counterfeit impostures Morpheus puts of to them
in their dreams.

Touching a general Council, with a wish for which Hi^ Lordship piouslie The
Praelates decline not the judgment of Councels.
concludes, No Covenanters go before him, nor will set one step after him in
that desire, who most uncharitablie make three p^rts of four in the Christian
world Antichristian, and ^o no constitutive members of such a meeting. An
oecumenicke Synod of Protestants would un doubtedlie condemn them, which is
most shamefullie praejug'd to approve of the rebellion and murder in their
Covenant. Nor can their Principals, in honor, be silent at such an horrid
impious praesumption publickelie printed and imputed to them. The Bishops and
his brethren have declined no solemn assemblies of their own countries*
those so called were factious schismatical conventicles* illegallie gathered
and composed of such mus^romes as how numerous soever, durst not admit of
twenty Praelatical Divines into debate, lest they should be squeezed into a
little spungie earth and wind (their originals) having no substantial worth or
abilities to support them. You need not pray the Warner to speak unto the
question you put, since you have his answer before hand without asking, viz.
That its worth the enquiring (even in such an Oecumenicke synod) whether the
marks of Antichrist do^ not agree as eminentlie to the Assembly General of
Scotland as to the Pope. He mentions some that plainly do, and means, it may
be as much of all the rest. To the charge in a Christian Council they would
answer. That they are able to evidence before God and the World, That all blood
and misery drawn from, and brought upon, the former King and his Kingdoms
must be cast upon the Covenant and General Assembly in Scotland, who will
never cease to embroyle all in new calamities untile they be destroyed. That if
this King and his whole family resolve not to prosecute Gods cause, which the
former did with much Christian courage unto the death, they hazard the tearing
their crowns into more pieces then the miters, and the demolition of their
Presbyterian cruelty, may by Gods providence be restrained.
thrones beneath that of the Praelates chaires, To conclude all. The Reviewers
breath, though violent enough, becomes in vain so definitive, as to perpetuate
persecutions against the providence of God, whom the Bishops look upon as a
potent Protector of Kings, and a merciful repairer of the breach made in his
Church by their own ruins. Their resolution, may be justly peremptore to
persevere in their opinion of the Scottish Presbyterian cruelty to be such That
as they, have bur^ed their Bishops alive, connived at, and if, not countenancd,
the Massacring their Kings; so their endeavor will not be wanting to scater
the ashes of ^e Royal family and three Kingdoms on their graves, Though their
consistorian fourmes, and repenting stools with other luggage be next cast
into the flames first kindled by themselves. The mysteries of their religion
being murder and dead monuments such as never Adm^n. ad G^.
made those heathen the sum of whose devotion Clemens of Alexandria
comprehended in two words. (...)

FINIS.
Errors to be amended.
Epist. Ded. page 3. line 18. Read, she or her Ancients. Ans. to Ep* Ded. p.
2. l. 8. for common shore, r. com. fewer. Ibid. l. 9. for power, r. paper. p.
3. l. 6. for and, r. etc. p. 6. l. 16. for comfort, r. confort. l. 38. for
burning. r. warning. p. 7. l. 18. for both, r bold. l. 36. for must. r. most.
p. 8. l. 20. r. deceitful lovers of themselves there are. p. 9. l. 35. r. two
or three such words as. p. 11. l. 32. for late, r. babe. p. 16. l. 13. for
Reviewer, r. Reviewes. Acolut. p. 8 l. 13. for own, r. owned. p. 13. l. 30. for
otherguede, r. otherguesse. p. 19. l. 37. for literal, r. liberal p. 20. l. 8.
for apposed. r. opposed. p. 21. l. 15. it del^atur. p. 22. margin, for
Chaldaeos, r. Culdaeos. p. 26. l. 10. for then, r. they. l. 11. for all r. a.
p. 29. l. 1. for Hierambicorum, r. Hierarchicorum. l. 25. for buselie, r.
basilie. p. 31. l. 30. for in that, r. and that is. l. 41. for anomia
ergapiria, r. anomias ergasteria. p. 37. l. 17. for stake, r. stick. p. 38. l.
19. for acknowledge, r. acknowledged. p. 40. l. 2. for reasonable, r.
treasonable. p. 45. l. 19. for Vnitglupte^, r. Vuygeastein. p. 48. l. 36. After
Ecumenical, add Council. p. 53. l. 37. for asgle r. air. p. 59 l.* 24. for
acconsequential, r. unconsequential. p. 60. marg. for to excom. r. no excom. p.
60. l. 29. for too rigid. r. to rigid. p. 64. l. 32. for halls r. heels. p.
68. l. 20. for triel, r. Ariel. p. 72. l. 11. for then, r. them. p. 73. l. 3.
for as, r. is. p. 78. marg. for vicitie, r. nicitie. p. ^0. marg. for 1493. r.
1593. p. 81. l. 34. r. (though but in the time) Ibid. marg. r. The Bishops
Sunday toleration. p. 48. l. 10. pro libra, r. litera. Ibid. l. 12. for jura r.
dura. p. 85. l. 1^. for papists, r. pupills. l. 3^. for its. r. in. p. 86. l.
14. for coloural, r. colorable. Ibid. marg. r. Scottish Presbyterian
reformation from etc. p. ^7. l. 7. for latewarmnesse r. lukewarmnesse. l. 13.
for too. r. 100. p. 88. l. r. for session, r. cession. l. 14. for Murre, r.
Mar. marg. for Ruthuer, r. Ruthuen. p, 92. l. 21. for servidi, r. fervidi. p.
94. l. 9. for scrive. r. transscribe. p. 57. l. 1. for then, r. them. p. 101.
l. 39. for superintended, r. superintendent. p. 11. for masters, r, matters.
marg. for contracted, r. confuted. p. 117. l. 14. guerts. r. Masters. p. 121.
l. 6. for indiscreet, r. in discreet. p. 122. marg. fuos, r. suo. p. 126. l. 9.
for on, r. or. p. 127. l. ^1. r. from whom I expect etc. p. 142. l. 39. for
cession, r. succession. l. 40. for successis, r. successio, p. 145. l. 40. for
Autorani ei, r. Autouranici. p. 148. l. 39. for and r. etc. p. 149. marg. for
sudunt... astragatus, r. sudunt astragalis. p. 152. l. 35. for pallea, r.
paleae. for Affltu, r. Afflatu [with no point before it] p. 127. marg. for
togodaedali, r. logodaedali. p. 153. marg. for odificentur in rumam,
r^aedificentur in ruinam. p. 155. l. 41. for manitates, r. inanitatis. p. 157.
l. 16. for if, r. it. l. 41. for mission, r. omission. p. 159. l. 40. for
doubt, r. double. p. 16^. l. 14* for forming, r. foming. p. 163. l. 1. for
too, r. so. p. 165. l. 13. susplicates, r. supplicates. page 169. l. 6. r. to
the Bishop. page 175. l. 83. for to, r. so large. Ibid. marg. for a estes quos
sidem ea vocant, r. testes quos sidemen vocant. for minus* r. munus. p. 177.
marg* for spirationes, r. conspirationes. p. 175. for many leaves, r. may
leave. p. 180. l. 5. for quae, r, quia* p. 181. l. 26. for quis pium, r.
quispiam. p. 182. marg. for homonymus subscribentiam. r. homonymoos
suscribentium. p. 185. for momseia, r. monscia Aristoph. p. 187. l. 38. for up
to, r. unto. p. 188. l. 14. for which, r. with. p. 191. l. 14. for guistnesse,
r. guiltless. p. 155. l. 15. for fermed, r. feigned. l. 34. for near, r.
nearer a possibility then likelihood, p. 157. l. 13. for fair. r. far.
marg. for Cosque, r. Eosque. p. 198. l. 11. for bay* r* bag. l. 35. for
inclioration, r. melioration. marg. for vide, r. vive. for se short causes, r.
see short confess. p. 200. l. 40. for Anabaptists, r. Abaptists. p. 201. l. 16.
for were, r. mer^.

An Alphabetical Principal Table of the Contens.
A.
THe Disciplinarians rebellious proceedings in their persecution of Arch. Bp.
Adamson. Page 43 Poenitent adulterers not necessarily to be put to death. 169
Little aequitie in the Reviewers debates and treaties. 190 Alteration in
Religion or Church Government unsave and sinful while conscience is doubtful.
95 They may be feared to be unchristian that call us Antichristian. 145 Trivial
debates among Scottish Presbyters about apparel. 125 The Reviewer dares not
speak out to the Bishops quaestion about taking arms for religion. 198 That
and Liberty no justifiabie praetenses for taking arms. 201 The Pr: Scots that
did, no more excusable then the Anabaptist in Germany. 200 They are planters
of their misse-named Religion by arms. 202 K. Chapter 1. had just cause to march
with an army toward Scotland Ans. to Ep. Ded. 9 The Pr. Scots had none for
their invading England Ibid. 11 Their General Assemblies Disobedience to the
Kings command. 1^79. 12 The incohaerent excuses thereof. 13 The rebellious
Assemblers at Aberdene 1605. 16 Appeals in Scotland to the King. 32 And so the
ultimate of them every where elce. 41 The proceedings against them no other
then legal. 17 Wherein the E. Dunbar c^ried himself impartiallie and nobly.
23 Assemblies summoning the people in arms upon the trial of Popish Lords. 92
Collusion and violence in the election of Members for Assemblies. 133 Why so
many Burgesses and Gentlemen in them. 134. 135
B.
TReason by statute to impugn the authority of Bishops, being one of the
three Estates. 19 Bishops perpetual in Scotland. 21 The calumny against the
three Bishops consectated by the Arch - Bishop of Canterbury refuted. 22 How
the Difference hapened between the E. Argile and the Bishop of Galloway. 141
Our Bishops contest not with King and Nobles. 140 Their praecedence and place
near the throne. Ibid. Officies of State. 141 The Antiquity, etc. Of Bishops
justified very judiciouslie by Dr Ier. Tailor, Whose book is an antidote
against the poison of all the Reviewers objections. 102 Bishops Apostles. 106
Evangelists, Prophets, Pastors. 107 Doctors. 108 Bishops and Ceremonies no
burden. 187 The Bishop of Derrie's prudence, no boldness in the publication
of his book Ans^to Ep. Ded. 2 Very seasonable. 1 In it His Lordship is no
slanderer of the King. 4 Blackes rebellious case. 53 Balcanqual, Bruce and
other Ministers guilty of raising the tumult. 56 Blaire and his accomplices
justly banished out of Ireland. 51 B^thwells notorious crimes. 61 Bruce's bold
speech to the King about E. Huntley. 63 The Bishops appeal in the Assembly at
Glasgow not derogatorie to the Kings personal praerogative. 45
C.
CAlderwood's ridiculous reverence of Bruce's ghost. 139 E. Cas^ls demeanor
Ans. to Ep. Ded. 1 Canons infirming the Reviewer to be an accuser of the
Bishop. 48 Public catechizing of Masters and Mistresses indecent. 171 Not very
necessary before their receiving the Sacrament. Ibid. The Kings Chaplanes use
no Court artifice, but what becomes such reverend worthy persons in their
places Ans. to Ep. Ded. 4 A proposition of trial to be made whether Christ's
scepter must be swayed by Bishops or Presbyters. 100 The difference between us
and the Church of Rome about ceremonies. 98 Jurisdiction of Commissaries. 52
The Kings Commissioner how offronted in Pr S^. Synods. 134 Ri^t in Scotland to
get down the High Commission Court. Which was not so tyrannical as the Pr.
Consistone. 173 Wherein is more rigor then other where among the Reformed
Churches. 174 The adventurous concessions of K. Chapter ^. extorded by the
necessity or difficulty he was brought to. 104 K. James's dislike of the
Scottish short confession. Many unjustificable practices about it. 14 Conscience
not bottomed only up on divine right. 95 Contrarietic of commands at the same
time ordinary under Scottish Presbytery. 114 The Reviewers fallacy to salve
it in the case of the French Ambassadors. 115 His ignorance of the true stated
controversy between us and the Church of Rome. 8 His cunning in altering the
true state of that between the Bishop and himself as in many places so. 30 K.
Chapter I. invaded not the Scottish Consistory, his condescensions leaving them
contended. 90 The Reviewers uncharitable interpreting Mr. Corbets's end a
punishment from God. 3 Particulars about framing the English-Scotish Covenant.
The persons by whom etc. 177 How dishonorable it is to the English that
approved it. 179 The Reviewer's abominable affected falsehood in defense of it.
180 His impudence in preaching at the Hage that nothing at all had been
objected against it. Ans. to Ep. Ded. 7 How destructive it is to the Royal
line. Ibid. 12 How the same with that of K. James 1580. 183 How it diverse from
it 184 Foraigne Presbyterians ashamed to countenance it. 196 The ambiguitie of
the words in it leaves religion to the liberty of their conceits that take it.
198 Covenants unlawfullie taken are more unlawfullie kept. 177 The Praelates
decline not the judgment of Councels. 202 No inhaerent right in Courts to
nominate Commissioners for intervalls. 123 Spiritual cruelty in the prayers
of Scottish Presbyters. 125 Their temporal cruelty, as much as they praesume,
may by Gods providence be restrained. 203 The Court conscience will, if the
experiment be tried, soon find the difference between the Episcopal and
Presbyterian Clergy. 197
D.
NO defensive arms for subjects. 40 Court of Delegates neither unbeseeming,
nor unreasonable. 43 K. James's Declaration 1584. How by His Majesty
subscribed. 51 The Pr. Scots imprudence as well as injustice etc. in delivering
up K. Chapter I. to his murderers. Ans. to Ep. Ded. 14 The old grudge that moved
them to it. Ibid. 15 The same newly conceived against K. Chapter II. Ibid. 15 The
difference between Us and Scottish Presbyterians is more then in Bishops and
ceremonies. 199 The Sc. Discipline omits what the ancient Canons had among the
cases of Ministers deprivation. What it has conconcernes more Presbyters then
Praelates. 67 It plays the tyrant over the consciences of the people. 124
Divine attributes pro^aned in asscribing them to the Discipline and Assembly
Acts. 100 ovenanters missetake the Discipline for Christ's institution. 180
^o legal establishment in Scotland of the first book of Discipline. 18 K.
James's consent to the second book of Discipline how improbable. 24 They
anticipate the law in the exercise thereof. 27 The English Discipline long
since settled by law in Scotland and our Liturgi there used. 1^3 That of the Pr.
Scots obtruded upon England. Ibid. Divine right pleaded for Presbytere
frustrates all treaties. 96 Episcopacie wants no Discipline aequivalent to that
in the Scottish Presbytery. 175 Our doctrines about real praesence,
justification, free will, final apostasy, praedestination, breif^ie touched.
And a quaestion propounded about David's case. 98. 99 Dowglasse that murdered
Capt. I. Stuart killed in Edinburgh high street. 21
E.
OUr Episcopacie not reputed Antichristian by other Reformed Churches. Ans. to
Ep. Ded. 3. 50 K. Chapter I. suspended the jurisdiction of Episcopacie in Scotland
for no crimes. No full and free Parliament that voted it down in England. 9
Episcopacie no obstruction to the Kings peace. Why it may not be laid aside.
40 What right it has to become unalterable. 94 The reasons of K. Chapter I. well
bottomed. 95 Some particulars about the history of Scottish Episcopacie. 111
Abolition of Episcopacie is not that which will ever give the Pr. Scots
satisfaction. 165 K. Chapter I. in his largest concessions yielded not unto it. 188
The assertours of the Magistrates just power miss called Erastians by the
Reviewer. 6 Erastus^s Royal right of Church government can not untie the Kings
conscience if straightened. No^ is that only it the Bishops praetend to. 97
The Sc. Discipline exempts not Kings from being excommunicate. 57
Excommunication not mean'd by delivering up to Satan. 110 Ignorance no ground
for the execution of it. 172 The Scottish Presbyters practice touching
excommunication little less rigid then their canon. 227 The inconveniences that
follow to be imputed rather to the Kircke then State. 128 Impunitie no good
ground for excommunication. 61 The Kings pardon quitting poenitent
malefactors. 65
F.
Scottish Presbyters much too busy in private families. 175 Faith not so
common, if such a grace as ordinarily it is defined. 201 Church Festivals not
legallie abolished in Scotland. 18 Cruelty toward fugitives. 129
G.
GIbson's insolent speeches unto the King. 21 The Assemblie's juggling in his
case. 52 Gilespie's theoreme for resisting Magistrates disclaimed by no
Assemblies. The substance of it the sense of many. 37 The King why concerned to
be cautelous in his grants to the Presbyterian Scots. 5 The Bishops Office
entirely authorized in the Assembly at Glasgow 1610. 23
H.
THe proceedings against D. Hamilton's late engagement discussed. 70. 71. etc
115. 117. etc. Mr. Henderson's speech of Bishops. 199 E Huntley's case truly
related. 61
I.
K. James a greater Anti - Presbyterian then Anti-Erastian. 64 The Praelates
title to Impropriations and Abbey lands beter then that of Presbyters. 137
Presbyterian indulgence in cases of sedition and rebellion. 47 Their monstrous
ingratitude for the too liberal graces of K. Chapter I. 104 The Kings concessions
to the Irish more justifiable then the other could be to the Scottish
Presbyterian demands. 146 The Pr. Scots endeavors to impose their Discipline
upon England. 5 The Assembly at Westminster having no power to authorize it. 6
Many of the Presbyteries in Scotland have very unfit and unable Judges. 174
Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical flows from the Magistrate. 34 Sc. Presbyters
usurp Civil jurisdiction. 69 No power of jurisdiction in what the Reviwer
miss interprets the Church. 108 Nor in a company met together. 109
K.
THe election of a King not originallie justifiable in any people. ^64 K. Chapter
I. not inclinable, though by counterfeit promises praevail'd with to cast
himself upon the Presbyterian Scots Ans. to Ep. Ded. 12 His writings not
interlined by the Bishops. The Reviewers commendation of them unawares Ibid. 6
K. Chapter II. has expressed no inclination to the Covenant. If any praeventiv^
disswasion of His Majesty's from (...) has been used by the Praelatical
party, it was a dutiful act of conscience and prudence. 149 His Majesty can
not so easily, will not so readily grant what his Royal Father denied. 191
Scots Presbyterians never seriously asscribed any good intentions to K. Ch, I.
nor. 2. 197
L.
MOre learning under Episcopacie then Presbytery. 150 The King supreme
Legislatour. 193 The Bishops share in making laws* as great as any one of the
three Estates. Ibid. Our Li^urgie why read. A parallel of it with primitive
forms fiter then with the Breviarie. 156 The Church of Scotland has had a
liturgy not only for help but practice. 160 The Presbyterians hypocritical
use of it. 161
M.
THe Magistrates definitive judgment in Synods owned by the Reformed Divines
both Praelatical and Presbyterian. 28 Sc. Presbytery will have Magistrates*
subject to the Kirk. 120 Presbyters why against clandestine marriages. 166
Consent of Parents how to be required. Ibid. No obedience due to them
commanding an unjust marriage. 169 The Bishops cautelous in giving license for
clandestine marriages. 170 Gods mercy in praeserving Archbishop Maxwel
falsified by the Reviewer. 3 The business about the Spanish Merchants
sophisticated. 80 Sc. Presbyters controllers in the Militia. 79 The power of it
in the King. 186 P^. Ministers rebellious meeting at Mauchlin moore. 119 They
exceed their commission. 121 Their power with the people dangerous to the
government. 122 Their rebellious proceeding in the persecution of Archbishop
Montgomerie and Archbishop Adamson. 43 The murders and other prodigious
impieties acted by the Sc. Presbyterians in prosecution of their ends. 82 The
scale of degrees whereby they asscended to the murder of K. Chapter I. 38 Which
might have been foreseen by their propositions, never repealed* 76 Murder may
be pardoned by the King who has been petitioned in that case by the
Disciplinarians themselves. 60
N.
THe King's negative voice justified as well in Scotland as England* 77 What is
the power of his affirmative. 78 The Sc. Presbyters gave the occasion and
opportunity for the Nobles to get the Ecclesiastike revenue. The Episcopacie
more then titular they kept up. 15 Presbytery more oppressive to the Nobility
and Gent^ie then Praelacie. 130 Noblemen why chosen Elder^. 131 Where such, how
slighted by the Presbyters. 139
O.
SC. Presbyters assume the arbitration of oeconomical differences. 68 The
Officers appointed by Christ in his Church need not be restrained to the number
of five. Nor those taken to be the same the Presbyterians would have them. 106
The Officials Court a more comp^ent Iudicatorie then the Classical Presbytery.
132 No power of ordination in the Presbybyterie. 108. 142 No comfortable
assurance but from Apostolical succession and Episcopal ordination which
Presbyterians want. (...) The Sc. Presbyterians trial before ordination more
formal then truly experimental of ability in the persons. 1^0 The
qualification different from that required by the Bishops. 152 The original of
the pretended oath taken by the King* for security of the Sc. Discipline. 163
P.
THe Sc. Assemblies decrees to be ratified by Parliament. 24 As those of our
Convocations. 32 Presbytery makes Parliaments subject to Assemblies. 120 The
Parliament of Scotland in no capacity to make demands after the murder of the
King. 163 Presbytery has no claim to the Church partimonie given by
Episcopal founders and benefactours. 25 Their disputes with Princes about
Church revenue. 63 The original right of patronage in Lay persons. 136 Peirth
Assembly 1596. 111 Provision under Episcopacie against the poverty of such as
are ordained. 153 The Praelats still of the same mind they were about the
rights and privileges of Bishops. 103 Reason of bidding prayer before sermon.
159 In the Ca^on form is no prayer for the dead. 160 S^t forms of no use to
beginers that pray by the spirit. 161 The gift of prayer in the Pater Noster.
Ibid. Presbyterians divided about prayer. 162 The injuries by extemporarie
prayer. Ibi. Presbyteries when, and how, erected in Scotland Bishops to
praeside in them. 20 Christianity at its first entrance into Scotland brought
not Presbytery with it. 22 Fallacy in the immediate division of religion into
Presbyterian and Popish. 53 No authority of Scripture for the many practices
of Scottish Presbytery. 10^ Little knowledge, labor, or conscience showed in
Presbyterian preaching. ^54 Scottish Presbyterians beter conceited of themselves
then of any other Reformed Church to which yet they praetend a conformity in
their new model. 198 K. James's speech concerning Scottish Presbytery. 30 How a
King may, and when, exercise the office of a Priest. 195 Sc. Presbyteries
process for Church rents. 3^ The same fault under a different formalitie not
to be twice punished. 126
Q.
K. James's 55. Quaestions. 111
R.
REading Ministers useful and justifiable in our Church. 154 The Praelats do
not annull the being of all Reformed Churches. 143 Though they have no full
assurance. 144 The Reviewers speech of Bishops and Pei^h articles. 199 The
Church of Rome true, though not most true. 145 A rigid separation from her in
many things needless. 146 Assemblies can reform only according to canon,
not the canon. 84 The Primitive Christians reformation different from that of
Sc. Presbyterians. 85 That of the Church of England began rather at K. Edw. VI.
then Henr. VIII. ^6 The Parliament can not reform without the King. 18^
Resistance against the person of the Magistrate can not be made inobedience to
his office. 35 Reviewer willfullie missetakes the scope of the Bishops book.
45 His barbarous implacable malice against the dead. 49 A riot under praetense
of taking a Priest at Mass. 91 Abetted by Knoxe with his confessed interest in
many more. 92 The Pr. Scots must bring beter marks then their ba^e words for
revelations. 201
S.
FOraigne Presbyterians tolerate more liberty on their Sabbath then ^e Bishops
on our Sunday. 50. 125 The hypocritical superstition of the Sc. Presbyters in
the sanctification of their Sabbath. 81 Offenders quitted to be admitted to the
H. Sacrament without public satisfaction in the Church. 126 False measures etc
under color of scandal not to be brought into the cognizance of the Church. 66
All civil causes are brought before the Presbytery under the pre^ense of
scandal. 170 The Pr. Scottish party inconsiderable. 2 They gave beter language
to our Bishops heretofore then of late. 8 Careful Christians will find little
leisure on week days to hear many sermons. 157 Sermons not to exceed an
hour. 158 Those that are Rhetorical may be as useful as many mee^lie
Textuarie. 159 S^. Claud Somais no Countenancer of the late Kirk proceedings
Ans. to Ep. Ded. 4. 111 The Sc. Presbyterians coordinate two Soveraignities in
one State. 113 Two Scottish Kings at one time avouc^ed by A Melvin. 114 Capt.
James Stuart vindicated at large. 87 Superintendents aequivalent to Bishops 23
Imperious supplicates from the Presbytery. 26 Rebellion the subject of most.
165. 179 The Kings supremacy impaited by Presbytery. 27. 195 Placed upon the
People. 29 Scottish Presbytery overthrowes the right of the Magistrates
convocating Synods. 10. 30 Synods where the Magistrate prohibited them. 31. 36
Receiving appeals not the principal end of calling Synods. 132 Noblemen to
have no suffrages in them but when sent thither by the King. 134
T.
THe by tenets of the Discipline. 3 The Texts of Scripture urged against
Episcopacic, for Presbytery, answered. 105. etc. The Presbyterians treason at
Ruthuen. 88 At Striveling. ^9
V.
Family visitations commendable as well in orthodoxe Priest as Presbyters. 173
The Reviewer much in love with the uncleanlie metaphore of a vomit. 176
W.
ACcording to the Word of God a more dubious and frivolous limitation in the
Covenant them heretofore in the oath for Episcopacie. 181
FINIS.

