A SHORT NARRATIVE Of the late DREADFVL FIRE IN LONDON: TOGETHER With certain
Considerations Remarkable therein, and deducible therefrom; Not unseasonable
for the Perusal of this Age.

Written by way of LETTER to a Person of Honor and Virtue.

LONDON,Printed by W. G. for Rich. Thrale at the Crosse-Keysand Dolphin in
Aldersgate Street over against the Half Moon Tavern, and James Thrale under St.
Martin's Outwich Church in Bishops-gate-street. 1667.

To His Noble Friend And Kinsman, Sr. EDWARD TURNOR, KNIGHT; Speaker of the
Honorable House of COMMONS in this Present PARLIAMENT.
SIR,
BEcause I know you were at a distance when that furious, never to be
forgotten, and never enough to be lamented Fire, begun the 2. of September.
desolated our Native City, the glory of England and of Europe, London; In
which, I, your Compatriot, formerly happy in it, am now a great sufferer with
it; I think it a just service to the public, and no unacceptable present to
you, to endeavor such an account of the commencement, progress and conclusion
of it, as both mine own view, and the faithful report of others assists me to;
that as God may have the glory of his just judgment on a populous and rich
City dispersed and impoverished, so men may see the dreadful effects of
providence, untutelar to their acquisitions, and call off their hearts and
confidences, from these sublunaries, to God, who only can bring them to us, and
preserve them with us, and by whom only they can be transformed into comforts,
(which as elementary and vicissitudinarious, they can in no true sense be. For
the fashion of this world passes away,) and the glory of it being but as a
Flower of the Field; to set the heart upon that which has wings and flies away,
will we, nill we, is to be as accessory to our own deception, as weakness and
wilfulness can make us, or misery and judgment can continue us to be.

And because (Sir) it is bruited abroad by some that this fatal accident had a
more than ordinary express of fury, that is, that London was fired from Heaven,
as was Sodom and Gomorrah of old, though say they, God restrained the Fire from
such dismal effects as then were permitted it: And others referr it to the
spite and furtherance of malcontent Villanes, and mischievous Foreigners,
greedy thus to revenge themselves of us, for our stout demeanours toward them,
and our great successes against them, which they judge no otherwise
ballanceable than by this spoil and non-such disappointment, equal, if not
paramount, to any other diversion: because (Sir) I say men are so variously
acted in this Euroclydon of Providence, which has been so stupifying to every
man's senses, that either was a compassionate spectator, or a concerned sufferer
in the spoil and loss of that once famous place, which Tacitus so long ago
terms, Nobilissimum emporium and commeatu negotiatorum maxim celebre; I have
adventured to write my thoughts of the rise, nature, and circumstances of the
Fire, and to beg your patience and pardon both to them and me.

And here (Sir) I must confess though I adore the greatness of God, and deplore
the grievousness of the sin of London, for which God may justly bring upon it,
not only what he has, but greater and more eradicating judgments, such as he
expresses, when he begins he will make an end by, and the fire of his wrath
shall burn, and none shall quench it. Though whatsoever of this that might have
been more, is the deserved severity of God to its many and monstrous sins, yet
do I not believe that this Fire was like that of Sodom and Gomorrah, for that
was fire from the Lord out of Heaven, Genesis 19. 24. Fire not only of wasting
things combustible, but Fire of exinanition to to the earth and soil,
incapacitating it to produce necessaries for the life of man and beast,
converting the substance of the place into Brimstone and Salt and Burning, as
the Lord paraphraseth on Sodoms judgment, Deuteronomy. 29. 33. so that it became
desert, never to be dwelt in again. Isaiah 13. 19. for such fire, like the
waters on the old world, God may be only thought once to exemplify his power
by, and to fix the fear and awe of him in the minds of men, insolent against
him, whose greatness it can reach, whose obduration it can penetrate, whose
fixation in the world it can dissettle; God who has said his spirit shall not
always strive with man, forasmuch as he is but dust, lest the spirit that he
has created should fail before him, makes all judgment his strange work, and
therefore such stupendous ones as this, he may be thought to account much more
his strange work: once indeed he has appeared in flaming Fire and devouring
Brimstone to Sodom and the City of the rich and fertile plain, who were sinners
before the Lord, that is, who because they were rich were riotous, and because
they had abundance from the soil which was rank and lusty, gave themselves up
to luxury and pride; ( For the sins of Sodom were idleness and fullness of
bread.) Once more he will send his Son in flaming Fire to dissolve the world
and render vengeance to his enemies; but his intercurrent judgments of Fire
between this first and that last president of unparallelledness, are alloyed by
mixtures of mercy in them. And I persuade my self of this nature was the late
judgment by Fire upon London, a City not like Sodom without Priest and without
Magistrate, whose vices and insolences bore down both ordinances of Church and
State. Londons fullness of bread and idleness were no public and owned
effronteries, no such wickedness as Sodom had was settled by a law, or practiced
against law in her, no rioters against Angels were her inhabitants as the
Sodomites were, no murmurers were they against Gods sovereignty as the
Sodomites were, ver. 13. Therefore God in the midst of judgment remembered
mercy to London; God overthrew not only Sodom and Gomorrah, but all the Cities
of the plain, giving Zoar only for a Sanctuary to one Lot; but God has not
destroyed the Suburbs of London or the neighboring City to it, but reserved
them for a shelter to her many thousand inhabitants; God destroyed Sodom and
Gomorrah in a moment, Lament. 4. 6. by a special and not to be disputed finger
of God, no mortal instrument cooperating, no culinary fire being so speedy in
its consumptions, but God exercised his judgments on London gradually that the
spectators might by the sight of their punishment, bewail the ingratitude of
their sin deserving it; God overthrew all the Inhabitants of Sodom, and that
which grew upon the ground of it, but God has preserved the Inhabitants of
London and much of their riches to be a seed of succession and a door of hope
to its future restoration. God petrified Lot's wifes body as a standing
monument of his wrath upon her, but for looking back upon Sodom whence she was
delivered, with commiseration of it and wish of better fortune to it, but God
has delivered the inhabitants of London to look to London with pity and to
praise him for their deliverance, and they wish its re-edifying, I hope,
without sin, and will set on to build it, I hope, without interruption. Lastly,
Sodoms judgment is termed Eternal fire, 7v. Jude
as if God had made those monstrous sinners, who turned the glory of God into
shame, to have a Hell both here and hereafter, unusual sinners punished with
unusual judgments; But Londons doom, I hope, is not such, for God has given
its inhabitants the spirit of grace and of supplication, and though they have
ashes for beauty, and the spirit of heaviness for the garment of salvation, yet
are they submissive to God, and accepters of his correction, and abiders by it
till he release them from it. And hence it is (Sir) that I conclude since
London was that City when it was fired that had a people and thousands of them
that feared God sincerely; if in any part of the world God had a chosen
generation, and a people nigh unto him, the judgment of fire sent upon it was
not miraculous and extraordinary as those fires we read consumed the Sacrifice
on the Altar, 9, 10. of Levit. Lib. 3. c. 9. Josephus lib. 8. Antiq. Iudic. c.
7. l. 8. c. 2.
or that which consumed the Flesh upon the Altar upon Elias his Prayer, or that
which destroyed the Soldiers, sent to apprehend Elias, or that which consumed
Solomon's Sacrifice, 1 Chronicles. chap. 8. all which with other the like Fires in
Scripture was by Lightning, fire darted from Heaven upon them, and prevalent
beyond all natural operation and activity separated from the addition of Gods
penal power in it, no such Fire I humbly conceive was this, but that Fire
which the providence of God suffered to fall out by the mediation of concurring
circumstances specifique to that Issue and productive of the consequences of it.

Yet Secondly I humbly also conceive this Fire of desolation, not to be barely
natural, but to be signal of something supernatural, for Gods not exerting his
power to hinder it, is the tacit commissioning of nature to express its utmost
of active evil, that is, of penal truculency, which only is mitigated and
assuaged by God, who says to the Sea, hitherto shall thou go, and to the
Plague, Sword, Famine, Fire, beyond this bound ye shall not pass. Which
considered, there may several particulars be mentioned which might subserve to
this ruin;

As first the general and malicious conjunctions of enemies ab^o^d who knowing
London the Governments Epitome, the Copy from the life of this Empires Majesty,
the second Throne of Rega^ Glory, the readiest and most certain supply of all
necessaries for Offense or Defense, the great Sanctury of Protestantisme, the
almost all of Great Britain, this so combined in London to her Sovereigns
luster, the Nations supply, and her opposites disappointment, might rationally
originate evil thoughts against her, and thence evil practices upon her, and
as the chief and most fatal to her this of Fire; which as it hastneth the
spoil, so both terrifieth the inhabitants, and gives rise through the
suddenness of its confusion to any discontented numbers in her, whose designs
being tenebrious, and their Partisans lewd and desperate, can have no sitter an
opportunity to act a Sicilian Vespers, or a Parisian Massacre in, then in that
mist and fog of danger and inconsideration, wherein every ones particular
concern becomes a neglect of the public, and the Nerves, Sinews, and Arteries
of Governments contexture become shrivelled ^p, and by reason of their violent
Convulsions, incorrespondent to their general designment; This wa^ one of those
evils that might have made, and probably was designed to make the time of the
Fire more fatal than God in goodness suffered it to prove; for since contemptor
propriae vitae Magister tuae is a true rule, and it is riveted in the corrupt
nature of man to revenge injuries by destruction of the Soul, body, substance
and being of enemies, and men's ambitions are most keen in exploits for their
Countries, to cause good to which, a Great spirit would not only beg off a
believed curse, as that Venetian Senator did the Popes interdiction of Venice,
with a Rope about his neck, lying like a dog at the Popes feet, and not being
to be drawn thence till he obtained it, but with Codrus dye to obtain his
Countreps liberty, I say considering that policy tempts power to scruple
little, that is, its advantage, and that where ever there is money to give,
there will be service to exchange for it, be the fact as horrid and sanguinary
as that of Faux or any like it; and considering that no mischief done us can
amount to any thing like this to London, it is not improbable but that this
Fire might be first kindled in the revenge, and then lighted further by the
hands of miscreants hired thereunto; Quoniam benefaciendo non potuit
innotescere, male agendo innotesceret.
for did not Herostratus a base Fellow, Josephus Antiq. lib. ^8. c. 1. lib. 7.
de Bello Iud. c. 10.
purely to have a name for villainy, set on fire the famous Temple of Ephesus,
the worlds wonder? etc. Did not Judas the Gaulomite, and Sadoc the Pharisee,
with his lewd comorades, set on fire the Temple of Jerusalem? And a single
Soldier of Vespasian's burn a second time the Temple at Jerusalem contrary to
Vespasian's mind, and though he came with Soldiers to quench it, yet the
Soldiers continued it burning that they might come at the Gold which they
believed it full of; and if this has been the course of other things, why
should we not consider that what has been may be, and what is to London so
dreadful, may as probably be the effect of such malignant counsels as ever
ruled heretofore to prodigies, if not parallel to, yet second to this; I see no
cause not to suspect it now, when this which is probable enough to be the
wisdom of the children of this world, shall be confirmed by confessions of
parties, agents, by depositions of confederacies, threats, preparations and
agitations by persons banished the land, or capital offenders for being in the
land, when notwithstanding the Laws penal in force against them, 27. Eliz. 2.
they shall abide and be in the very face of power, 35. Eli. 2.
and glory in the confusions that by Parties and Fire they have made, 1. lac. 4.
There is just cause to fear there be many Michalls amongst us. 3. Car. 2.
And let us (in Blessed King James his words) rejoice and praise God for the
discovery of them, Par. 88. of his works in Folio.
assuring our selves they were never of us, accounting all them to be against
us, that either rejoice at the prosperity of our enemies, or rejoice not with
us at our miraculous deliverance, and let us also diligently and warily try out
those crafty Michalls, for it is in that respect that Christ recommends unto us
the wisdom of Serpents, not thereby to deceive and betray others, no, God
forbid, but to arm us against the deceit and treason of Hypocrites that go
about to trap us* Thus that Solomon of his time wrote, adding his weighty
reason, That these Meditations of mine may after my death remain to the
posterity, as a certain testimony of my upright and honest meaning in this so
weighty a cause; Page 81.
from which I collect this positively, that not to be prudently zealous, and
politickly severe to men of bloody and active principles, who are by the Breves
of their holy Father commanded not to take The Oath of Allegiance, Paul the 5
in his B^ief to the English Catholics. cited p. 254. of K. James
because this Oath cannot be taken with safety of the Catholic Faith, and of
their souls health, since it contains many things that are plainly and
directly contrary to their Faith and and Salvation; and who embrace this as
Divine Canon, which I do not believe all Romanists do, whom Secretary
Wallsington styled Papists of softness and conscience, though the Jesuited
sort, Papists of Faction undoubtedly do; I say, not to take notice of these
dangers is much a blemish to the integrity of Reformed Religion in the hearts
of those that are guilty of it, which to clear themselves from, as of old there
has been prudent regard to those Engineers of disturbance, who to relieve their
Religion from Captivity as they pretend, have in the days of Queen Elizabeth
and King James, Princes of Eternal memory, raised invasions and conspiracies,
and of latter days have carried them on, hanging forth Pirates colors to
suppress true men till they displayed a Papal interest under the Vizzard of a
popular Reformation; See Faux and Winter's examinat on at the Powder P^ot. p.
231, 233, 234.
which though it were by wise men perceived, yet was permitted by God to punish
our too much favor to them, Apolog. for the O^th of Allegi. p. 252, 264. 270
who do not only maintain Parracides and Rebellions; Speed in H. 8. p. 790.
some of which the Reign of Hen. And the Pope instigated the Princes and
Subjects o Eng. against H. 8. Speed p. 783.
8. shows, who was a Prince of their own persuasions, though he opposed the
Popes power over him, for which many of his Popish Subjects opposed him,
(though they paid dear for it,) as still many such would do if they had power;
and if the maxims of their State Fathers the Jesuits had, that power with
them that heretofore they had; for though it must be acknowledged, many of the
English Romanists are and may be good Subjects, because they have and will I
hope take the Oath of Allegiance and Supremacy without Papal dispensation Stat.
28. H. 8. c. 10.
or mental reservation, which declares their fidelity to the Crown and
Government; yet are there many that are so far from so doing (because they are
taught that salvis principiis they cannot do it) that they will rather hazard
any thing than do it; and I am contented they that will not do it, should
rather hazard their any thing, then the Kings and our All. As I say these
preliminations ushered in Laws of purgation, prevention and punishment
heretofore to be made, so do they upon presumptions of equivalent prudence
prompting thereunto, solicit and warrant the revival of those laws vigours,
Now in this nick of time wherein the Gangreen of enmity against Englands glory,
and its Empires prosperity, is so combined against; And I bless God and the
Great King and Parliament of England now sitting, In His Majesti^s Pr^c am^tion
of the 10. of Nov. 1666. upon the desires of His two Houses of Parliament. c.
25. de monarchia hispanica.
for their vigilance and zeal in this provision lately concluded against the
evil instruments, and evil effects of such disloyalty as the Iesuited Engineers
have raised against us, not only that of Wars, (which their Campanella has long
since counseled to and is now brought about,) but also all other ways of
subjecting this Crown and Subjects to their Catholic Tyranny, which (not only
that Anonymus author Revelatio consillii Tridertini set forth in French, and
then suppressed, though since about 1620. printed in Latin, has made good by
irrefragable instances, which I here would have set down verbatim, had not my
copy with other things of mine been burned in Syon College,) but many other
Authors have given us severalties, which summed up together, makes out such
secret Policies and bloody Practices, tending to the like funest issues:
Witness the boast of the Duke of Alva a little before his death, that he had
caused near 18000. persons to be under the Executioner for several sorts of
punishment for Religion sake: Witness that speech of Phillip the Second of
Spain, Thuanus l. 85. 98.
that he had rather lose all his Provinces than seem to grant or favor any
thing which might be prejudicial to the Catholic Religion; so in the
pacification of Colen, Anno 1580. the Spanish Ministers of State declared
openly that the Protestants would be well served if they were stripped of all
their goods and forced to go seek new Countries like Jews and Egyptians, who
wander up and down like Rogues and Vagabonds: Witness that boast of Cardinal
Granuellanus, who was wont to say, that he would reduce the Catholic Gaspar.
Grevinus in Institut. p. 192. B^llaeus de actis Pont.
Religion in all places, though 100000. men were to be burned in an hour; and
reported it is, that in less then 30. years the Spanish Inquisition did consume
by various torments and sundry kinds of death 150000. yea, so hateful is any
thing of Reformed Religion to them, Campanella c. 16. de monarc. Hisp.
that not only does a man of note of their Church blame Charles the fifth
Emperor for keeping his word with Luther, which he says he kept vanum
clementiae famam aucupans, affecting the vain fame of clemency, and that which
reason of State ought to have excused him from; but if, says he, he did well in
such a punctilio, yet post in domuitione illum eundem opprimere debuisset atque
principes Protestants De comitiis ^ormacientibus and Augustionis, c. 27.
jam suppressos prorsus extinguere; That is, when he was upon his return home
he ought to have surprised him, and utterly extinguished all the Protestant
Princes he had power over: And, if I am not misinformed, it was disputed
amongst the Inquisitors, whether the bones of Charles the fifth were not to be
dug up and burned, because before his death he seemed to be inclined to the
opinion, That man is only saved through faith in Christ. Yea, that Learned and
Good Son, of a Matchless Father, Dr. Du Mouliu, Answer to Philanax Ang. p. 58,
59.
evidences the kindness and charity of Jesuited Romanists to consist in no
better fruits of piety to us, than to censure the Protestant Reformers
(Sovereign Princes and their Loyal Subjects) and the Reformation it self
(though done by their authority) guilty of Rebellion and High Treason, calling
it the new Gospel, Iustifies Mariana and the Jesuits against those that object
to them their Doctrine of King killing, cries down Protestants as persons not
to be trusted with the Government of the State, or suffered to live in any
Commonwealth; bestows upon them the most odious terms that he could devise,
Traitors, Diabolical, Cockatrices, Infernal Spirits, and such wild terms. And
yet while that Author reviles the Religion that our Gracious King, his Loyal
Parliament and Subjects are of, and inveighs against them as unworthy the trust
of Government, he has the impudence to style himself Philanax Anglicus. And
King James of blessed memory has long ago charged it as an abuse of his Lenity,
that though he had honored many Papists with Knighthood, that they were known
and open Recusants, though he did indisserently give audience and access to
both sides bestowing equally all Favors and Honors on both professions, all
Ranks and Degrees of Papists, had free and continual access in his Court and
Company, that he frankly and freely did free Recusants of their ordinary
payments, and gave out of his own mouth strait order to spare the execution of
all Priests, notwithstanding their conviction, joining thereunto a gracious
Proclamation whereby all Priests that were at liberty and not taken, might go
out of the Country by such a day: This general pardon having been extended to
all convicted Priests in Prison, whereupon they were set at liberty as good
Subjects, and all Priests that were taken after, sent over and set at liberty
there; notwithstanding all his Royal clemency, beyond which so zealous a
Protestant Prince as he was, could not warrantably go; the good Kings charge on
the Papists was such, that not only the Papists themselves, grew to that height
of pride, in confidence of my mildness, that they did directly expect, and
assuredly promise to themselves Liberty of Conscience and Equality with other
of my Subjects in all things; but even a number of the best and faithfullest of
my said Subjects were cast in great fear and amazement of my course and
proceedings, ever prognosticating, Page 253. In the Apology for the Oath of
Allegian.
and justly suspecting that sour fruits to come of it, which showed it self
clearly in the Powder Treason: Thus the King.

If I say the confidence and enmity of the Jesuited confederacy be such, when
the power of the Nation is (blessed be God) not theirs, nor the hundredth man
in the Nation theirs, and when they have all the favor Subjects that are sober
and conformable to Law can have or be happy with; what would the courtesy of
England be less then Banishment, Fire, Faggot and Slaughter, if they were in
power and had their will, and if their devices were not by the boast, braving,
and appearing of their activity, taken notice of, and the Nation thereby
remembered, that danger is designed by those homines novae fectae and malefica
superstitionis qui republicam turbabant, as the words of the arrest of the
French Parliament for expulsion of the Jesuits are? with which the Statute of
Et per Iesu^tas Fact^oois Hispaniae emissar o^ vulgi animos solicitasse atque
hoc rebellionum lacendium in Gallia quae side erga ^gitimos Principes ante illa
tempora precipua suit, etc. Thuanus l. 101. To 5.
27. Eliz. c. 2. consents, when it declares them to be sent, as has appeared
by sundry of their own confessions and examinations, as by diverse other
manifest means and proofs, not only to withdraw her Majesty's Subjects from
their due obedience to Her Majesty, but also to stir up and move Sedition,
Rebellion and Hostility!

All which suggestions (Sir) laid together amount to this, that probable it may
be, that the Fire in London might be the effect of desperate designs and
complotments from abroad, shrouded under and seconded by some malcontents at
home, because it seems to me of such consequences to Foreign purposes, not
only by becoming an opportunity for commotion, and the dreadful consequences of
it (had not God in mercy restrained them) but also by retarding the supplies of
men, money, and all other necessaries for peace and war, which thence are best
readiest, and in fuller proportion served than from the greatest part of the
Nation besides, and if suppliable elsewhere, yet with more charge, more
difficulty, less constantly, less plenarily.

Which has ever kept up the honor and influence of London; for had it not been
for the River of Thames, and the portability of that which it brings up to the
Keys of London, which drew and kept together. Trade, and t^ereby plenty of men
and money, London would not have been so deservedly accounted the Chamber of her
Kings, the Seat of their Government, the Mart of the Nations Trade, the
Magazine of the Nations wealth, for enemies and enviers she has ever had more
than many, and those of the great men, some of whom have had the face to court
their Daughters, and with their portions to redeem their Lands mortgaged, See
my defense of Arms and Armory printed Anno 1660.
and to inherit more by them, yet forgot the gratitude they owe and ought to
pay to their Fathers, made what they are in London; yea, London has ever had
more rough and opprobrious scorns cast upon her by the issues of Citizens,
grown men of Country Fortunes got in London, then by any more noble Country
Gentleman: Which considered, if London were not such a useful part of England,
as the heart is in the body, it would not have been of such import as it was;
but such it being, it must by a parity of reason become the mark of this
Kingdoms enemies malice for so being, and thence must follow unavoidably, that
all designs of ruin and diminution are formed and executed against her, for
her so being.

Thus (Sir) it may be probable the instigation to it was from abroad: Nor
Secondly, can it be denied but that it may be furthered from a party at home,
who being mixed, partly constituted of men differing in main points of Religion
and of dangerous principles in Civil Policy, and of men loose in Life and
indigent of Fortune, may both rejoice in, and be helpers forward of the doom of
London, which while Loyal and under due Obedience to lawful Government they
look upon as the only check to their exorbitancy, and the only probable
balance to their mutinous preponderations? for though I well know they do not
all agree in first principles, yet may they conjoyn in the design of rendering
their opposites, (as they account all men who are for legal settlements, and
subject-like demeanor) less potent, and their enmity less formidable, which
makes the case of London more deplorable* in that it had not only a contest
with the Fire to quench it, but also with the virulent vulgar, and the deboshed
libertines nessed in her, whose necessities and vices as they pinch them, so
will they provoke them to any destructive course in supplement to them. For
London, as all other promisouous aggregations of men, having vast Suburbs, and
(those inhabited by multitudes of men, and those under a loose Shire
Government, and many of those single Persons, Gamesters, and others of
shuffling life, or married persons, full of charge and poverty,) undergoes a
great danger from those insolent and needy numbers, who if not restrained by
strong Watches, and Trained bands ready upon all summons, and hindered rise or
conjunction by vigilant Officers, and Popular readiness to seize upon
Insurrectors, would undoubtedly upon any general and amazing contingent, become
vexatious and bloody, which being the apprehension of Government has caused it
in all times of fear to survey the Out-parts, and take account of all Inmates,
requiring the Inhabitants to be responsible for them, and upon survey of their
number about 1647. I remember the number of them who lived in the Out-parts and
were independent on Government, as to their charge to or in it, was said to be
many thousands. And how dangerous these added to the other poor members of
Parishes and Masters of Sheds and Houses are, is easy to be judged and has
been found by sad experience in the Fire, the loss of which was much in the
Goods imbezzelled, and the Thefts committed by them upon pretense of helping
forth goods and hindering the approaching Fire, as well as in the actual
consuming by the Fire, (the houses only excepted,) and probably those in a good
part had been saved, had they restrained their hands from theft, and employed
them to master the Fire, by handing water, pulling down houses, ridding away
materials mingled with the Fire, and observing the commands of provident and
knowing leaders in that (so employed) saving service. But their design being
not what wontedly (though stealing has been ever in fashion in those cases) so
much to stay the Fire and aid the sufferers and their neighbors, yea, and the
whole City which ought to be concerned in the misery of any part of it, as to
prog for themselves, and to pilfer from them whom the Fire sufficiently
threatened, and at last preyed upon; the Fire had no impediment from their
labor, nor the removers any benefit by their fidelity, but they either valued
their labor so high that no losers purse could well reach to it, (by reason of
which some ordinary Housekeepers were put to 40. pound charge but to remove
from the Fire, and some few of the more stored sort as I have been informed at
near 400. pound,) or accepted engagement, that under pretense of it they might
color and act their designed falsehood; for though many there were that gave
and could give great rates for honest Carts and Laborers, yet others there
were that could not reach it, moneys being not so flush with them, nor they so
stored with it on Saturday nights, men then paying out all on Saturdays their
pay day; and those who had thus drayned themselves were certainly put to great
straits, being either forced to give one part to carry away the rest, or to
leave all to the fire; the mercies of which was cruelty to all that it came
near; the flight from which gave opportunity to mis-carriage of thousands of
pounds worth of goods, and to many thefts of goods lodged in open places,
Fields and others for present riddance out of danger and hoped for security
from it, which as it frowardly proved, became a removal out of the danger of
Fire, into the Den of Thieves; so that indeed in some sense, the City, that
rich and glorious seat of Merchants and other Tradesmen, who were as those of
Tire are said to be (...), the Honorable of the Earth, Members of the Crowning
City, which employed the Nations younger Brothers and Sisters, and restored
them in their posterities, of elder Brothers Fortunes and Honors. The City,
that I think I may say was one of the wonders of the world, if Pope Innocent
the fourth were a competent judge, who desired not with Moses to see Gods
glory, but to see with Satan the World and the glory of it, summed together in
the riches of London, and the rarities at Westminster; this riches in some
degree, and the subsistence of the inhabitants thereof, was as well devoured by
the Suburbian thieves, and by the Countries extortion for their Carts and
conveniences, as by the Fire; all which had their respective share in laying
load upon Londons broken back, and upon the general distraction of, and in it.

Which I note, not to lay an Imputation upon all assistants, either as
Laborers or as Carts; for some, and many I hope, and know by relation, to have
been very honest and reasonable, but into those honest and happy hands God
knows many of my goods fell not, nor the goods of thousands more, but into the
hands of those Harpyes that devoured all they took, and cried Give give, never
to return again; whereupon the argument must stand good, that the riches of
London being only the posessors during the vigor of Laws and the ability of
the Magistrate to circumspect every part of his charge, all disability of thine
so to do, and so this distraction of the Fire must demolish the wall of
separation, and draw a line of level to whatever industry and villainy during
that rage will prey upon. For as Inter arma silent leges, so inter flammas
cessat proprietas, and in such case Occupancy is judged by men unconscionable
the best title, and the after Proclamations may endeavor, return and threaten
detension of goods so unjustly gotten, and some out of honesty, and oaths out
of fear may return some parts, and others out of envy to those that have more
than they may disclose things that by these means may come to the owners hands;
yet notwithstanding all these, there will not be thetenth of the goods restored
that were carried away purely in theft; so great and effectual a temptation is
opportunity, to need where it is not restrained by conscience, nay in this
harrass of Fire, and that so generally absorptive of the City, then there is
somewhat toward authorizing a scruple of conscience, and absolving persons
from the guilt of theft; In that what they took being in a kind of Landwreck,
wherein no body owned goods, and they deserted and left to the Fire, must have
been consumed; better they were taken away by any to whom they would do good,
then consumed by the Fire which does nothing but hurt. And if they will now
part with their dubious titles upon reasonable terms, they that took away goods
in a sort wrongfully, will prove themselves preservers not raptors, which I in
a great measure distrusting, do conclude that though the Fire in London might
not come, yet it might be negatively continued from those needy numbers who
fish in troubled waters, being like the vultures in publico malo falcies,
carrying more from two or three days such disorder, then they will by labor
or patrimony get or save to themselves all their lives. There is a story in
Josephus of the Fire in Antioch which consumed the four square Marketplace,
the public place where all Writings and Registers were kept, as also the Kings
Houses; which Fire so increased that it threatened firing the whole City;
Antiochus accused the Jews to be the incendiaries, and all the Jews were like
to be slain upon the suspicion and bruit of it; Book 7. c. 25. de bello Iudic.
but Collega appeasing the people, and further inquiring into the matter, found
the Jews wholly innocent, but certain inpious people had done this being
imdebted, thinking that when they had burned the Market places, and the public
writings, that then their debts could not be required at their hands. And
though if men thought seriously upon the judgments of God on such evil works
and ways, such gains would prove but like the hire of a Mic 1. 7. Jos. 7. 21,
^4.
Harlot, or like the wedge of Achan, or the Babylonish garment, a curse to them
and theirs, yet posession being nine points of ten of the Law to them, the
advantage they in present (for further they look not) have by it, carries them
out to withdraw assistance from hindering its progress, which by their manual
labor they might probably have done; so that though what has been written is
intended to satisfy so full as it can, You (Sir) and all that read this, from
concluding this to be from a supernatural cause, that is from Fire darted upon
it from Heaven; yet does it not, nor can it in the least drive at making it a
bare accident and a nude casualty, but a just and severe judgment of God upon
the place and nation, auxiliated and perfected by concurrence of circumstances,
benign to, and corresponding with a vastative event; nor is any evil of
punishments on Cities, or Men, or Nations, but from God concurring with it, and
exciting and carrying forth instruments to the accomplishing of it, Ex. 13. 3
The deliverance from the captivity of Egypt, The raising of the Syrians
against Israel, The defection Ezekiel. 9. 23. 1 Km. 11. 12, 13.
of the ten Tribes from Rehoboam, The Jer. 29. 4. Jer. 27. 9. Jer. 32. 3.
captivity into Babylon, The desolation Mi. 3. 12. Zec 1. 12. Luke 21. 20.
of Jerusalem by Vespasian, The afflictions of 2. Sam. 13. 14, 15.
David from his childrens lust and insolency, the Sanguis martyrum semen
Ecclesiae.
misery Job 1. 12.
of Job from Satan's inrode upon him and his, The storm 1, and 2. c. Jonah.
upon Jonah for his disobedience, The temptation of Mat. 26. and 14 Mat.
Peter for his self-confidence, The thorn 2 Cor. 12. 7.
in the s^esh for Saint Paul's elevation; The persecution of the Primitive
Martyrs, which were the Churches Spawn, The Translations of Empires, The
advance and reducements of families, The Marches and Counter-marches of men and
things out of one posture into another, all these are circumacted by God
employing instruments of his in the managery of them. Thus though by good and
evil spirits God leads about the world and all in it, bringing them into the
mold and method of his own good pleasure both of wisdom and power; yet are
these instruments so purely passive compared to God, that they are drowned in
his omnipotence, whose vassals and visible puppets of agency they only are, nor
are men to respect them but as bubbles raised up and flatted, as God the
Master Builder of them, informs or deserts them.

Which rectified notion proves a just medium of expediency to those equally
boystrous extremes of seduced man, who on the one side will have this judgment
miraculous and Fire from Heaven without any natural assistance, Gods finger
heavier than all the loins of nature; or on the other side ascribe it so to
second causes, that they will allow no more judgment of God in it, than that
which accompanies common casualty; whereas indeed in this case of London there
are so many concurrencies which have their attending cheques; which possible
are to be, but actually, were not improved in remedy that the prevalence of the
Fire against, and in despite of those wonted prudences, and usual resistances,
and the Latitude of effects, seconding such a neglect of impeding means, where
so well understood, and so dexterously at other times practiced; this I say
duly and impartially considered must evince some more than ordinary
concurrence of God to arm and enable those arising pimples to such a general
distemper and mortification. And I pray God that this judgment that has thus
begun at the House of God (For such I dare account London) let profane and
superstitious defamers of it say what they please (God had more marked ones for
Mourners Ps 37. 37.
over and livers against the abominations done in the Land, in London, E^e. 9.
4.
then I believe in a great part of the Nation beside) may stay there, and not
proceed to those that are yet preserved who are no more righteous than their
ruined neighbors; Which the Lord of mercy grant for his Sons sake.

Having thus (Sir) made way to the more Historical part of this Narrative,
which falls in properly with the circumstances of cooperation with the Fire,
whereby it unhappily as to man, though happily as to God propagating his power
by it) prevailed against the City, I come to the particularization of such
instances as were by wise men observed Fautive of its progress and conclusion.

And the first circumstance notable in it is that of the time when it began,
which was ominous as it was about 3. of the clock on a Sunday morning, a time
when most persons, especially the poorer sort, were but newly in bed, and in
their first dead sleep; for Saturday being the conclusion of the weeks labor,
and the day of receipts and payments, the markets last not then only all the
day, but some part of the night, especially in Butcheries, and too often in
Alehouses, the Poors pockets then stored with money overflowing mostly that
way: And thence might the Fire get a more than ordinary rooting, from the
leisure of its burning before it met with checque or suppression; Yea, and when
it was discovered, the usual custom being to lie longest in bed on Sunday
might make men more indulge their ease, and remit their early stirring and
wonted vigor, than otherwise they would and besides this, amazements in the
night are most terrifying to men even of courage, whom the dangers of the day
are not at all discomforting to, because known and distinguished to be what
they are by them; whereupon in that it pleased God to permit it then to break
forth, it was not without intimation of some displeasure; For usually it is
with God to make days, places, and persons, peculiarly and devotedly his the
instances of his eminent and wasting judgments, thus he is said in
commissionating judgments to begin at his Sanctuary, Je. 25. 29.
to give his beloved into the enemies hand, Ezekiel. 9. 6. Ps. 78. 61.
to tread the Daughter of Judah in a Wine Press, Lam. 1. 15
to make Shiloh the mark of his anger, Jer. 7. 12. 14. 26. v. 6.
to abhor his people, Amos 6. 8
and to hate Sacrifices, Isa. 1. 11.
and to cause the Sabbath to cease from a La^d, Jer. 6. 20.
to cast down the Prince and the Priests his own Vicegerents, Isa. 1. 13.
to make Jerusalem a hissing and an astonishment, Hos. 2. 11.
Lam. 2. 1.
and to give up his Temple and people into the spoil of the Nations, Jer. 19.
8. c. 25. v. 9.
to suffer the Blood of Jesus that speaks better things than did the blood of
Abel, to be the blood of execration and indictment against them, who cried out,
Let him be crucified. These things thus by God ordered, and the method of his
ordinary providence, inverted, and corrosion coming into the room of
Balsamittiqueness; this ruling of Wine into Vinegar, and of Oil into Aqua
Fortis, (as I may say) argues God highly incensed, and resolved upon
destruction and vengeance. For some provocation unnatural, unusual, persisted
in with obstinacy and in opposition to, and despite of the means and motions
of ^eclaimer; And applicable hereunto seems Londons case, as to the time, to be
suitable, for did he not God make His holy day of Rest, a day of labor and
disquiet? did he not cause the Church to be thin of people to pray to him and
hear his Word from him? did he not cast off the care of his Sanctuaries and
Ministers, and give them and theirs up as a prey to the Fire? because many of
the people would not be present at their Churches according to the Law; nor
many of the Ministers spiritually expend themselves, but according to the law
of man, has not God dis-parished and scattered them, Priest from people, and
Neighbor from Neighbor? Indeed (Sir) these things are to me observable, and
that God who is a God of Peace and a God of Order, should bring distraction and
disorder upon a City Regular and Religious, upon his own day, and in the morn
of it, to anticipate as it were, their conventions of expiation, and to avocate
them from the use of a probable and prescribed remedy, argues indignation: For
Gods promise to Solomon as a Type of Christ was, 2 Chronicles. 7. 12.
If my people that call upon my name, shall humble themselves and seek my face,
and turn from their evil way, then will I hear in Heaven, my dwelling place,
and have mercy and heal their I and* For I have chosen this place to my self
for an house of Sacrifice; yet God seemed to walk contrary to his people of
London in this, for he drew them as it were off from the remedy, that his hands
being loosened, Deu. 9. 14.
he might punish and not be prevailed with to pardon, which aversion of Gods
from being entreated, imponderates the judgment with a weightier note of Gods
displeasure, which the pensive Prophet Jeremiah rehearses to this sense, The
Lord says he has swallowed up all the habitations of Jacob, and has not
pitied, Chapter 2. v. 2.
he has thrown down in his wrath the strong holds of the Daughter of Judah, he
has brought them down to the ground, he has polluted the Kingdom and the
Princes thereof. This, this, is that which is not ordinary, that God began the
Fire of his wrath on the day of his rest and solemn worship, and (with
reverence be it uttered) profaned his Sabbath, which he commanded to be
sanctified; as if the sins of the Nation punished in London, the head and heart
of it were such as had procured a violation of all the methods of kindness and
paternal goodness, whereby God wontedly corresponded with us, and as if he had
recalled his former condescension, and would be in Covenant with us, and a
Patron to us no longer; La. 2. 15.
This advantage given the passers by to clap their hands to hiss and wag their
head at London, saying, Is this the City that men call the perfection of
Beauty, the joy of the whole earth; This, this, brought upon London, upon a
Lords day, wherein were more Sanctifyers of his Holy day and Name, than in most
of the Nation besides, gives the judgment a tincture, nay, a deep woad of
intense displeasure, He that commands, we shall not do our own works, nor think
our own thoughts upon that day, would not himself have set a foot this work,
this strange work, upon that day, nor have thought thoughts of ruin to a
populous and ancient City, called upon by him, on that Holy day: But that the
Notation of the day might lesson us displeasure extraordinary. Which I mention
not to comply with any party whose constructions of Gods meaning are calculated
to the Meridian of their interest, which has couched in it a secret reak of
enmity to their opposites, and of applause of themselves, such as are on the
one hand the outed party, who expound it to be for their ejection, or the other
party, who averr it to be a punishment of Phanaticism, which they will have
favored and advanced by London, or of that proud party who will have it sent
for the pride of London, who because the Citizens in it thrive and provide well
for their Wifes, Children, and Relations, are accounted proud in their suitable
livings to their births, and Gods blessing upon their industry and thrift, or
of that profane party who will intrude their loose sentiments into Gods
counsel, and confirm themselves in their libertinism, to live, and speak as
they list, because they see themselves delivered, when the Precisians of London
(as they deridingly, and perhaps sinfully call them) are plagued and punished
by Fire; I say not to dance after these mistaken Pipes whose notes are besides
Gods Gammuth. All that I see or dare believe inscribed by God upon the
judgment is, that the sin of the Nation, punished by War and Plague last year,
and yet unrepented of, is further prosecuted by God, thorough the sides and
heart of the chief Corporation and Master-City of this Island, Eze. 15. 8.
London, whose burning is the Herald of God to the Nation, calling it to view
its remaining doom upon its persisted impenitence; For as they were not the
greatest sinners on whom the Tower of Siloam fell, so were they the greatest
sinners in England on whom the Fire of London fell, and whose Fortunes and
habitations it has levelled; but except we punished, and others yet privileged
therefrom, repent, we shall all, and altogether perish.

The next remarkable circumstance in this Fire, was that of Place wherein it
first began, which was Puddinglane, a place so called, but from some eminent
seller or sellers of Puddings living of old there, it being usual to take
denomination of Lanes and Streets, not only from men's names, chief owners of,
and dwellers in them, but from some other accidents from whence they are
denominated; thus as the Lord Baynard, Lord of Baynards Castle, gave name to
Castle Baynards Ward, and Sir John Basing to Basing-hall Ward; so streets have
been called according to several occasions, as Lothbury, because Founders and
Brasiers living therein, made every one Loath the Street for the noise;
Bread-street, Milk-street, Wood-street, Candlewick-street, and infinite others
were called from the Bakers, Milk-women, Wood-buildings, and Chandlers that in
quantity dwelt there, which is evident in the Survey of London, Stowes Survey.
so is this Pudding-lane called; For that Lane bordering upon Thames Street and
Billings-gate, where people of labor and poor condition ply, and are early in
the morning, and late at night, when the Tide serves to bring up Fishermen,
Passengers, and other Boats and Portages; the vicinity of such a good house as
they call them, wherein Pudding, the general beloved dish of English men was
sold, might reasonably bring the place in request, and thence give denomination
to the corner wherein the seller lived.

This little pittyful Lane, crowded in behind little East-cheap on the West,
St. Buttolphs-lane on the East, and Thames Street on the South of it, was the
place where the Fire originated, and that forwarded by a Bakers stack of wood
in the house, and by all the neighboring houses, which were as so many matches
to kindle and carry it on to its havoc; thus the Fire meeting with the Star
Inn on Fish-street-hill on the back of it, and that Inn full of Hay, and other
combustibles, and with the houses opposite to it, and closed with it at the
top, burned three ways at once, into Thames Street, (the lodge of all
combustibles, Oil, Hemp, Flax, Pitch, Tar, Cordage, Hops, Wines, Brandies, and
other materials favorable to Fire; all heavy goods being ware-housed there
near the water side, and all the wharfs for Coal, Timber, Wood, etc. being in
a line consumed by it) unto Fish-street-hill, till it met the other Fire at the
Bridge, to the Interval of Building, and to Butolphs-lane into Mark-lane in
Tower-street; and in all this Savage progress met with no opposition from
Engines or other Artifices; because it was impossible in such a strait, and in
such a rage of Fire, they should be serviceable; for if all the Engineers of
mischief would have compacted the irremedyable Burning of London, they could
not have laid the Scene of their fatal contrivance more desperately, to a
probable success than there where it was, where narrow Streets, old Buildings
all of Timber, all contiguous each to other, all stuffed with aliment for the
Fire, all in the very heart of the Trade and Wealth of the City; these all
concentring in this place, put a great share of the mischief upon the choice of
the place.

And hence there may be a more than ordinary argument, that this choice was not
a thing of accident but contrivance, and meditation for some time, If it were
by the Instrumentality of Man only permitted by God, for so was the Plot by
Mendoza as Throgmorton and Parry confessed: So was the Vault under the
Parliament House, Speed p. 872, ^73.
in the case of the intended Powder ruin by Faux, great enterprises always
requiring grave perpendment of the method, by inspection, circumspection, and
retrospection, before they be reduced into act; forasmuch as in the defect of
due adjustments and prudent libration of what weight they will and will not
bear, suitable whereunto must every particle of the composure be framed and
disposed, not only the whole Fabric sinks and proves effete, but the actors in
it, and the well wishers to it, prove ridiculous, if not ruined, which causes
that axiom to be so acclamated among Politicians, Deliberandum est diu quod
constituendum est semel; nor do wise men and fools differ in any thing more
than in those specifique actions which are denominative of them, fools running
hand over head, and wisemen going fair and softly, surely though slowly; and
probable it is that the many foreign minded and addicted subtilists amongst
us, adjuuated by the needy miscreants and desperadoes at home, might do much to
the production of this Centaure, which so speedily devoured more houses of
State and Residence, and more wealth and value in Merchandises, and other
better things, than many years wars could spend, or many years labor can get;
yea, the victory of any thing beneath an Indies will be but a ten groats
composition, for a 20 s. lost.

And if God, who knows all things, and whose infinite wisdom is past finding
out, or hiding from, stirred up evil men to act his counsel to punish England
by London this way, that should need (as it were) no second to it, then we have
all great cause to take off our thoughts from evil instruments, men; and place
them penitently upon evil Sin, for which Gods thoughts are upon us for evil,
and not for good, and we have just ground to bemoane our ways and doings which
have not been right before God; for the punishment whereof he sends such
sweeping and unchecqued judgments, such as a Fire is, which has no ears to
hear the cries of the sick, weak, aged, lame, who are in danger to perish, by
not being able to remove themselves from it, nor happy in being tendered by
others who will in that disorder pity them; nor eyes to see the cries and moans
of those Widows, Orphans, and spoiled Creatures, whose tears are Orators
potent enough to prevail with any thing but its inexorability, When God gives
the inhabitations of London for Fuel to the Fire, when he sets his face against
them, that they shall go out from one fire, and another fire shall devour them
then this had, it is sad. And this was the case of London, the fire removed from
in one place followto another, yea, sundry there were that removed two or three
times, yet lost at last, and that not only by evil instruments who forfeited
their trust and took advantage of the confusion incumbent on all men, but by
the very Fire which broke in, like waves of the Sea, and raged like a Bear,
robbed of her Whelps, until it had executed its errand, and made that
predicable of London which Florus writes of Samnium, so destroyed by Papyrius
the Roman Consul, Vt hodie Samnium in ipso Samnio requiratur. So that though
the advantage of place was much in this as in other cases, ubi plus valet locus
quam virtus, and though there might have been rational and probable
anticipations of these conflagrating progresses, yet were they altogether hid
from the eyes of those whose interest in comfort and fortune it would have been
to have improved them.

The third circumstance of furtherance to the Fire was that of the wind, which
was not only not still but boisterous, and such as carried it to, not from the
City, and turned to fan and blow up the Fire East, West, South, and North, at
some time or other during the Fire; like that judgment God threatened upon
Elam, 49 Ier. 36. Upon Elam will I bring the four Winds from the four quarters
of Heaven, and will scatter them toward all these winds, and there shall be no
Nation whither the outcast of Elam shall come. So Josephus says, the
providence of God turned the Fire the Romans put to the wall of Jerusalem upon
the City, Antiq. l. 7. c. 2^
by reason of which the Fires natural tendency was carried forth to oblique as
well as direct effects of wasting, that is, spread it self this and that way,
till it had prevailed every where, spreading it self like an Armies wings first
drawn forth, and the main body marching up to it: Which complication of
circumstances inductive to and in augmentation of, a mercyless fate, argues
this Fire to be no ordinary judgment, but to be sent as an evidence of God
incensed, and of sin the meritorious cause of it out of measure sinful. For if
the punishment of one single element be dreadful, as the water was to the old
world, and the Air is in pestilential infections, and the Earth was when it
opened its mouth to swallow up Corah and his company, how dreadfully sinful are
those provocations of a land or person That God punishes with double and treble
judgments in their judgment? what vengeance is that like to prove, which has
Gods Armies of fire and wind united, when his single army of Insects are enough
to destroy Egypt? and when his negative hostility is productive of Famine to
consume his enemies? Whom, because they would not serve in the abundance of all
things, he will press to serve their enemies, and be ruined by his bringing
upon them the want of all things? And if Jonas his storm at Sea was so
dreadful, that he swallowed up in it, is said to call to God out of the belly
of Hell, 2 Jonah 2. What a Hell of confusion and torment were the inhabitants
of London delivered from when their lives were in the rage of Fire and Wind,
and when the Fire carried the noise of a whirlwind in it, and was so informed
with terror, that it surprised the eyes and hearts of men with fear, as well
as their houses and goods with flame? So that this wind from the Lord was not a
wind like that of Numb. 11. 31. which brought the Israelites quayles, a wind of
benignity, nor such a wind as God made to pass over the earth to return the
waters into their Trench after they had inundated the earth, and absorped all
the gayity of it, Genesis 8. 1. but a wind it was that carried away and rent
asunder, by leading on the Fire upon its prey, a wind it was that was
commissionated to join with the Fire to devour above 2 third parts in the midst
of the City, as the phrase is, Ezekiel. 5. 2. And this is that which in the
concurrence of two such potent circumstances renders it more than ordinary as
well in the intention of the chief cause as in the operation of the mediate
ones. For had God antipathized and severed their conjunction, they had not done
that complicated mischief they did, but in that they corresponded each with
other, and both performed a savage charge upon London, routing her Beauty,
Riches, and being in a great degree, it is not to be doubted but as the
instrumental enemies rage is glutted with the booty of his option and
designment, (those that prophesied of its firing before it happened, being
probably the principal contrivers and furtherers of the firing of it, and those
that blew the coals, heated the iron, and made all things ready to further it)
so the Lords anger in permitting such a success was great, and the humiliation,
for it ought to be serious and sacred; for if God made the wind winged, I
allude to that passage in Zach. c. 5. v. 9. to proportion the fire to its
breadth as well as boisture of fury, if this judgment like that of the
Caldaean God speaks of in 1 Hab. 16. must march through the breadth of the
City, if the flying roll of Cursing had its length and its breadth, as the
Prophet Zachary has it, 5 chapter v. 1. then this fire and wind in its length and
breadth of procedure and subversion, being a great judgment, calls for length
and breadth of humiliation before God for it, yea not to be sutably affected
for the provokings of sin, is to be deservedly punished once for all;
incorrigibility is next door to final impenitency, the merit of utter
subversion.

And truly, when to all this it is considered that the Fire burned at some time
contrary to the wind, and as it were in opposition of it, and then did as much
spoil unto whatsoever it approach^^, and was as unchecquable then as when it
had the winds raising and chasing it, then surely there must be great ground to
conclude that this wind as well as this Fire come from the Lords anger, and
that whatsoever in it was besides the usual import of Fire in a place of so
great help and experience to obviate and Master it, was by the precise
appointment and commission of God, who does not only Authorize the Sword to do
execution upon the world, but imploys Air, Wind, Fire, Water as well as other
Creatures to be his Baliffs to Arrest, if not his Devils to ruin them. And if
further it be ruminated, that Gods proceeding by pauses, (which though not very
deliberate, compared with fatal protracted ones, yet mild weighed against the
method of Gods firing and consuming all in a moment as Sodom was, seems to
insinuate that God in this might expect a man or men holy before and accepted
with him to stand in the gap, and propitiate (as it were) for the City, whereby
the Fire might have been forced back and carried off) the non appearance of
such, whose spirits God touched with holy Charity to Gods cause and their
Nations weal, shrewdly insinuates a suspicion that God by removing or
suspending the impediments might conclude the formidable issue, that it had,
when God not only hides himself from his people that pray, but calls off his
peoples devotion from prayer for pardon, that so his wrath may take its full
course, and burn so that none can quench it. In such a case Gods expectation
being defeated, it is time to sit down under Judgments with confession of our
doing wickedly, and justification of Gods righteousness in whatever he has done.

The fourth circumstances of aid to the Fire was the drought of the season and
the want of water, which had not only prepared the combustible matter for a
speedier reception of igneous Attoms and Contacts, but prevented application of
remora's and extinguishments, to both wind and fire; For as showers usually lay
winds, so winds abated, usually mitigate fires. Here then was another instance
of propagation to this fire, that God suffered it to carry all before it, and
to be impeded by nothing specifiquely its check, whereby is argued in a good
measure Gods allowance of the quarrel and his conduct of this his artillery of
havoc, and besom of severity; God having created all things in proportion to
the whole of his design, and placed in nature balances and repulsives as well
as insolences and pestilences of assaults on harmony, when these repulsives
shall be exinfluenced, and their vigor not only be abated, but their
contraries prevail and be effectual, then is doom inevitable, and the
consequence as fatal as the counsel of it, unsearchable. And this was Poor
London's case, God had given us a long brightness of weather, and made every
thing so dry, that it was of it self, by the length and efficacy of that
exhaustion, in potentia proxima to fire, and the Springs were so low, and the
Engines of raising water so destroyed, that there was no suitable appease to
it, applicable, whence it came to pass, that as a Buck that is not able to run
must yield and die, and a Vessel that cannot bear steerage and sails, must be
surprised and taken, by wanting the conveniences to flight, and a Soldier
that has lost his sword and shield must submit to his Enemies quarter, how
manly soever his courage be, so in the defect of those obstacles to fire, it
unavoidably must follow that whatever the fire can do it may and will do, for
all natural stays being absent, the battle is gained without stroke, and the
possession got without so much as challenge.

For as in ways of mercy God makes every thing ancillary hereunto, as he
suspended the fires consuming in the case of the three Children, and in the
bush which burned but consumed not, and as he does in invigorating dry bones,
and in making the weak things of his justitution to confront and evict the
mighty oppositions of flesh and blood, as he bears down the daring Monarchs of
humane Learning, and precipitates the fiery Sciolists of superstition by the
piety, zeal and humility of illiterate men Apostoliz'd and made by him
unopposable, God making his little and low Ordinances as the world esteems
them, the foolishness of preaching, and the faith of a Crucified and derided
Savior, paramount to all more subtle projects of captivation, because
conducted and blessed by him who is all power, wisdom and duration, and
therefore can be neither abbreviated or defeated in his volitions and resolves.
(All things working together for the good of his Elect, and his counsel ever
standing like Mount Sion which can never be removed.) As I say in his paths of
kindness and obligement to man he predisposes and forecalls severalties to
their Randezvous, and draws forth such services from them, as conduces to his
own honor and his holy servants security and comfort by them, so in order to
judgments does he ripen and forward them by such assistances and proper
adjuncts, that the beauty of penal providence is maintainable from them in
spite of all artifices of wickedness to Eclipse or cashire it; Thus when he
will destroy a sinner, he hardneth his heart against his fear; and when he will
give Victory to his Armies, he causes a noise of horsemen and Chariots, and
drives them away in fear when none pursues them, yea he will and does prove a
Terror to wickedness even in the pleasure of it, as he did in the handwriting
upon the wall to Nebuchadnezzar.

What alas signifies Haman's rage, if God deny him favor with Ahasuerus as
wontedly, and bring in Ester his Enemy to his supersedal? What avails Sampson's
strength, if God give a key to the secret of it, which resides in its
unshavenness? To what purpose is Achitophel's policy, if God turn it into
foolishness and conntermand the aids and cooperations with it, we put all our
endeavors and seize in a broken bag; if God be not the blessing of them,
if he speaks no fiat, folly is the best prognate of our contrivances; so
necessary is Gods allowance and aid, that without it all is abortive and amort.

As then when God is in mercy or judgment present, all things are as they are
properest to be, so in his absence on either side, there can be no through
effect of either, for all things observe him, and as when he says Go they Go,
so when he says recede they depart, as he gives heavenly influences in mercy,
so he withdraws them in wrath, he makes the light darkness, and the rain
fruitlesness, the suppression, the exaltation, the death, the life of his,
manifests to the world what He is; and when He has famine, pestilence, sword,
or any other noyance to charge a man or Nation with, he withholds seasons,
showers, salubrity of air, and causes the ^ire of animosity to break out into
war, and no endeavor of honorable peace to be offered or accepted, he
withdraws remembrance of old leagues and ancient obligements, he casts a veil
upon true Christian advantage, and will not render its amability to the view of
judgment and impartiality, and he suffers such intricacies to clog breaches
once made, that they are reconcilable by no Tertian, nor are they admissive of
any expedient beneath that dubious, fatal, and I had almost said uncharitable
one, of aut Vincere aut vinci, either get or lose all. And thus God pa^esies
the way to his displeasure, in that he drys up the pooles of supply in the
wilderness of need, and as a moth of corrosion in place of a horn of salvation.

And if the drought and scantness of water upon a Land, be a judgment, as God
testifies it to be, 50 Ier. 38. where he says of the Caldaeans, a drought is
upon her waters, and they shall be dried up, for it is a land of graven Images,
and they are mad upon their Idols; and God is said to call for a drought on the
Land upon all things man and beast, Hag. 11. as a token of his displeasure,
then to want water when fire burned, and to have the buckets of heaven and the
lodges of earth exhaust of water to quench it, (there being no rain of a long
time before the fire, and both the Springs low; and the Waterworks at the
Bridge-foot which carried water into that part of the City burnt down the first
day of the fire.) Thus, thus for it to be was no small judgment, for as it is a
mercy to have God a ready help when trouble is near, so is it a judgment to
have his creatures denied when there is most use for them, when their presence
is salvi^ique and repulsive, when God gives a stomach to eat and no food to
satiate it, When he opens his peoples hearts to pray, and yet hides himself
from them, and will not be found of them; when he that is all plenty becomes a
barren wilderness, and he that is all power contracts his arm and will not
out-stretch it. When he that commands the Seas, Winds, Fire, and they obey him,
raises those Elements by evil instruments, and remands them not into their
restraint, but suffers them of servants to become Masters and instruments of
spoil and terror; This unconcernedness of God, when his great arrows are thus
shot forth of his Almighty bow, and fixed in the very hearts of men's delights
and recumbencies, so that they see all that was dear to them ruined before
them, and they rendered helpless to themselves, can not choose but be a signal of
Gods indignation. And we may conjecture God sends his fire to punish our ^^e,
his wind to reward our wind. Levity and zealesness for Reformed Religion, and
enmity and uncharitableness in matters of no moment compared to provoking one
another to love and to good works, See Letter Archbishop York to K. James.
Cabala ^ part. p. 13.
has undone all; repining against God and against one anotehr has had a notable
share in this judgment, and as this puts the charge into Gods Cannon, so has
undervaluation of God, ramm'd home the charge to fit it for fataller execution;
in 78 Psalm. 21. God had smote the rock and the waters gushed our, and yet the
people questioned, Can God give bread in the wilderness? The Lord, says the
Psalmist, heard this, and was wrath, and a fire was kin^led against Judah and
anger also came up against Israel; And I pray God this late harrass of us by a
more than Gottish and Vandallique fire, be not the stroke of some such brutish
and unchristian provocation of God, For greater and more express indications of
Gods power and goodness has no Nation ever had then we, never any Nation less
conformed to the call and mercy of it then we; Gods Jewels have had their
righteous souls vexed amongst us, and they cry out to God as David did, 57
Psalm. 4. My soul is among ^yons, and I lie among them that are set on fire,
even the sons of men, whose teeth are Spears and Arrows, and their Tongue is a
sharp Sword. And may not God, to revenge this offense to his little ones, hang
the Millstone of his fury about our necks, and cast us into a Sea of misery, and
into the pressure of a helpless condition? may not he pour out the fury of his
anger and the strength of battle? May not his anger set us on fire round about,
and we lay it not to heart though we be burned by it? as the words of the
Prophet from God are, Ier. 42. last.

O that this were seriously considered, that it might work a penitential
reflection in us upon our ways and doings, which have not been good; For which
God has both lengthened and strengthened the sphere and activity of the Fire,
to inundate things sacred and civil, and to be repulsed from neither the water
manageable against it, nor the wind dormant in it, but has been provoked by
every thing that might make our guiltness suspect that God having kindled the
Fire in our gates, made it unquenchable, till it had left nothing almost
further to ruin! And I pray God it were not a Saboth days punishment, for many
Sabbath and Fast days profanation, 17. Ier. last. This I subjoyn, to show that
where God shows his displeasure he does it by all instruments of advantage to
his purpose, not only desolating chief and remarkable places, but by denying
all combinations of aid against it, that so the judgment might not so much sip
as swallow down its full draught of waste and consumption; that as he made them
all things in perfection, so he may show us that he can so perfectly destroy
them, that the place of their once being, shall be known no more.

The fifth circumstance of augmenting it, was that of the choice of place that
this Fire was to work its woe upon, the Heart of the City, both for Houses of
State, Trade, Charity, public Magistracy, most of which it took into its
Cyclopique arms, and crumbled into ashes, for its burning was from London
Bridge to near the Temple, both upon the Street side and on the bank of the
River, its expansion was from a good way low into Fanchurch-street to all the
houses that were upon the hilly part of London, Candlewick-street,
Gracious-street, Lombard Street, Cornhill, a part of Broad-street,
Thred-needle-street, Throgmorton-street, and so up Coleman-street, and so all
up to Cripplegate, to Aldersgate, all Newgate-market to Holborn-bridge; Thus
from the East to the West it prostrated Houses, Halls, Chapels, Churches,
Monuments; all which it so flaked and enervated, that it has left few standing
walls, stout enough to bear a roof, without new raising or charge of repair
equivalent to new building; which argues the Fire more than ordinarily in
earnest, when it was not only not impartial, but not copable with by those
Giants of strength that usually outstand the shock of Fire; yea, it brought to
ashes that Goodly and Generously useful Pile Sion-Colledge, the place of my
then comfortable and beloved Residence, whose foundations (laid by Dr. White
and perfected by Mr. Simpson, D. D. One of the Residentiaries of St. Paul's.
Twins of precious memory, and the ever to be celebrated benefactors to Londons
Clergy, and Religions Increment) it demolished; For which I cannot but grieve
as much as for mine own great losses both in and out of it, because it was a
public Dedication to God in a good and graceful accommodation to persons of
Learning, and aged Poverty; the former sort of which had access with welcome to
its fair and well-furnished Library six hours in the day duly and freely open
to all comers, whom the honest and understanding Mr. Spencer, (the trusty and
Aboriginal Librarier, yet living, and yet faithfully attending the remains of
the Books, (for which he deserves to be well rewarded with a fixed Pension
during the little restancy of his life) conscionably and with much diligence
and humility attended; And the latter sort persons of Poverty being twenty of
both Sexes chosen Alms-folk into the College, were quarterly relieved out of
lands appointed thereunto by our Reverend Founder. This College, I say, not
added to (God knows) in Lands by any since its Foundations Gifts (though God
has made its Library, a good part of which is preserved, and safely lodged in
an upper Gallery by the Favor of the Honorable Government of Sulton's
Hospital) increase by the gifts of pious and charitable Gentlemen, Citizens,
and their Widows and Children, as also by good additions from the London
Clergy, and by others formerly well addicted to it, amongst whom that Learned
Grandaeus long since deceased and now with God, Mr. Walter Travers Bachelour of
Divinity, ought as he deserves to be remembered, the greatest Benefactour to it
of any Clergy man whatever since the two Reverend Founders: This, this, Beloved
Sion so nobly designed, and so kept up in its Credit and Reputation, till the
unhappy dissolution hereof by this Fire, was burned down and ruined; only the
Case of the Library and some of the Gate-piece yet remains, but so shattered
that long it cannot stand, nor suddenly is it like to be repaired; the site of
the College lying for three Months since the fire open, many of the Materials
embezzelled, too few resenting the detriment that Religion and Learning will
receive by the neglect of it, so that the remains within the Freedom that were
exempted this fire were only from Leaden Hall to the Bars without Algate; from
Bishopsgate-street Corner in Cornhil to the Bars without Bishopsgate, and from
Moorefields first postern Gate along the wall with Broad-street, from the
Church up into Bishopsgate-street, from Cripplegate to the Bars in that
Parish, from Aldersgate Street to the Bars above in that street, and all the
compass without the wall, from thence to the end of Cow-lane, and from Holborn
Bridge to Holborn Bars; these together with the houses, from near Iron-Mongers
Hall in Fanchurch-street up to Algate and down Mark-lane, till within near
twenty houses of Tower-street end, with Crutched Friars and the Appendixes
thereto, were all that of the Liberties of London were preserved, which I
reckon not above the twentyeth part of the City Freedom in quantity, nor the
hundereth part of it in value of houses, and all this waste committed by the
mercyless flames in four days, the speed whereof added to the quality of what
it preyed upon, argues the judgment remarkable and past president.

For it was wont to be computed amongst the choice mercies of God to London,
that it was specially protected from fires, notwithstanding the houses were
most of Timber, very contiguous each to other, and had constant and fierce
fires kept in the hearths of them night by night, and those later than in any
City of the world; Ferox Flammae urbes multas Eeclesiam quoque Sancti Pauli
Apostolicum majori and meliore part Londonia consumpsit.
the good Government thereof making the night as safe for Passengers as the
day, Dunelm. p. 214.
which gave occasion to more free and more lasting hospitalityes in her then
otherwhere are practicable. And yet so has God in all times preserved London,
that such a fire as this never before was kindled in her thus to prevail over
her.

I read indeed of great Fires of old in her, In Anno 764 when many Cities and
places were destroyed igne repentino. London, Dunelmensis says, was one, P.
106.
and in Anno 798, London is again storied to be burned, repentino igne cum
magna hominum multitudine consumpta. In Anno 982 Temps Ethelred there was P.
114.
a great Fire. In Anno 1087, p. 267.
Cambden tells us the Spire of S. Paul's was so high ( quae ignem caelestium
provocavit) as his words are that it was set on Fire by Speed p. 39.
Lightning, Cambd. in ^^idx.
arsitque non sine Magno totius vrbis damno, E^t.
in King Stephen's time there was a Fire that began at London Stone, and
consumed all unto Aldgate; Not to mention the smaller Fires which have been
many, the damage whereof has returned only upon private persons, These have
been the remarkable Fires: yet none of them were such as this, not only because
London was not then near what now it was, nor the consumption of it by them
proportionable to what it was by this Fire; which was not a Fire that picked
and chused, but a Have at all Fire, a Fire that took into its possession 81
Parish Churches, and at least 6 or 7 Chapels, and other Churches answerable to
them, amongst which, the famous Cathedral of St. Paul, was one, so incinerating
the Glory and Emasculating the vigor and firmness of them, that the standing
Walls are (for the most part) unable to bear new roofs, the sturdy Supporters
of them being enervated, the Monuments in them burnt to powder, the Bells in
the Steeples melted, the Vaults underground pierced, the Stones of the outside
so scaled, as if the Fire was greedy to eat out all firmness in them. Thus God
spared not Shiloh in the day of his feirce wrath, but destroyed the Gates of
Sion, together with the habitations of Jacob.

Add to this, that the Fire reached the very Wombs and Mines of Charity, the
Worshipful Societies of London, to whose honor I dare erect this Trophe, That
of all the Societies in England or Europe none excel, if any parallel them in
discharge of their Trusts, which they punctually and indispensably do Modo and
forma statutis, not transgressing any appointment of the Donors will, except it
be in enlargement of his charity as it improves These, that were the
maintainers of aged Poor, whom they housed decently, and salaryed competently,
These, who were Benefactors to Young men of their Societies, whom, upon
security to make good the Principal, they lent hundreds a pounds to persons,
upon none, or very small Interest, to begin the world with, by which (with Gods
blessing,) ^hey grew rich and wealthy in after times. These, that gave out
Portions to Maids Marriages, brought up poor Children, fitting them for all
Callings; let good Penyworths to their Tenants; hospitably treated Strangers,
and their Members at their Halls, allowed comfortable exhibitions to Young
Scholars at Universities; gave Presentations of Livings in City and Country to
worthy Clerks; maintained bravely their Guilds, Common Halls, Servants and
Utensils. These, that upon all public occasions of Triumph, made up the
renowned Pomp of Londons Festivals and appearings. These, These, are in a great
measure ruined; Eleven of the Twelve chief Companies Halls (the goodlyest
buildings one with another in any one Town in Christendom* being burnt down,
the Furniture and Utensils of some of them wholly lost, besides the spoil done
to the 24 Companies, very many of whose Halls and Incomes are likewise
destroyed. Amongst which, that of the Company of the Stationers is sad, the
Common Stock of which valued re vera at between Twenty and Thirty Thousand
pound was employed to yield the profit of the Joint Stock to those Old men,
Widows, and others qualified (according to the Laws of their Society,) who
were allowed respective proportions in the same. None of which exceeding above
360 l. made way for the more accommodation of perticulars, than if they had
allowed men to have put in greater Sums; This so good a security, and so
gainful a proceed to many aged Stationers, their Widows and Children, This
Dreadful Fire has wholly consumed, and over and above destroyed of the Members
of this Society and other Booksellers and Printers in London, near to the value
of 150000 l. in Printed Books and Copies, besides the loss of their Common Hall
and other Houses and valuable things belonging to them. And if one and but a
mean Society, compared to other Societies of the City has thus suffered, what
incredible detriment have the Societies jointly suffered? How many asking
hearts, hungry bellies, bare backs, will this Winter show us helpless by want
of their Charity? How many impoverished Tenants, how many wandering Pilgrims,
outed of Houses, Callings, Acquaintance, has this caused? Yea how many not only
valuable parts of intrinsique wealth, but Writings, Evidences, Charters,
^oyntures, Contracts, Morgages, Bonds, Acquittances, Books of Account has this
consumed? It were endless to wade into the confusions hereby made, into
Hospitals laid wast, and their Inhabitants, Children, and other aged persons
turned out to the cold weather, helpless in themselves because decrepit through
Age, or tender by reason of Childhood; yet incapable to be helped by others
whose hearts prone enough to it, are not seconded by their Purses provided for
it, Churches levelled, and their Poor and painful Clerks at once robbed of
their Tithes, and over and above of the charities of those that are now
companions with them in Misery and Poverty; Public places of Magistratique
dispatch bare of all Beauty, and visible only in their deplorable Ruins. The
Houses of Hospitable and Wealthy Aldermen, Merchants, and Shopkeepers swept
away, and they themselves either fled, or cooped up in some hole of Covert, the
Maintenances of Widows, Orphans, and others ill Married, brought to nothing,
and they by means thereof either forced to beg or to work for a Livelihood, and
glad they can get the Bread they and theirs may Eat; This is that God has done
to London. He has not spared in the day of his fierce wrath, but has covered
the Daughter of London with a cloud in his anger, he has swallowed up most of
the habitations of its Jacob, he has thrown down the strong hold of the
Daughter of England, and has polluted the Kingdom; he has violently taken
away his Tabernacles, he has abhorred his Sanctuaries, the Elders of the
Daughter of London sit upon the ground and keep silence, to allude to the
Prophet Jeremiah writing of Jerusalems ruin; Lament. 2.
Behold, O Lord, and consider to whom thou haste done this, To London, the
Chamber of Englands Kings, Londinum totius Britanniae Epitome, Britannicique
imperii seeds, Reg^umque Angliae Ca^era tantum inter omnes emi^ct, quantum
(...) viburna cupressus. C^mbd. Brit. lat. Edit. 1587.
To London, the chief of Englands Empire, To London, the Native place of
Princes, Prelates, and men of Renown, To London, that Ancient and Rich Magazine
of Trade and Wealth, whom men called the Perfection of Beauty, the glory of the
whole Earth, To London, the Citizens whereof were men of Blood, Fortune,
Valor, men of Renown as those of Tire was, To London, the Non-such of orderly
Government and of frequent and fervent Religion, Adeo ut Religio and pietas hic
sibi delubrum collocasse videatur, as the Learned Antiquaries words are, To
London the inexhaustible Secret of her Princes, Fons imperii, orbis Terranum
Matter, gentium, Regionum contumbernium pacis aeternae consecratio, Sanctus
Hyeronimu; lege clogia Romae apud Ludovicum. Dorleans in Comment ad l. 1.
Annal. T^citi. p. 2.
To London the Treasury of Men, Money, Arts, the Rome; the Athens, the India of
England. To this London has God done this, Weep O Daughters of England! for
this London who clothed you in Scarlet, but now is her self clothed with
Confusion, Mourn ye Princes and Grandees for this, because the mighty City is
fallen which once was the Market of what brought you Wealth and Peace; For this
London who took off your younger Sons, making them thrifty Commonwealths men,
and in time returned them to you Great and Noble, for your Daughters who into
it were comfortably bestowed, and from it were richly provided for in their
Persons and Issues. For their Eldest Sons, whose Wives portions, the provisions
of Younger Children, were hence plenfully had, without sale of Land, or
diminution of Income; Weep O Peasantry! who had London for a Market swallowing
up all Provisions for it, Grande illud and ante T^mpus invictum caput Syracusae
quamvis Archimedis ingenio de^enderetur, aliquando cesserunt. Jornandes l. 1.
de Regni and temporis successu.
and all quantities brought to it. Weep O Poor! that in London had great
relief, Weep O Aged! who in London were refreshed, and prepared by constant
Devotions and hourly Sermons for their dissolutions; Weep all, High, Low,
Honorable, Mean, for London was, but is not!

London, O Populum dignum orbis imper^o dignumque omnium savare and admirat one
hominu^ ac deorum compulsus ad ultimos metus. Idem.
despise it who will and dare, the Great and Flourishing Sprig in our Princes
Plumes, the Pyramyd of conspicuity in the admired Pile of Britain. The
Graecatrojan Horse out of which marched many of the Hectors of Englands
courage; The great Academy of Arts, wherein the Learning and activity of all
parts united; The Hospitable Sanctuary of all distressed strangers, who thither
came numerously, and there were entertained civilly; London the great Bulwark
of reformed Religion against the assaults and batteries of Popery and
Prophanness, is in a great measure destroyed; O tell it not in Gath, declare it
not in the Streets of Askalon! lest the Uncircumcised Levellers rejoice, and
the Enemies of God and the King, the Parliament and the Religion say, Ah, Ah,
so would we have it.

O Day, O Month, September, not more inauspicious to many Famous Cities, such
as Jerusalem, Josephus lib. 7. c. 16. de Bello Iudaico.
begirt the seventh and entered the eighth of Sept. Nicephorus l. 15. c. 21.
Evageius l. 2. c. 13. Baronius Tom. 5. 465.
such as Constantinople which was wasted by sire Anno 465. In the beginning of
September, such as Heidleberg, which was taken by the Imperialists about Anno
1622. And now to London in this Fire, of September 1666. I mention no more,
though probably those forty which See Chronol. Ca^ncsi^ Edict Quartae Impress.
Francae-surti. Anno 1650.
Caluesius mentions in his Chronology, might yield more in execration of
September, I say not more trist to other parts of the World and to this Nation
in general, then to Me in particular; For it has been successively within
eight years Productive of a Quaternion of unhappinesses to Me; The loss of an
Excellent Wife, of an Indulgent Father, the affliction of a terrible Sickness,
all which happened to Me in September 1658. and now were added to by this of
September 1666. wherein it pleased God to give me a fourth trial by Fire, that
I may for the future learn to devote my portion of Soul and Body to him in the
Fucre qui annotarent XIIII. Calendis Sextiles ^rincipium incendi^ ^ujus Ortum
quo and Senones captam urbem inst^mmaverunt. Tacitus Annal. lib. 15. p. 792.
Edit. Porleans. de incendio Romae.
sacred and serious service of him, Which O Lord I desire to do as, and when,
thou shall call, enable and accept Me; This is my particular apprehension of
September. which Sept. thus the time of Londons firing and England^ Misery, let
it be Discalendred, and not be numbered amongst the Twelve, let it be accounted
the Judas Month that betrayed all the rest to infelicity; Let that day that
first opened the Womb of fire be darkness, and let the shadow of death stain
it, let a Cloud dwell upon it, let the blackness of the day terrify it; as for
that night let darkness be upon it, let it be solitary, and no joyful voice
come thereon, let the Stars of the Twylight hereof be dark, let it look for
light but have none, as holy Job's pathetique is upon a like dismal accident
and occasion, because it produced a Monster, and diminished the enjoyment of
present, and the hopes of after-ages, and cast into the Widows disconsolacy.
Her, that sat as a Queen upon a hill of plenty and honor, viswing all the
Nations doing homage to her, as to the Faithful City, as to the City of
Righteousness 1. Isaiah to 26, as the City of praise, the City of all Joy, as
Damascus was called 49. Jeremiah 25. as the City of Renown, who was strong in
the Sea, that caused their terror to be upon all that haunt it, as the Prophet
Ezekiel describes Tire. c. 26. v. 27. London, the Earthly Paradise of Cities,
having the glory of Gods Ordinances, and the light of his Reformed Truth in
her, shining like a Jaspar stone, clear as Crystal; The foundation of the Wall
of which City was garnished with all manner of precious Stones; Its Government,
its Magistrates, its Ministry, its Fraternities, its Franchises being all
Emblematical of, and Symmetrious with the Greater Ones of the Nation, in the
best and clearest instances of its Royalty. This London ancienter as is thought
than Rome, and more potent though less politic then she, that has her Oar in
every Boat, This London, (which its learned Native, and Englands admired
Antiquary Cambd. Britain.
terms such, that none has better right to assume to it self the Name of a
Ship Road or Haven, than she, For in regard of both Elements most blessed and
happy it is, as being situate in a rich and fertile soil, abounding with
plentiful store of all things, and on the gentle ascent and rising of a Hill,
hard by the Thames side, the most mild Merchant (as one may say) of all things
that the World does yield) has swelling at certain set hours, which the Ocean
Tides, by its safe and deep Channel, able to entertain the greatest Ships that
be, daily brings it so great Riches from all parts, that it striveth at this
day with the Mart Towns of Christendom for the second Prize: thus her Cambden.
This London, I say, who was to those that lived in it, whatever Heaven and
Earth could indulge a Militant condition and a viatory state, did God give up
to the destruction of Fire. So that now there is little resting in it but Piles
of Rubbish, and Mountains of wast, no neatness of Pavement, no Magnificence of
Structure, no vestige of Majesty, there only now is to be seen the the tops of
Steeples Belless, and the Stones of Structures Mortarless, and the figures of
Beauty disfigured; no Palaces have the Magistrates to sit in, no Prisons, as
wontedly, to hold Offenders in, no convenience almost to sustain Order to its
future hopes, but God has made it a Bochim, and scattered the Inhabitants of it
into all quarters: Thus has God done to London, ^2 Neh. 43.
our English Jerusalem, the joy of which was heard even a far off. More I could
Write, and more of this I had written in a Commentary on the Chartar 9. H. 3.
For election of the Lord Mayor of London, but that with many other Manuscripts
fitted for the Press, together with the general collections of the study of my
life being burned, I can only weep my kindness to her, Quid faciam, vocem
pectori negare non audeo, amor ordinem nescit; And if London the place of my
Birth, and of my longest dwelling, should not have all the right my poor Pen
can do it, It deserved not to be accounted any thing tending to the Pen of a
ready Writer, nor indeed is it, but I hope it will be accounted and prove it
self to be the Pen of a veracious and well meaning Christian Englishman, whose
glory it is, not so much to subdue Devils of danger, and to level Mountains of
difficulties, as to be owned a Friend to Learning, a Servant to Religion, a
Native of London. And if I forget thee, O London! let my right hand forget her
cunning, and they that forget thee by their cold Prayers, heartless Tears,
Vituperious Sarcasms, Secret rejoycings at thy ruins had best to remember that
the Inundation of thy Thames may cool their courage, Franci illi qui pugnae
super suerunt Londinum convolantes, I am j am urbem perdaturi erant, nisi
Tamisis qui nunquaem Londinensibus de defuit Romanos milites pererrore nebuloso
maris a class abductos opportune intulisset Cambd. in M^ddx. p. 265.
and thy tutelar Angelique Patron, become thine avenger on them, for God has
fixed an immortal spirit in London, the horn and branch of which, will sprout
out to her detractors amazement, and though she sit now in darkness, yet the
Lord shall be a light to her. While England is an Empire, London will be the
Metropolis of it, let who will dote on that Northern Prophecy, which some
thought fulfilled in stout Bishop Montaigne, Lincoln was, London is, York shall
be; yet the very Learned and Noble Geographer Dr. Heylin is so far from
cherishing that, Cosmography. p. 316.
which has any reflection of Eclipse to London, whose misfortune is as it were
the prodromus of the Nations misery, that he discreetly docks, the recital,
^incoln is, London was, etc. And Ingenious Dr. Fuller (who will be more valued
in after ages, History Worthies. p. 227.
as most are, than in their own) upon this Proverb, thus writes, But as for
those whose hope is York shall be the English Metropolis, they must wait until
the River of Thames run under the great Arch of the Ouse bridge. However York
shall be, that is, shall be York still as it was before, for if York (I write
for my Native City, and no City or person ought to be offended with me for my
zeal for London) would ever have overpoysed London, it was probablest to have
been when the union of England and Scotland into Great Britain was, because of
its near situation to the Two Kingdoms then conjoined. But then it failing by
the advantage London gave to the seat of Government, above that or any part of
the Nation, Ca^sa fundationis Civitatis Londine^sis Fluvius Thamisis liber
Dunthorne.
the River of Thames that flowing up to her, caused her foundation at first,
will I trust in God forever keep her in her Metropolitical station, and add to
her Paramouncy of renown, as the Vrbs aeternabilis, as Rome is called, For so
she seems to be framed after the Protoplast of the Nation, that she answers
every feature and digestion of parts in the Greater Body. As if the Providence
of God and the Policy of Antiquity, had set her as a Glass before her Monarchs
to see the paths and perfections of the greater Government, in the methods and
manageryes of her the less. And so far does London answer the favor of her
Sovereigns in their indulged liberties to her, that she has the suffrage
abroad to be one of the most August, Regular, Religious, Subaltern Governments
in the world.

And now (Sir) after a more than usually long digression, I come to the last
Circumstance promoting this desolating Fire; which was that Dread and pavid
manlessness, that seized the Inhabitants, by reason of which, they not only
fled before the Fire, leaving it to its forradge, and not checquing it while
dealeable with, nor anticipating its Progress by pulling down or blowing up
buildings before it; For by this did every man's unmanly example discourage,
till at last the hearts of men were in their heels, and every hand (as it were)
became Palsy thorough terror of apprehension; there being a kind of
Divination in men introductive to, and fautive of, the victory of the Fire over
both their houses and endeavors; lib. 10. c. 10.
For as Josephus well observes, when God has designs to accomplish, he puts
upon men the guilt of humane error and incredulity, by which they think it not
lawful for them (...)
to avoid their future calamity, neither shun they irrecoverable destiny, which
as it was the case of the Jews when Nebuzaradan led the Jews captive into
Babylon, burning the goodly Temple and razing the City. So was it (in a great
measure) the condition of London; for though the Inhabitants had seen many
Fires, and seen them soon again upon Gods blessing on their endeavors quenched,
yet This, This Fire was from the beginning of it, a Fire of amazement, a Fire
bespoke by them to be portentuous, they gave up all by common Opinion and
mistrust of vote unto it, God stopped some ruling men's ears against Counsel,
and filled other men's hearts with terror, the rich packed away, effaeminating
their endeavor by the securings they made of their Wives, Children, and Goods,
and those not only near and within view, but remotest from the Fire, when no
color or prudent probability gave judgment to warrant such doings. But yet was
it done, and thereby the City undone; for had not that exportation been,
Diligentissima est tela sui (...) Fortitudo.
their diligence and success against the Fire would have been trebled, and
sutably for ought any knows have proved successful; the prayers and tears of
some cooperating with the hands and heads of others, being more probable
securities to communities, then such courses of astonishment which tended to
presage of depopulation, and was a holocaust to nothing but the extortion and
thefts of Forraigners, and had not God been more merciful, to Outrage and
Savageness.

Which seizure of the Inhabitants, and over early pregustation of Woe,
disarming them of all agible judgment and prudent succor was if not the (...)
of, yet the (...) in the judgment. For as in the body natural, when the Sun,
and the Moon, and the Stars be darkened, when the keepers of the house shall
tremble, and the strong men shall bow themselves, as the Preacher describes old
Age, c. 12. v. 2, 3. Death is at the door, so in the body Politic, when manly
Courage flags and the spirit of people fail them so that they crep about like
walking Ghosts; there is a sign that God is the cause of it, and punishes by
it; when God turns men's pleasure into fears, 21 Isay 4. when fear prepares for
the pit and the snare, 24 Isay 17. when fear is on every side, 6 Ier. 25. when
God sends a voice of fear, 30 Ier. 5. and when he seconds the voice with real
fear, 48 Ier. 43. and those that fly from fear shall fall into the pit, v. 44.
when God sends a fear from all those that be about men, c. 49. Ier. 5. This
fear of exatlantation arising from guilt, and its punishment poorness of
spirit, is that which is the Judgment and Curse of fear.

Now this God does to make way for his execution, and to render the endeavor
against it less potent, and to save himself the drawing forth of his Almighty
Artiller; This he does to show that his wrath is perfected by rendering enemies
passive to his power as well as by becoming himself active in power
irresistible; And as in evidences of mercy, The righteous shall be quiet from
the fear of evil, 11 Prove. last, and be not afraid of sudden fear, 3 Prove. 15.
and Gods people are dehorted from fearing other men's fears, 8 Isay 12. And God,
St. Paul says gives not his Elect the spirit of fear, 2 Timothy 1. c. v. 7. so in
displayes of judgment fear shall amate and terrify wicked men, God will mock
when their fear comes, when it comes as Desolation, 1 Prove. v. 26. 27. Fear
shall be upon the Land, 30 Ezekiel 13. Fear fell upon all them which saw Gods
judgments, 11 Rev. 11. This not only real, but opinionative and imaginary fear
is the Crysis of the judgment, therein lies the vigor and execution of it,
when God gives up the Pilot to neglect steerage and stoppage, when the
Mariners that should ply the sails and pump, prepare for planks and shipwreck,
when the light of reason is under a Bushel of passion; and impuissance is
regent in the soul and senses, when the right hand not only knows not what the
left hand does, but has forgot it is a right hand, or a hand, and hangs it
self down folded, when the sluggards dilatoriness is upon men, and they will
sit still a little longer, and pause a little more, till sorrow and misery come
upon them like an armed man; These remisnesses in cases of strait and Paroxisms
of instancy, argue Phrygian wits, and arrive men at woe with a witness. Thus
was Troy lost by the sloth and carelessness of her Inhabitants. And thus,
Baptista Gramay D^scription of Asia.
Sir, was London's Fate and fyring, helped forward by the extremes of some men's
precipitancy and other men's dilatoriness; For had but Industry led the Van,
Security probably, or at least not this havoc, would have Marched in the Rear,
but because some neglected the fire to save their Movables, and others
neglected removing upon belief (therein, Sir, I accuse my self who was one of
those unbelievers) that the fires limits would be within and short of them and
theirs, the fire diverted not from its persuit, but devoured the Goods of many,
and the Houses of all, so dangerous a thing is that, which the consequence
calls unpreventive wisdom, that the want of it is censured by many (whose
fortunate fright has proved advantageous to them) to be wanting to their own
good, and helpers forward of their own Woe.

And yet (Sir) God often impregnates his severity with this which is the Talent
of Lead in the Ephah of judgment, ^ Z^c^. 7.
that men shall not see the day of their Visitation. This fetched tears from
the innocent eyes, those Casements and out-looks of the tender heart of our
Lord Jesus, who beholding the City Jerusalem wept over it, saying, O that thou
had known, even thou in this thy day the things that belonged to thy peace;
This is that which becalmed Jerusalem, who sat as a Queen and knew no evil,
till at last Misery came upon her in a moment and desolation as a whirlwind,
when men and Cities have Babylons doom to be cast into a deep sleep; 29 Isa.
10.
so that sooner may all be crumbled down about their ears, and they buried in
the rubbish and confusion of their downfall, than they awaken, when God brings
a high repose on Saul in the Cave, and makes him secure amidst bare and
watchless weapons of defense; Then either men are taken napping as Saul was, 1 Samuel 26. 12.
or are ruined nodding as Eutychus, but for a Miracle had been, 20 Acts 9.
and nothing but mercy reached out of the Clouds can save them from their
perpetual sleep and unawaking period, 51. Ier. 57. Now though (Sir) it be too
heavy a guilt to charge this on London, yet how we of this City can discharge
our selves of it, I do not very well know, unless we take refuge in that rule,
Quos perdere vult Jupiter dementat, or in that Quae fata manent non facile
vitantur, which Tacitus makes the salve for every fatality, or unless the day
of Visitation being come, and the time of recompense being on us, God makes the
Prophet a Fool, and the Spiritual man mad; that is, brings Prescience, Counsel,
Courage, Constancy in all degrees of their activity out of date, giving men up
to the just surprise of ridiculous stupidness, and to obstinate contumacy
against the dictates of them. And if God had not intended much of this nature
to be evidenced in this Case of London's trouble in order to the whole Nations
abatement, he would not have charged home this assault in the time of London's
weakness, when so many of the Good and Grave Magistrates of London, men of
steddiness, experience and power in the City were in their Graves, when many of
the Weeping, Fasting and Praying Intercessors of her Clergy, whose Office it is
to expiate for her, were either absent or disseised (by fear) of that vigor
which their hands and Prayers in full Assurance of Faith nothing doubting might
otherwise have expressed against the judgment. Nor would he have made the
hearts and hands of the people of London so lanquid and unactive in this day of
their Concern; But thus, and only thus it was preordained of God to lesson the
Nation that God can bring down high thoughts, and that the scorn and contempt
of Religion and sober sincerity in Her and in her skirts, might be punished
with an amazing and insolite judgment, that those that are round about and are
not less guilty than She that is punished, May hear and fear and do no more
presumptuously. For though London be the place smitten and afflicted by God,
yet because that cannot be charged on her that Josephus relates of the
seditious Jews that had gotten head in Jerusalem; L. 6. c. 16 de Bello Judaico.
I will not cease to speak that which grief compels me, I verily think that had
the Romans forbore to come against these sedetious, that either the Earth would
have swallowed the City up, or some Deluge have devoured it, or else the
Thunder and Lightning which consumed Sodom, would have light upon it; For the
people of the City were far more impious then the Sodomites. Thus Josephus,
because I say (though wicked enough London was yet so wicked it was not (but as
regular and Religious a City, and as full of those that feared the Lord, and
called upon his Name, and that Mourned for the Abominations done in it, and in
the whole Land as any I persuade my self the world then had or at any time ever
had) To convince the incredulity and ill will of refractory spirits of the
truth of which; God I believe reserved a Remnant in it, and was mercyful to the
Bodies and Goods of the Inhabitants of it, the greatest part of whom and which
are now blessed be God resient dwelling and Trading in the remains of the
Freedom, and in the reserved Suburbs. This (Sir) Shall be written that the
Generations to come may know it, and the people that are yet unborn shall
praise the Lord; For if the Lord had not been on our side may London now say,
If the Lord had not been on our side when the Fire rose up against us, then the
Fire had swallowed us up quick when its rage was kindled against us; Yea,
certainly God never mingled a Cup of wrath with more Mercy than this, which was
rather Physic than Poison, more a Paternal chastisement, then an extirpating
Vengeance.

For whereas he Marched against Jerusalem of old, charging her from his pale
horse of fury, bringing truculent and bloody Enemies against it: Romans,
Syrians, Arabians, all which accompanied ^espasian against it, and that then
when there were 270000 Jews which came to Sacrifice, shut up by the siege in it
as in a Prison, and were slain and starved during the siege and at its
rendition, whereof 600000. L^b. 7. c. 16 de bello I^d^ico.
were cast out of the City in such distress that a Bushel of Wheat was sold for
a talent which is 600 Crowns, L 6 c. 16.
and the dung and raking of the City sinks was ^^^d good Commons, and necessity
made a Mother kill her Child and dress it, and whereas the dead Bodies lay so
thick, that the way by them was not passable, the whole City flowing with
blood; so that many parts set on fire were quenched by the blood of them that
were slain, and after all the City was burned, whereas God thus punished
Jerusalem by giving it a Cup of trembling, and filling it brimful with deadly
Poison, leaving no remnant from which succession should arise, or rebuilding,
and re-inhabitation become probable and effective, yet to the praise of the
glory of his Grace be it written, and be this loving kindness of the Lord never
forgotten by London. It was not with London as Tacitus writes of Rome, Sequiter
clades, omnibus quid urbi per violentiam ignium acciderunt gravior atque
atrocior. Annal. lib. 15. p. 791. Edit. Dorleans. No blood of the Londoners was
mingled with their Sacrifices; that is, no violent essusion of blood was in
London, no Famine during the fire was in London. God indeed made the
Inhabitants of London during the distraction like Reeds shaken with the wind,
its Streets were confusedly walked and hurried about in, thwack'd with Carts,
pestered with Porters and Portadges, every house threw out its Furniture, which
they could not carry away more orderly, Men, Women, Children of all degrees and
ages carried out somewhat, either to safety or spoil, some sent their Goods
into the Country, others into the Feilds and other Open places, watching them
many nights, and others removed them from place to place to lose them at last;
yet though this was sad, God gave them their lives for a prey, and they had had
the Pity, Presence, and Comfort of their Good King, and the Noble Duke of York,
with the most Generous Lord Craven, and others, for Guards and Securers to them
and theirs. There were indeed bruits of fear, and there were companies of
suspicious persons who at the best, live upon the vices of the Nation, and who
like Coasters ride out at Sea, to expect prey from wrecks, and small Boats
which they can Master and prey upon, Scyllam inopem unde praecipuum audaciam
Tacit. Annal. lib. 14. p. 159. Ex edit Eudovici Dorlea^s.
such Cormorants of pillage and snaps of ruin My Lodgings were an eminent
instance of before they were burned yet open violence there was none to speak
of, but much even of exemplary Justice, and charitable Mercy, In the time of
the Fires raging, and of the distractious impetuosity; which I write not to
vindicate the dissolute Multitude of pretended Laborers, and other instruments
of carriage (who exhansed the rates of their own portadge, while perhaps their
Wives, Children, and Servants, or some of them, were busy at other work, all
becoming theirs which their hook could reach, or their Net drag away.) Nor yet
do I mention This to atone the displeasure had against those Country Carts and
Laborers, some of whose wages exceeded the worth of their Lading, or the
ability of the persons they in this distress exacted it from, From these so
dreadfully Mercenary to their sensual gain, as no more Justice or Courtesy is
to be expected than is haveable from a Spoyler, who must leave what he cannot
carry away, and who does not take all, not because he cannot find in his heart
so to do, but because he is afraid so to do, whose avoydance of extortion is
from wisdom of caution to prevent trouble, not upon Conscience of duty to
approve himself to God and to Humanity. From These, I say, as no Mercy or
Justice is (upon resolution) to be expected, so the Justice and Mercy of These,
do I not in the least intend to mention by way of praise) the Justice and Mercy
then remarkable, was that of many Honest persons, who well understanding the
Duties of Constables and Officers, became voluntarily such to preseve peace and
prevent disorders, assisting Government against the common rout, apprehending
and deteining suspicious persons till they brought Good vouchers and cleared
themselves. And other Guards and Foot Soldiery upon duty, answered the end of
their array, and did not only not do violence to any, but secured all against
the violence of any that attempted it; it was not with the Sufferers in this
Fire, as with the Jews when the Romans besieged and Mastered them, and they
were envyed, the Gold that was supposed to be in their Bellies, it being noysed
that they had swallowed down much, which caused some of the Roman allies in one
night to rip up the Bellies of 2000 of them, to search for that they found not,
which Vespasian hearing of, 6 lib. c. 16. De bello Iudaic.
and the cruelty of it abominating, caused them to be compassed about with
Horse, and to be destroyed; No such truculency was acted here, but the Citizens
were fuffered to secure what they could, and to pass and repass with what
possible freedom and security the exigency of affairs would permit, The
Soldiers riding about, and being their guard and help. Thus did King, Duke,
Peers, People, Soldiers, do their parts, but Gods Counsel stood, and he did
with the Buildings and Riches of the City, what came in his Sovereign mind to
do, by reason of which, the beauty, vastness and order of Land. came down to
its Chaos in four days, which had been climing up to its Meridian above 2000
years, Impetu pervagatum incenaium, plana primum, deinde in edita assurgens
inferiora populando anteriit remedia velocitate mali. Tacit. An^^l. lib. 15. p.
791. Edit. Dorlea^s.
exchanging its name of a goodly City, for the reproach of a graceless heap;
The rumination of all which particulars, that God suffered a City saved by the
Lord from the miseries of War, and the mercylessness of Insurrection, Risen by
grave pauses and Centuries of time, into a Miracle of stature, accommodated
with all ingredients and concentrations to publish and establish it in request
and value, Whose appositeness for Trade, was Magnetique of all Nations and
Merchandises to it. Whose Credit for order and honesty, lewred Strangers out of
their Countries to reside in it, and kept them here, and naturalized them to it,
Whose Government was effectual and sweet; To ends of terror and obligement,
whose Customs and Franchises were beneficial and stated, Whose Citizens were
Rich and Hospitable, Whose appearances were pompous, and becoming their
Descents and Fortunes, That London which was so celebrious for public
Edefices of State and Religion, that it was not possible almost to wish better
or more remarks of Christian Devotion and Politic Grandeur in such dimensions
as it stood upon, That this City which once deserved the Union of all
Characters of glory, vying with Rome for Religion, with Naples for Nobility,
with Millan for Beauty, with Genoa for Statelyness, with Florence for Policy,
which Venice for Riches, That this which was complete usque ad Invidiam mundi,
as I may so write, should become inglorious, and be the Subject as well of her
Enemies insult, as of her Friends pity; This Inscription of Gods fury on the
Roll of her Judgment, Lamentation, and Mourning, and Woe, ought to call us, 26
Ezekiel. 13. 7 Jer. 34. 16 Jer. 9.
From joy and melody, from pleasure and riot, which God has caused to cease,
unto prostration and confession before God; And that not by Hanging down the
head like a Bulrush for a day, and returning to our Sin the next day, like the
Dog to his Vomit, not by presenting our selves in the Congregation of God,
which too few do, and there only counterfeiting Devotion for an hour only, but
following it with unmortified bestiality and inhumane luxury, not by bare words
of piety without any reflection of them on the heart, or any evidence of the
truth of its radication, in the Flower of it, the life; Humiliation that God
commands and accepts is deep and settled, the souls contusion and exinanition,
such abhorrence as Job speaks of 42 Job. 6. an abhorrence of a Man's self, and
of that Sin that cleaves closest to him, and is most connatural with him, and a
repenting in dust and ashes, that is an evidence of self condemnation in the
vivid'st and most exact note of it, in that which is Emblematical of the lowest
dejection, such a frame of Soul as weeps bitterly with Peter, and makes
restoration with Zachaeus, and rejects the former allurements to Sin with Mary
Magdalen, and resigns up it self wholly to Christ Jesus as consternated Saul
did when Christ dismounted him, 9 Acts 6.
and he became his Convert, such a humiliation as Manasses and the Good men in
Nehemiah presidents us to in the 9. Neh. where it is said the Children of Israel
were assembled with fasting and Sackcloth, and with Earth upon them, V. 1. 2.
and the seed of Israel separated themselves from all strangers, and stood and
confessed their sins and the iniquity of their Fathers; Such a humiliation as
pulls with indignation sin from its Root, and suffers no corner of the Soul or
Land to be fantive to it or polluted by it, such a humiliation as is in
sincerity and truth commensurate to the God of Truth whom it is devoted to,
such an humiliation as includes the Kings, the Peers, the Prelates, the Clergy,
the Laity does God call for, and that in proportion to that Epidemique mercy
that he has obliged all by, and suitable to that heavy and repeated judgment
he has already brought and farther may bring upon all, such a humiliation as
excuses, no degree, no age, no person from it dres the Lord require from thee,
13 Jer. 18 2 Chr 12. c. v. 6.
O England! and from thee, O London! To whom he has showed Mercies of a former
or latter date, parallel with, if not paramount to his manifests to any Nation;
He has called us Beloved who were not beloved, 28 D^ut. 13.
and caused us an Island to become the Head and not the Tail of the Nations, He
has brought us into the mavelous light of Christianity, who sat in darkness
of error, and in the shadow of death through Ethnicism, he has not been a
wilderness to us, nor planted us in a barren soil, but given us a Canaan, 11
Jer. 5.
flowing with Milk and Honey, a Land rich in Corn, Pastures, Cattle, Fruits,
Fish, every thing that necessity and delight calls the glory of any Land, God
has raised us up Kings, Rulers and Judges, not e Fece populi, but derived from
loins Noble, 10 Eccl. 17.
the Sons of Honor and Majesty, who have been Nursing Fathers to our Pieties,
Persons and Laws, God has preserved us from Vassalage, and made us free in our
persons and properties (safety and propriety being in the Kings Protection and
his peoples subjection, according to the Law.) God has preserved the Rights and
Renown of England so, that the Subjects of it are famous for Valor and Success
in their Enterprises by Sea and Land, God has made this little spot, that in
the Map of Chorography is hardly discernable, a Mart of Trade and a Mine of
Wealth, which the inexhaustion of this last twenty six years, by Sums
unsummable, and in their possibility to be adjusted would be incredible, yet
have not drawn low, but preserved pregnant to carry on its just and necessary
Interests against her potent combined Enemies; These Mercies to Engl. ever
since her Christianity, recognized by those abridgements of them in the Reigns
of the five last Princes equalling all other anteceding them, The Reformation
of Religion by E. 6. The deliverance from the cruelty of Popery in Queen Maryes
Reign, The Restoration of Protestancy in Quen Elizabeth's days, in spite of
the Jesuited Plots, Spanish Invasion, (...) Thankful Rem^mbrance of Gods mercy.
See Dr. Sharpe's Letter. Cabala p. 256. 259. 1 part.
expensive Wars purposely raised to distress and divert her; In the Reign of
King James, whom God brought in rightfully, settled quietly, and deliverd from
the fatal Powder Plot, to leave his Crown Rich and Great to his Successor, the
late Glorious King Charles, (...) (whose Reign was as beneficial, and peaceful,
(for the most part of) it as any preced-ed, and had made the Nation as happy
after a Cloud, had not God punished and polluted the glory of it with the storm
of Contradiction in a Civil uncivil War, and with the guilt of the, blood of
that, Solomonique Codrus whose life was sacrificed to vindicate the Religion
and Laws of Loyalty and Liberty, against the Oppressions and Insolences of
Antiscriptural Error and Antimonarchical avarice;) These five last Reigns in
which the Princes and people of England were kept from either the sufferings of
public mischief or the long and grievous detinue under it, show Gods Mercy to
this Nation, and call for humiliation from it; And if these so long past are
not fresh in our Memories, as God forbid they should, (being done but within
the Age of those that yet Live, and God forgive if they be, which ought to be
had in everlasting remembrance) yet there are Obligations of late which are
Monitory to us of Mercy abused and ingratefully deported to.

And here give me leave (Sir) to Apostrophize as God did by his Prophet Isaiah,
1 Isa. 2.
Hear O Heaven, hearken O Earth, bear witness Angels and Men, and our own
Consciences, whether God has not nourished us up that are now alive as his
Children, and yet We, we have rebelled against him; O Sir, the Mercies showed
to our Glorious Lord and Renowned Sovereign of England, our Gracious King
Charles the Second, whom God long preserve and Sanctify thoroughout both in
Body and Soul, are the Marrow and Fatness of all Gods Treasury of Mercies
concerning this life; His seasonable departure and safe arrival beyond the
Seas, when he might have been in the same hands his blessed Martyr Father was,
His Conduct and Preservation while abroad, in the condition of a Pilgrim, and
under the Eclipse of a Pensioner, His preparation to reduction by his opposites
dimnion, and his Subjects better prospect into their Seduction and combination
against those Artificers of their former delusion, His Generals and ever
Glorious Father in fidelity to him, and success for him and us. I make bold
(with His Majesty's gracious Pard^n humbly implored) to use the Compellation
that I have heard reported to be given him by His Majesty) the now beloved and
deservedly admired Duke of Albemar^^, his sagacity in carrying his intents
undiscovered, till he had both enabled himself and disabled the opposites to
discover or defeat them; The honest and wise Parliament of 1660/1 their
plyableness first to publish, and after to act the security and seasonableness
of his Restoration; The passivity of a potent Army and Party formerly against
him, which foreseeing what is come to pass, yet opposed nothing at all, at
least to no purpose, but rather in a great measure forwarded the mercy by their
activity. The advantage that accrewed to His Majesty upon his reverter, not
only of Money and Monyes worth by Offices, but by Improvement of Lands, and by
other valuable perquisites; and besides all, the love of his Subjects, who
adoring the rising Son of so blessed and lamented a Father, and accounting
themselves delivered by him, and Establishable against relapse only from him,
Sacrificed all to him, Their persons and fidelity to him by Oath, Their Laws,
Liberties and Purses to him by Parliamentary playbleness, Their Prayers to him
by thinking that best done which he did, and their praises of what he did, as
acceptable to them, and magnified by them; This, this Sunshine in the harvest
of their hopes; This, This Rain of Fertility after Englands Sultre of war and
dissension. This mercy of Inundation in the joy of Englands King Charles
returned, is a mercy from the Womb of the Morning, which the light sprung from
on high visited us with, a Visitation it was of Gods Light and of his Truth, Of
the light of his countenance in making our Captivity like the Rivers of the
South, 126 Ps. 4.
a reaping in joy after a sowing in tears; 1^2 Ps. 28 11 Prove. 21.
of the Truth of his Promise, The seed of the Righteous shall not be forsaken,
of the truth of his Paternity to us who thus remembered us in our low estate.
For his mercy endures for ever. This, this prosecuted and perfected by his
deliverances from Insurrections at home, from Confederacies against him abroad,
from the violencies of ungo^ly men, and from the dangers and uncertainties of
war, This raising of him in his Reputation, and making his Adversaries appear
little to him, Is the Matchless mercy of God to him, and is Gods Envoy and
Herald to beseech His Grace to suitable subjection to him, and to circumspect
Sanctimony before him.

And if O England! and O London! God has thus obliged thy Monarch, and his
Peerage and his Prelacy, and his people of all degrees. Then what O England!
does God require of this Renowned Recipient and Lodge of thy mercy by the
distributions from whence thou art refreshed and enriched, then that thy
Monarch with all his Train of dependants, do execute Justice, love Mercy, and
walk humbly with his and their God. Answer God O England! Prince and people in
this requiry of his? Do Justice upon sin, the abominable thing that he hates;
upon sin of all sorts, of all degrees, in all persons, Execute the Laws
impartially while they stand in Force, Repeal them if they be supernumerary,
mitigate them if vexatious, explain them if dubious, add to them if too short
to reach and redress emergent evils, and be not overcome of the evil of
partiality, but overcome that and all other evil with the goodness of public
spiritedness, which aims at entailing Gods blessing upon him and his. For he
has not only said he will forgive the sins of those that execute judgment, 1
Isay 17. 18. But has promised that those that Execute judgment, make their
shadows as the Night in the midst of the Noonday, hide the outcasts, and
betray not him that wandereth, to have their Thrones be Established in mercy,
and their Posterity sit upon them in truth, 16 Isa. 5. yea with execution of
judgment, God whose Throne is Established by Righteousness, and whose ways are
Mercy and Truth, is so taken at, that He promises to pardon a great and sinful
City, Jerusalem, if in the streets and in the broad places thereof, there can
be found but one man that executes judgment and seeks the truth, 5 Jer. 1.
Thus to do Justice is to please God, if it be seconded by Love of mercy to Gods
poor and afflicted Ones, Relieve the oppressed, visit the Fatherless and Widow
in their extremity, be not a terror to those that do well, do not break the
bruised reed, nor quench the smoking flax; Let the long-sufferance and
patience of God to you make you compassionate to those whose errors you ought
to pity and pray for, rather then punish, Let Gods Longanimity in your renewed
Conscience break out upon their passions in Victory over them; and in virtue
expressed to them that are contrary minded to you, and think that the noblest
Conquest that makes you triumph over mortal wrath which accomplishes not the
Righteousness of God, 1 Jam. 20
and that carries you out under every weight that would suppress your heavenly
ambition to take heaven by force, and to lay hold of eternal Life, and to carry
away the assurance of God yours in the Talons of an Eagled faith, which looks
upon the Son of Righteousness boldly, and which mounts to the Throne of glory
with humble confidence; This, O Prince and People of England is to love mercy,
To seek out every true and sacred object of it, To neglect no manifestation of
it to such, To be unwearied in such welldoing, To expend every measure of it
with Eye to him in heaven that does command, cannot but accept, will without
fail reward it; He that remembers that Gods Extraordinary benevolence to Man is
phrased by showing mercy, 14 Number. 18. 3. Lam. 22. 103 Ps. 8. 11. 17. and that
he promised his mercy and loving kindness, he will never take from His, cannot
but promise himself great comfort in showing mercy, and greater in loving
mercy. For God delights in the mercy which is complacential and flows from the
bowels and being of the shewer, and because he delights in mercy and is a God
merciful and gracious, 34. Exodus ^6.
therefore he requires Men his Vicars, 2. Chron. 30. c. v. 9.
to love mercy; 103. Ps. 8.
Evil men may occasionably show mercy. 3. Jer. 12.
But good men only love mercy. Thus O England! thou have invitations from thy
God to performances of doing justice and loving mercy; Nor is this all, but
there is another requiry aequivalent to these in the coordination of which,
Gods postulation of thee is answered, walk humbly with thy God; This, This, O
England! is thy duty and interest to propagate also, for there can be none of
the two former without this latter, there is no demeanor national or personal
under-mercies, true and uniform, without the Condiment and Ballast of this,
Humility in owning God the spring of all authority and enablement to do
justice, and love mercy, is that which carries the grace of resolution to its
period of performance, Let God, O England! O London! have all the glory of what
ye have arrived at, while some put confidence in Charriots and Horsemen, 49.
Ps. 6.
and say their Bow has brought them their Venison, and their Council and their
Confederacies has thus befriended them, while they boast of their hearts
desires, 10. Ps. 3. and of a false gift, 25. Prove. 14. while they boast in
their Idols, 97. Ps. 7. and of too Morrow which they know not what it may bring
forth, 17. Prove. 1. do thou, O England! boast only of God all the day long, 44.
Ps. 8. and so moderate your minds, under all your mercies that ye may be termed
the Ministers of our God, that ye may eat the riches of your Enemies, and in
that glory shall you boast your selves, 61 Isaiah 6. O England! O London! the
Country, the City of my birth breeding, and love, how considerable an Interest
is this to thee, praeponderating all those of Moneys, Men, Navies, Armies,
though all admirable and useful, yet without thee thus prostrate and devoutly
nothing in thine own Eyes, thou art nothing before God, nor will thou be any
thing against thy Neighbors, but in this, and in the strength of Gods might by
this, Thou will be more than a balance to them; Thou will be a Victor over
them, for God saves the afflicted people, 18. Ps. 27. that is the humble
people, 2. Sam. 22. c. v. 28. 49. Isa. 13. and To England and To London thus
afflicted and paenitent for their sins, God I trust will commiseratingly say as
once he did to his Church by his Prophet, O Thou afflicted, 64 Isaiah 11, 12,
13.
tossed with Tempests, and not Comforted, Behold I will lay thy Stones with
fair colors, and lay thy Foundations with Saphires, and I will make thy
Windows with Agates, and thy Gates of Carbuncles, and all thy Borders of
pleasant Stones, and all thy Children shall be taught of the Lord, and great
shall be the peace of thy Children. This is the cause why I humbly provoke the
Nation to humiliation before God upon view of his mercies immerited, we have
not been worthy of the least of those Myriaded ones that we have enjoyed, nor
improved them to such a degree of Melioration and gratitude as we might and
ought, For if those mighty wonders that had been amongst us, had been done in
any other Nation or City, Mat. 11. 21. 23.
they would have repented long ago in Sackcloth and Ashes, Lu^e 10. 13.
whereas We are still settled in our Lees, 48 Jer. 11.
and return not to him that smites us, 7 Hos. 10.
neither bring we forth fruits meet for repentance. 4 Mat. 8.


Further (Sir) I do humbly pray and wish that England and London would consider
the necessity of their humiliation before God; for the Judgments past, present,
and probably to come upon it and them that are Impaenitent in it, and
unreformed by them.

And here methinks I hear the Nation crying to its Neighbors, and inhabitants
as Jerusalem is personated to cry out, 1 Lam. 12. Is it nothing to you all ye
that pass by behold and see, If there be be any sorrow like unto my sorrow
which is done unto me, wherewith the Lord has afflicted me in the day of his
fierce anger? Is it nothing to you that after above 80 years peace I should
have an Intestine War, an Irish Rebellion, a Scotch Insurrection, and an
English Discord; By the Tragickness of all which, in Battails fought, in
Violencies committed, in Depraedations made; I lost Hundreds of Thousands of
Men, Millions of Wealth, Multitudes of Buildings of State, suffered Havoc of
Religion, Humanity, Timber, and what not that was valuable to keep or get? Is
it nothing to you that I had wickedness settled in me by a Law, 9. (...) ^6. 9
(...) 13. 6. (...)* 12.
and that the Rulers of the People caused me to err; turning judgment into
Gall, and righteousness into Wormwood, till at last the light of our eyes, the
Anointed of the Lord fell in their snare, and the blood of that Holy and Just
one Charles the First, my once Lord and Master was slain in me? Is it nothing
to you, that I was made another Absyrtus, and my seameless coat was torn in
pieces, and divided between those that then were chief; That I was in a good
progress to Anarchy, and to an impossibility ever to have been recollected and
reduced into my orderly and consistent way of regularity and harmony wherein
our Governors might be as at the first, and our Judges as at the first, 1.
Isai. 26.
no Neighboring eye pitying me in this day of contempt, or saying unto me
Live, had not God made this time of my pollution, the time of his Love? Is it
nothing to you, that God has given me a Horn of salvation in this house of his
Servant David, 132. Ps. 2.
and we that under his shadow and protection sit under our own Vine, and under
our own Fig Tree, and enjoy our good things with Peace, yet do repine at the
Anchor that holds us all together from wreck, and think necessary aids granted
to him, burdens, and his Proclamations and Manifests against Profaneness and
contempt of God (disobeyed by many of those who will Ram and Damn themselves to
be his best friends, and all Phanatiques, who refrain from the same excess not
to be heeded with them) Is it nothing to you that God has brought a War upon me
from my Neighbors in Situation, and Religion, and made the two Earthen Vessels
placed in the Sea, and insuperable while inseparable, dash each against other,
Certo constat Regem Hispaniarum si totam Angliam cum Belgio donare possit
totius Europae magnaeque partis mundi Novi Monarcham cito Evasurum; Omnino id
agat ut Anglorum vires infringat, ad quod efficiendum Naves Hollandiae and
Frisiae sufficerent si nimirum Classi A^glae opponerentur. Campanella c. 25. de
Monarchia Hispanic^.
and they that in their Union are a terror to all their opposites, become in
Hostility the advantage of those that abet their feuds, looking for that day
(which I hope they shall never see) wherein they promise themselves the spoil
of them? Is it nothing to you that the God of Heaven has brought upon many
great Cities and Towns in me and into my London, in Anno 1665. the grievous
Plague and Pestilence wherein above a hundred thousand dyed. Many of its
Inhabitants were scattered into several corners of the Nation, and impoverished
by high expenses, loss of Trade and Debts, and by other unavoidable accidents.
And when they were but a little returned, and were in their way of settlement
and recovery, Is it nothing to you that God has by this Dreadful fire of
Londons havoc given the Enemy of the settled Religion of England occasion to
account England and London forsaken of God; 71 Ps. 11.
And Apology and Appeal to the Royalists now published.
now to be as vituperious of me and mine as their Predecessors in Profession
were in their Petition to King James, in which they have amongst many other
passages this; ( Assuring your Grace that howsoever some Protestants or
Puritans incited by morral honesty of life, Cab. l^. 2 p^^t. p. 84.
or innated instinct of Nature, or for fear of some temporal punishment,
pretend obedience unto their Highness Laws, yet certainly the only Catholics
for Conscience Sake observe them, Is this? Is this nothing to you that thus the
adversary reproaches me upon the misery of London? Beloved London, Virtutum
omnium domicilium, as the Ammi^^nus Mar^lli-nus. ^. 14.
Historian styled Rome, now the object of our Tears, who wast heretofore the
pleasures of our eyes, whose being and bravery God has given up into the rage
of fire as the punishment of God upon the Nations and its own sins; 2 Cor. 4.
c. v. 9.
Though thou art persecuted yet art thou not forsaken, Why may not the words of
the Prophet Isaiah be applied to thee, ^ 2 Isa. 11. 12.
Behold thy Salvation comes, And they shall call thee the Holy people, the
Redeemed of the Lora; and thou shall be called sought out, A City not forsaken.

Tell me, O tell me, ye that are most proud upon your prosperity, ye that
despise the day of small things, and think ye are delivered to do all the
abominations that the worst of men do, who follow the lusts of their own eyes,
and the thoughts of their own hearts, and make God unconcerned in their
behavious, As if every one that does evil were good in the sight of the Lord,
and he delights in him, or where is the God of judgment, 2 Mal. ult. ye who
discharge the providence of God from all Regency over the world and the men,
and things of it subjecting all things to chance, as if the Lord who made it,
wholly cast off the care and control of it, and will not do good, 1 Zep. 12*
neither will he do evil in it; Tell me O ye mistaken ones, who smile in your
sleeves, and exalt your selves against those that the Lord has humbled, Vere
affirmare possumus mundum novum quodammodo perdidisse mundum.
may not the Prophet Obeds words be applied to you. But are these not with you,
even with you sins against the Lord your God; 2 Chronicles. 17. c. v. 10.
For which sins God may meet with you also? Let these things O people of
England be weighed, Veterem nam mentibus nost. is a varitium insevit and mutuum
amorem inter homines extrin^it. Campanella c. 16. Monarch Hispan.
and let it not seem light to you that God has made such a breach in the wall
of the strength of England, and caused the Metropolis of it to be a Stepmother
to her Children.

This O London Inhabitants now dispersed, take religiously to heart, and let
God have the glory of your voluntary and penitent taking to your selves shame
and confusion of Face; For behold the Lord has made the Earth of 24 Isa. 1.
London waste, he has made it empty and turned it upside down, and scattered
abroad the Inhabitnnts thereof, God has given it (for but a while I hope) the
portion of Egypt to be desolate and waste, 29 Ezech 9.
though the River (was and is and will be I trust Hers,) which brought all
Trade to her, and carried all Trade from her, not only into England, but into
all other parts of the habitable world. Because of which testimony of Gods
indignation against us, for our untowardness to him, and our neglect of him
when his judgments on us ought to make us learn righteousness. What cause (
Dear Sir) has England and London to cry mightily to God for a profitable issue
of this his judgment upon us, and how ought we all to abhor our selves for
provoking his goodness, and patience, so long and so far?

Let (Sir) evil Instruments have their due Guerdon if they be found, and found
guilty, Let no eye spare, nor any heart compassionate the misery of any Villainy
that shall be Confederate against the Lord, and against his Anointed in the
ruin of London, (which was more happy in some respects when on fire, than Nec
quisquam desendere audebat, creb^is multorum minis restinguere prohibentium,
and quia alii palam faces jaciebant atque esse sibi auctorem vociserabantur
sive ut raptus licentius exercerent, seu ^ussu. Tacitus Annal. l. 15. p. 791.
Edit. Dor^ea^s.
Rome when on fire was) But yet the great Delinquent that provoked God to give
up London such a main Pillar and Masterbranch in Englands Grandeur, into the
power of raging fire was Englands and Londons sins, for which she and it has
received such things at the Lords hand. This is a lamentation, and it ought to
be a lamentation; For of all the Clouds over England, none more portentuous
than this.

Which (Sir) in mine opinion, (but I am a modest subscriber to your and other
Wise-mens better judgments) addresses to the Nation this Counsel to promote
union and general compliance amongst true Englishmen, to serve their Prince
resolutely, supply his necessities roundly, discourage his Enemies manfully,
and in all things prove themselves a terror to the common Enemy, whose pride
it is to see us peevish, and whose project it is to keep us jealous and
inconfident each of other, and thence impotent against them, so Camp^^ella has
told the world. For having advised to open Popish Schools in Flanders Ad
Rel^gionem Angl^ae quod s^ectat obtinet quidem Calvin a^a attamen moderata, nec
tam prava ut Genevensim est quae tamen facile restling ui non potest, nisi
aperiuntur Scholae in Flandra, quae gens cum Anglis multum commercii habet,
into ventuque illarum spargentur semina Scismatum in Scientiis Naturalibus,
etc. c. 25. de Monarch. Hispan.
( which Country has much commerce with England and is near to it, he
concludes that Natural Sciences professed there, and drawing over many great
Wits thither, will so engage them to cavil and busy their brains in disputes,
That the errors of the Calvinists will be made manifest. And he proceeds, c.
27. To conclude that God himself has showed, them the way by which the
Heretics may be overcome; namely, their rendering into Sects and Parties,
which he assures by the endeavors that he prescribes may be such, That there
hardly be found a family in that Land (meaning Engl.) in which diverse Hersies
shall not be favored, nor is there wanting to our wishes anything but the
knowing and improving of so desirable an opportunity, For every Kingdom divided
against it self shall be desolated, Deus tamen ipse postmodum ust^ad^t vtam qua
illi vinci potuerunt cum ipsi ( Protestants) per sectas in diversas parts
decesserunt, Cro^^ sciliscet Lutheri, subtilis Calvini, dissoluti Zuinglii and
Mem^c nis, adeo ut vix ulla domus ibi terrarum inveniatur in qua (...) diverse
Haer^ses soveantur, nec ulla desit nobis quam scientia apprehendendi and
usurpandi tam exoptatam occasionem, omn^ en (...) regnum inse divisum
desolabitur and unio fi^ma difficilem semper habet nodum. c. 27.
and firm union has ever a undissolvable knot; Thus Campanella.

For as in the body natural the amputation and dock of one member forces the
blood and spirits that therein reside when fixed, to recur to the heart, and
there to succor it in the absence of that part, to the more plenary vigor of
the remaining parts, so in the body politic, in this sense Intentio supplere
debet defectum, What England has at present lost in Londons Counsel, Riches,
Readiness, it must supply by the hale and uninjured other parts, till Londons
dispersions can be recollected, and the impoverishings of it be regained. The
number of Land. (blessed be God) are not by the fire much destroyed, nor their
spirits Crest-fallen, nor are they languid and despairing in their endeavors
to get up again, if God give his blessing to them, and if they be left (so far
as may suit with His Majesty's pleasure and the Laws direction for public
advantage) to the building of it upon its old Foundation, and according to the
just proportion of every man's allowed claim and right; This, in such measure as
the wisdom and justice of Government shall indulge, may make us hopeful, and I
hope confident to see a London again, and therefore O England, O London,
renounce thy Factions and Parties which are great Remora's to thy prosperity,
and let us who are Christian Englishmen keep the unity of the spirit in the
bond of Peace, 2 Cor. 13. c. v. 11. 4 Ephesians. 3. 3 2 Isa. 17. 11 Prove. 30.
and the God of peace will be with us, and make the work of it peace and
assurance for ever, rendering this fruit of Righteousness a tree of life.
Nothing tends to redintegration, to improvement like union, for by that are
unnatural Breaches made up, and firmness the only auxiliary to opposition of
Enemies is advanced and carried on to its amiable issue; while Brethren live
together and are full fed at their Fathers Table they often will be found
jarring each with other, and contending with animosity for straws and bubbles,
but when their provident Fathers disposes them into several quarters, and they
see and hear from one another but seldom, then their childish vatiances fall
off and they unite into an indissolvability of affection, so that they will
covet to hear from and see each other, omitting no expression of obligement
that they can make to one another; Sembably in National differences it proves
true, that the common affection of Countrymen solders them into a common
resolve of kindness each to other, when they see they have bought their humors
at too dear a rate to boast of their purchase, or to continue in it any longer.
And this, they that are most stupid and settled upon their Lees, may easily
discover; And if God that divided Simeon and Levi in Jacob, and scattered them
in Israel, because cruelty was in their dwellings, Ge^.
shall unite Ephraim to Manasseth, and Manasseth to Ephraim, Judah will have no
cause to complain both of them against each other have been against her.
Nothing is a Curse of subversion to a Nation but Faction, 9 Isa. 20.
Dissension, Jealousy, which the aforesaid Campanella calls (the most approved
and successful way to humble the Heretics of England and distract them that
can be, Egregia vero via ad humilandos Ha^eticos eosque distrahendos etiam haec
est, nimirum aperire Scholas Philosohicas and Mathematicas in Germania ut
ejusmod^ speculati omnibus immergatur potius quum Haereticis studiis vacet. Et
Paulo post una quadem via est si animus omnis et voluntas interse coeundi et
conspirandi illis auferatur suspiciones et simultatis inter illos alendo, etc.
c. 23.
for while they are afraid of one another, and keep at distance, they all lie
open to become the prey of their Adversary.) Nor can this Nation be solidly
thankful to God for his Mercies on the right hand and his Correction on the
left, nor are they or any of them rightly understood or applied by us, till
with one heart and one mind we turn to God by Prayer and Supplication, till we
seek him with undivided hearts, and beseech him junctis viribus, with
intireness and unbroken devotion, till we all become a Fulminans Legio, a band
of seekers and servers of him orderly, as those that are gathered together, and
the Kingdoms to serve the Lord, Psalm 102. v. 22.

O union! how will thou befriend Engl. if thou now become the blessing of City
and Country, of Church and State, High and Low, old and young; let this spirit
hold riffe in Engl. and let us learn obedience to God by the things that we
have suffered, for being too much without it, and our prosperity will be like a
River, and our Renown and dread like a mighty stream, our enemies will be
before us as the Chaff before the wind, One of us will chase a 1000, 23 Josh.
10.
five of us will chase a 100, and a 100 of us will put 10000 to flight, 26 Lev.
8.
For till union be Gods gift upon National endeavors and prayers, its best
blessing is like to prove but a balance to enemies, not a Victory over them,
God may, and it is but a may, make their bow abide sure to wound their enemies
in the hinder-parts, yet shall they still be but partial Victors, while their
enemies industry and unitedness wastes that by length which it cannot scatter or
bear down by strength.

And if any man (Sir) think this a paradox and mis-judgeth it an error in
History, let him rectify his mistake by the Oracle of truth Christ Jesus, A
Kingdom divided against it self cannot stand, and let him thereupon consider
whether the plenary success of Nations in their enterprises both offensive and
defensive, depend not, under God Almighty, upon union, which if the late
judgment of Pestilence and Fire, with the present war will not invite us to,
and confirm us in, what will do I know not, unless whom the Lord intends to
destroy, He hardneth against his fear, and against knowing the day of their
saving Visitation, which I hope and pray Engl. may be delivered from, and do
promise my self Englishmen will ever make good that humor which I think is
natural to them, Read Sir Walt. Bawleigh 2 Book 1 part p. 262. l. 10.
to lay aside all private grudges, and bid their Valors to a reconciled
entertainment in furious charge upon their Countries enemies, and thereby
discharge their Countries vexation; For if pro aris, pro focis and Patre
Patriae if in these cases (to use K. James of blessed Memory his words) p. 233.
of his works in folio.
no man ought to think his life happyer and more gloriously bestowed than in
defense of any of the three; how great an obligation is there on us to be true
to our Nation when all are in danger, and how ought we all to be united to
defend them all, who are so happy by them all?

Thus (Sir) having observed to your Judicious eye and to the Nation's, the
mercies of God to Engl. in general, and to London a considerable part of it, I
think it proportionable to mine honest intendment, to become in that measure
that God enableth me, the Cities Orator and Advocate to the Nation, to whose
aid, splendor, convenience, Grandeur, She when she stood upon her ancient
bottom was so great a Contributor, Do not, O do not glory in her ruins,
trample not upon her dislustre, reproach not her widowhood, insult not over her
humbling; Do not, O do not vomit out Invectives against her whom God has given
as it were the Cup of 23 Ezech 32.
abasement and astonishment to drink; 12 Zach. 2.
do not lay load upon those Shoulders that God has in a sort, Issachar'd, 49
Genesis 19
to crowch between two Burdens of Poverty and dispersion, lay not that upon
them which they are not able to bear, 36 Isa. 27.
because God lays upon no man more then he gives strength to undergo; 1 Cor.
10. c. v. 13.
Be not lifted up in this day of Londons dejection, lest the Lord see it and be
displeased, and he hurl you Lucifers out of the Heaven of your sinful selicity,
and make you Noctifers and Mortifers of misery and contempt; Remember God was
sore displeased with the Heathen that were at ease, Because I was (says he)
but a little displeased, and they helped forward the affliction, 1 Zach. 15.
For I hope God is returning to it in Mercy, and his Houses shall be built, and
a Line shall be stretched forth upon it, v. 16.

I the rather (Noble Sir) mention this, because the rancour of ill Nature, lewd
rage, and un-English truculency discovers it self in the words and actions of
some to such degrees, that they count London as Nero's House was termed,
Spoliarium Vrbis and Orbis, Censuring it thus punished for her blood and
Rebellion, for her Sectarism and Puritannicalness, making the loss and just
complaints of her Inhabitants, the matter of their secret repast, if not open
exultation. To this the answer of our Lord to his furious Disciples, who would
have had Fire called for from heaven upon their enemies, is apposite You know
not of what spirit ye are, therefore to such I shall make no reply that will
incense them or engage me. Only (Sir) I hope I may with modesty and truth say,
that whatever Londons guilt before God has been, and its receiving from the
Lords hand by this fire is, God is just, and it has reaped but the fruits of
its own sinful doings, as to God Londons destruction is of it self, but as to
the Nation, it has not I persuade my self had more than a proportion of sin
with it; Her Magistracy, Her Ministry, Her Sabbaths, Her Congregations, Her
Citizens, Her altogether has been as orderly and pious as the proportions of
them in other places privileged from her Calamity were, and when ever the
temper of her Inhabitants was most distempered, they were then no more Criminal
than the rest of the Nation; whose Emissaries and Suffragans either called up
those disorders in her, or confirmed, ex post facto, what was vildely done by
them. And if London (be it as bad as it will be, must in policy be made as good
as it can, and be born with till its humors be sweetened, and its eventriqueness
be reduced, for the Metropolis of Engl. I hope God has ratifyed in Heaven it
shall ever be and abide;) then to no purpose is this waste of rage, while Land.
being the common Hostelry of the Nation, receives into it men of all additions
and tempers, nor can it be responsible before God or man for that, which a more
governable place (then the continued building which in this account is reckoned
Land. but really is not) would be, Londons numbers made London orderly, or the
contrary, as the predominant virtue or vice of them led her, nor avails it much
what a few wise and loyal men say or do, if many more than they will appeal
from them to the power they have gotten over them, and the mastery they are
resolved to keep upon them. And though the least instance of Land. misdemeanor
be that which I wish from my soul she could not be charged with, yet if those
that are most censorious of her, and most profess service to the K. and the
Country would consider it aright, they may I presume find cause to join with
Renowned K. James, who in his acknowledgment of Her great forwardness in that
honorable action of proclaiming him King, says, Anno. 1602. Cabala. p. 81.
Wherein you have given a singular proof of your ancient Fidelity, a Reputation
Hereditary to that our City of London being the Chamber of our Imperial Crown,
and ever free from all shades of tumultuous and undutyful courses, so that King.

And so much by way of Atonement for London, the challenge to which needs no
other or better reply than that of the Archangel, contesting with his
Antagonist about the body of Moses, whom he answered not with railing
accusations, but said, The Lord rebuke Thee; even so, O Lord, St. Jude 9.
rebuke the evil spirit of these Sanballats, and raise up the spirit of the
Nehemiahs and such other Heroicks of Kindness and Ability, to consider London;
If not the place of their birth, breeding, supply, or the foil in which their
Ancestors laid the foundations of their Honor and Fortune, yet that wherein
their younger Brothers, Sisters, or Cozen-Germans were disposed of, and lived
happily in. At Pompeii theatrum igne fortuito haustum, Caesar extructurum
pollicitus est, eo quod nemo e Familia restaurando sufficeret. Tacitus Annal.
lib. 3. p. 417. Edit Dorleaus.
And, O that such of the Nobility and Gentry, whose Greatness owes its Freedom
and Fullness to their City Ancestors who throve so well in it, as to leave them
that whereby they and their thrifty Posterities may enjoy the plenty they
neither labored nor spun for. O that, I say, these would think the ruins of
London, under which the Monuments of their worthy Fathers or Grandseirs, and
the ashes of them lie, worthy their rescue and revival, by re-edifying those
Piles of Devotion in which they were erected and buried; That what is written
but upon the Porch of one Church now in the Borders of London, may be the Motto
of every such restored Church and Chapel, St. Gyles's in the Fields.
Heus viator anne bonis operibus effoetum est hoc soeculum. A senatu petivi^
Lepidus ut B^silicam Sancti Pauli Aemiliam monumenta propria pecunia firmaret,
o naretque, erat enim tunc in more publica munisicentia. Idem eodem loco.
And O that the aid of their great Estates would come in to help the public
Places of Londons Government, Guild Hall and the Halls of the Worthy and
Charitable Societies of the same, a Work becoming the best and bravest Minds,
and only expectable from such, who thereby would more contribute to their own
earthly perennity, than by the doubtful continuance of Sons and Daughters. God
knows my heart, I hate the vapor of words divorced from real and solid
Intentions, but this, if you (Sir) and other Worthy men will give me leave to
write, and belief in writing, I had rather live in such public Munificencies,
than in Sons or Daughters. And had I an Estate as Augustus had, Legata non
ultra Civilem modum nisi quod populo and Pleb. ccccxxxv. Praetoriarum co^ortium
militibus singula nummum millia, legionariis autem cohortih^s Civium Romanorum
trecenos nummos vi^itim dedit. Annal. lib. ^. p. 33. Edit Dorleans.
whom Tacitus reports to have bestowed by Legacy in his Will, incredible sums
of Money to the Citizens and Soldiers thereby entitled to his Gift; I should
rather choose, after moderate Provision for my Children, to make the Ruins of
London. (In which Beloved Syon College should have no small share) Mine
Executor then to restore, or continue my own Family by it. And, I trust, God
who I believe has accepted, as well pleasing in his sight, the Piety,
Faithfullness, and Diligence of the Corporations in London, will give a Command
to those Lazaritique spirits, who have been of late engraved in cold resolves
to hoard what would be better thus employed, to come forth and become
charitably visible; And if God be with London to this purpose, He that at first
brought Order out of Confusion, can from this present Heap of Rubbish, raise up
a New and no less Renowned London. And thereby provide anew for the Reverend,
Learned, and Painful Clergy, many of which Constant Preachers, Polite Writers,
Discreet and Holy Livers, are now exposed with their Wives, Children and
Families to hardship, un-housed, dis-parished, Fortuneless; Some whereof have
lost all, or part of their Libraries, Common Places, and Sermon Notes, the
fruits of their Studies, and the supplies of their Cures, and other
advantageous Emergencies; and what is yet as lamentable as any other unwelcome
Accident, have lost the convenience of Sy^n College, whose well furnished
Library (though little added to these late years) in a good part saved, yet by
the ruins of its Case, and the uselessness of it in any place, but that which
was peculiar to it, adds to their unhappiness; to recover which pristine
convenience, there was a Motion made to the President and such of the
Governors as could be got together about three weeks after the Fire, by a
Gentleman who would have been the College Orator, had they given him, and some
other Gentlemen joined with him, Credentials to address in their name, and to
so worthy a purpose, The then living, though now dead, Dr. War^er.
Bishop of Rochester, whom the Motioner, to my knowledge, told such of the
Governors as there were present, the most likely of any one liveing to accept
the Entreaty and Motion, to become the Patron and Refounder of the College.
God having concentred in his Lordship those arguments of Motive for him to do
this, which he has not now, in many no less willing, as that his Lordship was a
Native of London, the Son of a wealthy Citizen in the same; That he was a
Churchman in the City many years; That he had been a Governor of Syon
College; That he had long published himself an intender of Public charity by
way of a College to be built, or some Hospital, or both; if this, added to his
Fatherly ability in point of Estate, and his non-avocation by Provision for
Children, which many men's Intentions this way are pestered with, and rendered
ineffectual by; These, I say, all amassed together, did portray him probable
enough to expect such an address, and to be by God prepared, not to brow-beat
it; especially when the Eminency of this Charity had furtherance by the
cheapness of it, the restoration of which Edifice to its splendour, would not,
with the Materials (when the Motion was made) already there, have amounted to
above 3000l. which was far less than either our first Founder, Reverend Dr.
White, or our second Founder worthy Mr. Simpson, though but a plain Rector of
a Church in London, St. Olaves Har^-stree^.
and having a charge of Children, bestowed upon their respective parts of
Foundation therein. But this Motion (which no man can deny to have been then
not impossible to have gained accomplishment to those honest ends) ceased under
the conclusion, He was an angry old Man, and would not relish such an
Application, and so it dyed, and two months after his Lordship too; but I wish
it be not the hopefullest opportunity that the College will ever have. And I
pray God that future diligence may supply what herein may be feared wanting,
and that the Library may be fitted to use. Since as the Lord Coventry once
said, The College had never been or continued, Nota ben^.
if it had not been for the Library and Almshouses.

This I thought here good to publish, it being my nature and custom to promote
all pious and learned Interests by any opportunities I have, or can seasonably
take, and to Gratulate the Kindness, Convenience, and Favor I have had from
any person or thing, with frequency of acknowledgment, and wherein I can with
fluency of requital. Yea, so great a confidence had I of the feasibility of
this Motion, had it been currantly followed, that, I dare say, and I would have
none displeased with me, but if they be, I will be pleased with my self for
believing it, That if the meanest Society in London had conceived such hopes of
any man so related to them, and so enabled for them, as the prementioned
Prelate was to the Corporation of London Ministers at Syon College, they would
have not been so Modest as to have made to themselves a difficulty to approach
him, and a denial from him, before they had attempted the one, and received the
other; But would have made as much of it, as their diligence, furthered by Gods
blessing, would have prospered their application to.

And I the rather (Sir) move the Nobles and Gentry to this, because God, in the
words of Mordecay to Esther, perhaps has brought them to, and preserved them
in, riches and plenty for such a time as this, Esther 4. 14. And how can they
do more to denominate them Noble and Great ^inded, then this of building
somewhat of public Use and State. Thus God when he declares his Mercy and
Greatness to his, is said to Build the Cities of Judah, Psalm. 69. 35. And when
the Lord builds up Zyon, he is said to Appear in his Glory, Psalm. 102. 16. Thus
God says to his Peoples comfort, The Heathen that are left round about you
shall know, that I the Lord build the ruined places, and plant that that was
desolate, Ezech. 36. 36. And when God threatened the deriders of his destroyed
people, whom he calls sinners of his people that shall die by the sword, which
say the evil shall not overtake nor prevent us, Amos 9. 10. In the 11th v. he
adds, In that day (to wit of their ruin) will I raise up the Tabernacle of
David that is fallen, and close up the breaches thereof, and I will raise up
his ruins, and I will build it as in the days of old.

And as God himself shows his Greatness by this, so does he stir up great
Minds thus to do. See Sir W. Rawleigh ^ Book. 1. part c. 10. 4.
Thus he stirred up Solomon to build a House to him, 1 Chronicles. 28. 10. Thus God
moved Cyrus to build the Temple, Ezra 5^13. Thus Cain, Nimrod, Ashur, and all
men else of Might, are excited to build Cities and Houses, and to call them
after their own Names, which was not only the Fashion of elder times, and
Eastern Countries, but has ever been the Custom of England: Most Halls and
Lordship Houses taking Denomination from the Primitive or most remarkable
Owner of them; Which perpetuation of any man's Name and Memory, is more probable
and certainly continuous, than that of a Child, who may die, or leave no Heir,
or but an Heir Female; or may by unthriftiness waste an Estate, and so
extinguish the Ancestor; when as a public Bounty fixed on the Basis of a
notable Structure employed to a general Use, can undergo no such change; for
its Corporation never dies, and its Alienation is secured against. Which is
verified in that Magnanimous and liberal hearted Benefactor to London, and that
Glory of Englands Traders in his time, Sir Thomas Gresham Knight, and Mercer of
London, the wealthy and serviceable Merchant of Queen Elizabeth of ever blessed
Memory; who dying childless, is buried in the alienation of Asterly, and other
great parcels of his Lands, now out of the Name of Gresham; but yet he lives in
the College of his Foundation, and in the City House he lived in, which is by
the Mercy of God preserved from Fire, and become the Chamber, The Guild Hall,
The Common Hall, The Exchange of the remaining City; The Royal Exchange in
Cornhil of his Foundation, Anno 1571. being wholly burnt down, and all the
Stately and Kingly Effigies of it demolished, except his the Founders, which
yet stands in its Arch undefaced: which president of Gods Custody of a
charitable man's Statue in that place and posture which to his Memory it was
first placed in, insinuates to me a very cogent Argument of invitation to some
of the descendants from Citizens to set apart some share of their spare Estate,
to restore waste places of Use and Notability, wherein they will more display
the Piety, Gratitude, and bravery of their Natures, than by any Paradoe of
Pomp, or any affectation of Grandeur which is Personal. It was a rare
Testimony given of the Centurion, That he loved the Jewish Nation, because he
built the Jews a Synagogue. And 'twill be a sure Evidence of Love to the
Ancestor that in London rose and enriched a Family in London, when the
Descendants from it so enriched, shall do good in their good pleasure to
London, and help to build up the ruins of its Churches, Chapels, Halls and
Colleges, which the sooner they are done the more exemplary, the less
chargeable they will be; and till they can be done, there are many real Objects
of Charity, which the wayffs and strayes of their amplitude would relieve, The
impoverished Clergy, The deserted Children of Christ's Hospital, Remember this
that God may remember you.
The aged poor of the Almshouses of the Societies. These, together with
thousands of altogether distressed and undone Housekeepers, call for your
charity, and will be worthy Objects of your Almonage. Look upon these, O ye
Great and Rich men, whoss Barns are full, whose Purses are weighty, whose
Bellies are pampered, whose Credits are questionless, whose Houses are well
stored, whose Children are well matched, whose Rents come in sleeping and
waking, Cast away some of your Bread upon these Waters, sprinkle some Crumbs of
Comfort before these helpless Infants; divide some portion to seven or eight,
to what number your discretion directs you to, and your Piety shall bless you
in so doing; For you know not what Evil shall come upon the Earth, Eccles. 11.
2. Remember (O man) God the distinguisher of thee and him, was the Creator as
well of thy Brother in want, as of thee in plenty; (the Rich and the Poor meet
together in their Commencement, both dust, God is the Maker of you both, Prove.
222.) and if thy heart be hard to him, and thou turnest thine eye from his
misery, and succourest not his poverty with thy plenty; as The Love of God
dwells not in thee so the blessing of God will not rest upon thee. Deuteronomy. 15. 7,
8, 9.
If there be a poor man among you, one of thy Brethren, within any of thy Gates
in thy Land, which the Lord thy God gives thee; Thou shall not harden thy
heart, nor shut thine hand from thy poor Brother, but thou shall open thine
hand wide unto him, and shall surely lend him sufficient for his need in that
which he wants. Beware that there be not a thought in thy wicked heart,
saying, The seventh year the year of release is at hand, and thine eye be evil
against thy poor Brother, and thou give him naught, and he cry unto the Lord
against thee, and it be sin unto thee: Thou shall surely give him, and thy
heart shall not be grieved when thou give unto him; Because that for this
thing the Lord thy God shall bless thee in all thy Works, and in all that thou
put thine hand unto. This is Gods Enaction in Force in the Moral Charity of
it to the Worlds end.

Which, in the Bowels of Christ, I think (Sir) is pressable upon rich exempted
persons now, according to such proportions as the public Affairs and other
Exigents, I know more then ordinarily expensive, will permit. Yet still
revolving in their minds that of St Paul, He that sowes sparingly, shall reap
sparingly; A Suit of Clothes, an Exuberant Servant, a Dish of Meat, an affected
Folly, is better spared, than a Charity to one of these: To whom a cup of cold
water given, shall be from God above rewarded. But I forbear, what mine Oratory
is incogent in, which for the Poor, God can supply, who has the hearts of the
Rich in his hand, and can soften them into such distributions, as they by the
poor, devote to him.

There is also (Sir) another Act of Charity, or rather Justice, that I humbly
commend to the great men of the Nation, to express to the ruined Citizens, To
wit, sudden and full payment of their just Debts. For they, poor Souls, being
outed of their Habitations, and loosers in the Fines* as well as Proprieties of
them, are not only exposed to lay down new Fines, and those, God knows,
unreasonable ones, to get them an abiding place, but are (by the suspicion that
their Creditors have of their loss and inability) rendered unable to buy up
Credit, upon which double exhaustion of them by the act of God, and the
inevitable inference thereupon; if those that are able be not willing, and
sudden in paying them, they will unavoidably be ruined, which, I hope, their
great Debtors, whom they must (for losses make men less confident, except they
be such as are total and irreparable) address with less courage, and are less
able to compel, if refractory, than heretofore, will count it beneath them to
put them to; For a Great man is not more distinguishable by any thing that is a
di^play of Notability, than by a Mind Just and Generous, as well abhorring to
do as to receive wrong, To whom Unjust and Mean advantages taken against their
Inferiors, is so execrable, that they count it no less than a stain to their
Honor, and an abatement to their Herocisme. King Sesostris is reckoned one of
the most Virtuous and Noble of the Egyptian Kings; yet he forgot himself much,
when he caused four captive Kings to draw his Coach; nor had he the true view
of worldly Instability, nor the great sentiments of Regality, when he prided
his inconstant Fortune, in the desport of their Vassalage. A braver humor
prevailed in the Christian and Masculine Soul of Charles the Fifth (many of
whose previous actions, to the resignation of an Empire, and the contentation
with a private life, were proportionate to the utmost expectable from an
Immortal Mortal*) This Great man, having by his Forces at the siege of Pavia,
taken Francis the First of France, a great and warlike King, L. Herberto Hist.
H. 8. p. 167.
Showed only such sense of it as became a wise Prince, and one that was not
himself exempted from a Quartan; for if he considered Francis in the custody of
his Guards, he looked upon himself as in the custody of his Phisician, saying
moreover, It was not for Christians to rejoice in their Victories each against
other, but only against Infidels: So treating him as if he had been no
Prisoner, but a free Prince: This, this to do is as Greatness ought, which
cannot but understand that the chances and changes of life are in Gods hand,
and that they are misunderstood by men, when their eye is evil, because Gods is
good: whose Moral, as well as Religious Rule, is not to lay snares, nor to make
men miserable by their power, Because he is an avenger of such things; But if
our Enemy be hungry, give him bread; and if he be thirsty give him water to
drink, for thou shall heap coals of fire upon his head, and the Lord shall
reward thee. So King Solomon, Prove. 25. 2. Confirmed by a greater then he,
Christ Jesus, Matt. 5. Luke 6. 27. And if those men owe nothing to, but in
point of Charity, be thus to be treated, then surely much more ought to be
expressed to them, who to this Obligation of Charity and Freewill, have in them
a right of Justice to crave Kindness from their Debtors, even that Kindeness of
seasonably paying them, what they seasonably for their own supplies took up of
them

This (Sir) I conceive very requisite to be entreated in the behalf of the now
distracted Citizens, because I have heard it said to be one of the great
miseries of Trade, to have arich Shop-book, and a lank Credit, by reason of the
detinue of Debts due to them, by which they should keep touch with their
Creditors, with whom they are forced not to correspond as they ought, because
they are not enabled by the solvency of their Debtors. And the noise of the
world is, that many men of great Estates, are most bare of money, and most
backward in payments; the sluice of which Evacuation, or the nick of which
retardment, must be either the secret displeasure of God against their abused
greatness, from which God has less tribute then is his due and expectation; or
from the vage expense of their Persons; or from Frauds committed upon them, by
non-inspecting their own Estates, but trusting others wholly with the managery
of them; which of these is the cause, I am not wise enough to state, but that
it is so, that many of those that have most reason, in prudence and
possibility, to be before hand, and to lend, rather then borrow, and pay when
they buy, rather then run into the Book, are the Debtors that are least, and
latest ready to pay. Sir Walter Rawleigh 5. Book part 1. p. 467.
That being too often true which the Judicious and most Learned Knight long
since wrote, Most of those who present Death upon the points of their Swords to
all that give the lie to them, use nothing so much in their conversation and
course of life, as to speak and swear falsely: which is not only a palpable Scar
to their Reputations, (their Credits being often refused) but a diminution to
their Estates, they paying upon such presumptions of hazard, and uncertainty
of payment, 20 or 30 l. per Cent. more then the ready money Market value, and
yet are the Dealers with them beggars by it, because Trade being like a Scale,
in motion up and down, the circumaction of it by paying and receiving, upon
buying and selling, is the life of it, which upon such incorrespondence, if not
insolvency, must acquiesse, and not flow and ^bb; whereupon it has ever been
the Maxim of great and solid Traders, To Purchase Lands of great Men, but to
trade and deal with common Persons, whom they can reach by the Laws compulsion,
if they cannot persuade by Credits value.

And truly (Noble Sir) if it seemed good to the Power and Policy of the
Nation, I could (yet with humility and submission) wish that it might be
examined whether those provident Statutes of 34 H. 8. 4. 13 Eliz. 7. 1 Jac. 15.
21 Jac. 19. against Bankrupts may not be extended somewhat further now, then
when they were made, there seemed to be reason to apply them: The Preamble of 1
Jac. 15. has these words; For that Fraud and Deceit as new diseases, daily
increase amongst such as live by buying and selling, to the hinderance of
Traffic and mutual Commerce, and to the general hurt of the Realm, by such as
wilfully and willingly become Bankrupts. For since, now it appears, not only
Traders, but diverse others, do contract Debts, buy Lands, settle them on their
children, or in trust, and take Prisons for their Sanctuaries, defying their
Creditors, which is Fraud and Deceit to all the execrable issues preambled in
the Statute, why these though not Traders yet under the same guilt, should not
be liable to the same severities, and be brought within the compass of those
Statutes, I am to seek of reason for it, as many are to seek of remedy against
those Frauds for want of it. A better course it is which Solomon prescribes,
Prove. 3. 27. Withold not good from him to whom it is due, when it is in the
power of thy hand to do it: say not unto thy neighbor go, and come again, and
to morrow I will give it, when thou have it by thee. Take heed of thus taking a
pledge of thy brother for naught; and of stripping the naked of their clothing,
of giving not water to the weary to drink, and of withholding thus bread from
the hungry; least by reason of this, thy wickedness be great, and thine
Iniquities infinite: as holy Job his words are, Chapter 22. verse. 5, 6. For such
withholding of more then is meet tends to poverty, Pro. 11. 24. Yea,
certainly to withold a just Debt, when there is ability in the Debtor to pay
it, and the convenient time of its discharge is come; or to let it come, when
it comes, with defalcations of Fees and allowances of poundage, is no less a
great trouble to the Creditor receiving, than a deceit to the Debtor paying: To
avoid which, it were much more peace to the Sellers conscience to sell at a
reasonable price, and with moderate gain, upon money ready paid and no hazard
encountered with (ready money answering the opportunity of a speed to Market
again, and of many light gains magnified by quick returns) and much more profit
to the buyers estate, and diminution to his expense, then upon this latitude of
Credit, given and taken, falls out to either.

Let then (Sir) the Man of Estate that is deep in the undone Tradesmans Book,
and who heretofore, thought it but a thing of course to make him stay long, and
dance many fruitless attendancies, and to enforce him to hedge in his first
Debt, by addition of money lent, and acceptance of security for both: Now
consider the Citizens impotency thus to do, and the mercilessness of thus
delaying him, and comply with this accident of stress which God has, without
his possibility of prescience or prevention, brought upon him and he will
oblige him by a Mercy and Justice propitious to this his exigent, and declare
himself truly Great; For Titles and Words are but Wind, but real actions of
Virtue are the substantial determinations of Magnanimity; the life-draught of
which was Heroically expressed in that Contest between the Earl of Essex, and
the Lord Mountjoy, Temps. Q* Eliz. between whom there being quarrels upon
rivalry of Favor, Caesar and Pompey's hautess being revived in them, the Lord
Mountjoy daring to accept, as readily as the E. of Essex was ready to give him
the Challenge, met the E. of Essex in the Field, the after Stage of their
Combat; the Lord Mountjoy being the Defendant, told the Earl of Essex, That he
fought him with some disparity, because that if he killed the Earl, his life
was sure to go for it; but if you my Lord of Essex kill me, your Interest is so
great at the Court, and in the Favor of her Majesty so much to you, that you
will easily obtain her pardon; therefore, my Lord, before we fight, let me beg
the favor of you, that you give it under your hand, that you challenged me,
and do pardon me: The Earl of Essex said, That I will, but how shall we do to
have a Pen and Inkhorn: My Lord Mountjoy replied, I have one: Oh but quoth the
Earl of Essex, would you have me quit my Sword in the Field, and my Guard upon
which I stand: Yes, my Lord, (quoth my Lord Mountjoy) and you shall write it
upon my back; I know your Lordship to be a Person of so great Gallantry, that
there is no danger to me, that can dishonourably come from you: So the Earl of
Essex wrote it upon his back, after which they generously fought, to show their
respective Valors.

This I introduce to show that true Nobility and Generosity, abhors to take an
advantage poorly and surprisingly against any man: Whereupon I am hopeful this
disablement of the Citizens of London by Gods act, who is Sovereign over all,
to whose pleasure our Souls and Bodies, with all the present and future
attendants on them are Vassals; I trust, I say and hope, it will produce a
speedier and more effectual payment of their due Debts from those that owe
them, then otherwise they would have got them in from them.

And Sir, I am further hopeful, that those Creditors to the City that are
undammaged, or so only detracted from by this accident, that they are but
shaven by it, not shorn, that is, abated in the excrements and parings of their
Estates, not in the substance and totality of it; that these would be as
patient and tender as they Christianly can to them that are clean undone; as
many, God knows, are, whose savings from the destruction will not keep the life
and soul of themselves and their charges together: They whom this accident has
made unable to live, and yet whom Providence rescues not from their misery by
death: Those whose children they themselves are disabled to bring up, and by
the disablement of others (the calamity being so Epidemical) are not to be
supplied with breeding from others: Those who turned out of their callings, and
unstocked by the loss of that ruffle, are neither able to set up, or fitted to
other employments, if they could be found, proportionable to their age and
ability: Those that are thus already Prisoners to want, pensive thoughts and
terrors of despair, are to be commended with all sympathy to their Creditors
Mercy and Kindness: That they would forbear reproaches to them, and arrests of
them, or suits against them; for prisons get no debts, nor does poverty pay
any; nor can they hope to be forgiven of God their great debt, who forgive not
their Brother, thus distressed, his small one to them: And remember what Tilly,
I have heard, said to Morgan, when the one marched into Stoade, and the other
marched out, Hodie tu, Cras ego, I might have been in your case, the fortunes
of War are dubious; you must now leave that place which you have kept as a
man, and I now enter on that which I have bought with many a man, and with much
misery; therefore, Sir, let us be friends in the conclusion, who have been
enemies in the premises: Let this, I say, be practiced in the little debates
of mine and thine referrable to Trading, thus clogged and impeded, and there
may be hopes that London may revive, and its Citizens have wherewith to employ
their industry in subserviencie to Gods blessing, and in time to make
convenient restitution. And those Rents and Fortunes of Lords, Knights,
Gentlemen, and other Proprietors, which now are incontributive to the public
Charge, as well as unaydant to their own expenses, and childrens provision for,
will in time advance toward their wonted service; And the Magistracy of London
be carried on by men of Fortune and fitness, whose Issues may, as heretofore,
be provided richly for in all Counties of the Nation; and Charity to the Poor
and to Learning, may by them be propagated, whose Predecessors in dwelling and
course of life, have, together with men Ecclesiastical, been more public and
generous that way, then all the Nation besides. Which I mention, not to raise
the indignation of any, but to move compassion to the present cloud upon
Citizens, and to allege what may advance their present ease, in order to their
future public usefulness and benefaction. Thrifty Oaks, though fleeced of
under boughs, yet if not headed, may thrive and grow stately timber Trees; but
if once headed, prove after but Pollards, short and rough Timber, fit only for
small and course uses. So is it with men under accidental Mischances; if they
be fiercely proceeded against, and discredited, they are probable only to live
in misery, and to die in poverty: but if they be favored, till their industry
fortunated by God has made head against its misfortune, and evicted its cloud,
they prove rich and valuable, according to the belief, or the contrary whereof,
my humble prayer for them stands or falls.

It were also (Noble Sir) worthy the consideration of the Nations wisdom and
goodness, to provide some Law of defense against the rigours of Landlords, and
the refractoriness of Tenants, by which the Party detrimented by this act of
God, might escape the additional misery of a vexatious contest. Let (Sir) mercy
be showed to the Looser, but not pretense of loss, pass for loss of
disablements, where it has really devoured nothing but valuless Lumber: Neither
let the condition of Books, Papers, Writings, and Records burnt or lost, be
unprovided for by some Good and Grave Salvo, pleadable for the Loosers
Indempnitie, least many long since discharged Debts be revived, and demanded
afresh; and least men be by loss of Evidences evicted their Freeholds, or at
least vexed with Suits concerning them; nothing being more sure, then that many
men out of Town, and in distraction in Town, either forgot to secure many Books
and Papers of weight and value; or else committed them to they knew not whom,
and shall receive them from them they know not when; nay it may so fall out,
that many Writings may by chance come into those hands from whence they moved,
and cease to be securities to those to whom they are passed; and what mischiefs
may hereupon ensue (if some Law of limitation and bar be not interjected) is
easy to presage. It were (Sir) also most suitable to the paternity of your
House, to provide somewhat about the Registers of Churches, which are now in
such dispersion, if they survive the Fire, that they would be commanded into
some Office, there to be till the Parishes to which they belong be rebuilt: For
since Certificate of Marriages, Legitimation of Children, proof of Ages, light
in point of Pedigree, depend thereupon, the same will be the reason of their
preservation now, that was of their Institution at first, and many poor Infants
will be, when grown Men and Women, at a loss irremediable, if some caution
against, possible, and probable evils of such nature, be not passed into a Law.

And Sir, to all these add not the least important act of your Piety and
Prudence, the furtherance of a Law, for making the Second of September for
ever, a Solemn Fast for the National sins that merited this Judgment of God
upon its London: And the Sixth of September a day of Thanksgiving for ever, for
Gods merciful stay of the Fire that it proceeded no further, to enter into the
Suburbs, and to destroy therein, as it had done in London: That the Palaces of
our Sovereign and his Peers, and the Cathedral and City of Westminster went
free, that they should be spared when London and St. Paul's felt the fury of
merciless Flames, ought to be had in yearly and hourly remembrance. Nor can any
better and more religious occasions of both duties be given us by God, than
these prementioned exchanges of his Providence, the Staff of which as well
comforts us, as the Rod of it afflicted us; for since he showed himself to be
ex utroque Caesar, it befits us to show our selves Christians to both his
exhibitions of Power and Mercy.

These things (Sir) I have in haste prepared in present to you, that it may
appear to the Nation, That there is one (amongst the many others that are well
affected to London) that accounts it his duty to appear for her, not ashamed of
her dislustre, and that now he can pay her no other duty, then that of his
tears over her, and prayers for her, allows her those, and over and above
those, pleads her Cause with God and the Nation, not justifying her Innocence,
or lessening her guilt, not excusing her Provocation, or drawing a veil over
her Deformities; No, God forbid I should thus become the Pharisee for her, who
ought to put her Mouth in the Dust, and by her silence before her correcting
God, testify her consent to the Justice and adequateness of his Judgments upon
her: On this account I will allude to Job's words, No mention shall be made by
me of her Coral or Pearls; Job 2^. 1^
all her righteousness my Pen shall publish but as menstruous Rags, the price
of the wisdom of humbling her self under this mighty hand of God, shall in my
suffrage excel any Rubies of insisting on Terms, God has done what he has
done, and let all the Earth of London be silent before him: The Lord has done
that to London which he has devised, he has fulfilled his word that he has
commanded; he has thrown down, but yet has pittyed, Lam. 2. 17. London is the
Back that is smitten, but there is not a Corner in England, but has
contributed to the desert, and will first or last feel the rebound and
consequence of this punishment to London. The sins of Sodom, the Violence, the
Levity, the Profaneness, the Luxury, the Lukewarmness, that provokes God, is as
much every where, as in London; there is a nauseousness of Angels Food, and a
tendency to the Garlicks and Onyons of Profaneness every where, as well as in
London: The Fields of England are every where ripe to the Harvest of Judgment,
as well as the Sickle of it has been already thrust into London, the Glory of
which God has cut down in his stupendous fury. Awake O North wind, blow O
South wind upon the Garden of Holy Zeal, Cant. ^. 16
that the Spices of indignation for God may flow forth: See Archbishop of
Yorks Letter to King James, Cabala part 1. p. 13
Come forth of your Graves you old Hectors of Holiness, Archbishops, Bishops,
and other renowned and triumphant Saints of this English Church, Help O ye
Jewels of Glory, and ye Bradwardines of courage and constancy, and ye
Fortherby's and ye Carletons of conviction and valiancy for the Truth, worthy
the Crowns ye enjoy, Come, O come ye in to the aid of the Lord against the
mighty hoasts of Profaneness and Uncharitableness, of Carnal Politics, and
Atheistical Ruffians, that are confederate against the Lord, and against his
Christ: O remember the Prophetical descant of glorious King James, once our
happy Monarch, who writing on the forth Angels Errand, by the Vial of Gods
wrath, says thus: Paraphrase in Rev. 16 p. 50 operum.
Then the fourth Angel powered forth his Vial upon the Sun, and power was given
him to afflict men with Fire. For even as the Sun was darkened in the fourth
Trumpet, to wit, the special Teachers did begin to fall from the sincerity of
the Truth, enticed thereunto, though not by Apolyon himself, for he was not yet
risen; yet by the qualities whereof He is composed, and therefore is here
punished for the same. And as Moses, troubled by the hot Eastern wind, the Land
of Egypt, by the breeding of Grass-hoppers, so shall the fiery Spirit of God,
in the mouths of his Witnesses, so trouble Babylon, with the burning Sun of
Gods Truth, as men shall be troubled with a great Heat, to wit, she and her
Followers shall be tormented and vexed therewith. So King James.

O sacred Zeal whither art thou fled, that thou have lest England, Hos. 4. 3.
a Land in mourning because of Oaths; A Land accursed because of blood touching
blood; Psalm. 107. 34.
a Land deserving to be abarren Wilderness, for the iniquities of the
Inhabitants of it, to whom the Word of God is made a reproach, Ier. 6. 10. and
a derision daily, Chap. 20. 8. The Saints of God are thought troublers, 1 Kings
18. 17. The Image of God which is renewed in knowledge after the Image of him
that created it, Col. 3. 10. censured singularity and hypocrisy; holiness of
life, which God commands as that which brings to his likeness and exaltation, 1
Pet. 1. 16. Heb. 12. 14. is nicknamed Phanaticism; Zeal for reformed Religion,
is counted groundless mistrust, Real Fury, precise Singularity, factious
Calvenism; Terms of opprobry beseeming rather the mouths of professed
Romanists, then pretended sons of the Church of England, whose primitive
Reformers, Bishops, Deans, and Doctors, if they could be raised up now to hear
them, would obtest against them, as having lost the Zeal of their Profession,
and not being a real honor to their way of worship and distinction, as if
every thing were becoming, but what becomes every thing, Sincerity and plain
dealing: Our Fashions and our Minds being so alike aerie and skeptical, that we
no day are what we ought, nor any day design to be what we should.

O Piety, O Gravity! Why have thou forsaken England, who were of old so
friendly to her, and so befriended by her? why are thy effects so invisible
now, which heretofore so clearly appeared, and so becomingly adorned the words
and lives of men, and the order and harmony of places and things? It is that
which will kindle the rage of a Moses of meekness, and impatience the patience
of a Job, to see and hear sin set up amongst us by common consent and practice
against Laws in Force, and Magistrates sworn to execute them. The 21 Jac. 20.
confirmed by 3 Car. 4.
exercrable swearing, the notorious 20 H. 3. 9 9 H. 6. 11. 18 Eliz 3 7 Jac. 4.
Incontinency, the abominable 4 Jac. 5. 21 Jac 7. 1 Car. 4.
Drunkenness, the unconscionable Some of which are punishable by fine and
indictment, others are against 3 E. 1. c. 29. 21 Jac. 26. 2 R. 2, 3. 3 H. ^. c.
4. 13 El. 5. 27 El. 4. 13 El. 10. 52 H. 3. 6, 7. 34 H. 8. 5. 27 H. 8. c. 28. 31
H. 8 c. 13. 1 E. 6. c. 14. 13 Eliz. 1.
deceit, the loathsome debauchery, the 3 H. 7. 1. 1 E. 6. 10. 52 H. 3. 25. 1
Jac. 8. 3. E. 1; 23 H. 8. 1. 26 H. 8. c. 12. 1 E. 6. 12. 13 R. 2. c. 1. 16 R.
2. c. 6.
brutish Read Sir Walter Rawleigh ^ 5. c. 3. of his first part p. 468
Murder; These and other Grists that pass by the Mill of public Severity,
and are challengers of privilege by their universality, are ill returns to Gods
multiplied mercies, and shrewd provocations to his Chastisement: But when his
Service is counted a vain thing, Mal. 3. 14. when his Prophets are misused, 2 Chronicles. 36. 16. and those that have not been wind of levity, Ier. 5. 13. or
Foxes of Crast, Ezech. 13. 4. or Prophets of Flattery, daubing with untempered
Mortar, Ezech. 22. 28. but Prophets of Truth have been lightly set by, yea,
shrewdly set against: When the Lords Day, set apart for Sanctification and
Devotion, has been profaned and made common, and not only mocked at by
Religions Adversaries, but thought too long by Religions seeming Lam. 1. 7.
friends, and the perparatory duties to them, and the performed duties on them,
too severe for Christians. When the Judgments of God face us to humility, as
the testimony of our sorrow for sin, so destructive of us, yet mirth and
jollity is so applauded and countenanced, that no man almost Remembers the
afflictions of Joseph, Amos 6. 6
The desolations that sin has already made, further may, and without prevention
by repentance will make. It is to be doubted, Thy ways and doings which Hos. 4.
9.
have not been good, Jer 4. 18. Lev ^6. 25
O England, O London, have procured the evils thou feel and fear upon
thee: Numb. 14. 12.
Thy Incorrigibility and Obduration has brought the Pestilence, Exodus 9. 15.
Thy contrary walking to God, has raised up Enemies against thee, Prove. 16. 7.
Deuteronomy. 28. 48. The pride we have had in our Strength, has made God contend by
Fire with us, and by such a Fire, as has eaten up, not the great deep of
England, but a part of it, London. And yet God that has pulled some of us out
of the Fire, and kept others from the Fire, is not returned unto, as he
upbraids the people, Amos 4. 11. These Judgments have been upon England and
London, the Lord deliver us from what followed upon Isreal's impenitency, Gods
abhorrence of the Excellency of Jacob, Amos 6. 3.
and his hating of his Palaces; God forbid that Judgment of Gods delivery of
England, into her Enemies hand, from his smiting of the great House of England,
with breaches, ^ers. 11.
as he has done the little House of London with clefts, ver. 11. Be that
Judgment, O Lord, be that undecreed by thee, and may our repentance reverse the
first thoughts of thy severity this way to us. This be, O Lord, the punishment
of those who are as Children of Ethiopians to thee, sinners that swear by the
sin of Samaria, ^ 9. ^ 7.
and say to the Deities of their own Erection, thy God O Dan lives, and the
Manner of Beersheba lives, Amos 8. last v. Let those who forsake thee, and
Follow lying vanities be thus given up to fall, Jonah 2. 8
and never rise up again: But let England and London that have trusted in the
Lord, Ps 1. ^ 7.
be saved by thee, and that with A mighty Salvation: 1 Samuel 19 5
O be gracious to England, Isa. 45. 17
that as it hitherto has, so yet hereafter it may stand in thy sight a faithful
Witness to thy Truth, and a signal Instance of thy Patronage for ever, and
build thou up the walls of London that lie waste, and let it once more be
called the Perfection of this Nations beauty; for my Nations sake, I cannot be
silent; for my Nativities sake, I cannot hold my peace, I cannot contain my
Pen, but it will bewray my hearts Language; for my Brethren and Companions
sake, I will wish thee Good will, O London, in the Name of the Lord; The Lord
send thee prosperity out of Sion.

And if the Question be asked of me, By whom shall London arise for it is
small: my Answer shall be, God only knows how and by what, for he can make dry
bones live: Yet there seems to me some ground of comfort from this, That the
root of London being left, that which now seems arid, and sapless, may kindle
in the womb of Providence, and take root downward, and bring forth fruit
upward; first, and chiefly, in repentance, for past Provocations, and in Vows
of renewed conversation in her Inhabitants; and then in making her Buildings,
her Judges, and her Magistrates, as at the first, and the Renown and Authority
of them, as in the beginning.

This Sir, is that which I would promise to my self, and fore-speak to be the
great mercy to England after revived London, The late loss of which, I believe,
to be great; which my prayers are, may be compensated with ten times ten
Myriads of Increase, and that to render it terrible to Gods and the Kings Foes,
and supportive to the Crown, Religion, Laws, under which it happily
flourished, till the late disastre upon it; and God Almighty, who knows all
secrets, and commands all hearts, raise it up, for these general and honest
ends, Friends and Benefactors, who may not only further its acceleration to
what it was, but to what, of further addition, it may be improved to. And may
all the Timagenesses, who hate London, as he did Rome, augment their grief upon
the cause he did, the fear and assurance he had Rome would be rebuilt more
glorious than it was Seneca Ep. 91
before. The prosperity of which must be the joy and prayer of every sober
English man, and sincere Protestant; and, I hope, whosoever is not both these,
shall never have the power to hinder it, as I am sure he never will have the
will to further it: I could enlarge in this Subject which is so pleasing to me,
to expectorate my self by; An Apho^ism of Sir Benjamin Ruddiards.
but over-doing is Undoing, and there is no strain but comes home with a halt.
Yet this I must subjoyn in comfort to London and England, Omnium istarum
Civitatum quas nunc mag^ificas and Nobiles audes, vestigia quoque tempus erudet
non tantum manufacta labuntur juga mon^^um destaunt, etc. Ep. 92
changes will, and must come, and those to great Kingdoms, mighty Governments,
rich Cities, Seneca has languaged this appositely to us.

All that now (Noble Sir) remains for me to write, is to beg mine excuse for
thus addressing you, whose greater affairs may be judged unreconcilable with
the perusal of such papers as these, which carry the memoires of what is as
unpleasing for you to remember, as impossible to forget. But I am not at all
diffident of your Civility to them and me, because I am in them wholly acted by
the cogency of public spiritedness to both, Propose Londons case to the
Nations piety, and to publish mine own Gratitude to it, the place of my birth,
and of the breeding and conversation of my Worthy, Generous, and most
Religiously sincere and Dear Francis Waterhous Esquire
Father, who both lived long, creditably and belovedly in it, and also had the
public respect and Honor from it, to be chosen Chamberlain of it upon the
death of Chamberlain Harrison (tho he was made incapable, when his hand was
upon the book to be sworn in the Office, by one of those Orders that then were
in date, to exclude those whom that Power termed disaffected.) These things,
together with my experience, conversation and search into the City Records,
Customs and Story (in which, I may modestly say, I have desired not to be
unknowing) court me to appear thus to you (Sir) and to the Nation in her
behalf. And since (Sir) I have no design to promote her happiness by any black
arts of injury and impiety to others Interests, leaving those mysteries of
iniquity to such as Clement the seventh, who to advance his own Family,
sometimes changed the Face of the affairs of Europe; and Cardinal Wolsey, L.
Herberts H 8. p. 378.
who to be made Legate a Latere, and to be enabled to visit not only
Monasteries, Idem p. 90
but all the Clergy, and dispense with Church Laws; so defamed the Clergy of
his own Church and Country, that they were by the Popes Bull termed Dati in
reprobum sensum. Since, I say, I have in this, and I hope I may truly say in my
former appearings, Ad prodendam virtutis memoriam sine gratia aut ambitione
bonae tantum conscientiae praetio ducebatur vir bonus. Scipio A miratus in
Digressionibus Politicis. p. 43. Edit. 1609.
(In Apology for Arts and Interests Honest and of good Report, only designed
the Glory of God, the service of my Country, and the just and necessary
vindication of my self from the censure of living to no purpose, and of
affecting an idle and unconversable moroseness, which I think a very great sin
against God, Nature, and the Time and Men with whom I live, and to whom I am
responsible for the service of any small ability I have, or may be improved to
have) I cannot but be in a sort assured that my Countrymen, who read me, will
excuse my Pathos for London; especially, when I have herein avoided all
vehemence that I apprehended in any degree offensive, or mis-becoming the
temperate ambition of my heart and hand; which, as they are daily lifted up to
God in prayer, for his peculiar direction, how to live, speak, write and do, as
suits with the attainment of a good Conscience, and the assurance of a glorious
Heaven; the only noble employment of time and parts, besides which all is
vanity and vexation, ( For of all other perfections, a few years will show us
the end.) So are they testimonial of their expectation to be freed from
prejudice, in respect of their author, who though he pleads for strict Piety,
sober Order, Religions Influence, Laws esteem, Trades increase, Londons
restoration, yet is void of all private concern in any of these, further than
as a Christian and an English man. No creature have I been, or am I of any
design, no Polypus to times and men, no Vower, Covenanter or Engager, no
Purchaser of Kings, Bishops* Deans and Chapters Lands; no Petitioner in
Tumults; no Sectary in Conventicles; no waver in Judgment, have I, through Gods
mercy, ever been; but a constant assertor of, and sufferer for my satisfiedness
in, and adhaesion to, the piety and probity of my breeding and belief, which
was ever, yet is, and I hope, through Gods grace, to death shall be, in point
of Religion according to the Doctrine and Discipline of the Church of England.
In Duty and loyalty, according to the sound judgment of the Law, and the
Declaration of Kings by their three Estates in Parliament; In love to, and
correspondence with the Universities and Houses of Learning, suitable to the
gratitude I, as a Gentleman, ought to express to them, wherein I have had
breeding and acquaintance, and from which I have received respect; upon all
which considerations I trust (Sir) this plain and honest application to the
Nation, under Gods and Your Patronage, will be seasonable and successful (tho
it has been longer held in the birth than was fit it should, had not the
unpardonable slowness of the Press, and the chilness of the Frost demurred
that, which the preparation of the Copy would have sent forth long ago. This,
Sir, I beseech you excuse.) And give me leave to conclude with that which is
the most suitable farewell to all things of this nature; The application to
God, that he would be our God; and the God of our posterities; that he would
bless with long Life and a happy Reign, our most Gracious King Charles; with
Wisdom and Understanding, the Lords and others of his Majesty's most Honorable
Privy Council; with Zeal for God and holiness of life the Reverend Clergy; with
Justice and Courage the Learned Judges; with Obedience and Loyalty the body of
the Commons: And that he would consolidate all these to the comfort of this and
after Ages, by the High Court of Parliament Fidum and altum Reipubl. Pectus as
Valerius his words are. Principes viri triumphisq, and am^lissimis honoribus
su^cti, hor^atu Princip^s ad ornandam ^^bem i^^^cti sunt. ^elleius Pare^culus
lib. 2.
now assembled, that by these degrees of Gods merciful endowment to this
Nation, all in this Nation, and of this Church, may be holy to the Lord, and
happy in themselves, is and shall be the Prayer of,

Noble Sir, Oct 20. 1666. Your Humble Servant, and most affectionate Friend and
Kinsman Edward Waterhous*

FINIS.

