A LETTER Sent from the Right Honorable, ROBERT, Earl of WARWICK, Admiral of
the Sea, To M. JOHN PYM, Esquire and presented to both Houses of Parliament, July
6. 1642.

Die Mercurii, 6 Iulii, 1642.
Ordered by the Lords in Parliament, That this Letter be forthwith printed and
published.

Io. Brown, Cler. Parl.



London, Printed for Ios. Hunscott, and Io. Wright.

M. PYM,
BEfore these shall come to your hand* I make no doubt but M. Nicholls of the
House of Commons has made both Houses a Relation of what has passed here
since I received His Majesty's Letters for the discharging me of the Command of
the Fleet wherewith I was entrusted, How I called a Council of War, and
acquainted them with His Majesty's Letters, and likewise with the Ordinance of
Parliament, sent from the Houses for me to continue my Charge: I confess it
was a great straight that I was put in, between two Commands that have so much
power over me: But when I consider the great care which I have ever observed in
the Parliaments of this Kingdom for the good and safety of the King and
Kingdom, and every man's particular in them; And that they are that great
Council by whose Authority the Kings of England have ever spoken to their
Subjects; And likewise that the Trust of His Fleet for the defense of His
Majesty and the Kingdoms was committed to me by them; And knowing the integrity
of my own heart to His Majesty and Parliament, I resolved not to desert that
Charge committed to my Trust, wherein God (blessed be his Name for it) has
made me hitherto so successful, but to continue it until I shall be revoked
by that Authority that has entrusted me with it: Which having declared to my
Captains at the Council of War, all of them unanimously and cheerfully took
the same Resolution, excepting five, which was the Rere-Admirall, Captain
Fogge, Captain Barley, Captain Slingsby, and Captain Wake, All which five
refused to come upon my Summons, as having no Authority over them, and got
together round that night to make their defense against me, only Captain
Burley came in and submitted to me. Whereupon in the morning I weighed my
Anchors, and caused the rest of my Ships so to do, and came to an Anchor round
about them, and besieged them; And when I had made all things ready, I summoned
them: Sir John Men's, and Captain Fogge came in to me; but Captain Slingsby
and Captain Wake stood out: Whereupon I let fly a Gunne over them, and sent
them word I had turned up the Glass upon them, if in that space they came not
in, they must look for for me aboard them. I sent to them by my Boat, and most
of the Boats in the Fleet; their answer was so peremptory, that my Masters and
Saylors grew so impatient on them, That although they had no Arms in their
Boats at all, yet God gave them such Courage and Resolution, as in a moment
they entered them, took hold on their Shrouds, and seized upon these Captains,
being armed with their Pistolls and Swords, and struck their Yards and top
Masts, and brought them both in to me; The like Courage and Resolution was
never seen amongst unarmed men, so as all was ended without effusion of blood,
which I must attribute to to the great God of heaven and earth only, who in
the moment that I was ready to give fire on them, put such courage into ours
men to act it, and so saved much blood.

I hope the Parliament will think of some course for all our Indempnities, and
especially for the Officers of the Navy, and principal for the Surveyor of the
Navy, my Vice Admiral, a very able and good man, For my self, I doubt not but
they that put me in this employment, will preserve me for serving them
faithfully.

I pray you Sir be a means to Sir Robert Pie, and M. Green, that some money may
be sent us; for it has been often promised, but hear not of it. The weather
continuing stormy so long together, that we spend our Masts, and top Masts, or
some detriment or other falls upon us daily, so that we are in great extremity
for want of money.

Thus, having nothing else to trouble you for the present, only that you will
be pleased to acquaint your House of Commons with our proceedings here; I bid
you farewell, and rest,

Your assured friend to serve you, Warwick.
From aboard His Majesty's Ship the James, on the Downs, this 4 of July, 1642.
Die Mercurii, 6 Iulii, 1642.
Ordered by the Lords in Parliament, That this Letter be forthwith printed and
published.

Jo. Brown, Cleric. Parliamentorum.

FINIS.

