

THE Gentleman's Monitor; Or, a Sober INSPECTION INTO THE Virtues, Vices, and
Ordinary Means, Of the RISE and DECAY OF MEN and FAMILIES. WITH The Authors
Apology and Application to the Nobles and Gentry of England. Seasonable for
these Times.

BY EDW. WATERHOVS, Esquire

LONDON, Printed by T. R. for R. Royston, Bookseller to his most Sacred
Majesty. MDCLXV.

TO THE Most Reverend Father in God, GILBERT By Divine Providence Lord
Archbishop of Canterbury, Primate and Metropolitan of all England, and one of
his Sacred Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council.
May it please your Grace,
GReat Presents bespeak their acceptance, small ones are modest intreaters, and
triers of the Grandeur of the minds of those to whom they are presented, who
value them rather for the respect and kindness of their Tenderers, then for the
Bulk and Port of such their Tender.

This being the temper of your Grace's mind, expressive of all Noble Civilities
and Favors, to those that have the happiness to be known to, and the Honor to
be favored by you; makes me hopeful that your Grace will not despise the
Patronage of this Discourse, which, as well in the nature of its matter, as in
the Authors design, and resolve, is most properly Yours: And in as much as it
treats of Virtues and Vices, as they refer to Men and Families, in the good or
bad effects of them, and subjoins Addresses suasive to the great ends of
Civility and Religion, to whom are they to be devoted as their Tutelar, next
under God, but to your Grace? who being a Gentleman by Blood and Birth, a
Learned man by Breeding, and Endowment, and an Eminent Churchman by Dignity
and Office, have the Naturallest, and most Powerful Influence to protect and
propagate, what, of right Reason, Civil Insinuation, approved Experience, and
Divine Zeal, Your Paternal Judgment shall allow contained in it. Such then as
it is, I humbly beg your Grace to Own, for the Subjects sake, and for the good
intent I have to the Public in its publishing.

For since the unparallelled Mercies of God are so mistaken by men, who build
their hopes and happiness upon this planetary World, the consistence and glory
of which is but, in Nazianzen's words, ^pist. 47. ad Amphiloch.
(...), Fabulous and Enthusiastique: and since we of this Nation, God knows,
little bettered by our past deliverances, are rather sicci ad ignem, then albi
ad messem, as Lib. 2. de Consider.
St. Bernard once wrote to Pope Eugenius; and since it is high time to
advertise the too too general Extravagancy of England, of that sober gratitude,
and virtuous conversation, which the abundant Goodness of God to the whole
Nation, and to the Nobility and Gentry in it, calls for, from them; I think it
my duty, whom God inclined to meditate and perfect this, now to submit i^ to
the view and censure of the Readers; beseeching God, the inelaboration of the
Method and Style, may rather return the Author disparagement, then the Argument
misfortune.

If then Your Grace, whom to speak and write of, is to speak and write of
Virtue, (...). Nazianz. de laudibus Athanafii.
as was said of (c) Athanasius the Great, shall excuse this confidence, which
proceeds from Conscience of my Duty to do, what in me lies, to serve the
Public, I shall take it as a good encouragement to hereafter diligence in
this way, wherein in the worst of times, and on the then least favored
Subjects, I have neither been silent, nor (I bless God) insuccesfull. Yea, I
assure Your Grace, I am so convinced of the Activity that Reason and Religion
expects from every one, in whom the Candle of God shines, and the Zeal of God
burns, that not to improve the least Quia non been utuntur talento sibi
commisso, id est, mentis acie qua videntu^ omnes qui docti aut urbani a^t
faceti nominantur excellere sed habent came in sudario ligatam, aut in torra
obrutam, id est, delicatis aut superfluis r^bus aut terreni^ cupiditatibus
involutam and oppressam, ligabuntur ergo his manus and pedes and mittantur in
tenebras exteriores. Stus August. lib. de vera Religione Tom. 1. Opetum.
Talent of Learning and Grace, I account Sacrilege and Sin; which would many
of the Great and Wise men of England think more upon, they would Fear, what I
do, to wrapp up their Talents in Privacies, or to mis-spend them on sins.

May Your Grace long live to Edify this Church, to Advance Learning, to Foster
Piety, to Suppress Licenciousness; to Pray, Preach, Rule, and Live down all
Malignant opposition to the Power and Purity of true established Religion, and
Practical Godliness: So shall You obtain the Virgins Crown, and the Victors
Euge; which that Your Grace may have, when Your Life (not Your Virtues and
Renown) leave this World, He most affectionately prays, who now is, and ever
resolves to be,

From Syon-Colledge, this 5. February 1664. Your GRACES Most unfeigned Humble
Servant, EDW. WATERHOUS.

The Authors Apology to the Nobles, Gentry, and others his Generous and Candid
READERS.
BEcause it seems to many wise men, to be out of fashion to be public
spirited, and Virtue bears now so ^w a price, that he who with Cleantpes, dare
and can deny himself, to erswade and example men to be Virtuous, (...) etc.
Cleanthes aapud Plutarchum, lib. de vitanaere alieno p. 831.
is so far from being accounted Magnanimous, that such an one is censured, down
right weak, and an unthrift of his time: Therefore do I in obviation of those
detractions, that prophance, spightful, and ignorant persons afflict honest
actions with, prefix this humble defense, hoping that God, who has in all ages
assisted his Champious in their conflicts with Error and Obstinacy, will not
desert me in this so Sober, and, I hope, so seasonable a Manifest.

Wherein, as I willingly have expressed no vain hope that my pen will prevail
beyond abler ones refused, so have I no fear but that God will give some
success to it, because it is (in a sort) his Monitor to men's miscarriages, and
does not with Xerxes quarrel with Seas and Mountains, (...) Idem lib. de Ira
Cohibenda p. 455.
whipping and battooning them by the rudeness of passion; but calmly comes upon
them, with the influence of Argument, and the prevalence of Language soft and
serious.

I confess in the Cause of God, wherein Catholic Truth is malled down by
Paganism, or corrupted by Heresy, there to appear with spirit like that of the
ancient Fathers, Athanasius, Clemens Alexandrinus, Caesarius, Augustine,
Optatus, Bradwardine, is but to answer the Alarms and Summons of true Christian
zeal; upon such occasions God expects the Cannons, and Volleys of our Courage
should play freely and fiercely on such defiancers of him. But when profaneness
has only eat into the manners of some men, and Laws are in being to punish
them; and Virtue is yet in possession of the credit and luster of Nations; then
not to be moderate, and to dissuade from Vice by Argument and Oratory smooth
and cogent, is to forget that great Spirits are rather led then driven; and
sooner caught by kindness, then conquered by force.

Having therefore this Iustifyable Errand to you, O Nobles, Gentry, and
engenuous Englishmen, to present virtue; in all the beauty and bravery my poor
Wardrobe can array her in; and to depreciate Vice, by allegation of those ill
Offices, and ill Events that it does, and occasions to You, I judge it, (with
your pardon) proper to hegg the belief, that since no motive works me to write,
but duty to God, and love to Mankind, of which ye are a considerable part; no
return will be worthy You to make Me, beneath your respect to my counsel, where
it is safe and serious, and your preterition of my mistakes, where ever they
appear, the displays of infirmities, and not the fruits of affectation.

I know it is hard, and in a sort impossible to please all; men will have their
humors in reading, as well as in any other pleasure of their senses: ye^, as I
hope not to satisfy all, because then I fear I should dissatisfie my self; so
do I pray I may please Readers and Hearers Wise and Worthy, and offend others
less valuable, as little (as right to Virtue) will permit. I love not Sarcasm,
nor are Gentlemen's Pens less, then profaned and dishonored, when like Draco's
Laws, (...) Plutarch. in Licurg. p. 841. Q^isquis talis ex vobis est frustra se
Christianum aut Sace^dotem dei profitetur qui le^itatem dei non cu^at. Optatus
lib. 2. advers. Parmenianum p. ^0. Edit. Pa^is.
they make impressions of Death and Terror, rather then expression of
Conviction and Persuasion: Cripples in reason, and men of maimed Argument may
horse themselves upon the Bucephalusses of noise and vehemence; but Gravity and
Truth that need no Fucus, abhors any publication, but that which is ingenuous
and inoffensive, because her project is to inform and captivate, not blemish
and provoke. Thus then have I endeavored to present my self to You, as one
whose design is more to gain You, then to gain by you; and as I have avoided
making my discourse like Semiramis her Tomb, (...) Plutarch. Apotheg. p. 173.
boldly promising, whaet it performs not; which is to do as Agesilaus was wont
to say Tailors do who make great Garments for little Bodies, and great shoos
for small Feet: So have I aimed to write, as one who by adorning the Statue of
Virtue, as Caesar did the Statue of Pompey, would not dis-eternize himself.
(...) de Fortitud. Alexand. p. 335.
Let Alexander, and his Enviers, fix their remembrances on Caucasus, Emodus,
Tanais, and the Caspian sea; I am contented to have no other Memorial, then
that of the practice of true sincere piety and generous love to Christian
Learning.

EDW. WATERHOU

A DISCOURSE OF THE VERTVES, VICES, AND ORDINARY MEANS Which probably raise and
decay, or preserve from decay, Men and Families.
The Introduction.
THough I have little reason to concern my self for the Grandeur of Families,
the Glory and Vapor of the World, promoted by them, having so little I thank
God obliged and engaged me; Nor ought I to hold my self much responsible to
Mine own Family, whose inactivity as well as misfortune, has left me little
cause to boast of a Generous ancestry; or to deprecate its setting in the
Masculinity of it, in my Line; which being intenacious of Sons (the only
ordinary continuers of it in its Name and luster) shrewly hazzards the
Temporary silence of it in me: Yet the love and service I desire ever to
express to those darlings of Time and Virtue, Nobility and Gentry, (The
succession and splendor of which I pray and hope may exceed their Ancestry in
Merits of mind and action, which is the greatest Earthly honor they can do
them, whose Lands and Names they inherit and are conspicuous by.) I say, the
zeal I have to subvert that hitherto conclamated^ truth, Perrar^ filiorum
claritas ut ipsos semper filios claros facit, sic parents interdum vicinitate
sua, contegit obscuratque, Multi faelicius obituri fuerint si sine filiis
obiissent. Petrarcha lib. 2. de remed. Vie. Fort. Dialog. 131.
( That Sons too often make their noble Fathers dishonourably remembered in them
degenerated, and to the age they live in, and Family they come from unhappy,
(compels me to persist in a willingness to commit to the kindness and civility
of those who are wise and worthy, what my modest and welmeaning thoughts are,
concerning Honor and Gentry, in the bud, blossom, leaf, fruit, and in the
improvements and consequences of them.

SECT. I.
Showing that distinctions of Men have been from the beginning.
THat as there have been men from the beginning, so have some of them affected
prevalence and priority, and thereby accumulated Power, Wealth, and Fame to
themselves and their relations, is not to be doubted: for that not only the
Holy Story, but even the light of reason, carries us toward, and confirms us
in, the belief of it: And in that Moses, who had so fair advantages, and so
much skill to manage them to his own greatness, and his Families advance, did
not pursue and improve them to a settlement of the Government of Israel in his
children and their descendants, but yielded and propagated it according to the
appointment of God; we are to admire a self-denial and integrity in him
paramount to them, whose worldly prudence it is, first, as much as they can, to
make, then to take, advantages, and those subacted to them, to apply to the
Majo^ation of their Names, and the coruscation of their issues and descendants.

There is then no doubt but as dominion and subjection are Aboriginal, so the
effects of it in familique as well as personal distinctions is very ancient:
for as nature dictates perpetuation of ones kind, by apt conjunctions of Male
and Female, so does she also include therein the beneficial consequences of it,
and accordingly composes herself to the service of them. Thus she visiblizes
herself in the Circumactions of Providence, in the hazzards of Courage, in the
toyls of Government, in the vicissitudes of Commerce, in the abstrusities of
Science, that by the good voyages issuant from them, and the ports of success
made by them, she may arrive her adventurers and owners at those Markets of
advantage, which to some are Crowning, to others profitable, to all
distinguishing mercies-

Thus Nimrod footed it fairly upon the stage of the first ages, (...) etc. lib.
2. verarum Historiarum, p. 403. Edit. in Folio.
which he made (if he found it not) like that Island Nauplius in Lucian,
conducted his followers to, A soil productive of nothing but Swords and
Ponyards, encompassed with two Rivers, one filled with the dirt and mudd of
black designs, tinctured with the brimstone of Hell, the other with the blood
of innocents prodigally and cruelly shed, and within all nothing but the fire
of concupiscence and evil desire, lodged and luted up. And from his president
did aftertimes carry on the project of greatness, by Methods proper to its
achievement: Nor could the design of power have been propagated by any engine
more adequate then that of a worldly wisdom, since the corrupted nature of man
being rude and sturdy, is reducible rather by terrors and Outwitting, then by
mercies and plain dealing; and since Order is so necessary to the Regiment and
Harmony of the World, and all Societies in it, that which most conduces
thereto, is the meetest genitor and conserver of it; and being useful in so
important a matter as rule is, purchases to its self a justifyable Title by
the common profit of its exercise, and the good office it does unto Piety, to
which it is subservient in the pessundation of vice, which it humbles, and
thereby renders preparatory to the prevalence of Christ Jesus in his Gospel's
discovery, and in the various and lovely attendants thereupon. Though therefore
it be the voice of Babel-builders and prodigious fighters against God, Genesis 11.
3.
Let us build a Tower that shall reach up to Heaven, and make us a Name; and
though the Prophet condemns it as a wicked worldly project and work, to live
alone in the Earth, to join house to house, Isai. 5. 8.
and field to field, till there be no place, yet is this to be understood
cursed, as God is thereby defied, and his fear resolved against; which is the
sin of the Fool, who says in his heart there is no God; not simply, as by
Masculine prudence, prevalence and advantage is gained, and thereby order
settled and kept: Nor do I see how the admission of some men of Gubernative
spirits interest (if moderate) into the motives to and procedures of it,
derogates from the charity or justice of such attemptors; for since without
them succesfull, no Order could be, all the happiness and security that is
enjoyed, is debtor to their disposition to, and acceptance of, rule and
pre-eminence; Nobilitas est quidam habitus electivus, in medio consistens circa
ea quae pertinent ad praeesse ac do^ninari* Cassa^aeus Catal. Gl. Mundi p. 303.
and for so doing they are worthily accounted Noble.

It must therefore be granted, that all distinction, Nobility, and Rule of one
over another (though it at first seemed violent, yet by act of time and
positivity of law, in which natural consent of Nations is involved, and the
providence and pleasure of God rightly interpreted) is of divine Institution
and moral Reason, as a branch from the Tree of Majesty, and of humane
approbation; as that vicarious divinity which conducts to, and preserves
mankind in, a neighborhood, correspondence and agreement.

SECT. II.
That the Jews, Egyptians, Greeks, Romans, and all Nations, had their Nobles
and Nobility, and did honor to them according to their virtue, power and
riches.
THis being modestly premised, (for I disclaim all Dictatorian peremptoriness,
and write with submission to the judgments of those that fear God and follow
virtue) It may not be from my purpose to insinuate, that there never was any
Time or Nation in which there was not the footstep, if not the full
portraicture of Nobility and distinction. The Jews, whom I see no reason to
disbelieve the first people, Councl. Ber^roni in Politia Iud^ica.
had it by appointment from God, the chief of their Families were Priests and
Princes to them, before their Judges and Kings, whom separated from the vulgar
they called (...) Noble; so is the reddition of the word Exodus 24. 11. and upon
the Nobles of Israel he laid not his hand, and 41 Isai. 9. I have called thee
from the chief men or Nobles of the Earth. Of these Nobles the Jews by their
Language made diverse sorts, chiefly (...) Heroiques, those that descended from
brave ancestors men of blood, Viri candoris, 10 Eccles. 17. Blessed art thou O
Land whose King is (...) the son of Nobles; so 4. Neh. 19. 5. c. v. 7. 34 Isa.
12. And then they had others they called (...) Men of great riches and estate.
For (...) aurum from (...) includere imported men, whose Gold was their fence
and confidence; whence probably that passage, 2 Hab. 6. of lading himself with
thick Clay; (...) etc. Josephus (...) fratres apu^ ^hilonem p. 61. lib. de
^^seph.
both these, for birth and riches besides others, were by the Jews called
Noble: After, the Egyptians, who termed themselves the chiefest of mortals, had
great regard to worth both in men the Meriters, and in their posterities,
renowned for, and privileged by reason of them; they had their Kings and their
Seconds in the Throne, their purple Robes and their Insignia's of distinction,
which were badges of men's pre-eminence, either for power or wealth, which
moderately, and which conscience to the public, administered, caused them to
be accounted Men above men, that is, Heroiques or Pettit-Gods. Thus Diodorus
Siculus writes, Nobility both in the Powery and Magnificent part of it, was for
some Thousand years arbitrated by the Gods and by Godlike Kings, who did not
only steer government to their own purpose of subjecting (...) Lib. 1. p. 41.
the persons of their people, and taking to themselves their estates and
labors, but according to the patrial Laws indulged their security as Shepherds
and their enriching as Fathers, leaving their own posterity such fortunes as
they for them gathered by thrist and common consent of the people, which
revenues, added to their wel-descended Fame, made them in the Moralists sense
Noble; (...) Plut^rchus lib. cont. Nobilita^em.
For Nobility (says he) is nothing else but ancient Wealth, and ancient
Worship, that is, Descent from ancestors, wealthy and worshipful. In process,
when Egypts glory withered, and the Greeks upon their stumps fixed their own
increment, the learning of Egypt transmigrated with their fortune to Greece,
where the Court Cards of request being, all the civil and learned order of
declining Egypt, (...) Herodianus lib. 5.
became prey to the Grecian trumps which ruffed and deported every excellency
that quondamly they triumphed in; and thereby Nobility became attributed in
Greek Authors to every thing rare and excellent; (...) Aristot. 3 Politic.
Birth of virtuous parents is called Nobility, Trees of a good kind (...) by
Lib. de Nob.
Philo, and Euryp. in Heraclide.
Euripides (...). The Noble born, have from their blood a hope,
That they shall rule in Princedom's Horoscope.
And so again, (...), etc.
Those that are brave and just in mind,
Daring in deed, of nature kind,
For Nobles are by God designed.


And that the Trojans had Nobility amongst them, is plain from that of the
Poet, Iuvenalis apud Lucium in Comme^tar. ad Virgilium. p. 903. Cerda in lib.
3. Aeneid. v. 3^9.
who mentioning valiant and divine men, terms them Trojugenas. -- Iubet a
Precone vocare
Istas Trojugenas --
Yea, in that Alexanerd M. cum fuerat 17. jure n^^^erni sanguini^ Achille
auctore, Paterni Hercule gloriatus est, Vel. Paterculus lib. 1. p. 14. edit.
Lipsi^.
Alexander was wont to glory of his descent from Hercules and Achilles, as did
the Macedonian Kings after him, which Silius alludes to in those Verses; Hic
gente egregius veterisque ab origin regni,
Aeacid^^^ sceptris, proavoque tumebat Achille.
This Gallant swollen was with boast to come
From Hercules, Achilles, Seirs to whom
They were, whose deeds gave them a glorious Tomb,
So pregnant of renown's his Morning Womb.


In as much, I say, as these things are in Authors of credit, we are to be
concluded, that Nobility was in account with the Greeks; nor else would the
holy Text have used the word (...) and (...), as it does, Luke 19. v. 12. 1
Cor. 1. 26. Acts 17. 11. If this Nobility, which those places allude to, had
not been in reputation in the world, and that in its several Vertigo's and
traverses of power and Empire: For when the Romans superseded the Greeks (Men
and States having their hot and cold sits) with the Conquests and Colonies of
the Romans, the Grecian usages, Inde prodiit jus Imaginum quas nobiles ab
armorum laud pararint Familiae (...) Et nomina militum clypeis ascripta.
Forrerius in leg. 195. Vegetius lib. 2. c. 28. de re Micitari.
laws, and opinions, eat themselves into the Roman greatness, and became, by
common approbation, Roman; and then Rome swells with the bulk of Patricians and
Senators, and groans under the overgrown weight of Triumphers and Coronetted
persons; and it not only allows Citizens to write their names upon their
Bucklers, or to charge on them some honorable device, by reason of which they
put a great value upon them, De Clypeorum dedicatione lege Plinium lib. 35 p. 3.
and would not cowardly lose them to their enemies, but while they could, carry
them, as their Badges of Honor, and at last dedicate them to their Gods, and
to the memory of their Progenitors: I say, Rome did not only allow her Citizens
this mark of clarescency, but animated them to every Instance of Heroickness.
Now no Porch is without its Frontispiece; no corner in its Room of State
without a Monument of Nobility, Nobiles autem primum Patricii, dicti sunt
quippe quibus primum honores iis quibus nobilitas co uparatur, in Republ.
p^^ueru ut post autem plebeii etiam ubi primi ad Curules honores pervenerunt
Nobiles dici caep^i sunt; neque enim ex genere nobilitas sed ex im^ginibus
parabatur. Sigonius de nom. in Romam. p. 368.
in some Obelisques and Pyramids, in others Triumphal Arches; here a Marble
Pourtraicture, there a goodly Statue, or Pillar; every where some Trophy, or
Fescue, to Honor manlily acceded to: Yea, though they most set by their first
instituted Orders, and reckoned the Descendants from them the Virtuoso's
primarum gentium; yet had they admissions into, and enlargements of Honor, to
reward brave Actions in obscure Men: Which made Seneca, no small Courtier, nor
yet a man of a refuse birth, to encourage real Virtue thus, No man is more
noble then another, unless he have a nobler soul, and be apter to virtuous
Achievements; Eadem ^mnibus principia eademque origo, nemo altero nobilior,
nisi cui rectius ingenium, and artibus bonis aptius, qui Imagines in atrio
exponunt, etc. Et paulo post, sive libertini ante vos habentur, sive servi,
sive exterarum gentiuns homines, erigite audacter animo^, and quicquid in medio
sordidi jace^ transilite, expectat vos in summo Magna nobilitas ib. 3. de
Benesic. c. 27.
those that are full of the Antiquities of their Progenitors, and make an
endless Narrative of them, adorning their Portals with their Effigiesses, are
by them more noted then noble; there is one common Parent of all Men: This
World, whether Men come first or last, are valued, or not, is not much by a
wise Man to be stood upon: Despise no Man, says he, that which only is
valuable is nobility of mind, which expects the best praise, and makes them
that have it worthy of it. Thus he: And hereupon he proceeds to defend
Cleanthes, Chrysippus, and Zeno, though in condition beneath Magistrates, and
so not enrolled in the public Charters of Benefactors to the Government,
proving that they, in the institution of men in moral Philosophy, Lib de O^io
Sap. c. 31.
and Rules of Virtue, were as useful as men of great Estates and Courage, In
cujuscunque animo virtus inesset ei plurimum esse ritbuendum. Patercul. lib. 2.
p. 76.
to support the power of the Commonwealth, were, though then the Romans did
prize Virtue and Wisdom in men of the first head, and thought highly of
Coruncanus, Carvilius, Cato, Marius, Fulvius, Asinius Pollio, Omnes boni sempen
uobilita^i ^avemus and quia utile est Reipubl. nobiles homines esse dignos
majo. ribus suis and quia valet apud nos clarorum virorum memoria etiam
mortuorum Cic. pro Sex^io.
who all were of no Families, but names of Honor and Nobilitation to
themselves, yet did they not wholly exclude the race of Worthies, though
degenerated from conspicuity reflecting on them from their Ancestors, who
begetting Children in nature and body, not always in nobility of soul, like
themselves, they cautioned not to be wholly casheired Esteem: Not thus is
Seneca to be misunderstood; but his meaning, in what is praealledged, is, That
if mere descent from a virtuous stock, and antecedent Patricians, and personal
virtue in an upstart, must be weighed each against the other, as two separate
and abstracted things, not resolvable into one person; then he, as a Roman, and
Man of reason, had rather choose virtue without blood, then blood without
virtue: For as Phalaris wrote to Antiochus, Virtue is the true and only
Nobility, (...). Epistola ad Antiochum.
other things are referrable to fortune. To which Philo suffragates, Truth and
Judgment, quoth he, considers not Nobility only from the race of blood, but
from justice and courage of action. For when the rattle and noise of descent
and blood is drowned in the casualties and confusions of worldly instability,
(...) Philo lib. de Nobilit. p. 904.
Virtue susteins it self in every condition, and is welcome to another, when
^it is banished from, or unhappy in, its own Country. Whence is discovered the
vanity of too much resting on Blood and Honor, which is only considerable in
conjunction with Wealth, which has wings, and may with them fly away, and then
the Nobility of an ignoble soul'd man leaves him helpless, and remarkable for
nothing but misery. Where then Names and Titles are concurrent with Virtue, and
the Mind is a strenuous second to the Names pretension, there can be no
attribution too luxuriant almost for such an Emeriter, Quid est eques Romanus
aut libertinus aut servus, nomina e^ ambitione aut ex injuria nata, subsilice
in Coelum ex angulo licet, ex surge modo and ^e quoque dignum finge Deo. Senec.
Fp. 31.
who turns the little cottage he is in, into a Theater of Majesty, and reduces
the grandeur of a Heaven into the uncouth angle of his residence. For such
Phaenixes, whose latitudes of love, and intentness of general good, Sint hi
reges quia majores ^orum non suerunt, quia pro summo imperio habuerent
Ius^itiam, abstinentiam, quia non Rempub. sibi sed se Reipub. dicaverunt,
Regnent tu quia vir bonus quidam proavus eorum suit qui anima supra fortunam
gessit qui ini dissensione Civili quoniam expedieba^ Repu^ vinci quam vincere
malui lib. 4. de Benef. c. 32.
puts them upon self neglect, in conscience to the general, more precious to,
and valued by, them: The wisdom of Nations ought not only to decree public
gratitudes, but to invite others by their acceptance to be free spirited: For
they deserve best to be trusted and relied on, who (as Seneca says) were single
hearted, and unended, who did not abe^ factions to admit themselves into
request and wealth, but retained in turmoils that just sobriety, rather to be
ruined in their private fortnnes, then to sacrifice the common peace to their
ambitious and malignant acremonies: So he.

As therefore the wisdom of Ages, and Governments, have given great virtue its
due Guerdon, so have they quickened the faint and languishing hopes of it, by
signal favors collated on them, whom by them they, as it were, bribed and
bespake to become and abide excellent.

Thus Constantine's Brother, Zrz^mus lib. 2. Eutrop. in breviar. p. 112. and
lib. 8.
and Anaballianus (though men of no great dedegree in virtue) were for their
very alliance to Constantine Nobilissimated; so the Emperor created his Son
Julian (...), and thus all Powers have done, to engage their Relations and
Attendants to follow Majesty in such manifestations of it as are expected from
their respective conditions, and opportunities: For surely, if Nobility, and
whatever is couchable under it, and understood by it, be worth desiring and
obtaining, it is chiefly for the subsidy it yields to Virtue, and the addition
it makes to Men and Things, which thereby are advanced to a Sphere superior to
their common natural influence and operation, as Macrinus notably noted to the
Roman Senate, (...) Herodian lib. 5. p. 560.
When he so smartly traduced the Idol of Nobility abstracted from Virtue, as
that it appeared the vapor and bladder of a tumorous nothing, and the blazing
semblance of an insignificant non ens.

From all which it appears, That Nobility and distinction amongst men has been
ever in observance, but chiefly when compeer to virtue; the association with
which, though it was not ever in an express of notability, yet in a truth of
being, and in some degree or other of suitable appearance, which verifies that
golden saying of Demosthenes, (...). Apud Stobaeum Sermon. 217.
He that is born virtuous is truly born Noble: And since pure Nobility may well
be compared to a River issuing out of four principal Wels, all which rise from
the compass of one Hill; the Wells are Prudence, Fortitude, Justice,
Temperance: Bishop of Saint David's Sermon at the entertainment of the IL. of
Essex, 21 Eliz. Holingshed p. 1263.
the Hill whence they spring is the fear of God and true Religion; as a learned
Prelate of our Church long since observed. Happy is that man whom the graces of
a regenerated and subdued soul to God, dignifies and declares Noble, Foeli^
ille quem non excellentia generis sed mores virtutesque nobilitaverunt.
Apulejus.
though he be in other regards straightned and reduced to be the object of a
generous pity, or of what is more usual, degenerous scorn.

Not only men then, but even Families have been happy enjoyers of Nobilitation.
For though the immediate ray of honor be darted upon the face of the first
actor, and that for his action courageously and with wisdom performed; yet are
the reflections of it considerable advantages to all his family and relations,
yea to his servants, who were chiefly Aliciat ad legem 40.
signified in the old Oscan word Famul, the lodge or lie of servants. Nor did
the Family extend then to Wives, Children, Nephews or Libertines, but only to
the drudging or least free part of their domestiques. Though times and
conquests have enfranchised words as well as men, so that at this day Family
extends it self to the utmost line of consanguinity, which the great Master of
reason as well as eloquence, Tully, Arist Polit^e. lib. 1. c. 3.
fully sets forth, when he tells us, that even Nature has so expatiated
charity in man, Et ipsa charitas generis quae nata a primo satu a
procreatoribus na^i diliguntur and tota domus conjugio and st^rpe conjungitur
serpit sensim for as cogniti^^ibus primum tum ad ^in^tatibus, deinde Amicitiis.
lib. 5. de Fin. bon. and malorum.
that he does not only accept them for his Family, who are descendants from his
body; or in a direct descent come from one common and numerical ancestor, or
are by marriage affianced to him, but also by the frankness and latitude of
that virtue, friends though more remote in blood are adopted into the fruits
and kindness of it. But this is a large sense of Families, and would require a
vast force of Fancy and pains to man the lines and outworks of its
circumvallation. That only notion of Families which is commonly understood to
be branches from one stock, is that which is the family I treat of.

And certainly there is nothing has been more the care of wise and generous men
to raise and confirm in honor and reputation then their Name and Family. That
is, not only their children and their offspring, but their relations
collateral, whom by laws of nature and nations they accounted second heirs;
which appears not only in the qualities men of great minds endeavor to
attain, and by them to be notable and requested, but from the suitable
improvements that they exercise the conspicuity of their parts about. For as
they do invigilate themselves that their amorous or rash follys do not
precipitate their after preferment: so having well married do they caution the
wel-breeding of their children, that fitted they may be for employments and
favors of respect and augmentation. Thus of old we read that the Patriarchs as
they chose for themselves Wives worthy their piety and love, so did they to
their sons present Wives, and them married, placed in courses of life laborious
and supportive; upon which foundation they laid all the superstructure of their
after happiness and thrift. This after ages imitated them in, and while they
saw themselves more then ordinarily mortal in their issues, they either having
none, or such as concluded in their sex the nominal perpetuity of them, they
made provision for their continuity by assumption of Nephews and Kinsmen, or by
adoption of daughters children, Totius familiae interest ne quis ex ea vel in
servitutem de. ducatur vel slagitiose damnoque dignitatis vivat. Ferrerius ad
legem 195.
which I best like, into their name; and so investing them with what fortune
and honor they had in their power: so great a zeal to the prosperity of blood,
name and relations is there in a generous man, that as their glory is his
delight, so their dislustre is his torment. Hence has it been ever the study of
brave men to promote their kindred, and to resent their disobligements as
unkindnesses done to themselves. Nor is there any more sure sign of a Noble
soul, then this of endeavoring to know and improve the prosperity of his line
and kindred, yea, and of his friends too; for I prefer constant and prudent
friends above relations that are loose and incapable; and truly I am declaredly
of the opinion, that Greatness or Riches is not desirable by any Heroique,
further then it capacitates the have to serve God, Quid enim generosius quam
tot literarum proceres habuisse majores: nam si inve^era^ae and per genus
ductae divitiae nobile^ faciunt, multo magis praestantior est cujus origo the
sauris prudentiae locuplis invenitur. Alatharicus Rex senatui Rom apud Cassiod
var. lib. 8. ep. 19.
and his Prince, officiates to the public, and is a hook to draw into and a
hedge to secure worthy friends and relations in the fellowship and affluence of
it; For although the other perquisites of it, as place, plenty, p^mp of life,
respect with men, be tempting and taking motives to its pursuit, and
obtainment, yet the prospect that it gives into the knowledge of men and
things, and the encouragement and reward it privileges a man to give to what
is excellent and useful, though perhaps clouded and spiritless, is the
Royallest incentive to af^ect and accept it; I like the charity that begins at
home, and since I account every one of my Family and Friendship that is
virtuous and valuable in any Noble accomplishment, they shall be the objects of
my respect and nearest to my kindness who are nearest of kin to the souls
nobility, and who have in them the most of intellectual Majesty and practical
Divinity. But I return to a man's family, which surely must be dear to him, upon
the reason of interest, as it is his temporary conservatory, and that in the
Lunary motions whereof he sees the ^bbs and flows of his own fame. For though
he is but a termer for life in his person, and has but a contingent estate in
that, yet in the continuity of his descendants he has a comparative fee, and an
estate, as I may so say, of temporary eternity; at least the lease he has is
such as it may last many hundred years: which wise men contemplating, if issue
of themselves fail by corporal defects, or anticipation of vice, vow, or what
is parallel to them, provide substitutions to their memory, though they
purchase them at rates transcending the ordinary values of reason. This makes
them venture on those designs of hazard, and labors of death, that none
would cope with but those that had a motion of mind above mortals, Non potest
grande aliquid and supra caeteros loqui nisi mota men's cum vulgaria and soli^a
contempsit ins^inctoque sacro surrexit excelsior. Tunc demum aliquid cecinit
grandius ore mortali non potest sublime quiddam and in arduo positum contingere
quam diu apud se est. Senec. lib. de Tranq. animi.
as Seneca says, and whose ears could hear no discouragement though death
were the Messenger to dissuade them; and though they saw the pit of their
sepulcher opened before them, and ready to receive them: for then they most
sweetly modulate the notes of greatness, when they strain their accounts
beyond and above the Elah of ordinary attainment, and assay the supern
greatness by the projects of a more then mortal action, which they meditate
and are generously transported to produce.

SECT. III.
Treats of the perpetuation of Families, as more the desire of brave men then
their attainment; and hereupon exhorts submission to Gods pleasure.
WHen men therefore propose to themselves, by Gods permission, to be founders
of Families, they do, as provident builders do, design models and lay in
materials before they declare what they will build; for according to their well
advised scheme and orderly draught, and the proper Instruments thereto, so
usually are the advances in, and the conclusions of it. He that will not
consider in his mind the money he would expend upon the conveniences he would
have in, the time he would allow to, the perfections of his Pile, will never be
a wise and thrifty builder; nor will he in resolves of illustration to a
family, be more happy, who considers not well and acts wisely, and perseveres
in his well-grounded design constantly, to the effection of it; and this if he
does, and is humble and civil in it, he performs as much as man can do to
serve himself to compleatness, and does by the very ambition to do generous
things, declare himself of natures Peerage and Nobility; (...). Apud Stobaeum
Sermon. 218.
so true is that of Menander, A Virtuous man, though to his Mother He A Black
have, yet is oth' Nobility.

This desire of continuing and propagating their Families the Romans of all
Nations were more remarkable for, who, as they knew learning, valor, and
employments of gain, gathered estates, and by thrift in, and knowledge to get,
disciplined men in the tenacious keeping, and the provident actuating of them;
so bred their youth to those frugal and masculine courses, that as they
despised vice and avoided the costly expenses of them, so did they preserve
their ancestors renown in its freshness and fragrancy by their patrization; and
where the contrary was, their public laws restrained the wast of
patrimonies, and infamiz'd their degeneration; which prudent caution and sage
provision for a worldly perennation, though it had not ever infallible
influence upon the end aimed at (the good pleasure of God, being often not only
negative of, but opposites to, such projects) yet was it a prudent assay to a
probable and rational attainment of perpetuity, or if not such in the
propriety of the blessing (which may be thought inconsistent with this world,
and with the men and things of and in it; yet secundum quid, and in compare
with courses diametral to frugality and the benedictions of industrious
deligence, the principles of growth, and beauty of Families; it promises much
toward its establishment, at least more then the sensual and senseless courses
of prodigality and loose living, which are not springs to, but dreyns of
estates, and let them run at wast by intemperance and neglect.

I know the activity and concerns of the Romans in the severalties of their
conquests, dispersing those of them that were strenuous and learned into the
several quarters of it, made the generosity of their spirits at home not seem
so much and quick as it would, had they been kept nearer their heart, and seat
of life, and not distributed into the remote veins and arteries of their
growing body, which they were to inform and quicken: Yet did they in their
transplantation not dye, Orta omnia aut serius aut ocyus tandem occident and
senescunt, volvet motu continuo rotans fortuna, and de gente ingentium
volubilia regn^ versabit: Facies illa cum volet reges ex servis, servos, ex
regibus, and in urbem Romam, and in orbem Romanam suam ineluctibilem poteutiam
exercebit. Petrarcha Ep. 4. sine Tit lo Tom. 2. p. 714.
but by their change of climate more improve. For since it is the good pleasure
of God, that the Ague of time should, by variations, serve to the revolution of
this vicissitudinary world; in which all the Natives, of what edition soever,
are by their principle of composition, and the regency of Gods Decree, inclined
to change, and not without miracle to be preserved from the fate of their
declention and variation, which is but the gradual preface to their interition.
They that ^ix Absolom's Pillar on this Pedestal of dust, do but fancy their own
deceit, and consent to their posterities delusion: For though it may please God
that some Families are so happy, that they produce as many Heroicks as men, Qui
tot annis continuus simul splende^ claritate virtutis, and quamvis rara si^
gloria, non agnoscitur in tam longo stemmate variata seculis suis producit
nobilis vena primarios, nescit inde aliquid nasci mediocre. Tot proba^ii quot
geniti and quod dissicile provenit electa frequentius, ita ut quod addidit
familiae juvenes, tot reddidit curiae consulares. Theodoric. Rex Ep. 6.
Importuno, apud Cassiod Var. lib. 3.
every one born in it, proving, not only not a blemish, but an Ornament,
companion to the Nobles, and best of men; in whom nothing trite, or prostrate,
appears, but every thing that proves a spring to the emulation of their
contemporaries, as the Decian Family is remembered to have, which lasted for
hundreds of years unallayed, and in its prime and increasing keenness, so that
to be of it was to be, whatever is expectable from manhood incarnate.

Or as the Domitian Family, Omnes ad consulatum sacerdotiaque ad triumphantium
paoene omnes pervenerunt insignia Pater. lib. 2. p 438. and 440. Plurimas
vivendi causas habentem. Plin. de Correll^o Rufo.
of whom Paterculus writes, all of them either arrived at Consular, Sacerdotal,
or Triumphal Grandeur: Or the Brethren of Metellus, who triumphed in one and
the same day. I know there have been these Instances of auspicious providence
to some, who, with Corellius Rufus, have had felicities of all kinds
constellated in them, and have had the issue of their prosperity imponderated
by the massiness of their own wishes; yea, by those concentrated accommodations
which have advanced them above parallel, and declared them single in those, not
almost to be believed, enjoyments: To have a clear reputation, and great power,
Wife, Daughter, Sons, Nephews, dutiful and virtuous, a number of choice
Friends, and all this with a chaste and unviciated Conscience, is, that which
but few Romans besides him had: Nor of many English men can that be said, which
our Learned Cambden writes of the Earl of Wiltshire, Britannia, p. 267.
Treasurer to King Edward the sixth, who well understood the different times he
lived in, and was to steer his course by: That he was raised, not suddenly, but
by degrees, in Court; that he built Noble and Princely Buildings; was temperate
in all other things, full of years, for he lived ninety seven years, fruitful
in his generation, for he saw one hundred and three issue from him by his Wife:
I say, though God leave these Instances, and such like, to assert, and make
good, the imperativeness and privilege of his pleasure, yet mostly it is
otherwise: Statues do not more gather moss, and moulder away with weather, nor
Vegetables fade and dye by the currency of their season, and the aridness of
their root, the decay of whose succulency appears in the contraction and
cessation of the Flower, then Men and Families do by Time, which has swept away
with its Besome, and carried down its Current, Kingly, Peery, and Gentry
Families, and set them and their Honors on shore in that Terra incognita,
wherein they are extinguished. Yea, in our own Nation, how has the same Carere
and fate mortified the quondam being and greatness of Name in the British and
Saxon Families; yea, and in the Families from the Conquest, by name, Albanay,
Fitzhugh, Mountacute, Mountford, Beauchampt, Brewier, Cameis, Bardolf,
Mortimer, Valtort, Botereaux, Chaumond, Curcey, De la Beche, Carminow, Brewire,
Fitz-lewis, Marmion, Deincourt, Burnell, Plantagenet, all right Noble and
Knightly Families in their times, but now either wholly eraced, or couched
under Families, who married their Heirs, and, with their Lands and Blood, carry
their Names only in their Title: I say, this Vulture, and vehemence, in time,
tells us, that as here there is no Permanency, so here good and brave Men must
expect rather to be deplorable objects of desertion and poverty, then the
Favorites of credit and abundance; nor do I observe the lines of life crosser,
or the channels of prosperity lower, to any then to these: Envy, or some other
mischievous accident, either calmming their design so that they can make no
Port before they are ruined; or else the surges of the storms, in which they
and their honest projects ride, suffering them never to be happier, then a
shipwreck of all can make them; and the breaking of their hearts for grief
superadded, can by it detriment the world in their loss. This I the rather
introduce, to turn Men and my self upon rumination of Gods proceedings herein,
more abstruse then the nature of unmortified man is capable to submit to, or
patient to acquiesce in: Nor is there anything, that I know, wherein the carnal
Heart, and inquisitive Wit, more covets to fathom, and concerns it self to
circumvolve, then Gods wrapping of himself up in the Cloud, executing the
pleasure of his Will in this, which our dwarfy reason, and insolent ignorance,
terms, with reverence I write it, the hysteron proteron of divine Sovereignty,
which, by what we call an inconsequence of cause and effect, ratifies his great
Authority, and ineffable Wisdom, Whose Judgments are past searching, and his
ways not to be found out; because it is a way in the sea, and a path in the
great water, Psalm 77. 19.
whose footsteps are not known.

How this notwithstanding has perplexed holy and wise men, appears in that of
Job cap. 12. who stumbled, That the Tabernacles of the wicked prosper, and they
that provoke God are secure, into whose hand God brings abundantly. And of
Jeremy c. 12. v. 1. Let me reason with thee of thy Judgments; wherefore does
the way of the wicked prosper? wherefore are all they happy that are very
treacherous? And Lam. 1. 5. speaking of the Church, complains, her enemies
prosper, her adversaries are the chief, for the Lord has afflicted her. O this
prosperity of the wicked, is, that which makes David, a man of a good nature,
and a grave sincerity, cry out, I have cleansed my heart in vain, and washed
mine hands in innocence, Psalm. 73. 13. and tempts them (unless better kept by
his Grace, and less leaning to their own understanding, and less swayed by
natural reason) to think there is either no knowledge in the most High, v. 11.
Or, that though a sinner do evil a hundred times, his days may be prolonged,
Eccless. 8. 12. This slow progress of God, to judge evil men in the punishment
of their evil actions, makes, as evil men set themselves fully to do evil v.
11. so good men almost put forth their hands to iniquity, Psalm. 25. 3.

Indeed, I confess, according to the seruples and narrow calculates of depraved
reason, and the vilde objects of our carnal senses, dijudicating these
transpositions and seeming confusions of administration, there should none of
this be, but as no ill thing should fall out to good, so no good befall evil
men; because, according to the Syntax of cause and effect, and the
compossibility of a good effect from a good venture well made and marketted,
there should be a Homogeneousness in the return. But when, as often it is
otherwise, and that not only in punishment of some adjunct evil to the best
good in us, and so on the contrary; but also in right to Gods independency, and
plenipotency, vindicated thereby, it proves otherwise, there ought to be in us
no repining against, or aversion from, the Love of, and Duty unto, God, who
does, with the Creation, his Clay, what the power and will of him the Potter
pleases, who in all the emanations of his Attributes both penal and premiary,
In quolibet continuo indubitanter sunt parts insini^ae and sic providet and
c^ravit creat^r, ut esset totum, sic providet et curavit ut esset medietas and
eodem modo se habet de medietate medietatis and ita in infinitunt qui enim
providit and curat, ut sit d^mus, providet and cur^t ut sit paries, and etiam
ut sil l^pis in pariete. Gulielm. Pari. siens. primae partis de universo part.
3. c. 2. and 3. p. 713.
evidences himself not more a God of power and wisdom, then a Father of mercy
and goodness. For in that the wisdom, power, goodness, holiness and fidelity of
God are concerned to effect the glory of the Divinity, in the preservation of
the prerogatives of its Crown and dignity, and in the accommodation of its
subjects with all things necessary to their being and wel-being. That which
occurs to them in their passage from the one state unto the other, must needs
be accepted by them as replete with all those energyes and intents of
advantage, which are effluxable from those forementioned divine Excellencies,
as Gods purpose concerning them, and the grounds of their subjection and
relyance on him. And thereupon it follows that to recalcitrate those befalls,
as they are consequences of superne goodness and greatness, is, to kick against
the pricks, and to desie the prescriptions and superemin^ncy of God.

Which lessons men to abate deploration of their personal or Family
misfortunes, because though the instruments that unwelcomely adjuvate their
infelicity be from themselves, yet the chief causality is in that regency which
is its own both regulation and support. And if there be not a hayr of our heads
but is numbered, Matthew. 10. 30. Or a Sparrow fall to the ground without the
goodwill of our Father, as our Lord has assured us, in the aforesaid Scripture,
then we ought to possess our souls in patience, Luke 21. 19. and to reason our
repinings out of credit with us, as Job did, Shall we receive good at the hands
of God, and not evil? Job 2. 10. Especially when the living man that complains
suffers for his sin. 3 Lam. 39.
For God being of infinite wisdom and power, as he designs nothing but what is
good, so he admits no good into the rank of his effective purpose, but what he
knows ought, and wills shall come to pass, and that in the very nicety and
seemingly minute circumstance of its appearing and opperation, either as to
time, degree, persons, issue, or whatever else is considerable in it. For there
being in him an Omniformity and comprehensivity of knowledge, by which he,
after a manner superior to our apprehension and way of intellect, reaches all
things by his simple and plenary intuition; the associate perfections in him
being of equal luster and unparaleldness, second the knowledge of God, and
serve it out in providence and order of action which as validly produces, as
his knowledge and wisdom contrives it. And hence it comes to pass, that the
will of God working on ou^ wills to a cooperation, works good in us, and thence
works good by us; and then rewards his own encouragements to goodness by
bounteous largesses of acceptance from us.

Thus come men to be Wise, Learned, Temperate, Just, Fortunate, Honorable, not
from the innate excellencies of their mind, or from the better temper of their
constitution; and the stellary influences propitious to their births, ( Though
I am far from denying natures operation in any degree that is within her
sphere, and Gods permission, which whether this be or be not, I undertake not
to state) but from the emanation of Gods power, goodness, and wisdom, imparted
to, and mixed with, their actions, in the regularity and aptitude whereof, the
characters of their merit and fame are impressed and fortunated; yea, so does
God sweetly Sovereign it in the wills of men, that he not only leads their
wills of action beyond their wills of deliberation, and resolve, so that they
shall not do the evil they intended, but in his method occasions their wills to
will his production of good, in the way and degree of his establishment, which
they intended not. Thus the peevishness of Laban occasioned the prosperity of
Jacob, and the treachery of Joseph's brethren, Joseph's advancement; the rancour
of Saul, David's rise; the revenge of Balack against Israel, Balaams blessing of
them; and in a thousand other examples, wherein it might be made good. Which
supposed, and written of (not I hope without the modesty that becomes a
learner, the reason that beseems a man, the piety that ought to be in a good
Christian,) there may be some good advance made toward the discovery of the
distentions and convulsions of Families, Fortunes, and Men, in the various
conditions and enterludes of their being: For though (as to us) things may ^all
out, as I said before, in a seeming retrogradation (and under wise manageries,
and in the times of good men, unhappily; and under worse times and men more
prosperously) yet is not this event of dissimilarity directed by a blind fate,
or a chance of mischance, as we call things of spurious causation; but it is
the very proper expression of God, conducting second causes to the subserviency
they must not dispute or say nay to; but by a positivity of observance and
compliance be disposed by, and concluded in, For it is the blessing of the Lord
makes rich; and it is his pleasure, that as the same Sun melts the Wax and
hardens the Clay, so the same power of his should become variously effective to
men and things; which lets us into the reason, How Men and Families are by a
secret sourse or sluice, either made affluent, or dreyned of whatever is notable
in them.

SECT. IV.
In what sense the Author understands Virtues and Vices to become Rises and
Decays to Men and Families.
ANd now I come to the main of my intendment, having by the preludiary
discourse introduced the subsequent matter, which is the mention of those
means, Virtues and Vices, which do Constitute or Determine Families, and make
or ruin Men in them. Previous to the enlargment whereon, I crave leave to pray
a right understanding of what by Virtues and Vices, commencing or determining
the Grandeur and felicity of Men and Families, I herein intend. Far then be it
from me to estate virtue in any right of merit to reward, by which God, the
most free agent, should ex opere operato of his creature, be obliged; or be for
reason of congruity or condignity of virtue in men, how remarkable for it
soever, bound to make them happy, and their families after them; Quare profecto
summae stu^litiae est dicere aut credere regna and imperia necesse esse, ad
illos duntaxat perveniant, qui nobilitatem jactare possunt, cum videamus
quotidie novos homines, non modo virtute, sed multis saepe vitiis praeditos, ad
magnos honores a^que imperia perduci Ita deo placitum est, ut nos nostr^
ejusmodi bona, hoc non pluris faciamvs quo magis communia eadem omn bus and
ne^mini perpetua esse videmus. Polydor Virgil pro emio lib 9. p 149.
for that were to make God mercenary to men, and to take off the gratuity of
his good pleasure, which makes every good in us what it is; or to persuade any
to believe that God cannot out of prerogative bless a bad or blast a good man
and family, without impeachment of his justice, or violation of his mercy. No
such thing intend I to ^ix upon the basis of my discourse; for that I know God
may do with men and things as he pleases, and yet reserve the glory and luster
of his Attributes; nor ought men to startle at the variousness of his
administrations, who (for reasons best known to himself, and admirable and
adorable by us) suffers sometimes just men to perish in their uprightness, and
not fearers of God to be exalted. All that I drive at is, to promote Virtue,
and deter from Vice, by those cogent arguments of the one, for the most part in
this world rewarded, and the other for the most part in this world sorely
judged; the one stabilitive, the other enervative, of Families.

SECT. V.
Of Piety the first Virtue in Rise of Men and Families, what it is, and how
evidenced.
THe first and main advance and prop of Families is Piety to God, which as it
consists in a conformity to him in all those imitables, wherein a likeness to
him is attainable, such as are Goodness and Charity of usefulness, easiness to
give and forgive, patience notwithstanding provocation, with all such other
branches as are reduceable under these. So is it seen in those restraints which
a man puts upon himself for Gods sake, and to null the power of temptation
diversive from God, to the opposites of, and the contrarients to God in him.
Hence are those curbings, that holy and effectual self-denial sets upon it
self, while the man, in whom it vigorously is, disowns his lawless heart, his
straying foot, his wandering eye, his subtle head, his fortunate acquisitions
in the most fawning and accumulate consequences and representation of them,
(...). Idem lib. 4. c 6.
to keep the testimony of a good conscience toward God, which consists not
only in the practice of that worldly Philosophy which Epictetus says is the
effect of refined nature, to consider what we want of the mastery of passions,
what of the minds tranquillity; what we are, and how we come up to the decree of
our being; and wherein our neglect ministers to our own improsperity; but in
giving ones self up to God, (...) lib. 3. c. 26
to be what he will, and will not have us be. This is to be truly godly, to
take God for our pattern, and to resolve our thoughts, words, actions to him as
into their Principle and Center of authentication and excellency, which when a
man sets his heart to effect in himself, God blesses with success above
measure, and with comsorts not to be valued; and that not only in the minds
calmness and in the faith of a future reward, but in the serenato of his
outward condition; so was it to Abraham, who for entertaining Gods command with
obedience, and following him to the abjuration of his native Country, and
believing his promise above and beyond hope procured the promise that God would
be his exceeding great reward; that in blessing he would bless him, Genesis 15. 1
multiply his posterity as the Stars of Heaven, and the Sands upon the Sea
shore; the extent of which reached not only to his natural seed, but to his
seed in succession of Faith in and reliance upon The to be revealed Salvation.
Nor can piety have less entailed on it, then perpetuation, because St. Paul,
from the Spirit of God, asserts it to have the promise of this life, 1 Timothy 4.
v. 8.
as well as of that which is to come; which though it be not in the summity of
its degree fulfilled ever to pious men (For whose condition affluence is not
ever good, nor by God allowed convenient, but often and in great proportions
the contrary. Yet is in such kinds, ways, and methods indulged to them, as
will comport with their present piety, and their future clarity; and that
because piety is an honor done to God, in preferring him as the best good, and
declining everything contrary to him, as evil inconsistent with him; and God
says, 1 Samuel 2. 30.
Them that honor me I will honor, and they that despise me shall be lightly
esteemed. Lev. ^0. 7.
Piety is an imitation of God, 1 Pet. 1. 16.
It Is to he holy as he is holy; Ioh. 1. 5.
Piety is a resignation of our selves and our affairs to Heb. 13. 5.
God; and that is attended with his never leaving nor forsaking his confidents;
so just is God to his word, so royal is God to his waiters on him, that they
who take him for their pattern to walk by, are sure to have him their reward to
live with; and that not only in the reversion of eternity, the object of their
faith, Quid est piet as nisi voluntas grata in parents? qui sunt boni cives?
qui belli qui domi de patria been merentes, nisi qui patriae beneficio
meminerunt: qui Sancti, qui religionem colentes? nisi qui meritam diis
immortalibus gratiam jus^is honoribus and memori mente persolvunt. Cicero Orat.
pro Cnejo Plaucio.
but in the earnest of this worlds accommodation convenient to their sanctified
and moderated sense; which makes me commend highly those parents who are not so
over solicitous to cark and prog wealth and worldly allies, which often are
seeming rather then real stores to Families, as to train them up in the fear of
God, and to dispose of them in Callings consistent with Religion, and then to
match them with such as are religious, and heartily revere God; For if to make
God ones aim, and to devote a Family to him, be to bespeak and in a sort lay a
rightful claim to his Patronage, and to the shelter and succor of his Wisdom,
Power, Goodness, in which none can miscarry, as appeared in the Midwives of
Egypt, who, notwithstanding the favor and terror of Pharaoh, would not
injure the births of the Israelites, but by doing their duties, as in the
sight, and according to the fear, of God, are said to be dealt with well, Exodus
1. 20. and that in Gods reward of security upon them; for v. 21. it is said,
And it came to pass, because the Midwives feared the Lord, that he made them
houses; that is, he not only secured them against Pharaohs displeasure, but
enlarged the number and wealth of their posterity. Sobolem eorum auxit quod
Haebrei soboli pepercissens. Grot. ex Ambros. in loc. Clarius in loc. Fecerat
eos domas sacerdotii scilicet and regni. Va^ab. in loc.
For, though I cannot assent to the Hebrews thoughts, that God directed the
Israelites to build them strong houses against the danger of Pharaohs fury. Nor
that this building them houses concerned their Families advance to the
Priesthood and Kingdom; yet I do humbly conceive, that God mightily enriched
them and their Families, in a temporal regard; Locupletaverit eos magnit
divitiis inter Egyptios and fecerit eos principla vel capita magnarum domorum
inde nascentium Stus. Greg. in lo^ Tostatus in loc.
which is, I think, the sense of the words: Though I know Reverend Calvin, and
others of great judgment, in regard of the Masculine Pronoune refer it to the
Israelites, propagated by the feeble Instrumentality of the Midwives, whose
judgment (though I in most cases submit to, yet from it in this, crave leave to
depart.) I say, if this fruit of piety, perpetuation of Families, be from this,
and such like presidents, evincible, then those persons and families that most
sincerely and constantly adhere to God, and are owned by him as such, are most
likely and sure to succeed in their wise, humble and godly undertakings, and
not only to have in their own hearts' and to give to others, excellent
comforts: as did the deathbed of the Earl of Essex, Deputy of Ireland,
Holingshed. p. 1^ 65.
tempore Eliz. to the then Archbishop of Dublin, who profes^ed that his
deathbed speeches should serve him for Sermons so long as he lived; but to
obtain temporal good things to them and their heirs after them. The assurance
of this in such times and proportions as God knows best, made Abraham so
precisely train up his children and family in the fear of God, and God give so
full a testimony of it, in those words, Genesis 18. v. 19. I know Abraham, that he
will teach his children and family to fear me. Yea, the expectation and
confidence of this wrought David, to that instruction of his Son, 1 Chro. 28.
9. And thou Solomon my Son, know the God of thy fathers, and serve him with an
uright heart, that ye may possess this good Land, and leave it for an
inheritance ^or your children after you for ever, V. 8.

I know this is vulgar Divinity to the high-minded World, and dull untaking
reason to the profane and deriding wits of it, who account Holiness the only
way to bigotry; and declare serious resolution to live to, and as, God,
excerebrated Enthusiasm, and Phanatiqueness; they themselves being, as Petrarch
that gallant Gentleman complains of the profane Gallants of his age, Ad ^il
aliud animosi quam ad luxuriae studium virtutisque odium, nihil autem insolite
est, si virtutis exempla virtutis hostibus sunt molesta. Lib. 2. de vita
solitar. Sect. 4. c. 6.
Remarkable for nothing but proficiency in Luxury, and Enmity to Virtue; and
thereupon not to be accounted as other then haters of, and opposites to every
divine man and thing. I say, though to these, religious severitie against sin,
and in zeal to goodness, be foolishness and loss of time: yet if any thing be a
support against decay, a luster in balance to blemish, a cordial against
desperitings, a security in evil times, a winner upon enemies, a confirmation
of friends; yea, above all, a Command as it were upon Heaven: this is that very
Sovereign darling which is the subject of Gods care and power, both which
cooperate to its preservation: This is that which makes a man's enemies be at
peace with him. Pro. 16. 7. and, his God to speak peace to him, Psalm. 85. 8.
and ordain peace for him, Isa. 26. 12. make him enter into peace, Isai. 57. 2.
live in assured peace, Jer. 14. 13. and die in peace, Jer. 24. 5. This is that
which makes the cup run over, Psalm 23. 5. whatsoever is taken in hand to
prosper, Psalm 1. 3. This is that which abandons fear in the midst of the
valley of the shadow of death, Psalm 23. 4. And this is that in whose right
hand is length of days, and in whose left hand are riches and honor, Prove. 3.
16. And if this Piety be, how beautiful is it, and how desirable ought it to
be, beyond every competitor with it? and how characteristical is it of it self
from all spurious pretenders to it? which therefore are ineffectual to its
ends, because adulterate and of false composition: For piety that is thus
Munificent and subsidiary to Men and Families, is such by its conjunction with
God, and its benediction from God. It Is that voice which God calls for, Let me
hear thy voice, In specie autem fictae simulationis, sicut reliquae virtutes
ita pietas inesse non potest, cum qua simule^ sanctitatem and religionem tolli
necesse est,
for it is sweet, Cant. 2. 14. It Is that sweet savor that is grateful to him,
Phil. 4. 18. It Is a potent charm, (with reverence I write) which has a pleasing
restraint on him, Deuteronomy. 9. 14. It Is that without which there is no peace, Isa.
57. 21. It Is that with which there is no want; Quibus sublatis, perturbatio
vitae sequitur and magna consusio. Cicero lib. de nature. deorum.
for to such as have it, The Lord is a Sun and a shield, he will give grace and
glory, and no good thing will he withhold from them that love him, Psalm. 84.
11. And is not this Piety to be valued? are Riches Power, Parts, Beauty,
Friends, comparable to it? which, how useful soever they are, and how
creditable soever they appear, are only termers to the worlds casualty and ebb
and flow, as the vicissitudes of it do, when the fear of God endures for ever
in its rule and reward, and thereby deserves a name or esteem above all names.
Yea if piety be sincere and Scriptural, it is such a representation of God, as
dazzles all mortals eyes, and silences all mortal detraction; such it is, as
extorts from enemies the acknowledgement that God is in it of a truth; and thus
the Spirit of glory resting on it, the obstinacy of man must become suffragan
to the testimony of its superexcellency; For if the glory of God be that
fixedness of his to his purposes, and the indefeatibleness of his creatures
expectations; then is Piety, which is the imitation of God in what he is
imitable: Not besides that proportion of glory it is capable of, even for its
conjunction to, and sameness with, him. And thus it is accounted by me in
Founders, or Continuers of Families, a great virtue; yea the greatest of
virtues, and that which gives acceptance to all the rest.

SECT. VI.
Of Justice the second Virtue and Means of raising Men and Families, with
Examples out of Sacred and Civil Story.
NExt unto it, I account Justice, and Civil honesty of Conversation and dealing
a great strengthening to the Rise of a Family: For Justice is the basis of Gods
Throne, Psalm 79. v. 14. and an Attribute essential to him, above all created
beings, which are so far only Just, as they are partakers of his original
Justice, which he has so implanted on, Omnium honestarum rerum semina animi
gerunt quae admonitione excitantur, non aliter quam scintilla flaiu levi
adjuta, ignem suam explicat. Senec. Ep. 94.
and riveted into, the soul and mind of man, that thence to avell it, or there
to usurp upon it, is a rape upon, and an insolence against the Modesty and
Majesty of it. Hence is it that the obligation and tincture of this virtue is
generally admitted by all mankind, as the principle of all natural Religion,
and moral converse; because it fortifies a man against all seidges of dismay,
and terrors of accidents; and composes him to set his soul upon the duty of
its design and being, Ecce spectaculum dignum ad quod respiciat intentus operi
suo Deus, Ecce, par deo dignum, vir for^is cum ^ala fortuna compositus. Senec.
lib. de Providentia.
to serve his Maker, and serve his age and relations: which perhaps may be
something of the reason why crosses and misfortunes befall the best men in
this world, God delighting to see the Virtues of his Hectors tried in these
combats, and the truth of their Metal hammered on so hard an Anvil, gains the
greater content to himself, and glory from others, by this their stability,
which is not only explorative of his bounty to them, but exemplary to others,
whose courage and resolution is thereby exerted and confirmed. Which Solomon
rightly. considering, appends a great Encomium to it in the benediction he
promulges upon it, when in his own experience of the providence of God, he
testifies to the world, That the curse of the Lord is in the house of the
wicked, but he blesses the habitation of the Just, Pro. 3. 33. And the
Psalmist, Psalm. 7. 9. O let the wickedness of the wicked come to an end, but
establish thou the Just. To which if we add that of the 37 Psalm, v. 25. I
have been young, and now am old, yet have I not seen the righteous forsaken,
nor his seed begging bread; there is enough to conclude with the wise man,
Blessings are upon the head of the just, but violence covers the mouth of the
wicked, Prove. 10. v. 6. For however it may fall out, that just men sometimes
suffer in common evils, and are boaren down by public oppressions, not only
as, but more remarkably beyond, violent and perverse men; and that to punish
some notable failing in them visible to Gods eye, though latent from men, and
to possess them that all things many times fall alike here to good and bad;
this World being neither the Heaven of the one, nor the Hell of the other, but
so checquered with black and white veins, and with lardings of fat and lean
occurrences, that there may be thought, in the contingents of it, no ground of
concluding good or evil by what are the returns of them, we seeing here many
impious men live in honor, and die in peace, while men more excellent then
they are living unfortunate, and violently dealt with in their deaths. As were
the two Transfigured Chiefs, who on the mount of Majesty appeared in their
respective ages, trangsfigured, K. Henry the Sixth: and the never to be
forgotten, but everlastingly to be admired and bemoaned, Our late gracious Lord
and Master, Sir Henry Wottens Character. p. 141.
King Charles the First, the Martyr, who was stiff in Good, and stout in great
resolutions. Though I say, these Princes, on whom no designed evil, acted by
them, can be honestly charged, were villanously dealt with; and by the
prevalence of usurpation, destroyed; yet is it mostly otherwise, the Just in
their persons and posterities being se^undated and kept by his power to their
perfect day of discovery and glory, (...). Bas^l* Seleviae. Orat. 5. p. 27.
(...) Naz Orat. 27.
Gods justice becoming to their justice a Buckler of defense as well as a
bucket of store to them and theirs, to whom it has conveyed waters of relief
and faecundation. This was remarkably made good to Noah a very just man, whom
because God saw, truly religious in his generation, Genesis 7. 1. when he
overwhelmed all the world, he preserved him by an Ark on the Waters, and with
him secured his relations, and in them the seed of succession, (...) as the
Fathers words are; and all this as a reward of distinction betwixt righteous He
and violent sanguine They, who were Giants in the Earth, Idem Orat. ^0.
and who provoked God by the Inundation of their truculency and oppression. Nor
rests it only upon this president, that justice is the way to honor and
establishment, but the promises of God, and the assurances of prophetique Men,
who accepted it as a matter of faith, and deliver it as such to us confirm the
truth of it. King David spends the 37 Psalm in enumerations of felicity to just
and good men, Verse. 3. Trust in the Lord and do good, and verily thou shall be
fed. V. 9. Those that wait upon the Lord shall inherit the Earth. V. 12. The
wicked plotteth against the just. V. 13. The Lord shall laugh at him. For he
knows that his day is coming. V. 17. The arms of the wicked shall be broken,
but the Lord upholdeth the righteous, V. 18. The Lord knows the days of the
upright, and their inheritance shall be for ever. Such flowers of comfort are
disperced thoroughout this Psalm; yea, thoroughout the Scripture, that the
acceptance of this grace with God is mightily thence arguable. In one
Scripture we read of the path of the just, cleared out to him, and his
proficiency in it, Prove. 4. 18. In another, the head of the just blessed, Prove.
10. 6. and his memory blessed, verse. 7. The just delivered from trouble, Prove.
12. 13. no evil happen to him, verse. 21. The wealth of the sinner laid up for
him, c. 13. v. 22. yea, his restitution to rectitude certain, c. 24. v. 16. So
much concerned is God for this just man, that as his Tongue is as choice
Silver, c. 10. v. 20. and his mouth brings forth wisdom, v. 31. as it is a
joy to him to do judgment c. 21. v. 15. So God does weigh the paths of the
just, Isa. 26. 7. and is to them a just God, and a Savior, Isai. 45. 27. O
this Justice is a rare Jewel, for it is not only the Rudder that steers humane
actions to a happy conclusion, dum rem suum, In Plato's Amaiores.
rem familiarem, rempublicam administrat, as Marcilius Ficinus notes: but also
makes the Haver, in the darkest night of danger, and in the dismallest age of
dishonesty, to be transparent and feared. (...). Cebes in Tabula p. 42. edit.
Wolphii. (...). Philosoph. lib. 5. de Morib. c. 5.
St. Chrysostom calls it, the chief Philosophy of the soul, and the Complement
of all the Will of God: Cebes the Theban ranks it with those (...), which he
places (...), as being led by Fortitude ushers Integrity, Temperance, Modesty,
Liberality, Clemency, all Virtues; by reason of which this Cardinal virtue is
of so useful import to the soul, that it serves for all purposes of avail to
it, as a Rudder to steer, an Anchor to hold, Sails to carry, Merchandise to
fraught, Port to secure, Market to vent it to ends of advantage: For as it
keeps one eye at home, and lessons a man, so to be good to others, as he prove
not evil to himself; so does it call him to be good to himself so, and so, only
as consists with the good of others. Therefore Justice I account a virtue of
distribution not impropriation, which is so operative that it ceases its
private concern, when Charity and Piety challenges and conjures it to a
manifestation of greater latitude. This makes a man not so much consult the
Willows prudence, as the Oaks fixedness, Scis quemdicam bonum, perfectum,
absolut^m quem malum sacere nulla vis nulla necessitas possi^^ hunc in te
prospicio si perseveraveris and incu^ueris and id egeris ut omnia facta
dictaque ^ua inter se congruant, and respondeant sibi and una forma percussa
sint. Sene^. Ep. 34.
and to not so settle his words and actions to a symmetry with men and times in
their riddle and skepticism of humors, as to bring his mind and actions into a
congruity of mould and a correspondency with virtue; the disproportion to which
argue them differently impressed, and not equally allied to truth, which in the
concord of them is nobliest defined, as Seneca's observation is: For this, in a
radiancy, as the morning light; and in a solidity, as the Center of the Earth,
was Job in the East famous, No man like him in the East, a perfect and an
upright man: one that fears God, and escheweth evil; Gods own certiorari of
him, chap. 1. v. 8.

And such another was Cato Vticensis in the West, Homo virtuti simillimus and
per omnia ingenio d^is qu^m hominibus propior, qui nunquam recte secit* ^t
facere v^deretur, sed quod aliter f^cere non poterat, cuique id solum visum est
rationem h^ bear, quod ^iberet justi^iam omnibushumanis viti^s immuni^, semper
fortuna^ in sut po^estate ha^uit. Paterrul. lib ^. p. 37.
whom Paterculus writes to be the very Image of all Virtue, in Wit liker Gods
then Men; who did nothing virtuously because he would have the praise of doing
well, but because he was so good, that he could not do other then good; to whom
the juster any thing was, the more was he a friend to it: for justice was
natural to him, and so exempted him from the miseries that attend injury; that
men concluded by the happiness he had, that God had conveyed to him the
arbitration of his own felicity. Thus Paterculus.

Upon which ground I cannot but esteem Haec est indubitata animi nobilitas quae
moribus probatur ornata. Theodoricus Rex Theobaldo ^p. 41. var. lib. 5. Cassiod.
Justice in the nature of any man such a deep tincture of Nobility, as nothing
else can equally ingraine the mind with; such a dos of general and genorous
cordiality, as no distemper can evirruate, or defeat in its seasonable
operation. For Justice being in the Philosophers word, (...), not the good of
the havers private self only, but of others chiefly he corresponds with, Lib.
5. de Moribus. c. 10.
evidences it self to all those persons and cases in which men apply themselves
unto it. Hence it makes the Zelot just to his profession, the Valiant man just
to his party, the Husband and Wife just to their ^roth, the Parent and Child
just in their exchanges of love and duty, the Prince and his Subjects just in
the entercourses of Protection and Subjection; the Scholar just to his Study,
the Tradesman just to his Creditors, the Husbandman just to his Lands, in
allowing them proper seasons and tillage. In sum, this is the not only
varnish and perewig that sets out men, V^us rectae rationit maxim apparet in
Iustitia, and usus indebitus in vitiis oppositis justi^iae. Aquinas Sam. 1. 2.
q 55. art 8.
and actions to an amiable sparkishness; but it is the very heart and soul of
all the Noble actions of life, without which man* (who is under God the King of
all creatures, and should follow the example of God Almighty his chief, who is
perfect Justice;) is not only not man, but even beneath the beast that
perishes: to whom as the Holy Ghost attributes Wisdom and Prudence, Lege
Bochartum part 2. Hierozoon. c. 17. p. ^56. Homines deprimit infra bestias
stupidissimas Id. part 1. lib. 2. c. 41. p. 409. Isa. 1. 3.
as to the sensual preservation of himself and his kind; so to the beast does
he ascribe justice of gratitude to the care and kindness of his keeper, The Ox
knows his owner, and the Ass his Masters scrib; that is acknowledges his
Feeder, and is observant of him. Hence it comes to pass, that as Justice is the
pale and boundary of right and wrong, Danda opera est, ne quid contra ae
quitatem contendas, ne quid per injuriam. Fundamentum enim perpetuae
commendatioois and fam^ est justitia, sin qua nihil potest esse laudabile. Cic.
lib. 2. de offic.
so to remove Justice is to lay all distinctions level, and to make a
Gallymaufry of order and beauty: Take away justice and lust will become law,
and power violence; friendship will transide into treachery, and neighborhood
lanch out into preying; the Table will become a snare, and the house a nest of
enmity. But when men live and act in reference to justice, they doubly
advantage mankind, both by the good Rules they prescribe, and the Noble virtues
they practice.

And hereupon justice, when other virtue are, in some sense, limited to
particularities, as Valor to Soldiers, Eloquence to Advocates, nimbleness of
peception to Statesmen: when diligence is proper to Tradesmen, Humility to
Servants, and Bounty to Greatness. Iustitia legalis move per imperium ad su^m
finem omnes alias virtutes morales S. Aquin 22. q. 58. art. 6.
This Justice approves it self the Catholic Ornament: Nor is any man to be
truly accounted good and happy, who is not grave and just, which because
Alexander was not in that inexcusable Homicide of Calisthenes, the blot of
cruel and sensual indelibly lies upon him, and Seneca is his accuser, Hoc est
Alexandri crinem aeternum quod nulla virtus nulla bellorum faelicita^ redimet
quod Calisthenem ^ccidit. Nature. Quaest. lib. 6. c. 23.
as dishonouring his conquests by the irregularity of that. And though Harold
the once usurper coming in by ill means, did many excellent things (destroyed
bad, enacted good Laws, protected the Church, honored Churchmen, punished
transgressors, defended the rights of all government, Regno potitus statim
caepit leges in quas destruere, etc. Knighton lib. 1. de Eventib. Anglorum c.
16.
which was Princelily done) yet with his Government he lost his honor, for
Knighton says, He came in by sin, and went out by shame. Yea, so great a
hater is God of iniquity, and so ill stewards are men guilty of it, for their
own peace and prosperity, that they seldom, that are immerged in it, avoid the
ruin of it: Nor among all the Romans were there many, or any almost, that
escaped cruel death, or banishment, who were causal of the deaths and
diminutions of their virtuous Countrymen: or of others whom, in their
Conquests they sinfully and against the law of Charity and Arms, trucidated.
This Petrus Blesensis temp. H. 2. observed, (...) 4. ^. Episcopo (...)
not without evident truth of story. Nor do I believe any Family in its descent
from the greatness of an Ancestor* who was or is unjust, can or will long
thrive, unless it be for a punishment to something else in the age of its
contemporariness; or to manifest some other pleasure of God, to which the
present prosperity of such a race, subservs. Nor is there cause to fear the
blessing of God upon Issue from a pious and charitable Parent. For though, as
before is noted, his branches may for a while, and in some particular, wither:
yet the root shall retain its life, and inform some seeming obscure Twigs to
after eminency; (...) specioso^cognomine sed in ve^a Iustitia regi^ regnique
(...) sita est Petrarcha lib. 1. de re^^ed. (...). Fortunae dialog 9^.
He has dispersed abroad, he has given to the poor, his righteousness remains
for ever, his horn shall be exalted with honor. Psalm 112. v. 9. And when
Eliphaz, in Job 4. 7. said, Remember I pray thee, who ever perished being
Innocent; or where were the righteous cut off? Does he not mind us that Justice
is a great help to ascent and permanence in Greatness, and that Families are
seldom long Generous or Noble that are raised by Injury; nor are men just from
what they say, but in what they do. Sumpsisti nomen, ex me^itis custodi ut
semper laeteris veritate vocabuli Cas^iod. var. lib. 8. c. 18.
Which Alatharick the Gothish King applied to Faelix, whom he minded to be as
he was named, and not to content himself to be styled that which in grace of
action he deserved not.

SECT. VII.
Wherein Frugality is asserted to be a Rise to Men and Families: Together with
the true adjustment of Frugality.
TO the two former there is to be added Frugality, a great advance to Families.
For though to live high and splendid, make a noise, filling the sails of a
Family with the air of applause; yet the purchase of that flourish is so
chargable, exhaustive, and irreparable, that wise men decline it as the (...)
and sive through which the increase of a Family dreyns and passes. Which Seneca
remarkably seconds, when he writes thus: What is more vain and sensual then
costly diet, Quid est caena sumptuosa flagitius, and equestrem censum
consumente? Quid tam dig. number cansoria nota, si quis ut* isti Gareones
loquuntur sibi haec and genio suo praestet. Epist. 95.
and profuse drinking, what more wastfull to Knightly wealth, then the luxury
of long and costly Entertainments? what is more worthy the Magistrates
inspection, then the prodigality of deboshees, that study nothing but to pamper
their bodies, and prostitute Virtue by a sinful excess. Thus he. And not
without cause and reason: for Rome was grown so profuse, that Vice disinherited
Patricians, and corrupted Matrons; which apologized for the Doctrine of
Frugality, as the stop to that carrere, and the check to that Gangrene. For
indeed great is the rake, and bottomless the mine of timely and discreet
Frugality: It Fills the purse, moderates the port, prepares for posterity,
supplies relations, answers charity, is obliged servilely to none, but subsists
upon Gods blessing, and its own lawful providence; lawful, I say, For it
resolves not to be rich, by making haste, in Solomon's sense: P^ov. ^8. 20.
that is, by making more haste then good speed; nor by denying it self lawful
accommodations; or by hoarding up what is better ungotten, then had; for such,
not frugality, but covetousness, would be like The acquirents of Sacrilege, a
curse to its saver; which God punishes in his penal blast, and in the vain and
praiseless dispersion of a prodigal heir, whose Fork will cast abroad all the
Come to mee's of his Rake, and send the Fruits of the short measure, the
deceitful balance, Diseamus membris nostris inniti cultum victumque non ad
nova exempla componere sed ut majorum suadent mores. Senec. lib. de Tranquil.
animi.
and of the evil covetise of the Achans and Iudasses of the world, into the
Lethe and dead sea of wast and inappearance: Whereas Frugality as it consists
in a convenient supply and management of things, in a mediocrity equally
distant from excess: So it keeps us in a composure of mind, not cast down with
our condition present, or raised by what may in our future state be more
public and notorious.

Thus Livius Drusus may be thought as a wel-poysed Roman to live, who would
have his house pervious, that his actions in it might be seen conform to the
rule of a serious and wel-directed man, whose Furniture, Diet, Clothes,
Equipage, were all such as his Fortune would bear, his degree answer, and his
reputation not be impeached by. And according to this, who ever enjoyes
himself, will find himself the better Christian, the wiser Man, and the
providenter Parent. I confess to the great spirits, and little experience of
Youth this is an unwelcome prescript; a degenerous abatement, they count every
thing of contraction, though it be a Pandora to afrer plenty; but yet it is
that which years and full sight into the world* disciplines men in; and the
further degree they take in this Liberal Science of life, the more capable are
they to be good subjects, good Fathers, good Masters, good Common-wealths-men:
For Vice is expensive and wasting, Virtue only is thrifty and chargless: and
if men do but once taste the sweetness of wel-tempered thrift, they will find
it befriend them with all the coveniences of life; and that without diminution
of credit, or fortune; for wisdom being the understanding of arts, in order to
the understanding of men by and beyond them; Frugality, which is the wisdom of
living without excess, in any Inordinacy, must be a notable means to Emineny,
as it veinges upon self-mastery and practical wisdom.

I am no Orator for narrow minds or penurious living; I thank God I have both a
spirit above the one, and have ever had the mercy to be exempt from the
necessity of the other, a Free spirit and a Free port suit well, and nothing
beneath it becomes Noble men, and Gentlemen; where God gives them fortuns to
their degree, credit and wisdom to do what is honest, seemly, and prudent; but
that which I defend in Patronage to the fortune and generosity of a Family, is
wisdom of practice to live within bounds, that is, to live virtuously. Without
voluntary poverty, Non potest sticdium salutare fieri sine ^rugalitate, cum
srugalitas paupertas voluntaria est: Inter exerpta^ libris Senec^^.
and the care of bounding a man's self, no Virtue (says Seneca) can be secured:
For, if men gratify themselves to the utmost of their extravagant fancy, the
progeny of that lubricity will be eradication of Fame first, then of friends,
and suddenly after of fortune: For no man can be truly worthy, who contemns
health, reputation, counsel, preservation, to satiate the rude importunity of a
delicate palate, a wanton eye, an extravagant brain, a credulous humor, and a
costly levity: all which, as so many eager hounds, gnaw upon the surprised
carcass of an overdriven prodigal, whose transition of the modest bounds of
virtue, renders him a prey to the extorting Usurer, the cunning Broker, the
harpy Cook, the cozening Tailor, the deluding Steward, the fawning Tenant, the
crafty Devil; till at last he become Lord and Master of nothing but a prison,
and be denied pity when in himself he is helpless. Whereas Frugality so
directs to live, in all the severalties of conversation, as to conform present
enjoyments to future equality, and to prosperity not only personal but
Gentilical; and to break in upon no advantage in hand, that leaves its dregs
doleful to succession; which, from the wound and mortification of it, first
droop, then wither, and at last fall off from their roo^ and branch.

The inconsideration of which (...) or wise foresight, in the practical use of
it, is one of the main, and to us known reasons of the unprovision that in many
the great Families of England makes Daughters and younger Sons unhappy; because
Noblemen and Gentlemen, swollen big with the flattery of a great Fortune, ^
free hous-keeping, a Noble retinue, ful^ and chargeable recreations, and often
with notable sucking vices, are so beleagured and overpowred with multitude of
expenses, that they breeding their children in proportion to, and in love of
these their treacherous diversions, leave the^ when they die little but
idleness, tenuity of fortune, Ignorance, Immorality, by reason of which they
come to shame, sorrow, unprofitableness to their family and the Nation; which,
were it timelily considered, and their expenses moderated in such excrecencies
as their prudences may abate, without impeachment of honor, and wast of
interest in their Countries; there might be such supply given to their
childrens marriage, or other dispose, as would render them independent on their
elder brother, and able to live like their fathers children. So true is that of
expense, which Xenophon says of War, small Forces well managed do great
feats, when bodies more vage miscarry. The knack of which some great men having
and holding, expatiate their Families much, and make their children in their
transplantation considerable; Optimus pecuniae modus est qui nec in paupertatem
cadit, nec procul a paupertate discedit, placebit autem haec nobis mensura, si
prius parsimonia placuerit sinequa nec ullae opes sufficient nec ulla non satis
patent. Senec. lib. de Tranq. c. 9.
nor have I ever in my experience seen so great estates raised by what has been
gotten, as by what has been saved. For Parsimony, says Seneca, is that which
makes a little, enough, and enough plenty; nor can he want content in whatever
he has, that makes what ever he has the bound of his desire and expense. For
whosoever does not this, casts all he has* and himself, into the bottomless
sea, the desires of man being vaster then are to be satisfied by the
accressions of life, He is the only wise man who lives at home, and des^res
moderate and attainable things; and them had, uses in measure as is worthy
their possession, and useful for others to do good to whom they are bestowed.
Which lesson, though it be difficult for men of high spirits to learn, Quicquid
cupiditati contigit penitus hauritur and conditur, nec interest quantum in id
quod inexplebile est congeras, unus est sapiens cujus omnia sunt, nex ex
di^^icili tuenda lib. 7. de Benef. c. 2.
and that which they often set themselves against; yet is it so much prudent
in, and beneficial to them to know and practice, that it enhanses the luster
and accommodation of their whole life, in the influence and sequel of it: nor
does any man neglect the season of it, but he that is permitted by God to be
careless, that he may be miserable.

SECT. VIII.
Directs to Callings of employment and income, as a great means to Aggrandize
and Felicifie Men and Families.
FOurthly, Callings of employment and income are great Rises and Enlargements
to a Family. For, since the mind of Man must be in Action, and the body of Man
(sustained by the labor of his life;) and his posterity be provided for, out
of the fruits of it, Callings of gain and advantage are preferrable before
either sordid ease, or unprofitable toil: For as to a virtuous and wel-poysed
mind, that understands it self created for public good, honest labor is a
delight, and diligence in it a recreation; Quis autem vir modo and erectus ad
honesta, non est laboris appe^ens justi and ad officia c^m periculo promptus?
Cut non Industrioso otium paena est. Senec. lib. de Providentia.
so to none but to stupid and besotted ones, is idleness a satisfaction; or
nugatory and returnless employment, their choice; I know there is an
unhappiness on some men, that be they never so diligent and knowing, yea, and
that in a calling of compensation and gain; yet they reap no crop, receive no
encouragement from it, but are put off with the loss of time, and the cross of
beggary; yea, amongst the learned, I have observed some that have thriven in
purse and preferment by talks and visits, (by cringings and flattery, and the
light Fopperies of trifling Learning: E^ce Romanos quoque invasit studium
inane, supervacua discendi. lib de ^revit. vitae c. 14.
Which Seneca calls, the vain study of useless things, which was the scab of
the Greeks, and grew the Plague Sore of the Romans;) when the serious and sober
Clerk, who plods upon the choice parts of learning, and is contributive in his
inquisition of good to his own and after times, gets nothing but censure and
scorn, and arrives at no preferment, but to be admired for his diligence, and
pitied for his imprudence. This has been and daily is seen, the unhappiness of
some Worthies whom God keeps low, that they may by their indiversion hatch the
eggs of their discovery, and publish their excellent endowments; but yet for
all this, Callings are to many, and the most, supportive: and the failer
thereof is rather the circumvention of an overruling power, and a destiny of
diminution to a few particulars, then the mischance and discouragement of all;
and hence comes it to pass, that as the prudence of man puts him upon choice
of a Calling, wherein to be busied, so is that conduct signal in the choice of
a Calling, of reputation and fortunary advantage; to promote which, it closes
with Sciences, Trades and businesses that are of good report, full practice,
gainful import; by which the industry of man is not only engaged but
encouraged to the utmost activity of it; which, delighted in, arrives men, if
not at Honor and Riches, yet at that condition of subsistence, which is free
from tempting want or servile dependence.

I know there is great difference in Callings, according to the subject matter
of them* and the persons engaged in them; and as generous Callings do not well
become persons of low degree, so common ones not Sons of good birth. Yet since
God gives not man his own choice, but rules him by his occult pleasure to such
a station and site of life as conduces most to his glory, and men's good; No man
must think himself too great for his employment, or too good to be obliged by
the rules of it: for as God humbles generous births, Nobis quidem militandum
est, and quidem genere militiae quo nunquam quies, nunquam ocium datur* Ep. 51.
Senec.
by the low conditions of their after life, They being exposed to those sorrows
and sadnesses which are allowed no relaxation, or subterfuge; so he advances
others by birth beggars, to be in quality Princes and Princes fellows; and
though he put them upon labor of obscurity for a time, yet when they are fit
to be Masters of their Arts, and Professors in their Callings, he ministers
occasion to their publication and rise. By which miracle of goodness
preternatural to the expectation, and in a sort impossible to the apprehension,
of reason; not only the seemingly dead grandeur of some Families are raised to
being and bravery, but a new creation of greatness is in them and their
descendants, who in their ancestry were worms and no men, the lowest of the
people and inconsiderable.

Nor do these redemptions of wasted honor, or obscure birth, ever become the
blessings of Families, but by the Midwifery of some one destinated by God to be
thus Orient in them, and by occasion of Callings of Law, Learning, Trade,
War, resolvedly entered upon, honestly continued in, and prosperously come off
from, (for courses of disorder and Immorality, in which men rather study
themselves, then advance the public, and value more their own trimness and
ease, then the honor and weal of their Family. Quis est is^orum qui non malit
Rempub turbari quam comam suam* qui non sollicitior sit de ^^pitis sui decore
quam de salute qui non comptior esse malit quam honestior Senec. de Provid. cap
12.
Which Seneca charged upon some degenerate Romans,) procure men not only no
splendor or addition, but the contrary, disrepute and tenuity. And therefore
let not any man, how well born and bred soever, disparage Callings and honest
and worthy men in them, for they have ever been, and further I trust will be,
not only steps and ascents of meanness into greatness; but revivals of decayed
greatness unto its pristine vigor: Non Ganus sed Genius.
Nor would the great men of England know how to dispose of their younger
children, or their Families expatiate so, and by such allyances strengthen and
imbellish themselves, as now they do, were it not for learned Callings, and
employments of Trade, which in the income of them are equivalent to Lands and
Manors, and by exchange purchase them.

I am for Blood and Antiquity of Family, and am concerned in the Honor of them
as much as other Gentlemen of ancient extract are: But I will pay a continual
Honor to Universities, Inns of Courts, and Corporations, as Wombs no less
fruitful of rises and additions to Honor, then Country re^dencies, and the
great estates in them; yea in as much as the present Greatness and Wealth of
England owes much to Vocational Improvements, 5 Eliz. c. 7.
and the purchases of them, they shall have my Vote for their merit of the
Nation: For while others vapor on their Sejan horse of idle and vicious
unfortunateness, See my discourses of Arms and Armory; printed An. 1660.
these command the Trojan Horse, out of which march continually the Hellio's of
Learning, the Hectors of courage, the Critiques in Law, the Magistrates in
Towns, the Nobles and Gentry in Parliament and Country; The Nation is now
peopledmore then heretofore, and necessity giving aim to ingenuity, there are
now more courses of employment and entertainment taken and approved then
quondamly; and as all sumptuary Laws are vanished by the mixtures of gentry
with the plebs in Corporations, so ought all grudge between the Country and the
City Gentry to be castated; for that is the best Mine of Treasure in the Nation
which advances men from low beginnings, to eminent growths, and leaves their
posterity rich and respectfull after them. And what would have become of the
younger Brothers of England, after the cessation of the Civil Wars, by the
Union of York and Lancaster, in H. 7. of happy memory; and ofter the
dissolution of Religious houses by H. 8. In both which they were bestowed, and
from them supported; If Sciences, Trades and Callings of Civil request had not
taken them up, is easy to say, either reason of State must have turned them to
a foreign War, or they must have lived at home upon the prey either of their
elder brothers, or of the Country.

SECT. IX.
Discourses of good Company, and the great Addition and Benefit it is to free,
virtuous, and liberal growth of Men and Families.
FIfthly, To the former, add good Company un-vicious and ingenious. For since
Man is a sociable creature, whose time is best whiled away, and his cross fates
digested by the help of conversation, and the pleasancy of company; Company
that abounds with those conjunct virtues, which fertilize and adorn life, and
make men useful to, and honored by, the age they live in, is most to be
desired, obliged, and adhered to; Cum pla^idissimo and facillimo and minime
anxio morosoque vivendum est, Sumuntura conversantibus mores and ut quaedam in
contactos amorem vini traxit, ita animus mala sua proximit tradit. Senec. lib.
3. de ir^c. 8.
which the great Moralist observes to my hand, With the most sweet, tractable,
and least sour companion men wisely court to live, because their own manners
are formed from their associates; and such, either in good or evil, are men
usually as their mates are. So he. Indeed life without society, is but a motive
death, and a sensitive insenseness, like a watch which has all the hours of the
day inscribed on its Circumferential Table, and has a finger to direct to every
hour of Circulation; but no spring within to carry about its finger, according
to the directed order: So at a loss is man, without company, and those proper
and adapt to him, that the quickness of his parts being abated by absence of
the edge of their presence, example, and of that little ambition of rivalry
which is amongst them, while he studies, he loyters; while he gathers, he
loses; whiles he endeavors to be something, he proves indeed nothing, but
lumpish, stupid, inexpert, ignorant of men (the best Expositors and sweetners
of Books, and the second noble expense of time.

Which has caused the judicious in all ages and Nations, to fix their mayn
content and conversational felicity on Company, which is called between Man and
Woman, marriage; between Men and Men, friendship: for this is so strict and
severe a compago, and in-laying of souls, that it is not only hard to discern
any character of inunion, or to peep into the secrecy of their piecing, but
impossible to conclude them any thing else but a coanimation of diverse
numerical souls into one and the same single and undivided souliness: The
consideration of which choice and connection of Companions by the bond of
friendship, made Senca conclude, Detrahit amicitiae majestatem suam qui illam
parat ad bonos casus. Ep. 9.
that when it is calculated only for, and limited to prosperity, it has lost
its Majesty; and therefore is it the ob^ectament of life, because it is a
fellowship of souls in community of Fortunes, what ever they are. Which Seneca
describes fully. Friends, says he, be of coincident hearts, making the common
secrets of each other the Jewels of their retirement and punctuality, who prove
themselves precisely such as transcend the suspicion of imparity; Nihil aeque
oblectaverit animum quam dulcis and ^idelit amicitia, quantum bonum est ubi
preparata sunt pectora, in quae tuto secretum omne descendat, quorum
conscientiam minus quam tuam timeas horum fermo solicitu dine le^iat
con^silium, expediat hilaritas tristitiam dissipet, conspectus ipse delect^t.
lib. de Tranq. c. 7.
whose speech is a relief to solitude, and are in Counsels Oracles; in
presence, pleasures; in absence, grounds of confidence, that they shall meet
the same in kindness and cordiality that they were at parting. This is
Friendship, which provoked Synesius lib. de regno p. 11. Mea inquit in Antonium
majora merita sunt, illius in me beneficia notiora, itaque discrimine vestro me
sub^raham, and ero preda victoris. Paterculus lib. 2. p. 60. edit Lipsii.
Synesius to term this (...), This Friend as a man's own soul, (...) a Kingly
present and to cry out (...) etc. Who a pleasanter partaker of prosperity, and
a patienter consort in adversity, who more upright in praise, and more
affectionate in reproof then a friend; who like Asinius Pollio raised by Mark
Antony, and commanded by Caesar his enemy to attend him in the Actian War,
replied thus to him: Sir, My deserts of Antony are greater, and his bounty more
resented by, and obliging upon me, then to permit my so doing; Behold I submit
to your pleasure, and withdraw my self from all appearance, that you may not
fear me, who render my self a spoil to your victory. Thus he, in testimony to
the efficacy of friendship, which because it is most confirmed by daily
converse, frequent compotation, sameness of humor and end; therefore is
company so to be chosen by men that would reap the royal fruit and harvest of
it, as that the procerity of virtue, the virgin verdure of sincere Ingenuity,
in the native marks of worthy and well attended Generosity, may appear herein.

For Company is the Glass in which the beauty or deformity of every man's mind
is transparent; it is the crucible in which the loyalty or adulterations of
their addictions are tried. It Is the Physic that either purges out peccant
humors, and abates the menace of them, or else leaves dregs of offense to the
body by its ill composition and the ineffectuality of its ingredients; by reason
of which, as if men resolve to be evil, they must not take good Company to
them; so if men will be good, they must not admit evil men to them: For
Company have a great stroke which way soever they take. Which caused Seneca to
admonish his friend, to recede as much as he could into himself, Recede in
teips^um quantum potes, cum his conversare qui te meliorem facturi sunt; Illos
admit, quos tu potes facere meliores. Ep. 7.
and to converse with those by whom he may be bettered, or whom he himself may
better. Which David considering, justifies himself to be good, from this, that
he was a companion to them that feared God, Psalm 119. 63. And Solomon
declares, He that walks with wise men shall be wise, but a companion of fools
shall be destroyed, Prove. 13. 20. Whosoever keeps the Law is a wise son, but he
that is a companion of riotous men, shameeth his Father. Prove. 28. 7. and v.
24. companion of a destroyer. For Companions are to men weal or woe, light or
darkness, preferment or ruin; which argues the necessity of choice in them,
and the danger men undergo, who being virtuous love any one not such; and the
improbability that any evil man will be companion to a good man, unless it be
to discredit, de^oysh, or tempt him to his subversion. To ^voyd which, 1. Cor.
5. 10, 11.
St. Paul dehorteth Christi^ns from worldly men's friendship; 2 Cor. 6. 12, 13.
not to ^ertake with them in their friendships, Romans 12. 2.
^ot to be conformed to them, not to be ^acked in their spiritual vigor by
them; why? they mind earthly things, which ^oly men do not; they tend to
gratify ^he flesh, with the affections of it, which ^odliness commands to
resist, and to cru^ifie: Yea, wherever virtue is regent, and (...) mastery, it
evidences its reallity by this, that it herds with those only that for it ^^e
eminent; and hence reports the praise ^f Excellent, which Socrates observing,
and following the best, became the wi^st of his contemporaries. (...) Epictetus
lib. 2. c. 13. ad fiuem.
So that it is ^sie hence to conclude, that all the value and esteem wise men
put upon company arises from their endowments in mind and manners; from the
conscience, courage, constancy, esteem of fame, fidelity to trusts, liberality
of humor, affability (...) nature, civility of carriage they see i^ them,
which only beautify and nobilita^^ Company.

Nor is there any thing that companions are useful in, to life in its Noble
pu^^poses; but to institute and confirm me^ in Virtues Religious, Political,
Civil, ^^conomique; nor do Birds, Beasts, or Me^ associate, but where there is
an harmo^^ in their natures, and a union of tendenc^ And I will as soon believe
that a Nigh^^tingale and a Vulture, a Lamb and a Woo^^ a Crocodile and a Dog, a
Basilisque an^^ a Man can make a companionry of friend^ship: as that a good man
with a bad, ^ a bad man with a good, can be comp^^nion. Good men must go out
of t^^ world, if they will not be in compa^^ casually with bad men: And so bad
m^ must not be so rife as they are, if good men sometimes light not into their
co^^pany; but to be companions to the^ fully, frequently, composedly, is
impos^^ble for any but those that are conjur^^ to their likeness. For
congeniality cau^^ consortion and delight, which that Nob^^ Lord Brook
proclaimed to the World; when above all his other felicities, He ^ccounted the
Phoenix of his Titles, and Friend to Sir Philip Sidney. Which is as ^uch as if
he had enlarged his own En^omium: therefore he himself to be a man ^f Courage,
Wit, Learning, and Omni-mode ^ertue, because a friend to him that was all
^hese, in a proportion above other men his ^oaevals and Equals.

Upon all which written on this Head, conclude, that as to be Nobly endowed,
and Noble indeed, advances a Man and ^amily: so to be in good company, and
(...) square ones word and deed by the pro^^pt and pattern of them, that excel
in ^owledge of the method of such profi^^ble expression, is to be a promiser
of, ^^d promoter toward, the rise of a Family.

SECT. X.
^^^videnceth that apt Marriage, both as (...) to Years, Degrees, and Honor,
is a (...) great advance to Families.
^Ixthly, next to good Company, apt ^matches in Marriage are helps to raise and
advance Famelies. To be successful an^ flourishing in any thing is a great
encouragement to men, and that which ren^ders them respected; so is Homer, the
blin^ Poet for his seeing Poems, which have (...) enlightened his Fame, that
Pat^rculus tear^ him, Clarissimum si neque exemplo maximum, qui magnitudine
operum and fulgore carminum solis appellari poeta meruit. In quo hoc maximum
est quod neque ante illum quem ille imetaretur, neque post illum quem ille
im^rari inventus. est. Lib. 1. p. 12. Edit Lips. Lib. 2. p. 27.
A Wit without president, and never (...) be followed, Poet of the Sun, who
nev^^ could have written so remarkably, had (...) not been by the Gods designed
to be the H^^ rald and Monument of his own worldly I^^mortality. So was the
Family of Me^^ lus, in which, in twelve years, twelve (...) least were Censors,
or Triumphed; an^ the Domitian and Cicilian Families, whi^^ succeeded in what
ever almost they ^^tempted; I say, to be Almoner of prov^^dence, and to dispose
the doles of (...) Sovereignty where we please, is to be ver^ happy; but to be
happy in a fit Marriag^ and to dispose life's pleasancy and succe^^sions luster
into the Safe of a Matrim^^nial Ark; which though it floats upon (...)
vacillations of life, yet is privileged from the Immersions and shipwracks of
it, (...) a great advance to Men and Families* For Marriage being the Port,
after all (...) vain Herrecanes of youth, there must (...) some ill principle,
to correct which (...) miscarriage is a judgmen^ unto, or M^^riage must be a
mercy, not as it is a bare conjunction of Male and Female, for that has met in
Marriages to which the Devil and the world have been Paranymphs and Solicitors,
Gravis sarcina, durae compedes, liberos humeros atque olim liberos pedes
premunt, durum ductu, durius cogitatu, durissimum perpessu, non unius lucis sed
totius vitae Hospes, forsitanque hostis, vacuam presidiis invasit domum. Pet.
arch. lib. 1. de remed. utriusque Fortunae dial. 65.
and made the married persons tetrical and deplorable, in the sad effects of
their unmeet and inconsiderate association;) but then has marriage been apt and
auspicious, when, the precedent love, and experienced Harmony receives
conferrumination in the perfected and joyed in engagement; when by a Dovelike
Mating, and a conformity of Coincidence, they have no scissure or flaw of
separation in thought, or of alienation in Carriage or Language. This is that I
primely call apt Marriage; which not had, all other aptitudes are
insignificant. For as the learned King wrote to his towardly son Prince Henry,
Bas^li^. Doron. 2 book, p. 172
What can all this worldly respects avail, when a man shall find himself
coupled with a Devil; To be one flesh with him, and the half marrow in his bed?
Then, though too late, shall he find, that beauty without bounty, wealth
without wisdom, and great friendship without grace and honesty, are but fair
shows, and the deceitful mask of infinite misery. Thus that excellent King. And
in this I am the more precise, because I know it is not more possible without a
Miracle of restraining grace, or subacted nature next to it, (of which I have
not known many examples thorow-paced) to find a happy marriage between a pair
mismatched in Years, Humor, Descent, Feature, (all, or most of which in
considerable degrees are the ordinary potent charms of it, (...). Thucydides
lib, 3. p. 177.
and the cordial repulses of the contrary,) then to expect a quiet match from
the yoaking of a Dog and a Bear, a Wolf and a Lamb, a Fox and a Goose,
together; or the composition of contraries in an equality of proportion, which
tends to no issue of accord: Cum per Matrimonium homo perpetuae servituti
mancipetur non potest pater cogere ad Matrimonium quanquam illum ex aliqua
rationabili causa ad ipsum possit inducere. Aquin. sum. Suplem. q 48. art. 1.
And how the Fire and Water, Earth and Air, Heaven and Hell, in dispositions
should agree (while like Caesar and Pompey their great Antipathy not attoned by
the expedient of love, the mutual axchanges of which are the transports of that
state (the matter of both those mediocrities being absent) but published in the
ones resolution to admit no Equal, and the other no Superior,) is to me a
Paradox; and to those that venture in such a crazy Vessel, oftener torment then
content. Nor do Marriages thus hudled up in have, and thus confounded in the
prerequisites to, and the associates with them, prove ought above the religious
Dungeons, and well-reported little eases of life, in which Adultery is
legitimated, and self Felony New-christned modesty; (...). Libanius declam. 35.
p. 790.
the injured parties reserving their thoughts for them they love, and pyning
away their souls, because they are crossed in their Contents. For Marriage,
where it is not virtuous, (and virtuous it cannot be, where it is forced from
its own motion, and diverted to something besides, and opposite to its natural
current, and presuggested tendency) attended with reputation, convenience
suitable at least in those things that are indispensable; occasions first
undervaluation, then soureness, then neglect, then abhorrence, and at last
total alienation: Which Seneca observed long ago, Nihil tam mobile quam
faeminarum voluntas, nihil tam vagum, novimus veterum matrimoniorum repudia and
sediores divortio male coherentium rixas, quam multae quos in adole^scentia
amaverunt in communi reliquere senectute. Inter excerpta. Seo^ta.
when he tells us, Nothing is more vage then effeminate minds; whence we have
seen desertion of Marriages long lived in; and those more scandalous then
actual and judicial Divorces; former love giving place to late discontent; and
those deserted in age, who had been beloved in youth. To prevent which
turpitude and ill Omen to posterity, it is good to marry in the Lord; that is,
according to the Lords appointment in nature; and with eye to the prevention of
sin, and the satiation of the mind in the object of its fruition of, and
cohabitation with; and if gratefulnes in every regard follows the aptitude of
it to some darling and approved purpose of man and woman, and according to the
presence or absence of it; so in the magis and minus is the love and acceptance
of it with them, as an apt or fit house for the Master his occasions makes him
take pleasure at home, and an apt horse causes delight in riding, and apt
servants pleases the Master, in their handiness; and apt words are winning and
prevalent. If aptitude and fitness in these trifles of life, compared to
marriage, be so pleasant and superating: how much more victorious and embraced
are they, when aptness in superious pleasures commends them to our choice and
love. Ad affectionem spectat quaedam jucunda and suavissima delectatio
Cassiodor. lib. de Amicitia.
If a Garment fitted to our bodies, and a Cookery to our pallats, and a
prospect to our eyes, and a perfume to our smell, and a softness to our touch,
be enamoring: how does fitness transcend it felf, when it invades us by the
pleasing assaults of a Wife, and batters us by the harmless cannon of her
humor, levelled to her own Mark? This correspondence and equature in a Wife,
Note this.
who is the Man's self in another Sex, the duplicate of his heart, his own
picture in the glass of Marriage; the partner of his cares, the ^ure of his
pressures, the heightner of his joys, the stock of his perpetuation, and his
Comrade in the Acts and Monuments of Omniform virtue. I say, this a fit Wife
becoming to a Man, there is reason to ascribe the rise of content and increase
in wealth, glory, and every blessing unto fit Matches: For though some who love
women only sensually, and in a corner declaim against Wives, as inconsistent
with content, or Husbands freedom; being irritated thereunto by either revenge
because they could not work their ends on them; or for that they would rove, Se
non posse simul uxori, and sapientiae studio operam dare, Cic.
and not be fettered to one Woman, which in Marriage they must be; or for the
contrary be infamous: which for ought I know, Quisquit litem fugis faeminam
^uge vix alterum sine altera effugies, ipsa presentia ut ito dixen^m umbra
nocens est.
Tully might be guilty of, when he answered the counsels of his friends, to
take another after he had repudiated his first wife (he could not serve Wisdom
and a Wife together:) Which Petrarch so unhappily with a Monkish severity
enlarged upon, Lib. 2. de vitae solit. c. 3.
that he deserves the censure of indiscreet and rude, Nil egregiis caeptis
infestius muliebr^ consortia, lib. 2. de remed ^te. Fort. dial 18.
when he writes, Whoever would fly contention, fly women, for the one is not
to be avoided without the other; the presence of women being no less or other
then a hurtful shadow; and the correspondence with them, the bane of all
Heroicisme. Though such lashes may be given this excellent Sex, the severity of
which is due only to the Eccentrique and Elopers of them; yet the sober and
well bred Wives with which God has blessed Men and Families in all ages, are
ever to be Owned as Foundresses and Copartners with their Husbands, in the rise
of Families, and the well-educating of their children to their after
preferment; for while a mother is not unquiet or vain, like her in the Poet,
(...) S^obaecus Sermon. 188.

(...).
A costly Wife does with her trouble bring,
Her Husband's slave, while she is in power a King.
Or like that Wife of Dominico Sylvio the 51. Duke of Venice, who was so proud
and costly, that she despised to wash in common water, Shutes History Venice.
or to touch her meat with other then a Fork of Gold; or to be in her Chamber,
but when perfumed that none that came into it could endure the scent of it, but
was overcome by it: when a Wife is not so impertinent, but the contrary,
affable, modest, thrifty, diligent, obliging to all her relations, and disposes
the fruits of her excellent endowments according to the respective objects of
her concernments, and the concerns of them; and that with an eye to God
commanding; her Husband, Children, Servants, Friends, needing and accepting the
Munificence of her virtue: Can she be counted less then a rare Jewel, a divine
comfort, a notable second to aggrandization? I think our Proverb, He that will
thrive must ask his wife, is enough to vindicate Women that are wise and
worthy, from vulgar esteem. Yea, since they are so great comforts to life, and
so great contributers to our perpetuation in honor and posterity; the least
they can deserve from men, is to have the testimony of being additions to them;
which Theodorick in Cassiodore, thinks but reasonable: and I judge a just debt
to such their obligation. Let lewd Poets, Inter caetera humani generis pondera
conjugalis affectus ^uram sibi praecipuam vindicavit, Quia in honor esse
meretur. Vnde reparatio posteritatis acquiritur. Var. lib. 2. c. 10, and 11.
and ranting deboshees unmercifully martyr them, as he did who branded all men
with folly that were not Satyrick against them. (...)
(...).
He that reviles not Women in a hate
Of them, no wise man is at any rate.
Yet ought sober and wise men ever to bless God for giving them such comforts
for life, and to value them the only Happiness enjoyable next to Heaven, to
which their fitness in Marriage is a great furtherance, and in the sequel the
rise of Men and Families.

SECT. XI.
Stateth the Advantage Towardly Children give to a Family.
SEventhly, after fit matches in Marriage, Towardly Children by them are great
advantages to Families; which as they do continue in being, so them do they
propagate in Honor and Wealth: For parents live personally but few years, and
possibly either have in their lives no opportunities to ascend, or else are cut
off in the very moment of their motion toward Greatness; when the foundation
of their Families pile is only laid, and the roof of it not covered, nor any
story of it finished, but in the virtues of children, (whose succession are a
kind of protraction of time, into a comparative infinity;) there happens often
not only a perfecting of the first design, but a procedeure to further and
greater degrees. To capacitate children to which profitable and illustrating
service, it becomes parents to bestow upon and rivet into, them, all manner of
useful nurtriture and discipline, which will usher them unto the opportunity,
and carry them thorough the method of such undertakings: For since the world is
variable, and one Generation comes, and another goes, and men of Noble minds,
though meanly born, by the help of great Geniusses and prudent diligences step
into those Chasms of honor, which mortally makes in ancient and renowed
Families, whose Braves die issuless; Or for misdemeanour and declension Escheat
their Blood, Honor, and Fortune, to their Principals; or by adoption take
others, because worthy and well qualified, into them; which Seneca says,
Fabriciorum imagines Metelli^patuerunt, Aemiliorum and Scipionum familias
adopti^ miscuit, etiam abolita saeculis nomina per successores novos fulgent,
sic illa Patriciorum nobilitas a sund^mentis urbis in haec Tempora constitit
Adoptio Fortunae remedium est. Lib. 2. Controv. 9.
was the advance of some Noble Romans; And by this adoption a remedy was given
to misfortune, and Nobility carried on, which otherwise must have abated. Since
these revolutions give season to notify merit, and to purchase to it the
reward of Gods blessing, and of his providence offer; ^here is great cause for
parents, that would advance their Families, to institute their Children or
Nephews in all varieties of Elegant, Fashionable, useful breeding, not only
according to, but somewhat above, their present quality: For Education has a
great influence on the mind and life of youth, and such as they are tutoured
and habituated to be, such usually do they prove themselves to be in their
Manhood: A good Item to Parents.
and therefore if men would have Towardly children, they must allow them their
fervent prayers, good example, constant love, prudent discipline, pregnant
counsel, diligent inspection, and if need be, thorow-correction^ for Youth is
liquid, susceptive of impress of both sorts, and seldom are the first
engravings on its shield worn out, ^^^long as its bearer lives, to be a display
(...) genitors care about, and charge upon them which as virtuous children
ruminate upon in order to their dutiful practice, according to it; so are they
by God reward with blessings not only of long life, ac^cording to the Fifth
Commandemen^ which our Lord says is the first wi^^ promise, that their days
shall be long in the Land which the Lord their God gives the^ which was made
good to the sons (...) Ionadab, the son of Rechab, who be^cause they obeyed
their fathers charge were promised never to be eraced, I^^ 35, last. but with
comforts in their sou^^ and prosperity on their estates. Which the Archbishop
of Canterbury, temps H. (...) presses upon the young King, who had
disobediently raised war against his father, and invaded his Kingdoms and
Territories, telling him what Judgments impended such irreligious and immoral
courses; and how short he came of those Noble examples of Decius, who when his
father would have admitted him into the Empire with himself, Vereor ne si fiam
imperatot dediscam esse filiut malo ^^men non esse imperator, and humilis
filius, quam esse Imperator and filiu^ indevotus etc Petrus Bles. Ep. 47.
replied, O Sir, I know not what my heart will lead me to when I have such an
advantage; perhaps when I begin to be an Emperor, I shall cease to be a son:
and therefore, because I prefer to be an obedient son, before to be an
Emperor, and undutifull, do you my father reign alone, and I under you will
obey. By this and other instances, he as a Friend counsels; and as a Father in
God commands him, upon penalty of his souls damnation, and the Churches
Censures, to remember his duty; which he not doing, was punished with sad
wars in his Reign, and was an unhappy Prince in his Conscience: For though
God is in the Generation of the righteous, Psalm. 14. 5. And it shall receive
the blessing from the Lord, and righteousness from the God of its salvation. So
that, for their signal mercies men shall say, This is the generation of them
that seek him, Psalm. 24. v. 5, 6. Though the just man's seed shall be mighty
upon earth, wealth and riches be in his house, Psalm 112. v. 2, 3. When the
children of wicked men, as the generation of his wrath, Jer. 7. 29. shall be
cut off, Psalm. 108. 13. Yet is this promise of benediction and advance to good
men, to be expected fulfilled by those gradations of providence by which God
brings the mighty things of the World to pass above and beyond the probability
of second assistances: and if God intend good to men in worldly regards, he
will excite in them desires to comply with his intendments, in the
predispositions to it, which are personal, as well as concur with them in
purveying for their acceptance in, and season of exhibition and reception: And
therefore I do highly commend parents, if not first to provoke their children
to take all possible and attainable useful breeding, yet, when they themselves
desire it, and their parents are able to give, not to deny it them: For I do
not know any punctilio or seeming minimm in accomplishment, gainable by
industry and instruction, Ipeculum sequidem cordis humani verba sunt, dum
illico moribus placere creditur quod ipse sibi ad agendum legisse monstrotur
Cassiodor Var. lib. 6. c, 9.
but has its use and reward in the return of Towardliness; even good words,
which are the cheapest expression of worth, yet are acceptable, and civil
carriages do either acquire respect or shame vice; which is victory enough for
a man to be modest with; yea, the levities of youth, abstracted from the gross
errors and sensual alloyes of them, are very often conducing to their
conspicuity; especially when its prepotency does not defeat the better part of
their ^ife, which is responsible to counsel and gravity. For thereby are they
made fit to live usefully to God, their Country, and themselves, which no good
and well directed man would not do, if he had the sole power to be what he
would: for of all pleasures, none so true and defecate, ^s that which arises
from an opportunity prayed for, obtained, understood, improved, and to the
giver of it acknowledged; which when the parents of Families consider not, nor
their issues and descendants by industry refresh and quicken, they serve not
the intendment of God in his blessing upon them: For, as it is not the best
tempered edge-tool that will do ^eall and skillful execution unless an artly
mind direct the dexterous poysing and handling of it; nor the best built Vessel
that rides in the water, which will endure ^he Sea, and arrive at a safe Port,
unless here be aboard it Seamen enough to manage the Sails, Tackling, and
Steerage, and skill iu the Officers, to appl^ them to the Wind, and to take
more o^ less of it as the rules of steerage and safet^ admit: so is it not all
the natural abilitie^ children have that renders them prope^ blessings to a
Family, unless those Virtue in them be poynted for, and directed to the
peculiar mean in which the excellency of their operation resides. Which Seneca
elegantly sets forth: God has give^ thee, Dedit tibi illa quae si non deferens,
par deo surges, parem autem Deo pecunia non saciet, Deus nihil habet praetexta
non faciet, deus nudus est: Quaerendum est ergo quod non fiet indies deterius
cui non possit obstari. Quid hoc est? animus: sed hic rectus, bonus, magnus.
Quid aliud voces hunc quam deam in humano corpore. hospitantem. Ep. 31.
O man, that which if thou do not desert in thy self, will make thee a kind
(...) Peer to him, and that not money: For the divine Peerage is not
purchasable; since Go^ wants no addition, because he is all perfection; nor
will clothing of luster be t^^ in which we shall be equal to him; for (...)
glory is his clothing, and his Paramont^^^^ to us, his exemption from the need
and or^nament of clothing; that which parefies ^ to him, is of another nature;
that which does not impair by time, nor can be impedi^ by power, or evaded by
policy; and that (...) the Mind, Upright, Good, Great, which is (...) otherwise
to be accounted then Divinity (...) a mortal residence. Thus he.

Which commends to wise parents the method of ordering their sons aright;
th^^ they breed their eldest son to Learning if he be capable of it; and the
younge^ ^o Trades, Travels, Wars, and such ourses of life as have employment
and ^rofit attending them, and are not distast^ull to their addictions; and the
father ^^all see in the compliance of them with ^t, and the prosequution they
make after ^t, what the probable success of it will be. ^or this will not only
kindle in them great and good ambitions to be excellent, but ^arry them to the
studies and exhibitions of themselves as such; and enfeoff them with the luster
and reward of such, which believe to be notably seen in some Fami^ies, wherein
almost every heir or son, being complete in breeding, enamours, a For^une and
heyr Female, whereby he adds to his family Land, Landsworth, and Alliance, with
armoreal accessions; when others precipitating, do not in ages add any thing by
their Marriages, nor are worthy or influential on Ladies of Fortune and de^cent
to bestow themselves upon them; and so they resting upon the single for^une of
their Ancestors, decrease every descent (as profuseness, or multitude of
children eats upon them;) whereas those that have several Fangs to fasten
them, and accrewments of Marriages, to relieve their distresses and inevitable
expenses upon, dure longest, and bear the expensive accidents of life, with
less palpab^^ injury and visible diminution. For as to^wardly Birds and Beasts
will be imitati^ their kind, and the Eagle despise Spa^^rows, and little Birds,
when he will e^^counter with what is his proper prey: (...) is it with towardly
Youth; it will expe^^ it self on the Noble enquiries of life an^ art, in
ambition to know how to ma^^ a little City a great State, while it negle^^ to
fiddle, and in providence to know ho^ to live another day, and how to save, to
mak^ a Sum, to become thereby somebody, and (...) purchase the renoun of
hopeful and thristy with it; when others of profuse and l^ principles, censure
such caution for folly and such forecast, for a too soon solid (...) be a long
lasting wisdom: Which howev^^ it be too often true, such precocity with solid
ripeness, carrying life in its whi^^ wind to her period; yet has this for i^
honor and comfort, that to pursue the great ends of living, while one live^
though it be but for a day, is more ^^^tional and manly, then to live beneath
(...) besides it a thousand years.

SECT. XII.
Declares Gods blessing upon Honest and Wise endeavors, to be the only Way to
durable Riches and Honor.
EIghthly, all these preceding furtherances, or such of them as God pleases to
have ordinated to these Ends, blessed by him. This indeed is the top of all the
imaginable successes Persons and Families, can hope, pray for, or wisely
endeavor after; to wit, to make God theirs, whose Word is the Law, and Will
the accomplishment of every good. I know there are other artifices more owned
and ascribed to by the Rhodomontado's of the World, then this of address to
God, and an humble relyance on, and expectation from his mercy. These Waters of
Siloam, that run in Gods method, slowly, in his, not their time, are not so
appreciated by them, as those of their fancied and applauded Damascus; by the
celerity and precipitious temerity of which, they hope sooner to come to their
aim, then by Gods Compass, and the course of his Channel. The violences of
power, the successes of blood and treason, the favors of Princes, the
grindings of the poor, by unreasonable gain, and unjust surprises; the
overreaching of men in bargains; the Cormorant enhansing of Markets and
Purchases; their well managed Frauds, their insinuation into secrets, and then
falsifying trusts by menace of disclosure, and the bribes they obtain to be
silent; the exposures of themselves to serve the pleasures of Greatness, and to
merit of them the protection of their power, to oppress their inferiors. These
and other the like tenebrious designs of gain and preferment, are the Idols
they worship, the Altar they bow down before, the Oracles they consult, the
parties they cajoul to them. As for God, he is not in all their thoughts; his
Power not their fear, his Eye not their restraint, his Goodness not their
dissuasive, Note this.
his Holiness not their example, his Word not their rule, his Hell not their
terror, his Heaven not their motive to self-denial they are all for the
sensual interest, they understand, and they set light by God; though he be the
best spoak in the Wheel of prosperity, and all the ends of the world are to
look unto him, Isai. 45. 22.
and be satiated and saved: for it is God alone that must smile upon men, and
their actions, and render them amiable and availing. 'Twas He, and He alone,
that by a secret impetus, and a call of efficacy, gathered together the several
Beasts, Birds, and Creatures from their dispersion so far distant into the Ark,
and not Noah's craft or power to cog or force them in: poor man, he was an
impotent tool to such a dexterity of Miracle, (...) Basil. Saleuciae Orat. 6.
p. 35.
had he not been prevented by the God of Nature, who cajould Nature in every
Species, to appear at its rendezvous, the Ark, and there appointed Noah to
lodge them. 'Twas He, and he alone, that carried Moses his obscurity, by the
various forms and steps of their order and motion into the Chair of their
Estate and Majestique appearance. 'Twas not Joseph's innocence that would have
opposed and evicted lust, malice, falsness, cruelty, and overruled them to
their shame, and his glory and vindication; but that God carried them beyond
their natural motion to his mark, Joseph's exaltation. 'Twas not David's beauty
and victory that would have had that being and renown with the Virgins of
Israel, that made them sing Epinichions to him, 1 Samuel 18. 7.
Saul has slain his thousand, and David his ten thousands. Had not God raised
David's spirit to such heights of expression, and stirred theirs to receive and
promulge his impression on them to that purpose. Whatever greatness the fair
looks, the learned heads, the diligent hands, the intrigoe's of policy, the
curryings of Favor, the successes of war and peace, the neerness of blood,
the dearness of love, the advice of friendship, the success of travels, the
relation of Marriage, brings men to, is the instance of God not willing the
contrary, but in spite of the storm of second causes, obstetricating the calm
of his own work and glory. Hence come the smooth gales in the sayls of
endeavor, the condescensions of hills to the proportion of valleys, the
reduction of roughs to their plainness of correspondence, with the design of
God. Thus comes rude and bloody Esan to be civil and unmurtherous; and the
eager nature of Saul to become tame to the yoke of an Apostleship, and to glory
in the Cross which was a cross over the glory of men in the World, and
dislustred it.

So that, if any man or cause would thrive* and succeed, it is politiquely to
make God in his Power, Wisdom, Goodness, All Sufficiency, its patron. For it is
he that passes the fiat to all occurrings; it is Turkish History p. 1197.
he that encouraged the Lord Medasty victoriously 1000 times to sight against
the Turks; yet at last subdued him to himself by death. It Is he that raised up
Count Mansfield to lay siege to Strigonium, fight before it valiantly; p. 1070.
but he whose wit contrived the method of its surprise, whose valor headed the
assailants of it, and whose heart was big with the hopes and glory of its
obtainment, dyed before he saw his valor fortunate, and his project prevalent.
He that brings Families to a hopeless and periodique decay, and then strangely
reinvigorates them, as he did that Famous Family of the Iustiniani in Venice,
all the Males of which being in the battle that State had with Emanuel the
Emperor, Shutes Hist. Venice, p. 102.
were slain; there was one a Priest, and a young man that survived, who was
dead in Law, being in Orders, and serving in St. Marks Church; Him, at the
request of the State and People, dispensed withal by the Pope, did God raise
to Marriage, and by that to be the Ancestor of the Family again, which, but for
him in that disability, had expired: He it is that makes improbabilities serve
his purpose. So did he in the advance of Nicola Donato D. of Venice, who was
chosen as the only worthy man, Sir Henry Wot^ons Character of some Kings of
England, p. 175.
and beloved by the People, ready to serve under, and be ruled by him only,
upon a buite that he was the Good man that had caused the decree to be made for
the Poor, against the Bakers; which good provision, though he was not the
promoter of, yet God made it a tendency to his Greatness, which he worthily
deported himself in. So did he in the the Case of famous Qu. Elizabeth, when He
prevented Gardiners malicious and undue gained Warrant from Qu. Mary for her
execution, by the stoutness of the Lieutenant Bridges, Speed p. 849.
who chose rather to lose his place then be such a Butcher. After, when she was
in the hand of cruel Benefield, and a Ruffian, Gardiners friend, came to kill
her, God saved her, by the charge Benefield had given the under-keeper, that
none should see her in his absence; during which, that assassine came, and
thereupon was denied access: Yea, her God it was that when her Chamber was on
fire, preserved her from burning in it; and kept up her spirit in a condition,
which she thought less comfortable then that of a poor Milkmaid; in whose place
she wished to be, when she heard her cry Milk. O, quoth she, that I were a
Milkmaid. 'Twas he that was her hope and Savior, that maugre all these made
her Mistress of these Nations; and of the glory of Government in her Time. And
'twas he, and he alone, that was in the religious heart and pious pen, of that
Angelique King, who in his sorest agonies, if trouble could have discomposed so
sublime and steady a soul, leaves us his doleful Suhjects the Legacy of
admiring his Virtues and Words: I am confident the Justice of My Cause, and
clearness of my Conscience, Eicon Basil. Sect. 28.
before God, and Toward My People, will carry me as much above them in Gods
decision, as their successes have lifted them above Me in the vulgar opinion;
who consider not that many times those undertakings of men are lifted up to
Heaven, whose rise is from Hell, as to the injuriousnesse and oppression of the
design. Which considered, who would not look upon God as the sweetest comfort,
and safest refuge? and make his hiding place under the pavillio^ of his
protection: Psalm. 32. 7.
who is a Rock of ages for his peoples establishment; and has provided
Salvation for their Walls, and Bucklers; Isa. 26. 1.
who leads them by his Pillar of Cloud by day, and by his Pillar of Fire by
night; under whom are his Everlasting arms, Deuteronomy. 33. 27.
and in whom his unerring Spirit is, whom his Angels minister to; his affection
encompasseth, and to whom his Truth performs all that is good for them; and
in wrong to whom he has said, no weopon shall prosper; no prayer, but become
sin; no counsel, but turn into foolishness: for all is Babel, and Nehushtan,
without and against God; who will do whatsoever comes into the wisdom of his
mind, to be brought to pass by the power of his hand: For as without God all
persuasion is but as a sounding Brass and a tinkling Cimbal; so without him all
actions is but writing in the dust, sowing on the rock, emptying the Sea with a
Sive; as the barking of a whippet against the Moon, invalid, sottish, nothing;
and if God be in our adventures, and his glory rest upon small things, Aarons
dry rod shall flourish, with fruit, and Sarahs dead womb spring forth a s^nne.
David's indiscernableness shall increase into a Kingdom; and Saul's Kingdom
decline into contempt; the great Monarchies be changed, and small Forces
prevail against great Princes and Countries: have not our ears heard, and our
eyes read of the amazing providence of God, bringing down Nebuchadnezzars, and
Bajazets, and Iulians, and unfortunating the Holy wars of Christians against
Infidels; Sequitur part quae solet non immerito contristare and in solitudinem
deducere uti bonorum exitus mali sunt, ut Socrates cogitur in mori, Ru^ilius in
exilio vivere, Pompejus and Cicero clientibus suis prebere cervicem, Cato ille
virtutum viva imago incumbens gladio simul de se and de Republ. palam facere.
Senec. lib de tranq. amici.
when he has suffered his enemies Banners to be exalted, and their Empire to be
expatiated into Christendom, to correct Christians for their dissension and
jealousies? When I consider Charles the fifth, and his puissant Army, vanish,
and do nothing worthy Story: and Charles the eighth of France, a young man,
destitute of Money, and Council, assault potent and Heroique Princes; and
overrun as much of Italy, as he passed through without so much as the least
resistance; (which caused Pope Alexander to say, that the French came into
Italy with Chalk in their hands, to take up their lodging where they listed:
For they had not so much as occasion to put on their Armor one day, in their
expeditions) I cannot but conclude, that the way to render actions, and Men and
Families considerable, is to promote God by all those several means of his
appointment, in the upshot of which his glory marches, and by his blessing to
his instruments, he prospers in their subserviency to him, and returns them
that which indeed exceeds their desires or deserts. For there is no contesting
with God, who has power and wisdom too effectual and commanding for us worms,
by policy or strength to cope with; nor are any preparations, how valid soever
(...) themselves, proper to a successful issue; but as the benediction of God
rests o^ them which Sir John Arundel, Holingshed, p. 423.
temps R. 2. found most true, to his ruin and cost, in his French Expedition,
upon which he entered with great pride and pomp, for he had 52. new Suits of
Cloth of Gold and Tissue with him, and all things suitable: but a storm came,
drowned his person and bravery, and defeated that voyage; and long before that
the terrors that God ha^ brought upon men and armies, Thu^ydides lib. 4. p.
335.
on no real apparent ground, when they sear where no fear is, and fly when none
pursues them, confirms this. Which if men would more ruminate, they would no^
despise the day of Gods small things; nor trust in Counsels, Setlements,
Armies, Navies, Treasuries, nor in any humane reserve or subterfuge, which are
failable, carrying the worm of their corrosion in them, and leaving often the
ill aspect of paramount power impending them; but they would apply themselves
by prayer to God for conduct and counsel, and refer the glory of their ayds and
gainful expedients to him, whose all men, arts, advantages, defeats,
conclusions are, and have no other dependence on emergencies, or second ^^uses,
then his Almightiness by them ^^ves us view of the haults they make, ^^d the
stops by them put to our ^onfidentest Carrears: for as there is (...) arrest of
the worlds greatness, but by ^^e officer of providence, who seises the ^ltanish
pride, and humbles the Lionlike ^ightiness of Might; so is there no bayl (...)
be taken to relax his prey from its sei^re, but by mercy conceding to the
mil^er methods of power, and turning to it ^he softer edge of its Regal
absoluteness; which is more Gods delight to manifest to ^^e sons of men, then
his severity, which ^e calls his strange act. And I think that (...) the survey
of the providence of God, Isai. 28. 21.
the meditation and learning of which is ^ery prudent and Christian to be
fre^uent in.) It will appear that to one of ^enal nature there is ten of mercy
and ^ndulgence: Nequaquam ergo nobis dolenda est ^aet asslictio infirmit^^^m
quum intelligimus matrem esse virtutum. Salvianus lib. 1. de Gubernat. Dei p. 9.
for the good and Philan^hropique manifests of God are such as ^ow from his
being and benignity; and ^o come upon us with all the adjuncts of ^indness,
compassion, indoctrination; when ^he punishments he is cons^rained to send upon
us for correction of sins of obsti^acy, and for reduction of us from our ^ay
of error, fall from his justice which ^e delights only in as his own
vindication, not our affliction. And though they (...) not so apparently, and
in present app^^ hension so obliging to us, yet as they ^ reductive of our
deviation, and do defec^^ us; so they are cordialand salvifique.

And therefore since man's prospe^^^ is so short, Non potest enim quis quam ab
initio sormatus, and tota ratione compositus, Omnes exsequi numeros, u^ sciat
quando opporteat, and in quantum and cum quo and quem ad modum. Senec. ep. 95.
and his condition so uns^^^ ble, that he is not fixed in any kno^^ ledge of
himself; or of what is good and when and how it is to be brough^ about; but
must be taught knowledge^ what he is and ought to be, and lea^^ obedience by
the things that he suffe^^^ It is good for man to have Gods re^ upon him, and
his grace of restraint (...) him, yea, his good Angels about him (...) keep him
in all his ways. And this favo^ God blesses his with that seek him w^^^ all
their hearts, and serve him with (...) their mights: whereupon I lay it dow^^
for a sure rule, That it is God that giv^ rain in season, and makes the earth
to yi^^^ her increase, Levit. 26. 4. and makes m^ increase mightily, and their
days to be prolo^^ ged, Deuteronomy. 6. 3. That blesses men in all th^^ increase, and
in the works of their hands wherein they rejoice, Deuteronomy. 16. 15. It Is G^^ that
increases men more and more, Psal^ 115. 14. It Is God that increases the jo^
of the me^k, Isa. 29. 29. Makes them f^^ ^^^ plenteous, and their Cattle feed
in ^rge pastures, Isai. 30. 23. brings evil ^on their devourers, Ier. 2. 3.
Causes ^em to be fruitful, Ier. 23. 3. Multiplies ^^vantages upon them, Ezekiel.
36. 11. Rai^^s their glory, Dan. 11. 39. And hence ^^ere is a good account
given, how ac^ording to what God has revealed, and ^^perience instructs us, Men
and Fami^es come ordinarily to thrive, and grow (...) and in greatness; all
which I call the ^eps of ascent to Gentilicial Beatitude. For (...) it is God
that gives a man a good heart, (...).
^^t aright to serve him; so it is God alone that can keep that heart to its
regular ^^xation, so as to be accepted by and re^arded Plato in ^ippia ad fium.
Dialog.
for such service with worldly ^ontinuance and success of increase.

SECT. XIII.
^^rraigns profaneness as the Curse and Cancre of Men and Families. Together
with the nature and leaven of it.
NOw the contrary descents To Gentilical Decay follow: for this Ladder of life
has Angels ascending and des^^^ ding ^on it, and consequences suita^
thereunto. And the first ill Omen to Fa^^ lies and men is profaneness and
irr^^gion; which is a defiance of God, and having him not in all our thoughts,
Psa^ 10^4. For since the imaginations of (...) thoughts of our hearts are evil,
and co^ tinually evil, as Gods definitive senten^^ upon them is, Genesis 6. 5. To
be a man^^ re^ined, and uncircumcised by Gods g^^ cious abscision of his
unregenerate fo^^ skins, is to be profane and unvalued (...) Gods sight, and
hostile against him. The the Scripture calls, rebellion against Go^ Deuteronomy. 31.
27. Ier. 28. 16. Fighting with Go^ Acts 5. 39. Unpleasedness with God, I^^ 21.
14. Forgetfulness of God, Deuteronomy. 32. (...) Ier. 2. 32. c. 3. 27. Hosea 13. 6. A
wearying God. Isa, 5. 13. Mal. 2. 17. A pressing God Amos 2. 13. Walking
contrary to God Levit 26. 22. A grieving of God at the heart, Genesis 6. 6. A
hardening of their fac^ against his reproof, and a refusing to return, Ier. 5.
3. Drawing iniquiry wi^^ Cords of vanity, Isai. 5. 10, 18. And her^ upon by
reason of the Deicidial insolence of it, God is provoked to impend and afflict
it with desolating vengeance, not always in the main bulk, and by signal
subversions of it. (For in this sense good men to their discomposure see the
wicked flourish like a bay tree) but in the pettytoes and particello's of it,
which do by degree abate and rot off, as precursories to the dissolution of
their entireness and beauty. For as in the Motto of the Famous house of
Memorancy (Deus primum Christianum ser^et) Which yet flourishes in France to
this day, we are told what the expectations and obtainments of piety are, from
the God of every good thing and perfect; Who has promised no good thing shall
be wanting to them that fear him, Psalm. 34. ^0. That is, not only that he will
not with^old any good from them, Psalm 84. 12. but that he shall make others
instrumental to their good; so that the fruit of his mouth shall satisfy good
to him, and the recompense of his hands shall be rendered to him, Prove. 12. 14.
So also are we taught from the contrary, of wickedness in men's hearts and
lives, which I call profaneness, and irreligion, that the eye of God is upon
Men and Families for evil, and not for good; and his Curse against them to root
them out: which the Scripture calls Pouring Hell out of Heaven upon them, as on
wicked Sodom and her sister, Genesis 19. 24. Consuming the Tents of wicked men,
Numb. 16. 26. bringing the way of the wicked upon his head, 1 Kin. 8. v. 32.
Making the place of the wicked come to naught, Job 8. 22. Putting out the light
of the wicked, that his spark shall shine no more, Job 18. 5. Putting out his
candle with him, verse. 6. Abbreviating his triumph, and assaulting his
excellency in its high noon, c. 20. v. 5, 6. Making the increase of his house
to depart, and his Goods flow away in the day of his wrath, c. 20. v. last.
Breaking the jaws of the wicked, c. 27. v. 17. Thus terrible i^ God to
wickedness, that he not only is angry with wicked men all the day long^ Psalm.
7. 11. Breaks the arm of them, Psalm. 10. 15. Brings sorrows upon them, Psalm.
32. 10. but after all gives them the dregs o^ his fury to drink, Psalm 75. 8.
and cas^^ them into Hell, Psalm 9. 17. And is not profaneness and irreligion
the bane of Men and Families, that lets Gods vengeance into the foundation, and
fixes his wind of dissipation, and his fire of execution, upon the Turrets, and
Parapets of it^ leaving neither stone nor mortar visible of its wonted
consistence. I know there is nothing more mysterious, then the path^ of God,
and his manifestations in outward things; nor dare I be too positive in
concluding love or hatred by what occurs to men here: those on whom the Tower
of Siloe fell, were not greater sinners then others that were secure; Luke 13 4.
yet from the word and warrant of God, and experience, I may believe, that good
furtherances to good men are the tokens of Gods good will to them, and ill
tidings and casualties coming, not by chance, but commission, are signs also
of God paternally correcting their wanders and unmortifiedness; which not being
collectable from the like carriages of his greatness to evil men, to whom God
is contrary, Psalm. 7. 11.
and with whom displeased; there may be sufficient warrant for looking upon
their temporary flourishing, but as a minutes gaity before an eternal setting
and expiration. And hereupon, when ever I see Men or Families turn upon God
their backs, Ier. 32. 33. and imagine evil against the Lord, Nahum. 1. 11. when
their heart is fully set in them to do evil, because sentence is not presently
executed upon them, Eccles. 8. 11. When I consider, They take crafty counsel
against the Lord, and against his Anointed, Psalm 2. And hat^ the man and thing
that is good, Micah 3. 2. And speak evil of what is good. When these Jude v. 15.
impudencies are exert, and the rancour of their profane irreligious hearts
breaks forth at their lips, and they do not only with Esau contemn that sacred
gift of God, divine primo-geniture, by bartring it for triobolary contents, and
momentany nothings; but they dare own Religion no further practicable by a wise
man, then in the uutside, and in that part of it which is popular and
exemplary; Non cogitamus quid ips^ simus sed quid alteris esse videmur^ ^^di eo
perdu^ and a resset ut neglecta veritate meriti de sola opintone curamus
Pelahius in qua^rela ad Deme^riam. Pro^^nos appellam ubique homines sacris non
imitatos. Bud^eus in Pandect. p. 180. Fol.
when men make no conscience of duties, and things sacred, but can pass them
over, and swallow them down, deriding the precisianism of those that make
scruple of sacrilege and impiety that is gainful. No wonder that God is known
to these in the judgment he executed, and these wicked ones are taken in their
own snare, Psalm 9. v. 16. No wonder that God denies them the comforts and
conducts of his Spirit, in their way, and the glory of his Son in his
Kingdom, who deny him their obedience and adoration here in their day; and who
set themselves to dethrone his Holiness, Power, Goodness, Justice, from its
command over the events of things, and upon the hearts of men: no wonder that
he leaves these trusters in man, and these makers of flesh their arm, and whose
heart departs from the Lord, by making them like ^eath in the Desert, and not
see good when good comes, as the words are Ier. 17. 5, 6. When they set
themselves to contradict his Institutions, and to live contrary to his
punishments and rewards, no wonder God gives them the whirlwind of instability
for their portion, and razes their posterity and glory out of honorable Hab.
2. 16.
record, who design his dishonor in their heart, and establish it by their
power, and defend it by their wit, Horum sententi^^ non modo superstitionem
tollunt in qua inest timor inanis deorum, sed etiam religionem, quae deorum
culta pio continetur. St. Augustine. lib. 4. Civit. dei.
and propagate it by their example. Can God be jealous of his glory and power,
which he will not give to any other, and yet pass by the provocations of these
insolences, which question his being as a God good, as a Spirit holy, as a
Lord great, as a Judge just? And when he gives, to such as give him the courage
of their Faith, 1 John 5. 4. the sincerity of their love, Matthew. 20. 37. the
perfect work of their patience, James 1. 4. the duty of their holiness, 1 Pet.
1. 16. the exceedings of their zeal, Gal. 1. 14. the indeterminateness of their
perseverance; when to these he gives a name better then Isa. 56. 5.
that of sons and daughters, and settles upon them the sure mercies of David,
which shall not depart from his seed sorevermore. Isa. 55. 3.
Is it not just with him to give to those that despise his counsel, and
dispute his power, and deride his holiness, and disgrace his Gospel, and grieve
his Spirit, and crucify his Son afresh, and put him again to open shame, by
their hard hearts, rash speeches, vicious lives: is it not just with him to
rend them and their children, and fortunes, with the stormy wind of his fury,
and in the overflowing storm of his anger, and by the great hayl-stones of his
fury to consume them, as the threatening is, Ezekiel. 13. 13. Yes sure, and such
will be the end of all contemners of God and his Gospel; who, though they be
too big for men to deal with, and too sturdy for them to argue off their
courses, and to undeceive in their placing happiness and content in the luxury
of life: yet are by God severely met with, sometimes in terrors of mind, and
visions of horror; as was that wicked Metropolitan of Saxony, Adalbertus
Archbishop of Hannaburgh, who being highly born, but not so noble in grace as
blood, was wont to boast, that all his predecessors were pitiful obscure
Priests, and had no descent; nor was the Sea ever honored with a Gentleman
Bishop before he came into it; God met with the Atheism and pride of his heart,
for on a certain night he dreamt he was officiating at the Altar, and that he
saw one resusing his service, and heard a voice, Thou proud Prelate, Tu homo
nobilis and clarus non potes habere par^em cum humilibus, Melchior. Adam. Hist.
Eccles. p. 60. c. 19.
that gloriest more in thy stemm, then rendrest thy self glorious by the grace
of thy heart, have no portion with Gods contrite ones. Or, if God calls them
not home this way, he either chastens them by great misfortunes, in their
posterity, as he did the Conqueror, for his Sacrilege in throwing down 36.
Mother Churches, besides Monasteries, Villages, Chapels, Houses and Towns,
where men habited, to make new-Forrest, his Chase for beasts, which place was
fatal to his sons, (for William Cambden in Han^shire, p. 259.
Rufus and Richard, his two sonns, both perished therein, the one by pestilent
air, the other by the arrow of Tyrril; and Henry his grandchild was hanged in
the boughs of a Tree, pursuing his Game in this Forest,) according to the
fourth Commandment, To the fourth generation of them that hate him. Or, by
sweeping their posterity away, so were Ieroboams, 1 Kings 15. 29. So Baasha's,
1 Kings 16. 3, 4. So Ahabs, 2 Kings 21. 21. Which is the judgment David
imprecates on the wicked, Let his posterity be cut off, and in the generation
following let their name be blotted out, Psalm. 109. 13. Thus is irreligion in
the heart, and profaneness in the word, and works, enervative of the
prosperity and duration of Men and Families.

SECT. XIV.
Presents Injury and Oppression a Demolition to Men and Families.
SEcondly, No less to Men or Families harm and dock is Injury and Oppression,
which therefore is a great corrasive and supersedeas to them, because a breach
of that law of Charity and natural goodness which God end^wed man with at
first; and the degeneration from which, is great part of the guilt and curse of
nature; and as God once sent the Flood on the old World, to sweep away those
Monsters of violence that rooted in it, Genesis 6. 11. So does he continue his
secret curse on all unrighteous deali^g, and advantage of one man sinfully
taken against another: For, if God commands to fear him, Eccles. 12. 13.
and keep his Commandments, one chief whereof is to love our Neighbor as our
selves; and to do nothing to others, but that we would have done to our Matthew.
7. 12.
selves. Then to do evil to, and to extort from our Neighbor, poor or rich, by
force or fraud, his right; and to benefit our selves by his diminution, is a
breach of the Royal Law, and a sin meritorious of eternal severity, and of
the forerunners of it Temporal infelicity: and if the righteousness of him that
gives and disperseth abroad to the poor, remains for ever, and his horn shall
be exalted with honor, as is promised, Psalm. 112. 11. which refers not only to
the plenitude and perennity of his reward in Heaven; but also to the temporal
conspicuity and continuation of his line and succession: If, I say, Minima
commoda^ non minimo sectanies discrimine fin^iles aiebas esse aura^ hamo
piscantibus cujus obrupti damnum null^ captura pensari possit Octavius apud
Sue^onia.
this promise be to charity and goodness, then by the rule of contraries, to
despise and oppress the poor, and to take from men their right, by violence and
circumvention, is to proclaim a Nimrodique spirit in them, and to consent to
the entry of their enmity and violence on Gods record, to be ever before the
eye of his jealousy to root them out as evil doers, and to erace and eradicate
both root and branch of them. That God may bring upon these Hookers and Anglers
of Oppression, whose every fish that comes into their bayt is, his fierce
wrath, and take th^maway with Hooks, and their posterity with Fish-hooks, as by
his holiness he has sworn he will do, Amos chapter 4. ver. 2.

I know this Doctrine is little in credit in the world, whose projects are more
directed by success, then by conscience; nor are men apt to believe these
terrors, which they think are so far off, and so dubious in their postage
after them, as to hope they may not at all fall to their share, or not in their
days. The prosperity of the Turk, Tartar, and other the great Leviathans and
Behemoths, disputes this out of their belief, and commends a likeness of
practice to them; as for the menace of Scriptures, and the dehortations of
Churchmen, (...) Socrates apud Stobaeum. Sermon 55. Caducum malis artibus partum
nomen eamque vulgo quae gloria dic^^r apud doctos in^^miam esse non gloriam
Petrarch. lib de rem. utri Fortune. Dial 19.
they weigh them not; their will is their law, their tongue is their own, their
hands are at liberty, they own no Lord over them; tell them, that ill gotten
goods thrive not, that posterity is no better for them then the world is for
the Sun after its setting: which Socrates told his Countrymen, and that fame
from cruelty, and a name for truculency, is infamous, and they believe it not.
No, God himself is not authority enough to his own prevalence over their
incredulity; for that they lay not his threats to heart, but heedlesly pass
them by: yet the Scripture, which will not fail in any Iota of truth, is
positive against Injury and Oppression in every limb and link of it. Job 20.
19. Because he has oppressed and forsaken the poor, because he has violently
taken away a house which he builded not, surely he shall not feel quietness in
his belly, he shall not save of that which he desired. V. 20. There shall none
of his meat be left, therefore shall no ^ian look for his goods. V. 21. Though
God will break in pieces the Oppres^or. Psalm. 72. 4. Make the Oppressor to
cease. Isai. 14. 4. And take away his fury, Isai. 51. 13. Yea, destroy his own
house, for the Nations oppression, Ier. 22. 5. Though hand join in hand, the
wicked shall not be unpunished, but the seed of the righteous shall be
delivered, as the wise man's words are, Prove. 11. 21. Yet men trust in violence
and oppression, till such Conijahs be cast out, they and their seed, and no man
of their seed prosper, Ierem. 22. 28. and till there be judgment upon them
without remedy; which we may read in the subversion of all the Asian Monarchys,
and of all the mighty Favorites in the world, who, because they came to power,
and continued to use power not so equally as they ought, lost their power and
their governments by improbable means, and made way for the providence of God
that were to subvert and succeed them. And though some righteous persons and
governments have been determined and suppressed, as well as those that were not
such, which proceeds, as I have written before, from the pleasure of God in the
variations of his declared power; yet ought this as neither to make us restive
and despair, Nihil mihi tecum foatuna, non facio mei tibi copiaus scio apud te
Catones repell^ Va^i^ios fieri, nihil rogo. Ep. 118.
as he in Seneca, who because Fortune would not serve him as he would,
discarded it, and vowed no service to, or expectation from it, because Cato's
were frowned upon and Vatiniusses favored by it. So neither to make us cease
to be good, and embrace evil, to prosper by it; for that when God does suffer
evil men to Bonum virum in deliciis non habet, experitur. indurat, sibi illum
praeparat. Senec. lio. de Providentia.
prosper, he does but fatten them against the slaughter; leave them excuseless,
by giving them their portions in the blessings of this life: but when he denies
it to good men and just, Omnia mala ab illi^ remov^t, scelera and ^^agitia and
cogitallones improbas and avida consilia, ipso^ luetur a^ vindicat nunquid hoc
quoque a deo aliquis exigit ut bonorum virorum etiam sar^inas serve^, Idem.
it is by their hard usage to try and indurate them, that their virtues might be
more approved, and their reward most appreciated by them. It is enough that God
takes care of their minds, says Seneca, and preserves them from vices. God
must not be expected to look after the luggadge of good men; no matter what
poor scraps they have in their snapsacks, if there be courage in their minds.

As then good men are not to be fretters at Oppressors and injurious men's
prosperity, which is but for a time; so are they not to despond their own
reward, transcending theirs even in a visible return of good to them. For even
worldly perpetuation as sanctified and consistent with Gods eternal intendments
(without which they are not worth having but curses, and to be deprecated) are
sure to be the just and merciful man's portion. So Prove. 12. 7. Ier. 22. 28.
Genesis 35. 12. Deuteronomy. 4. 37. chap. 11. v. 9. chapter 34. v. 24. 2 Samuel 7. v. 12. c.
22. v. 51. 2 Kings 5. v. 17. 2 Chronicles. 20. v. 7. Psalm 18. v. 50. Psalm 25. 13.
Esaias 54. 3. c. 66. v. 22. and in many other places assertive, that the
Tabernacle of righteous men shall be in peace, that their seed shall be great,
and their offspring as the grass of the earth. Job 5. v. 24, 25. It is not
then, how much Wealth, how great Honors, how potent Friends, how politic
Counsels, how hopeful Successors, men leave in their Families, and are
carefully improved after them, though these be excellent outward comforts and
preliminaries to establishment: but how Just and Honest men's acquisitions of
them were; and how little they were Cruel, False, and Oppressive to others in
them, that leaves the blessing of God with them, and adds no sorrow to the
enjoyers of them; one Achans wedge in a Fortune is able to curse both it, and
them that have it: that is only durable riches and honor, which is Gods in the
aim of the seeker, and tends to God in the expression of the finder and
enjoyer; which because sacrilegious men, who rob God of his right, and prey
upon his patrimony, have not well considered; they have by this injury to and
oppression of God, intailed his curse and blast, upon their Families. So God
cursed the Sacrilege of Israel, Mal. 3. 6. Ye are cursed with a curse. Why? Ye
have robbed me, even this whole Nation; ^pist Bonisac. ad Aethelbaldum Regem.
Spelman in Conciliis p. 235.
and that in Tithes and Offerings, V. 5. And so he cursed Ce^lred and Osred,
two of the Saxon Kings, and sent miserable death upon them. The fret and
consumption of which is irreparable, by diligence or thrift, because till
expiation be made the sin is prosecuted in the punishment; Temps H. 8.
which, if I mistake not, Chief Justice Fitz Herbert, considering, on his
deathbed, called his children together, charging them, that they should
neither buy nor take into their hands, any of the Church-land, which the King
(said he) is now alienating; for if you do, my curse shall be upon you, and so
will Gods too; and it will eat out all the Patrimony I leave you. And Sir
Henry Spelman was resolute in the observation, that nothing had eaten out Noble
and Generous Families since H. 8. time, more then Churchlands. For if Injustice
between man and man is a sin of provocation to, and punishment from God; how
much more the injury that man does to God, and the prey such covetise and
violence makes upon his rights; whose man's life, breath, being is; and to whose
mercy and power they are everlasting debtors.

SECT. XV.
Insinuates Prodigality and Incirumspection, a ready way to ruin.
THirdly, Prodigality, and ill conduct of life, is a great worm to the
flourishing Gourd of an Estate. I rank them together, because much of
prodigality arises from ignorance of life, and the advantages or disadvantages
of it, in all the expectations and rencounters of it; for to spend vastly, and
with no eye to the possibility and duration of the supply, is, as if an
insecation should be made of every veyn in the body at once; Addiximus auimum
voluptati, cum indulgere initium omnium malorum est Senec. Ep. 110.
and is to the fortune by its plurality of vent a suitable disperiting: for
Estates are made up of savings as much as gettings; and so are they kept
together when got; parsimony being the penning up of the floats of gain, which
raises the depth of the estate, procuring therefrom not only supplies to
necessity, but inundations of purchase, Nor did or will ever any man grow in
his Estate, according to the estimation of common wisdom, who from what he
gets, or has given him, saves not the matter of his increase; therefore to know
what frugality is, has done, or yet can do, and to approve and well-mannage it,
is a great mastership in vital prudence, which is (...), the Prince of all
virtues, because it so governs the reins of life, that it keeps every
deportment and expression of man in its proper activity of regiment and
subordination, according to the law of respective prudence, (...), Solen. apud
Stob^eum. Sermon. 25.
and the quality of man's station, To God, To men, To a man's self; and thence
becomes as absolute in the virtues of practice, as the eyes are in the account
of senses, where the precedence is given taem. Nor dos any man here well as
wise and worthy, that vainly and loosly expends his time, parts, fortune,
^ealth, in courses of deboshery and dis^epute, which Plato consented to, when
^he saw a rude unthrift catching at the ^naps and offalls of a good
hous-keepers (...) Plato apud Stobaeum. Sermon. 75.
Table, O, said he, if you had oftener dined ^paringly, you might have supped
now more ^leasingly, and plentifully. Although then men are fondlily imposed
upon when they ^ancy that luxury is liberality, and that good husbandry is
beneath a great mind; which Tacitus condemns, Falluntur quibus luxuria sub
specie liberalitatis imponit. Tacit. 1. Hist.
as a fashionable gullery, and a fraud of circumvention, ^n great favor with
ayery youth, which ^elights in becoming thereby seduced, yet is prodigality the
truer argument of a low and mean soul, which looks at no end above that of a
beast, nor uses any more reason in provision for the end of his actions, then
beasts do: for God having given man reason to weigh and consider actions, and
events and according to his apprehension of them, to regulate himself, to or
from them, as they are dependent on Providence in the good or evil of them; not
to use our reason in things of such consequence, nor to be secured by its
efficacy, well expressed by us in the prudent use of time, friends, fortune,
pleasures, is to cast away the reverence of God, so enabling us, and to
reproach the dignity of the enablement rightly managed, and to lose the result
of those virtues, which by a rectitude of application to emergent providence,
might have been advantageous to us; for that is true liberality, which is
steered by the rules of reason, directive to, and associate with it; whereby
all those assistances to obligement, Ambitio and jactantia and effusio and
quidvis potius quam liberalitas existimands est, Cui ratio non constat, Plin.
Panegyr.
being orderly introduced, and improved according to the proportion of their
use, and created designment, without any diminution or diversion, become
praiseworthy for some men to do, and comfortable for other men to partake of:
For, as it is not strength only, but art and slight that brings great bodies
into motion; so is it not so much the bulk of the estate, as the way of
ordering and placing it, that appears operatively great. Thus sagacity fights
with few against a numerous Army of men; and with a little wheel great weights
are craned up; and with little cost good houswifery furnishes a Noble Table;
and with few ingredients the Physician prescribes a Cordial composition: it
being only the property of prudence, and experimental intuition into, and
intelligence of the world, and men in it, to frugally manage a little to great
acceptance; which is shostliest, and most comendably done, when the order of
marshalling, the seasoning of time, the efficacy of performance, both enters it
in, and brings it off. Hereupon, whatever advantage and courtesy, to the glory
of life, thrift and parsimony, (in the creditable regularity of it,) bring to
life, that prodigality defeats, and evacuates; which fatal activity of its
wast, does not only display its self in immense expense, Nondum satis omne
robur projecimus, adhuc quicquid est boni moris extinguimus levitate and
politura corporum, muliebres munditias an^^scessimus, co ores meret^icio
matro^is q^idem non (...), viri sumimus, Tener^ and molli ingressu suspendimus
gradum, non ambulamus sed incedi^us, Quotidi^ comminiscimur, per quae
virilitati siat iniuria, ut traducatur quia non potest ex^i Senec. 7 Nature.
Quest. c. 31.
and in triobular baubles to set out and pirk up a body of dust and vice with;
which Seneca gravely increpates the folly of the Romans, for, We have not yet
(says he) cast off all antique masculineness, such relics of virtue yet
remain, which are passing over their solid worth to the levity of fashions,
which invade virtue, and traduce it into a study of sining the body, rather
then adorning the mind; so that now we men exceed women for neatness: no soul
finger, no wrinkle, nothing must be otherwise then exact. Yea, we learn to lick
from those Curtezans, whose native beauties they think not leur enough, and
therefore curl and paint to entice more vehemently; and we walk so tenderly,
and with such state, as if we crept, not walked; and daily we busy our selves,
if not wholly to put off, yet in great degree to abate, Manliness. Thus that
Author. Not only, I say, is prodigality notified by these profusenesses, but
by negligence of which end goes forward, and overliness in managing what men
have, and ignorance and Invigilance in humouring and helping it to its best
accommodation. This Solomon reproaches, and sends the guilty of it to the Ant,
Prove. 6. 6. For as men are bodily unamiable, as well by not washing their skin,
not trimming their hair, not paring their nayls, not wearing decent clothes,
and keeping them decently, as by mayhems, scarrs and diseases; and as he is as
untrue a Steward for his Owners, who does not observe and take the first wind,
and put out all the sayls he safely may, and the vessel will well bear, in a
quick wind, by which his port will be soonest made, and the Owners fraught be
turned into effect; as he that casts them into the sea, or betrays them to
Pirates, because in both cases there is a failer of trust, and so a desert of
subsequent censure: so may he be accounted as true a waster of his estate, who
lets it have its own swing, and minds it not; as he that by vain and costly
living contracts debts upon it, and then is fain to sell it to pay them: For
Estates seldom stand at stay; if they increase not, they diminish. Let then the
restraints and guards of frugality be taken off, and there will nothing in men
of vice and latitude of living remain; but rashness, indiscretion, mistake,
disobligement, poverty, contempt, ^ervility; yea, men never do sordid things,
till their greedy vices pinch them for supplies; which because they cannot
furnish as they would, they must as they can. Which was the misery Agur
deprecated, in that passage, Giveme not poverty, lest I be poor and steal, and
take the Name of my God in vain. Pro. 30. 8. And which had William Rufus
avoided, who was by them put to extremities unbeseeming a King; Holingshed, p.
27.
(witness his ruining some to be benevolent to others:) he had never been
needy, at such disadvantages to his conscience and honor, as he was, who being
a Christian took money of the Jews, to force converted Jews to become Jews
again; and made so slight of Christianity, that he for money would violate any
right of it; Which unhappiness of his humor, verified the character that is
given of him, In such sort was he liberal, that therewith he was prodigal; and
in such wise stout of courage, as proud withal; and in such manner severe, as
he seemed cruel and inexorable. And so his virtues were absconded, and
derogated from, by his concomitant errors. All which confirms me in the
resolution to not only commend the abstayning from supernumerary expenses, but
from all diversions which render business and diligent overlooking estates
tedious, as those inconveniences which are equally destructive to Men and
Families. For true is that of Petrarch, No virtue is too big for its own sphere
that God has set it in; Nullum virtus spernit habitaculum, nisi vitiis
occupatum, visne tibi domus omnis amplissima videatur, cogi^a sepulchrum.
Petrarcha lib. 2. de remed. ut. Fortur. Dial 63.
nor do great minds undervalue low conditions; unless vices corrupt them, to be
curious and unsatisfied: Will thou think thine own house big enough for thee,
meditate it as thy sepulcher, in which thou layest down thy body, not to rise
to live here again, and that will calm thy pomp. Thus Petrarch.

SECT. XVI.
Impeacheth Idleness, as the direct track to Beggary and Devastation, both of
Virtue in the Mind, and Riches in the Purse.
FOurthly, Idleness, which brings naught home, is a great Corasive to a Family:
for it makes a plenary wast of all Ancestors acquisitions; and brands the
guilty of it with ingratitude to those that competently feathered their nests;
and with unnaturalness to those that are to succeed, whom they will leave bare,
and unsuitable to the president by which they were provided for. This Solomon
as productive of sad effects, pungently brands, Pro. 12. 24. The slothful shall
be under Tribute. His way is a hedge of Thorns, Pro. 15. 19. The desire of his
heart kills him, chapter 21. 25. It casts him into a deep pit, Pro. 19. 15. His
building decays and drops down, Eccles. 10. 18. His body is clothed with rags,
Pro. 3. 21. All which, amounting to want and contempt, is so far the spur to
ingenuity to avoid, that no labor, no hazard of life, is refused, to escape
and secure the spirit against it: For as the glory and happiness of a man is to
independ on any but God in Heaven, his Vicegerents on Earth, and those
subaltern and remote umbrages of supernity, which the conditions of inferiority
and superiority in a sort make necessary to the circumvehency of the World: so
is there no means more prevalent thereunto then Diligence, providently applied,
and humbly persisted in; which the wisdom of this World finds so great a
prevention, and so frank a supplement to the straits of livelihood, that it
pubishes it second, if not superior to descending patrimonies* And hereupon it
has been the care and practice of wise Nations and Parents to not only punish
idleness, as an extraordinary crime, Tholoss. Syn^tagm. Iuris universi lib. 39.
c. 6, etc.
but to permit no man to live, but to show to the Magistrate how he supported
himself: and no child to be brought up without some Manual skill, by which he
might be able to get a subsistence, and employ his mind, whatever revolutions
should happen to him: For since the world is casual, Irus and est subito, qui
modo Crassus erat; and Governments as well as Houses, Lands, Moneys, may cease
to be subsistencies; it is good to carry as the Nightingale of a good
conscience in the breast, so the Mine of a supply whence to eat or drink, in
the head or hands. Acts 10. 34.
For what St. Paul said in a case like this, These hands minister to my
necessities, may be true of them. When their Lands or Portions left or given,
may, like the charity of his deserting hearers, (...). Euripid.
signify little or nothing to them. So true is that of the Poet, For wealth
and nature do decay,
When thrift by pleasures chased away.


And how great a provision against Idleness this is, another Poet tells us. The
Idle vein no good does bring;
God to such wast gives no blessing.
That Idleness is productive of evil, (...). Sophocles in Iphigenia. Ad summa
pervenit quiscit quo gaudeat qui faelicitatem suam in a^iena potestate non
posuit. Senec. ep. 23. (...) etc. Instit. Cyri. lib. 1. p. 30. E^^aeminari
quidem otio and torperm pigritia, nihil allud est quam suffoca^e virtutem,
nutrire superbiam viamque construere ad Gehennam. Ep. 9.
and nothing but such dangerous effects, appears not only from the prealledged
miseries, whereby a man's happiness is in another, and not his own power; that
is, he is void of all help, be his condition never so pressing, unless charity
of others relieve him; but from the exercise of those virtues that in an
occupied course he may comfort his soul by, and win upon others by the Majesty
of his well-boaren affliction. Whereas Idleness lays a man open to all villainy
and misery. Which made grave Xenophon instruct Cyrus, that it is hard to
nourish one idle man, more an idle household, most of all an idle army.
Insinuating thereby, the consuming nature of Idleness, and the damage and
defamation that attends it. Which Petrus Blesensis remembered to an excellent
Scholar, and once his Pupil, who had a mind to be Priested, but was loath to
part with the pleasures and idleness of his Lay life, and to take upon him the
yoke of Christ. To study self-ease, and to wallow in idleness, is to chak
virtue, nourish pride, and furnish the soul for Hell. This the holy Ghost
seconds, in the severity he expresses against Idleness, Ezekiel. 16. 49. Behold,
this was the iniquity of thy sister Sodom, Pride, Fullness of bread, and
abundance of Idleness was in her, and in her daughters; and because she fed
high, and was at ease, therefore was she filled with beastliness, which nothing
but a fire from the Lord could consume. Which made St. Paul account it a deed
of the flesh, and caution young widows to beware it, lest they come within the
lash of those who learn to be idle, wandering about from house to house, and
thereby come to be talkers, and busiebodies, speaking things which they ought
not, 1 Timothy 5. 12, 13. Yea in that idle souls shall suffer hunger, Prove. 19.
15. And virtue cateth not the bread of Idleness, chapter 31. v. 27. And our Lord
lays it as a crime in the Parable, Why stand ye here idle? Matthew. 20. 6. It
may be concluded, that Idleness is inclusive of all turpitude, and they that
are idle will be every thing that is mischievous: for the mind is a quick and
sprightfull part of man, active on something, which, if not good, will be bad,
there being between them no medium; for he that is not employed in good, will
be soon the tenant of sin, and the vassal of vice: Which was the reason St.
Bernard writing to a Monk, Sis semper occupatus ni diabelus te invenia^
otiosum.
charges him to be never out of employment, lest the Devil approach and find
him idle. For then are men in danger of his temptations, when they are loose
from engagements of virtue; which all men are, who propound to themselves
nothing but themselves; that is, the pleasure, luxury, and gaity of their
lives; which had Plutarch done, he would not have made his house (...), the
house of Learning, as Plato called Aristotle's: Lege Rualdum in vita Plutarchi
c. 15. and cap. 19.
nor have written so much, and so well, in a life of so much employment as his
was, nor had the great actions of Peace and War, Learning and Law, with the
Volumes written of them, been transmitted to us. For to perfect and compose
these, nothing but fedulity and avarice of time hoarded up particularly for
such purposes, could avail.

Since then Idleness is so apparent a road to vicious life, in all the
extravagancies of it, it must needs be a certain and unavoydable way to the
extirpation and diminution of Men and Families; which are only and best built
and enlarged by frugality and employments of Revenue and Fortunary addition or
income.

SECT. XVII.
Debates the Infection and Danger of bad Company, to make a Man worse, and a
Family less then but for them they both would be.
FIfthly, as Idleness, so bad Company is the Appollyon and Whirlpit of all
hopes by men and their endeavors from good Nature, Mores graves in spectaculis
quis requirat? ad circum nesci unt convenire Catones, quicquid illic gaudenti
populo dicitur injuria non putatur locus est qui defendit excessum Theodoric.
Ep. 27 lib. 1. Var. opud Cassiodor.
graceful Education, and natural addiction to employment: For it leads a man
not to see, hear, and observe Cato's, nor to attend wisdoms posts; Nor to learn
the matter of our old age glory, and the sustentation of our last and best
days credit; but to Theaters and Houses of Game and Intemperance; where
nothing but vanity and ruin nessles, And to the love of which seldom any thing
of Heroique import is consequent. Whence it comes to pass, that because Company
is as the Sword-fish, or Shark, that takes of^ whatever limb or part of
towardliness it can come to: The wisdom of men has deemed it the infection and
plague of youth, over which may be written, Lord have mercy upon us; since
Company Gangrened and Mortified by Vice, are the incurable ruins of those they
wind themselves into, and seduce unto their own likeness. Many a man had surely
been good, had not his love betrayed him to his company, and his company
assigned him to their sin. When a man is a brother to Dragons, and a companion
to Owls, as Job's words are, Job 30. 29. He can be no bird of Paradise, no
creature for rooms of State, and for heirs of beauty and choiceness to behold
with pleasure. O quam bonum tempus in remala perdis? quanto nunc satius erat.
amicos parare imi micos mitiga^e. Remp. ^administrare transserre in res
domesticas operam que circumspicere quid alicui possis facere mali, quod aut
dignitati ejus aut patrimonio, aut corpori vulnus af^ligas. Senec. l^b 3. de
Ira^. 28.
Seneca appeals to the Prodigals of his time with this reasoning, O how many
good minutes do thou wast in bad actions? were it not much more manly to
addict thy self by merit to purchase friends, and mitigate foes, to interest
thy self in the good order of the public, and to regulate affairs wisely at
home, then to prog up and down how to spite and injure thy brother in nature
and Country; and to watch how thou may make his body miserable, his honor
suffer, or his fortune be lurched? Thus he; and not amiss, for ill company is
the seminary of all mischief; and the forsaking of them the way of security and
credit. When a man walks with wise men, he shall be wise, but a companion of
Fools shall be destroyed, (...) Stus. Clemens. Pauci sunt qui consilo se suaque
disponant, caeteri ^orum more quae fluminibus innatat, non eunt sed feruntur.
Senec. Ep. 23.
Prove. 13. 20.

I know, nothing is more usual, than to keep company at all rates, and with all
persons; without choice or fear, as Boats on Rivers, so men in humors, rather
are carried by the eddy of custom and opinion, than by the line of reason, in
their company and their recreation; and hard it is to persuade them, that
company is ought but a Cipher to the numeral Letters of their commanding
Virtue; O! they are their own Masters; and they know what to take and leave;
and they are wise enough to distinguish between the Date and the Stone, the
Gold and the dross, the benefit and the danger of any company; not considering
that Vice is cunning, and ore-reaching, and while they delight, they overcome,
which adapteth that of Solomon to these con^idents, as their caution and
correction. Not who so keeps merry, and witty, and intelligent company, but
who so keeps the Law, is a wise Son; but he that is a companion of riotous
men, shameth his Father, Prove. 28. 7.

O, what Caitisss were the High Priests, and Scribes, though they sat in Moses
chair, who had Judas the Traitor for their companion? and how near was Peter to
ruin, who in the High Priest's Hall, came almost to be one of those
Fanatiques, who cried out, Let him be crucified; so dangerous a taint is ill
company, that to use it, is the in next degree to delight in ill company, and
that is, to be wicked; so impressive is ill company, that it by degrees, winns
and transmutes their companions nature into their own likness, (...).
as Plants become complyant and identique with the soil they are set in, says
Philo; Hence comes the minds corruption, the life's shame, the credits blast,
and the prosperites determination: And, I have often thought it one of the
gracious tokens of Gods goodness to me, to have a judgment of, an aversion
from, and a power against evil company, which concession of God to me, I have
ever held my chief tutelar; for it is his grace alone that directed me to, and
has ever kept me in, the love of good company, and that when I have been in
ill, has preserved me from the power of their wit, the se duction of their
wiles, the influence of any pleasure, or other charm upon me: so that now I can
hear of ill company without wonder, know them without engagement, endure them
without rudeness to them, and pray for them, in pity to their souls, that they
may see and abhor their evil hearts and ways. This, I thank God, I freely can
do; but my delight is in the company that fears God, loves virtue, promotes
learning, lives regularly, are not lofty but mild, not sordid but neat, not
lucigirous but open faced; neither prodigal nor loose, neither capricious not
tepid, but mediocriously tempered, between pleasant and grave, as either
extreme is useful to them, and symbolizes with the occurrences of their lives,
and is regent in the tempers of their natures; and such as they I have found,
the Sunshine in the cold, and the shade in the heat of life; (...). St.
Chrysostom.
the Mine of all supply, and the Womb of all Fertility. The Sea is not fuller
of drops, the sky not more infinite in breaths of air, and blasts of wind; the
Sun not more replete with rays, the Earth not innumerabler in its
particello's of dust, then good Companions are of delight, comfort, profit,
praise. Nor can the deepest degrees of misery give a truer description of woe,
Primo inde strui potest unde destruitur, nemo ab eo illuminatur a quo
contenebratur. Tertul lib deprescrips. advers Hereses.
and tristicity, then bad companions, in their fatality amount to, and in the
dreadful conclusion occasion to men, which makes me not more delight in
company, as releases from melancholy, then as examples and instigations to
virtue. For as there can be no greater a help to enlarge a Family, then by good
companys which sharpen the parts, exercise the civility, propagate the merit,
advantage the marriage, comfort the consciences of their friends, to whom they
are all that health and sickness; riches and poverty, every condition requires
from them, and they are able to express toward them. So is bad company the
very sink and lurch of all wit, thrift, sobriety, morature, preferment, and
renders the relations uncomfortable in the defeat of their hoped for contents.
The bad friends, the bad husbands, the bad sonns, the bad Christians, the bad
Englishmen, that are, owe their deterioration to bad company. Wicked men, and a
wicked Devil, cooperating with their own wicked hearts; and thence are they so
totally vitiated.

SECT. XVIII.
Treats of ill Chosen and Imprudent Marriage, as the Wreck of Men and Families.
SIxthly, unfortunate Marriages are decays of Men and Families: For this is
the dismal inquisition, whereinto whosoever is brought, by his lustful or
imprudent heresy, (for it is sageless obstinacy, and too much leaning to their
own selves, that lodges men in this dungeon) never sees the light of a happy
day, or moment, after it; but is, if not wholly lost, yet overwhelmed in those
cares and distractions that are parental of, and prefational to, unrescuable
bonds, and merciless contempts. Now, because I have laid so heavy a charge on
unfortunate marriages, it will be necessary for me to discover what I
understand by unfortunate. For, though unfortunate is unfortunate in every
notation and accept, yet every incongruous marriage may not fall under the
pungency of the censure in the full of what is thus expressed; though in some
considerations of time and persons relating to it, and in some degrees under
the capacity of it. Far be it then from me to think every unequal marriage
unfortunate; because then I shall make more unhappy marriages then I fear are
happy; the most marriages of young persons, or those unknown in dispositions
either to other; or those unequal in years, education, complexion; or those the
regen^^ wherein are advantage: being the counsels of friends, the prevalences
of interest, not the fruit of choice, being in this sense unfortunate. Nor do
I under the term of unfortunate reduce those marriages where every good virtue
is present, though not commended by a suitable fortune; which to some persons
is useless, they having enough before, and so happy enough, that they have the
opportunity to oblige and eminentise a person whose worth wants only their
addition to make it Honorable or Worshipful; No such thought have I in this
term unfortunate; nor do I think religion, beauty, modesty, wisdom, thrift,
courage, constancy, less then counterpoises to any money or land fortune, with
which they are not always presential; God not ever, if often lading all his
blessings in one vessel, but dispersing them, that every one might have some
largess of his love, and some Magnetique to draw the exchange of love to it.
Nor is merit less then valuable, if it suffer under the greatest temporal
diminution; nor do brave spirits adheare to Crowns less, because they are set
upon rotten posts, but stand most fixedly to them, to testify their homage to,
and courage for those divine endowments, are not so much the hopes of
preferment, as the obligations of love. Not in this sense then is unfortunate
to be always, or by me understood. But by unfortunate I mean, unfit,
Matrimonia inter valde dispares infalicissimos exetus habere solent. Sanches de
matrimon Sacram. lib. 1. disp. 12. 11. p. 37.
improper and unsuitable marriage, where men and women suit not each with
other, but are in their marriage like two perfect contraries, pugnant with,
opposite to, displeased at, inharmonious in, their conjugality. So true is that
of H. 5. to his mother, dissuading him from marrying the Lady Gray, small
pleasure takes a man off all that ever he has besides, Holinshed, p. 726.
if he be wived against his appetite: which he spoke, alluding to that lurch of
the pleasure and felony of the contrivance of marriage, under an incongruity of
humor, and delectation of temper and person. Sanchez lib. 2. disp 55. p. 149.
And though I think it not always a sure rule to build infallibility upon
examples, God not walking always in the same path of providence; nor decreeing
a like event to all marriages of like nature; but allowing various events of
good and evil to them. Nor are we concerned in events, which is his peculiar,
and subject only to his jurisdiction, our duties and credits being responsible
only to the prudence of our actions, not the issues of them, which are above
us. Yet is it highly important to use all discretion, that the truth and
vehemence of love, and a due dependence on Gods ability to bless us above all
outward advantages, will permit in our marriages; and that done (with as little
alloy to the freedom of our choice, as possible can be) to refer our selves in
that estate, and the consequences of it to God. Thus no doubt did that virtuous
Lady Queen Margaret, wife to H. 5. and mother to H. 6. who took to her husband
Owen Teuder, a gallant brave Gentleman, whom she loved, Holinshed, p. 615.
and under the blessing and bond of that marriage produced amongst other
children the renowned H. 7. the glorious Ancestor of our now gracious
Sovereign, whom God has made the second Uniter of all the Roses and flowers of
peace and plenty in this Nation.

The state of marriage then being founded in a mutuality of corporal and
soulary compliance, containing in it the warrant of all intimate knowledge, and
natural mixture of kindness, If the irritation to such familiarity and honest
sensuality be not from the complacency of fancy and the imperation of kindness
often obcaecating judgment, whereby the body and soul each of other are
inseparably united in an oneness of indivision, all the content, veracity, and
matrimonial confidence recedes and becomes lax and disloyal; yea, without this,
marriage is so far from a remedy that it proves the meetest repository, and
safest color of all imaginable lust. Yea, and the nest of all brawles and open
dissociation. Thus was Jane Shore disposed to the enamourings of E. 4. For she
was young, given to pleasure and pomp; which her husbands calling not well
allowing, not yet suiting with his godly temper, whose delight was to be in his
calling, and intent upon that; she, I say, disliking him for this, so opposite
to her way, and having no fixed affection to him, forsook his counsel and
advice first, Holinshed p. 724.
then his company, then her own conscience in the checks of it, and at last
wholly waved him, as he unwillingly did her. And so her excellent endowments
heard ill while she lived, and she ended miserably her ill chosen life: And
where the Honor is preserved, the best effect of unequal matches is discord
and unpleasancy; either by occasion of accidents, which presetled love would
have obviated or consolated under; or by the interfering of eager and
unmortified tempers one against another; for though men are not often Fitz
Lewisd, Cambden Bri^annia p. 442.
nor have the fire of their wives displeasures bin destructive to them or their
wedding days; nor do wives know the hidden mischief of their husbands hearts,
before the nine days wonder be over (for we men are often cunning and conceal
our hidden deceits which I would to God were written on our foreheads) yet too
soon the fruits of their preengaged seductions will appear not only in the
light skirmishes, but in the foughten fields of disaffection and enmity. Not
only says Petrarch do suspicions, complaints, Nec ad mensam nec in thalamo
tutus eris, multum Tempus litigio vacabit. Media nocte pugnabitur. lib. 1. de
remed. u^r. Fort. Dial. 65.
and little ruffles mingle themselves with these mistaken loves, but immortal
duels, and open hostilities, at bed, at board, at all times, not midnight
excepted: therefore he counsels good men, To learn to suffer, to forsake all
for their own wife, who must be, or else she will not be quiet, the wreck and
rock to rend apieces all friendship. This I would not have Englished, but to
lesson Parents and Guardians to great discretion and conscience, not to force
or betray their children or charges to persons they disaffect; nor to brow-beat
or lessen their respect to and care for them, Uxorem habeo Formosam R. Venenum
dulce* compedes aureas, splendidam servilutem. Idem Dial. 66.
if they choose rather not to marry then to marry at their time, or to their
person preferred. For, if they do, the best expectable from such a rape and
violence upon them, is to account their state a sweet poison, Golden Fetters,
splendid thraldom. For every Lover is a Sovereign, Est enim amor latens ignis
gratum vulvus, sapidum venenum, dulcis amaritudo, delectabilis morbus, jucundum
sopplicium, blanda (...). Petrarcha lib. 5 de remed ute. Fortun. Dial. 69.
and desires to be absolute in its power, to give its self; and since love is a
sudden fire, a welcome wound, a welrelished poison, a sweet bitterness, a
delightful disease, a pleasant punishment, and a sweet death; is it not
reasonable to allow those that are parties to these bitter sweets to be free?
sure it ought to be so, unless Parents and Guardians will have their children
and trusts free of what is not their own; which they are seldom free from
being, or dying for grief, who are lugged to marriage as Felons are to Goals;
Note this.
or frighted to it, or beguiled in it, as children are by Bug-bears and
Rattles. And those Parents and Friends that decry the libery of treats and
impudicity of freedoms, between Men and Women, had best consider, whether it be
not the consectary of their overruling pleasure, upon their Children and
Pupils: for nothing is more the fosterer of stolen love, then the anticipation
of real love to persons beyond just, valuable, and religious exception. Nor is
there any thing that will sooner and with more contentful efficacy restrain the
exorbitancy of women, who bring the Matron natured of them under prejudice for
their licenciousness, Non mutata faeminarum natura est sed vita, nam cum
virorum licentiam aequaverint corporum quorum virilium vitia aequaverant non
minus pervigelant, non minus potant and oleo and mero viros provocant. Ep. 95.
while ( as Seneca complains of the Roman Famosa's They take liberty equal to,
yea above men, sitting up whole nights, drinking, playing, and toying, as men
of deboysture do, yea, provoking them to do more then they otherwise would;)
then by the resolution that they see sober men have to avoid them, and to
oblige Ladies of more self-denial and modesty. Nor will men persist in such
vanities, if they see it is distasteful to women, from whom no preferment is
hereby like to befall them. The permission then of love to run in its own
channel, and the non-obstruction of power in its free and natural course, is
that which I esteem the best expedient to rectify the disorders of marriages,
and to render them (with other moderate accommodations) Fortunate. Nor will it
be any hard task to persuade a well-bred woman to stay at home, look to her
houshold-affaires, and observe her husband, In Menone, p. 409.
which Plato makes a woman's virtue, if such husband of hers be beloved by her,
keep at home with her, and be obliging as a wise man should be to her. For
without this indispensable sine qua non, love, which is grounded upon likeness
of humor and proof of constancy, I conclude little fortunateness in the
promise of any Match: For though to some persons who are not touched with the
virtue of love; nor have any sense of it in marriage further then negative, or
in non-abhorrence, whose ayms are Wealth, Friends, settlement, though they
admit all incongruities and discouragements of a more generous nature, so their
avarice or popularity be gratified. Though, I say, to these deliberate Lovers,
whose love is not only not stronger then death, but weaker then water, and
overcome by the dirt and pelth of money, and moneyworth, All Matches that are
rich, and accomplishable of design, are fortunate, and as they think prove
well; yet to others whatever marriage is not affectionate, religious, and
symmeterious, can never be accounted other then unhappy, and often destructive
to the body, soul, fame, fortune, family, relations of them: Nor do the Bills
for Alimony, the Suits for divorce, the owned and open incontinencies, the
stolen loves, the frequent pawnings of Jewels and Lands, the rendings asunder
of Families, derive themselves and their disorders from any truer parent then
from these. For though in the Roman Commonwealth, In Civitate Domini, in monte
sancto ejus, hoc est in Ecclesia, Nuptiar^m non solum vinculum, verum etiam
Sacramentum ita commendatur, ut non liceat viro uxorem suam alteri tradere,
quod in Republ. tunc Romana non solum minime culpabiliter verum etiam
laudabiliter Cato fecisse prohibetur. Tertul. lib. de Fide and O. perib. c. 7.
men might lend their Wives, and probably borrow other men's, as to them seemed
best, which Strabo says, in defense of Cato, lending his Martia to Hortensius,
was, according to (...), the old Roman Law, yet, when as in the Church of God
with us Christians, Tertullian says, such customs are abhorred and forbidden,
there ought to be greater care to choose well, because change men cannot without
sin. Which considered, I do (not I think without cause) make unfortunate
Marriages one of the true causes of the Decay of men and Families.

SECT. XIX.
Induces wicked and expensive children, the wastes of honor and riches in a
Family.
SEventhly, Another cause of decay of Families, are foolish Children; for, if
Families be carried on in their Succession, by Children supplying the
departures of Parents, and the introduction of one Generation upon the
cessation of another; then children that are wicked and improvident, are never
like to maintain or augment the glory of their Ancestors, who were wise and
pious: For, since glory and Gods blessing of enduring is the reward of his fear
and grace in them, so recompensed upon them, their virtue not being in their
children, Gods reward to them will not be hereditary to them, this the Prophet
Job, for so his Spirit testifies his endowment to be, exemplifies to us, in Chapter
5. v. 3, and 4. I have seen the foolish taking root, but suddenly I cursed his
habitation; His children are far from safety, and they are crushed in the
gate; neither is there any to deliver them. So Chap. 20. v. 10. His children
(speaking of the wicked) shall seek to please the poor: so Chap. 12. v. 17. How
often is the Candle put out; and verse. 19. God lays up his iniquity for his
children; that is, God punishes his unjust dealing with prodigal and loose
children, who shall riotously waste his injurious leavings, and render
themselves children of fools, children of base men, vilder then the earth, as
the words are. Chap. 30. 8.

These foolish, because wicked, children, the Holy Ghost reproaches in the
notion of his wayward Israel, whom he calls children of rebellion, Isa. 1. 2.
corrupters of themselves, v. 4. lying children, Chap. 30. 9. children of
transgression, Chapter 57. 4. backsliding children, Ier. 3. 14. sottish children,
Chap. 4. 22. forsakers of God, Ier. 5. 7. children of whoredoms, Hos. 1. 2.
children of iniquity, Hos. 10. 9. children of the Aethiopians, Amos 9. 7.
children of disobedience and wrath, Ephesians. 2. 2. covetous cursed children, 2
Pet. 2. 14. and can these children, who are thus ingrain'd in wickedness, be
expected to be within Gods care and blessings; or will he build up those who so
pull down his glory in their hearts and lives? Indeed, children are not only a
blessing, but the best of earthly blessings, because the continuers of
Families, Names, and Ages, in which regard they are not said to be man's, but
Gods delight, Children, and the fruit of the womb, are his delight, Ps. 127. 3.
but then they are good and gracious children, that hear instruction, Prove. 4.
1, children of obedience, children that apply their hearts to Wisdom; they that
are old in understanding, when young in years, and are grave in their toys, and
sober in their extravagancies, that speak and do as those whose age and wit
will give each other the lie, and are reconciled by nothing less then a
miracle; such children as have their fortunes in their heads, their preferments
in their faces, and their bucklers in there tongues, such as like Alfius Flavius
in Seneca, who when a Lad, spoke with applause, Semper commendabat eloquentiam
ejus aliqua res ex^ra eloquentiam, in puero eloquentiae latrocinium eras
ingenii aetas, Controv. lib. 1, decl. 1.
and so settled to Cestius, no puisne Advocate, that he not only commended,
but feared the force of his eloquence; who was eloquent above eloquence, and
did whatever he did, not only above others, but (as it were) above himself;
such Sons (causing their deceased father, to live afresh in the gratulations of
men to their memory, for being causal of blessings to Ages and Nations by the
production of them) are honors and enlargements to Families, Raymundi Comitis
Provinciae Phocensis quatnor filiae, quatuor summis regibus Christiani Orbis
nupt^ erant. P. Aemilius, lib. 7. Licaon secundus Arcadum Rex filios habuit 26.
omnes clarissimarum Vrbinm sunda^ores. Pausan. in Arcadicis.
who by them are clarificated and Sydneyzed, but to have children that shame
their Genitors, and dislustre their Stocks, is a sore curse, better never be
generatively viril, than to beget children to be Boutefeau's and earthquakes to
Ages, how much rather would pious Predecessors have wished they had died
uncontinued in their Male line, then to leave Sons Unthrifts of their
Patrimony, careless of their honor, forward in vice, intent on villainy,
engaged in confusion. 'Twas a serious profession of renowned King James to his
Son Prince Epist. to Basilicon Doron.
Henry, I protest before that great God, I had rather not be a Father, and
childless, than be a father of wicked children. It Is a sad upbraid that a
father gives his unfortunate Son, as the father of that Roman did, to whom,
taking part with Catiline in the conspiracy against the Commonwealth of Rome,
Te Reipub. non Catilinae genui
he said, I begot thee (sirrah) for the Commonwealth, not for Catiline, and
had I thought thou would have proved a Rebel, I would never have ventured
for thy being and birth, nor when thou had been born have thus educated thee;
children, that like Simeon and Levi are brethren in that evil which makes their
father stink in the nostrils of the people of their land; children that are
born for the fall and fate of Ages and Governments, that rave and rage till
they have confounded Heaven and Earth, and disinfluenced, as much as in them
lies, the good influences of both, such Attila's, whose gloryings are, that
they are scourges and devastations to well constituted settlements and
habitations of order and wealth; such Herod's as make nothing of the heads of
John Baptists, to gratify a rash oath made to a vain Mistress: Such children,
who are grievous, wicked, stupid, disobliging, do not bless the womb that bears
them, and the paps that give them suck, but curse and traduce them; For, as to
separate the Rays from the Sun is to deprive the Sun of light, Avelle a sole
solis radinm, and non elucet, rivum a font, and arescit, ramum ab arbore, and
siccatur, membrum a corpore, and putrescit, separa filium a devotione paterna,
and jam non est filius sed frater and collega eorum quibus dicitur vos ex patre
Di^bolo estis, apud Petr. ^lesens. Ep. 47.
and the River from the fountain, is to render it dry; and the Bough from the
Tree, to dead it; and the Member from the body, to perish it: so to sever a Son
from his Father in similitude to him in true qualities dignificative of him, is
to make him appear of a Son of a wise and good father, a colleague of them that
are of their father the Devil, as the Archbishop of Canterbury Temps, H. 3.
wrote to H. 3. And the reason why this is, is because, as a wise Son makes a
glad Father, so a foolish Son proves heaviness to his Mother, Prove. 10. 1. and,
as Wisdom is said to build her house, so Folly is branded with the demolition
of it, and that with both hands, Prove. 14. 1. which warrants the Position, That
foolish children are the bane and minoration of a Family, and that because
Folly harkneth not to the precepts of Wisdom, which are preventive of ruin, as
well as inductive of endeavor, such as are harkening to Counsel, Prove. 13. 1.
avoiding vanities, which are a grief to the Father, Educantium saelicior laus
est de filiorum probitate laudari, Alatharicus Rex, Epist 2^. lib 8. variar.
Cassiod.
Prove. 17. 25. embracing the fear of the Lord, Prove. 24. 21. observance of the
Law, Prove. 28. 7. acceptance of correction and instruction, Prove. 29. 17, 21.
all which declined, the curse of God comes upon a Person and Family to root it
out, which caused the son of Syrack very gravely to advise, Desire not
multitudes of unprofitable children, though they multiply rejoice not in them,
except the fear of the Lord be with them. Eccles. 16. 1, 2. For by one that
has understanding shall the City be replenished, but the kindred of the wiked
shall speedily become desolate.

SECT. XX.
Treats of Gods blast upon the Endeavors and Achievements of Men, the
unavoydable Eclipse, and irreparable Diminution of their Families.
Eighthly, the eighth and last, but not the least means of the ruin and decay
of Families, is, Gods blast upon the Virtues, Endeavors, and successions of a
Family. For this is the storm in which no vessel of humane art, no cable of
secular contexture, no project of worldly hold, can avail; not only because it
is anticipative of all wisdom and prevention: As appeared in Caesar, who
refused the counsel of Pansas, and Hirtius, to be wary and strict in
government, and who despised the predictions of the Astrologers, the lesson of
his Calphurnian dream; and laid aside the papers given him in detection of the
conspiracy against him. So fell it out to Archias of Thebes, Charles the last
Duke of Burgundy, and the Duke of Guise, and in that great Duke of Buckingham's
death by Felton that Villain, Sir H. Wottons character, D. p. 106, 107, 114,
116. Ineluctabilis fatorum vis cujus cum fortunam mutare constituit consilia
corrumpit. Paterculus lib. 2. p. 48. edit. Lipfii.
against which Fate he was forewarned by the Lord Goring, by an old woman in
the way, by Sir Nicholas Throgmorton, by the mis-givings of his own thoughts:
yet he (Generous soul as he was) despised all, being made confident by his
courage and resolution; the force of fate being ineluctable: For when it should
endeavor avoydance, it suborns prudence to incredulity, or groundless
resolution, whereby it works its end. Whereby not only is Gods purpose aversive
to men's prudence, but positively conclusive of what shall befall them, in every
circumstance of it. For though Mauritius the Emperor foresee in his Dream,
that Phocas shall ruin him and knows what he ought wisely to do to prevent it,
yet all in vain. And therefore if God blast, who can bless? what shall succeed
without or against him? Not devout prayers, not excessive humblings, not rich
gifts, not potent friends, not personal worth, not the love of living, nor the
legacies of dying friends, can stop the leak of a Families Immersion: Nay, if
any family were so happy to have the cream of mankind in it, were it the Nest
of all the Eagles, Nightingals, Unicorns, Phoenixes, (as I may so say) of
mankind; were Cicero, Hortensius, Crassus, Cato, Sulpitius, Brutus, Calidius,
Calvus, Caesar, Corvinus, Pollio Asinius, Varro, and the rest, whom Petrarch
calls, Lib. 2. p. 307.
Ingenia eminentia: Were these, added to by all the later Heroiques, of one
family and confederacy, yet would they be Physicians of no value, to recover
that family from Gods blast. As when God blesses, every thing contributes its
service, so do things equally minister to his curse: Not Babels Walls strength,
or its Towers height, nor Senacheribs army, not Herod's. Oratory, not Iulians
craft; not Prior Boltons Hermitage on the top 16 H. 8. Holinshed, p. 882*
of Harrow-Hill, will avail; they are all as weak subterfuges, as miserable
comforters: The best ingenuity and artisice of security and augmentation, is to
pray aid of God, and to beseech his presence with men, in their spirits by
grace, in their actions by prudence, in their designs by success, in their
correspondence with men by fidelity and favor, which when conducted by him,
who is the Intellects fountain, the hearts steer, the tongues conduct, the
foots guide, the friends motive, the foes disappointment; when, I say, he who
is, and there is none besides him, becomes men's in the effects of his power and
goodness to them, then the springs of second causes flow freely, the winds and
waves of opposition become calm and still. Thus good men in all ages have had
their ends upon the World; though it has set it self against them, and
execised all cruelty to them: Witness the Primitive Martyrdoms, in which though
the bodies of holy men were trucidated, and their credits and fortunes
plundered from them by the malice of the Gospels adversaries; yet, maugre all
their vehemence, whose interest it was to make the credit of Christianity
creditless, and the professors of persecuted Truth, vile; yet those dry bones
invigorated, and those rams horns bore down the walls of their Jericho, because
God was in the cause, and in the Champions that suffered for it, Gatakerus in
Antonino commentar, p. 386, 387.
who is resolved to abet his Justice and Authority, against the malice and
Tyranny of the World; the perduration of which, and its carriage in a way of
conviction and efficacy, against the high-flown resolution of and subtle
undermining, that the Ethniques ages discovered toward it. The result of
which, is directive to men, in the fortunation and felicitous conduct of their
actions, in any kind whatever. If men would not have the Watchman watch in
vain, Psalm. 127. 1. Nor, the labourer earn Wages, to put it in a bag with
holes, Haggai 1. 6. If men would live long, and see good days, Psalm 34. 12. 1
Pet. 3. 10. If they would see their childrens children, to many Generations,
and those wise and wealthy; there is no other nor better way to accomplish
these seize, then to comprecate Gods aid and blessing. This is to be wise
with a witness, with the witness of all wise men, and all wise ages: And
without this, Achitophels policy becomes folly, and Iulians zeal for Ethnicism
the price of that Arrow which vindictively wounded him, and let out with his
life the rancour of his Apostasy; yea, when men contrive a project without,
and in desiance of God; it is just, the sequel of that insolence should be
shame and subversion. Never any standard was set up against God, but lost it
self, and all that adhered to it. And therefore, O ye Nobles and Gentry, whose
the Generous and Divine aim is to preserve and enlarge your Families; desist
your other prudences in comparison of this Masterpiece, which miscarries not;
Gatakerus in Annotat. ad M. Antonium p. 235.
set your faces toward God, seek his cooperation with, and benediction upon
you. Be not faithless, but believe; for God to unhorse the confidence of man,
and to spoil the trust in Princes, often despised the day of great, and
advanced the day of small things; that is, he has made Austrian greatness to
stoop to Copper Kings; The Emperor so called the King of Sweden.
his little and contemned appearances to prevail against all formidable
oppositions; for he looks not to the goodly Eliabs of our outsides; nor is
taken with the Micholls of our transport, but he looks upon his own Image, and
at his own glory, and according to the Instrumentality of them to those ends,
so he furthers or impedes them. Hence is it that dangers formidable, like
Spanish Armadoes and Invasions, he changes into Morris Dances upon the Waves of
dislustre, and makes the very Engineers of them to Sir H. Wotton, p. 23.
confess, that Virtues, though they are within the chance, yet they are not
ever within the power of ill Fortune: and good things that we promise fixed
upon us, and p. 97.
retreat and die useless to us. Yea, in Families, because men look usually upon
the prodigiousest wit, or the beauteousest person, or the valiantest Spark of
men's packs, for the hopes of the house, as if the day of victory, and the field
of greatness, were to be a present to his merit, and to be won by him;
therefore God jealous of his glory, in men's lavishing attributions to it, while
they luxuriate to such Idols, of their own institution, either removes by
death, or disappoints by accident, the prevalency of such their hope, and puts
a period to their felicity then, when they thought it most advanceable. This
has bin so, this will be so; and that to put the question of Gods Paramontship
out of question, and to confirm the certainty of no certainty in any prop or
reserve without him; and to undeceive us of that distrust and undervaluation of
weak and worthless things, adjuvated by him; Saepe Deorum permissa honorati ora
sunt ossa pauperis philosophi qui vitam duri^er egit quam princiti qui
delicaus^ime vixeta, Antonin. Ep. ad Egesippum.
since how contemptible soever instruments in disjunction from him are, yet in
conjunction with him, and subserviency to him, they are mighty and regent.
Which truth hardly assented to by the Idolaters of sense, and the magnifiers of
success, outstands all the violencies and attaques of this worlds artillery;
and by God concurring it, makes good its ground against worldly cavil, and
incredulity; for God sorsakes not his confidents, nor do they receive a
bafflle, Sicut qui deum audit non est surdus, fic quem deus audit non est
mutus. Petrarch. lib 2. de rem utr. Fort. Dial. 103.
or defeat, whose help and hope he is, For they that fear ths Lord shall renew
their strength as the Eagle, they shall run and not be weary, they shall walk
and not faint, Esaias 40. last. That is, God will give them blessings
extraordinary, and lofty, above the usual sore of blessings, and blessings
durable and unlanguishing, blessings that shall outweigh sons and daughters;
he will give them so much of these lower springs as shall keep their names sweet,
and give them all they can receive of the glory and satisfaction of his
intuition and fruition. For such honor have all his Saints. Which concludes
what I have to write upon the general causes and means of the Rise, Progress
and decay of Men and Families, as they are prudently, and without offense to
particulars, to be taken notice of by us.

SECT. XXI.
Alleges the Ways and Means of raising Men and Families, now in this happy
return of Affairs in England.
HAving now by the help of God finished what I intend on the precedent heads: I
proceed by the same blessed conduct, and under favor of the wise and pious, to
suggest the ways and means of Rises and Decays of Men and Families now in
England: For as there are particular qualities in men, that adapt them to those
good Fortunes of Rise and Riches, and so to Decay and Beggary: so is there in
times, as biased by men regents in it, certain specifique helps and
hindrances effective of both chances, prosperous and cross: And those the late
surly and unnatural commotions, and the miraculous and merciful composure and
reverses, having strangely occasioned here in England, It will not be amiss to
write, tenderly and yet truly concerning them. First then, as Money is the
price of all things, and thereupon, is said to answer all things, Eccles. 10.
9. and so did in all Ages heretofore, for by it, men have made good evil, and
evil good, corrupting Justice, seduced Counsels, subborned multitudes,
purchased Royalties, directed Expeditions, prostituted modesties, achieved
Honors, yea, too much influenced Religions to intend or remit their influences,
according to the Market of them; Pecunia ex quo in honor caepit verus rinum
honor cecidit. Seneca Ep. 115.
so did it of late in England, in the time of the troubles amongst us; it made
men offenders, and restored them to a rectitude; it purchased lands upon the
owners extremities, and at inconsiderable rates; it chopped and changed bad
Titles for good, and put the negotiators into a capacity to buy their peace,
and acceptance, in cases that were in their own nature, and in the current
repute of Honor, pardonable, so auxiliary was Money then to any purpose, that
it seldom sailed of its errand to persons in Power; nor is Money inauspicious
to the havers now, or are their merits less believed and accepted, for having
good fortunes, and knowing how dexterously to declare themselves by them, in
this our happy Serenato of affairs and glorious appearance of so long a desir^d
settlement. For, as we all know, that in London, and in Corporations of Trade,
and in Countries too, personal Estates, (which were the Estates of private
persons, who would live Office-free and undiscovered, such as were old men,
widows, and Bachelours, and some other,) in the great years of Trade, from
1630. to 1640. were in request, men desiring to keep their Estates such,
because they made one third part more profit by them then they did by land
Estates of the same value; (the Wars coming on, and those Estates being out at
Intrest and in Trades, trusted into several parts beyond the Seas, and into
this Nation, wherein the late unhappy Wars made Garrisons of Towns, and in the
taking and re-taking of them, Merchandise and Staple goods portable, became
plundered by those, and such like courses, those Personal Estates of very great
value, became wholly lost, or in a very great degree mutilated, and so the
Owners of them that way impoverished, unable to be afterward, either Traders
or Increasers, or to give great Portions with their children;) so are we also
to know, that abundance of mean persons coming fresh into Trade, the old
Traders being beaten out and ruined, or they being in Offices of Plunder, Law,
Custom, Trust of sale of Crown and Bishops Lands, with such other courses, of
not dubious, but certainly illegal Title, did yet by their craft (knowing that
Acts of Oblivion, and confirmation of Judicial proceedings would come, as of
course in all restitutions they do) so transferr their acquisitions of ill
Title into solid Estate, that they raised themselves from nothing, to great
estate, and in that estate, by small refundments, inconsiderable to what they
thus indirectly acquired, established themselves in prosperity (while others
that lost Estates, and would get no new by those means) are in a great measure
impoverished, and by reason thereof obscured. Such being the posture of things
at home, and the affairs of those abroad requiring supply, few having
wherewith, but these traffiquers in disturbance, and otherwise casual gainers
by it; they chiefly, and in number, must be the persons advantaged; no^ is it
strange to have Money so requested, and so operative to ingraate men now; for
the same feats it has done in all revolutions. Solomon hence calls Money a
defense, Eccles. 7. 12. and when we are told wisdom is good with an
inheritance, we are to suspect that it little avails in worldly revolutions
without it; for though Princes Victors, do not themselves get by their ill
subjects losses, or their good subjects diminution, yet are they necessitated
to make their favors beneficial to their servants and allies, who have
attended their misfortuues, and are to be rewarded by the better issues of
their affairs; And though in absolute Conquests the Victor'd persons forfeit
life and land, as in that of the Conqueror, who ejected the Britains and
English, and put Normans in their Houses, Lands, Honors, and Offices; yet in
fewds of one part of the Nation against the other, though the Heads and
Ringleaders of the peccant party do suffer capitally; yet the majority of the
seduced and unperverse Commonalty, and Persons of worth, pass off by mediation
of Favorites, by whom they are well offered to the Prince, and from him obtain
testimony of good will: Thus was favor after Rebellion obtained temps Rusi;
thus did the Citizens of London obtain many privileges, temps R. 1. and 'Twas
time for them to give money, when that King declared, That if London would be
bought, he would surely sell it, Gul^el. Paruus, Raud. Hayden. p. 25.
Holinshed, p. 119. p. 143. 145.
if he might meet with a convenient Merchant that were able to give him money
enough for it. Thus Offices, and custody of Castles came to be sold, 5. R. 1.
Thus great Men paid Fines for leave to Turney, p. 497.
6 R. 1. and 22. and 23. R. 2. And thus since has it, and will it in all such
alterations be; for Money being the great ground of altercation, and
separating, not only man and wife, Prince and People, but even Popes and
Prelates upon dispute of it, as appeared in that notable resolution of the
Bishop of London, 40 H. 3. who, when the Popes Legate exacted money from his
Clergy beyond measure, said, he would rather be a Martyr, as was Thomas
Becket, then be subject to such exactions; and when the King was angry with the
Bishop, and told him, the Pope should punish him, as he well deserved to be, he
answered, Let the Pope and King, which are stronger then I, take away my
Bishopric, which by Law yet they cannot do; let them take away my Mitre, yet
an Helmet shall remain: I say, Money being such a bait to discontent, and such
an engagement to the casual effects thereof (as it is a great help to the
comfort and conspicuity of life, while it procures remission of past faults,
acceptance of present favors, sets men out in their Parts, Families,
Relations, Enterprises to all desirable advantages, and by the relief and
employment of the poor, as well as rewards to Artists, and good offices to the
Public; it so strong^y draws popularity to it;) so is it in the want of it, a
potent alloy to, if not a total suppression of, whatsoever is eminent in Men
and Families, Eccles. 9. 15. For while the rich man's wealth is his strong
castle, the destruction of the poor is their poverty, Prove. 10. 15. And while
the poor uses entreaties, Prove. 18. 23. is separated from his neighbor, Prove.
19. 4. hated of his brethren, and avoided by his friends, V. 7. is ruled over
by the rich, Chapter 22. v. 87. and devoured from off the earth, Chap. 30. v. 14.
The rich come boldly, and are welcomed frankly, dispute stoutly, and are
answered civily; fear great men, but live without them; prefer their children,
and make and take good settlements upon them; which shows the comfort and
furtherance to men, that Estates give. (...). Menand. in M^nagirta. (...)
. Which made Menander cry out, Blessed is he that has wealth, and a soul
aright to use it. For a man to be tempted by wealth, and by it not be overcome,
is to be a man of men, and a very great debtor to grace of restraint; for there
are but few that sincerely can say with him in the Poet, Vice nere by money did
me overcome:
For it within my soul there is no room.
Which exemption from the treacherous possession of money, is not the gift of
all men, for St. Paul tells us, The love of money is the root of all evil, 1 Timothy 6. 10. Which place is observable, because he says not, The having, but
the inordinate love of money; nor that it is the sprout, but the root; Note
this.
nor that it is the root of some, but of all evil; and he confirms it from the
Apostatique Effect of it, which while some have coveted, they have erred from
the faith, and pierced themselves through with many sorrows. Which is Emphatique
also, While some; not while all. God has his Jewels amongst rich men, who use
the world, but abuse it not; who have money, but love it not; that is, commit
no sin to accomplish their end, as Apostates and Seducers do, who have been
so besotted and transported with it, that they have, for the convenience and
glory of it, erred from the Faith, made a revolt and defection from the Church;
and not only wandered, as Gods people too often do, but persisted desperately
in that error, which Gods people do not. This the inordinate love of money
leads into, and therefore is by all that love and fear God to be avoided; for
he that buys will sell, and so judgment may be turned into gall, and
righteousness into wormwood. Plato makes riches and possession of money^a great
help to rectitude and injuriousness, (...) Plato de Repub. lib. 1. (...). In
Phaedro ad Fin^m Dialog.
while it not only raises a man's spirit above wrongful basenesses, but enables
him to attain to whatever wisely and in a way of virtue he can well wish, and
well use. And hereupon I cannot but account that a wise design of him in Plato,
to beg of the Gods to be good and virtuous within, and to have no outward
advantage that inconsisted with his intern virtue: And if rich, he must beg to
have so much Money and Moneys-worth, as a temperate mind knows well to use, and
yet enjoy its own virtue. And thus to have money, is to be master of every
almost desirable adjument, to Gods glory and men's good. Money then being thus
prevalent, it cannot be denied to be a probable Rise to Men and in them to
Families. For in that it answers all things in the exchange of it, there is
no Match, Honor, Place, Character, Privilege, which it (Subjects being
capable of, and consistent with it) will not procure: nor is there any merit of
conspicuity and obligement, which it gives opportunity to express and represent
it self in, but is furtherable by it; which Richard Duke of Cornwall found
true, as he well defigned, when by his Riches (with which he glutted the
Electors of the Empire, though great Princes) procured them, contrary to their
Honors and Oaths, to choose him a Forraigner, and no Germrn King of the Romans.

SECT. XXII.
Proves that Favor with the Prince is the chiefest cause of Rise to Honor
and Riches.
SEcondly, Favor with the Prince is the most undoubted step to Honor, wealth
and Greatness. This I had placed first, but that Money is the more general
cause of Rise, many coming thereby to Honor and esteem, who never see the
Prince, or transiently only, being added to by him, as they are attested to him
by those that have reason and interest to give them a good character. Those
then that are favored by the Prince, as they are the better sort of subjects,
so are they better dealt with in the shares and participations of their
Favors. And if Princes be to Subjects as bodies to shadows, and souls to
words; and Princes are as absolute by their Generous and Just Government, as
their own consciences and Noble desires wish themselves to be. Regnum vestrum
imitatio vestra. Forma est boni propositi unici exemplar Imperii, qui quantum
vos sequimur tantum gentes alias anteimus. Theodoric. Rex Anastasio Imper. Var
lib. 1. c. 1.
(Regulations or directions being (as it were) needless and supernumerary,
where true Christian piety, and paternal Royalty, are guides to Princes,) then
cannot their Favorites that are dear to them, but be great by them; For theirs
are the Offices of Revenue, the Titles of Honor, the Embassies of Credit, the
Matches of Fortune, the dispose of Trusts to bestow, or have undeniable
influence upon. Excepit ^e noster affectus implevit beneficiis manus, fecitque
esse votum quod nostrum expetisses imperium. Theodoric. rex. E^. 2. Felici Var
lib. 2.
And if these be the ways to Greatness, and they are commanded by Princes,
then to be favored by them, whose so much is to bestow, is to have all
accesses to Honor and Wealth unfolded to them. The knowledge and
practicability of this, inclines men of good person, ready wit, quaint speech,
generous garb, confident spirit, to apply themselves to Princes services, and
by it become either Rich, Respected, Honorable, or some, or all of them: Yea,
by this has the Worlds greatness in Persons and Families first been obtained,
and after augmented, with that which is remarkable in them. Thus Hadad in holy
Writ is history'd to have favor with K. Pharaoh, whereby he became his brother
in law; by which means his son (begot upon the Queens sister) was born and
brought up in the Kings house, 1 Kings 11. 19, 20. And thus David, by the
favor of Saul, 1 Samuel 18.
obtained first his daughter, then his Generalship, and at last his Kingdom.
This, not needful to be further instanced in, because a truth of every days
ratifying, is the reason that the Wise man informs us, that he that seeks
good, procures favor, Prove. 10. 27. Which I take not so much to be meant of
Favor, as the consequent of goodness, as the opportunity to seek good for a
man's self, and others also for whom he that is favored interposeth. Hence
those passages of Solomon, Prove. 14. 35. The Kings favor is toward a wise
servant. And chapter 16. v. 15. In the light of the Kings countenance is life, and
his favor is as a cloud of the latter rain. Which Text is affirmative of
whatever is issuant from the prealledged notation: For in that the favor of
the King is said to be life, which is optimum bonorum, the most delectable and
desirable of all created goods: And in that it is said to be as a cloud of the
latter rains, which is increasive, and has fertility included in it; what can
the expectations of men in their service amount to, which this grandeur of
theirs does not answer and exceed. And as I think Princes happy in the
opportunities they have to oblige and reward servants, wise in heart, active in
dispatch, diligent in attendance, sober in counsel, sincere in love and duty;
and who are as faithful to them, as the Sun is to his course, as Pyrrhus said
of Fabritius. So do I not believe them otherwise happy; (...). Suidas in
Fabricio.
nor do I read or see that any Favorites, who are not such, long continue
happy in such favor: For rival envy, and popular jealousy, hovering about and
laying ginns for them, by cooperating accidents of diminution, ruin them,
unless their personal and public virtues are dissipative of those gatherings,
and supersedall to the efficacy of them. Therefore Solomon's advice to Take away
the wicked from before the King, and the Throne shall be established in
righteousness, Prove. 25. 5. is good counsel, for Princes to avoid trouble to
themselves; and for Favorites, to secure their favor and stability, by being
good and virtuous, and by that to establish the Throne of their Masters, and
themselves under the protection and favor of it. Nor is Princely favor at all
dangerous to, but desirable by, wise men, and next to the favor of God, to be
sought after, if it be constant, and virtuous in the Prince, and transport not
the Favorite beyond the true end and use of it, Gods glory, the Princes
service, and the peoples ease and thrift, together with such advantages as the
forementioned great ends, thoroughly answered, allow to his private emolument;
which Brewier, Baron of Odgcomb, the Favorite of H. 2. and R. 1. observing,
was highly advanced, and continued in Wealth, Honor, and Love with all men;
Cambden in Somersetshire p. 267.
and Beauchamp the great Earl of Warwick, so favored by H. 6. that he was
Crowned King of Wight, yet lived and died beloved. So did Charles Brandon Duke
of Suffolk, p. 469. It^ enim virtutes magnis viris decori gloriaeque sunt, si
illis salutaris potentia est, Nam pestiferavis est valere ad nocendum, illius
demum magnitudo stabilis fundataque est, quam omnes tam supra se esse quam pro
se seiunt cujus curam excubare pro salute sin gulorum atque universorum
quotidie experiuntur lib. 1. de C^emen^^a. c. 3.
the Favorite of H. 8. and others. Which the Despencers in H. 2. time,
Delapool and others in R. 2. time, E. Rivers temps E. 4. Wolsey temps H. 8. and
others, not considering, made themselves hated, infamous, and ruined. For
Virtues, says Seneca, are often useful to men of place and power, when they
qualify, sweeten, and wisely manifest themselves in power delegated to them;
for pestilent Might it is that is nocive; and then only beloved and prayed for
is authority and power, when men find the power over them is for their good,
and not directed so much to cow them into stupidity, as to cherish them in a
loyal freedom. And then does it deserve the duty and subjection of all and
every particular subject, when it intends the prosperity and protection of
every particular subject. The consideration whereof lessons Favorites to
petition God, whose the judgment of every ones course and conclusion is, Damus
quidem tibi equos, enses clypeos and reliqua instrumenta bellorum; sed quae
sunt omnimodis fortiora, Largimur tibi nostra judicia, summus enim inter gentes
esse crederis qui Theodorici sententia comprobaris, Ep. 2. Regi Herulorum. Var.
lib. 4. Cassiod.
to direct and fortunate them in the religious, just, judicious improvement of
their Princes favors: for if to them not only Honors, Riches, Reputation,
but even in a sort much of the administrative divinity of Kings is indulged, as
Theodoric the Gothish King wrote to a Vice-king under him; What fidelity ought
they express to their benefactor, in not neglecting their service, disobliging
their people, misusing their trusts; (as did Wolsey, who fraudulently got a
warrant from H. 8. to execute the E. of Kildare, though the Lieutenant of the
Towers honesty in not executing it, made it void by the Kings Countermand Speed
p. 775. p. 849.
. And Gardener from Qu. Mary to execute the Lady Elizabeth, the after happy
Queen of this Land?) What conscience and reverence to themselves, not to do any
thing rashly and improvidently, by which they may lose their ground, and be
outed the occasion of so general good? For Princes favors being of delicate
and casual composure, are not to be put to the stress of gross and dull
mettalled ones, but to be humbly and modestly improved; which the wise King
Solomon advises to, He that loves pureness of heart, Prove. 22. 11. Fuit enim
illi nobile ingenium and furebundi regis Impatiens. Senec. Not. Quest. lib. 6.
c. 22.
for the grace of his lips the King shall be his friend. The failer of which in
Calisthenes, the Favorite of Alexander, lost him both his interest in the
King, and in his own life: That being true of Favorites over-confidence, and
peremptoriness, which a friend of the Earl of Essex, Sir Henry Wotton work p.
Favorite to Queen Elizabeth, told him, O Sir, These courses are are like hot
waters, which help at a pang; but if they be too often used, will spoil the
stomach: as it was woefully made good in him, whose impatience to have any
companion in favor with him, or any grists of greatness go by the Mill of his
only influence, declined both his luster and his life: Yea, above all, what
caution are they, that have these intrusts, to express, in avoiding envy, Sect.
2. Eicon. B^silic. upon the E. Sra^^ord.
Who moving in so high a Sphere, and with so vigorous luster, raise many
envious exhalations, which, condensed by popular odium, are capable to cast a
cloud upon the brightest merit and integrity, as the divine Kings words are;
and to choose such choice servants and friends, whose int^grity, conscience,
prudence, and industry, they being responsible for, Holinshed, p. 324* p. 511.
may not be defeated in; and then they will be secure, if not from the calum^y,
yet from the desert of envy; which had the Spensers in E. 2. time, p. 555.
the Earl of March temps H. 4. Earl of Arundel and Lord Percy temps R. 2.
guarded themselves against, they could not have fallen, as they did, For much
suspected by me, does no hurt, when nothing proved can be, is true.

All which in such measures and proportions as God shall permit their prudences
to method to themselves, being protected and blessed by him, makes Favorites
not crazy, but hayle and happy in their Princes favor; then which there is no
speedier way to Rise, Riches, Nobility, Prelacy, Splendor, and Endowments of
all kinds, possible to be imagined: for though Riches, Industry, and Frugality,
give many rounds to the ascents of men; yet the Master Caper, and the Noblest
Capreol to advance, is the Kings Favor: which as it is too full a blessing for
any but a Magnanimous and Royal minded person to digest, and well manage; so
to such as already have, or hereafter may have it, I beseech God it may be
continued and enlarged; for it is an opportunity to serve God, the King, the
people, and the havers, to all beneficially Noble purposes: it being (under the
King) the spring that moves all; without which nothing runs current, but has
cheques too many to pass by, as is evident in the vivid representation of it in
Haman, who is said to have his seat (set by Abashuerus) above all the Princes
that were with him. Ver. 2. Esther 3.
and to command that all the Kings servants should bow before him; and his word
so prevailed with the King, that he gave him his Royal Signet, and said, The
Silver is given to thee; the people also, to do with them as it seems good to
thee. Ver. 10, 11. and what Haman issues forth is dispatched to the Kings
Lieutenants, to be accordingly executed, Ver. 12, 13. In that, I say these are
the bounties of Princes to their Favorites, from whom they seem to withhold
nothing, but the Throne it self, there is great cause to conclude, That no way
to advance Men and Families, is more expedite and energical, then Service to,
and Favor from Princes. For if the displeasure of a King be as the messenger
of death, Prove. 16. 14.
and the fear of a King is as the roaring of a Lion; who so provokes him to
anger, sins against his own soul, Pro. 20. 2. If not only in case of Felony
or Treason, but upon displeasures, penalties are not only inflicted upon
persons but upon Lands, Cambden in Doaset, Britan. p. 214.
and that indelibly, as Mr. Cambden tells us, the Lands of Hind and others, in
New Forest, were charged and yet pay white heart Silver, for killing a white
Heart of H. 3. in that Forest. If these terrors and mulcts are in the
disfavour of a King, whose frown and word has killed the heart of subjects of
courage, who durst have outlived any other hardship; what joy and freedom is
in the Kings favor? No less sure then dew upon the grass; Prove. 19 12. Chapter 20.
v. 8. v. 26. Eccles. 8. 4.
no less then scattering all evil, and bringing the wheel over the wicked; no
less then power, and that visible in the testimonies of his favor, and the
effects of it; the prosperity of which is such as the Princes in soul and
government are, whose the favor is, and the design of the soul is, who is a
suitor for, and obtainer of it: For as to be in favor with Terrible Princes,
whose reigns are butcheries, and whose instruments must be rigorous and cruel,
as was Pierce Exton to H. 4. who, (to be, as that Kings words were, The
faithful friend which will deliver me of him, whose life will be my death, and
whose death will be the preservation of my life,) Holinshed in H. 4. p. 517.
undertook and effected the execrable and damnable Parricide of good King Rich.
2. is to be a devil in Flesh, and a miscreant more unhappy then almost Hell can
make one. So to be in favor with a virtuous and serene Prince, whose soul is
so serious and sincere that he dare appeal to God as his Compurgator, and
beseech God to try and search him, if there be any malicious and premeditated
iniquity in him and in his government by his privity: To be a Favorite to a
Prince, whose faith in, and relyance upon, God comforts him, Eicon Basil. Sect.
15.
That no black veils of calumny shall be able to hide the shining of His face,
while God gives Him a heart frequently and humbly to converse with him, from
whom alone are all the irradiations of true Glory and Majesty, as the Kingly
Martyrs words are. To be Favorite to a Prince, as our most Gracious Lord and
Master the King that now happily, and with general blessing of God and the
people, reigns over us, is, whose conscience is not chargeable to Gods justice
for the ruin of Favorites, and the blood of Subjects; but is Vigilant, Mild,
Just, Generous, and strict in Religion and Government, according to his Laws
both Sacred and Civil: Consider this* O England, and be thankful, and l^yal.
To be a Favorite to such a Prince, is to be presumed virtuously complete; and
to be an Instance of happiness: which, if not alloyed by a deceitful heart
within, yields no temptation, but to be a Nehemiah, an Aristides, a Samuel, a
what not, that is complexive of Greatness and Goodness: for if the zeal of God,
and the rules of Honor, and Justice, inspire such a one, he cannot choose but
be presidentially good.

And therefore, since it is not boldness, but love to the prosperity of Good
and Great Favorites, that invites me to write upon this head; the only Rock
that Favor has to fear, is from Gods jealousy, that any thing should rival
with him for the glory of his Munificence: Since that promotion, as it is from
him, so ought it wholly to revert to him, in fruits suitable to his bounty and
intendment. For then he leaves men to themselves, when they leave him, by
forgetfulness of him and themselves; and when they remember not, That it is he
that gives them friends to bring them into view, parts to carry them through,
Fortunate accidents to cooperate to their continuation, Acceptance in and for
what they have done; and in this thus variated, confirms them. Yea, if
Favorites consider how necessary every fiber, sparkle, punct, and occult
meatus of Providence, is to their being and stability; and how important the
Sovereign benediction of God is to their consistence, Sic me inebriaverat
ambitio, ^ic ^me blanda principis promissa preverterunt, ut sciens and prudens
viderer in omne discrimen animae, corporis dispendium pertinaciter conjurasse.
Pet. Bles. Ep. 14.
they will find abundant matter to solicit God to their aid, Eicon Basil. c.
27.
and to the subduing of their hearts, Psalm. 87. 6.
against elevation under such Sunshins, The Flatteries of which are as
inseparable from prosperity, as Flies are from fruit in Summer.

And if Princes are but Gods that are mutable, and mortal as men; and the
counsels of God must take place against all secular projects, and in defiance
of all Politic contrivements: how prudent and Christian is it for Great men
to trust mainly in the Lord Jehovah, who is the same yesterday, and to day, and
for ever. And to serve and trust in Princes, as those who must give account to
God and Them every moment; and in which reddition their innocence will be their
best refuge: For since God has entailed passancy on this world, and here the
best of men have no abiding City, but are wafted to and fro, by the impetuosity
of passions, and the blasts of inharmonious variations, which admit no
anchoring but in sincerity of aim, and piety of desire, and deed, according to
the possibilities and allowances of humane infirmity. It is good to remember
Mortality and Mutability in the greatest transports of advancement and
affluence. Which had Abraham, the great Vizier Bassa to Solomon, believed, He
who had his souls residence in his Masters body, as was said he had, would
never have been such a Doter on greatness, who after the misfortune of his
Masters Army in Persia, (which Expedition he was Counselor to) was
disfavoured, Turkish History p. 654.
cursed, murdered, and after all submersed, and a great weight tied to his
dead body, (...), etc. Plutarchus in Solone p. 94. Edit. Paris
cast into the Sea, Nor would Solon have so divinely, and with such a
prophetique importunity, pressed on Craesus, moderation of soul in a state of
prosperity, but that he knew the treacheries of its incantation, and the
fatality of its obcaecation and seduction. Yea, God himself would not fore-arm
men by reason, and fore-warn them by counsel, and president of frequent
miscarriage in this voyage of pleasure, but that he would have his learn to
deny themselves, and take up his Cross and follow his Christ to the contempt of
this world, as their rest and refuge: For he that was in his time a Prince,
Psalm 146. 3.
dehorts from putting trust in Princes. Yea, Psalm 118. 3.
declares it to the world, It is better to trust in the Lord, then to put
confidence in Princes. And why? Not thorough pufillanimity, or inaptitude, to
Majesty it as high as any Monarch, does he utter this; but because of a spirit
subacted by grace, and reduced by God to see and detract from its self. Princes
are mortal, Princedoms are casual; and therefore it is good to trust to God,
Psalm 82. 7, Psalm 107. 40. Eicon B^sil. Sect. 27.
in whose Mercy no relyant miscarries. For as That King that keeps to true
Piety, Virtue, and Honor, shall never want a Kingdom: so, that Favorite that
relies on God for the favor of his Master, shall never want such favor as God
sees best for him to be favored with; whom he would bestow the Glory of the
next, after the Grace of this world. Notwithstanding all which praeconsidered,
the Maxim remains firm, that Princes favors are the ready and most pregnant
way to Enrich and Enhonour Men and Families in England.

SECT. XXIII.
Considers Ambition and Confidence in wel-parted Men, a Means to the Rise and
Riches of Men and Families.
THirdly, Next to the two former Rises to Greatness, Ambition and Confidence
may be allowed a notable stepp to Honor and Riches. In maximis animis
splendidissimisque ingeniis plerumque existunt honoris, imperii, potentiae,
gloriae cupiditates. Cic. lib. 1. Offic.
For men having a conceit that they are born for great, and that small things
do not become them; that no courses beseem them but Olympique ones, and no
companions but Kings; what is there that they will not undertake, and
industriously follow, which has^ a probability of arriving them at, and fixing
them in, the sphere they aim at. This busies their thoughts, impedes their
rest, accelerates their motion, cherishes their spirits, intends their
correspondence, beautifies their civility: Thence they refuse not tedions
voyages, desperate rencounters, dangerous intelligences, pawning soul and body
to propagate their party, and merit of their chief. This calls them from their
native seats, and gaining callings, to actions turbulent, perilous, and, as to
the present, losing, making them despise being for a while miserable, that they
may for ever after purchase ^and live in the Sunshine and Summer of Regal
favor. This makes them resolve to be active in their commands, passive to
their wills, patient under their displeasures, free of their fortunes to supply
them, of their persons to fight for them, of their minds to consult for them,
yea it arms their prayers and tears to encounter their misfortunes, with their
zeal* and to despise hazard, and to fear as little to sink for, as desire much
to swim with them; and all this that they may be taken notice of as Clyents and
Votaries to Greatness; pleased with nothing beneath or besides it. Non ego
ambitiosus sam sed nemo aliter Romae potest vivere: non ego sumptuosus sum sed
urbs ipsa magnas impensas exigit. Ep. 50.
This Seneca says, was the humor of Rome, where nothing was requested but
Ambition, nothing commendable but what was costly and gay. And this is so much
the darling of the Sparkish youth, that they think the still and quiet humor
sottishness, and mediocrity of station, plebeity of humor and flettenness of
spirit; Necessario itaque magnus apparuit qui nunquam malis ingemuit, nunquam
de fato suo quaestus est, fecit multum intellectum sui, and non aliter quam in
tenebris lumen effulsit, adver^itque in se omnium animos, cum esset placidus
and lenis and humanis divinisque rebu^ pariter aeques. Senec. Ep. 120.
which is the reason that these precocious natures put themselves upon affairs
in a kind of rape and compulsive violence upon them, and are content to be
instruments in, and agitators about, those matters, which softer and better
poysed tempers, and modester judgments, decline, as uneasy, difficult, and
unhandsome for them to appear in, or promote. And indeed, were it not for such
forlorn and desperate services, it were impossible for heady and fortuneless
men to come to Riches or Greatness, because they would be void of friends, and
reason, to countenance them in, and manage them amidst, the Maeanders of those
courses; but they counting all their own they attempt to get, Celso^ cursus
nisi confidentia magna non appetit, dum generosi est animi in optare quod
summum est, audentes facit homines fidentia sui quia se non patitur occulere
quem precipit na^ura prodire Theodari^: Felici Ep. 2. Var. lib. 2.
and concluding themselves born for, and destinated to those toyls and
hazzards, which other men are not, nor shall be rewarded for, put themselves in
the heat of the service, and venture their lives to rescue Greatness from
contempt, and to revenge the insolence of its opposition with the ruin of the
Oppressors; in the return of which well-couraged service, they have Guerdons of
honor and acceptance from the fountain of Honor: which title is the only true
and honorable origination of Honor,

Not that Ambition and Confidence of ones self is the only way of rising: for
it is seen and known that Rises and Honor sometimes attend modest and meek
spirits, who are so far from appearing canditates for them, that they avoid and
disfigure themselves, that they maybe not beleagured by commands to enter upon
action, or be taken notice of for well discharging them; though more often great
friends usher men in accidentally, and their own parts continue them profitably
in that way which is attended with Greatness and Wealth: So was the great E. of
Essex called from Sir H. Wotton, p. 4. 76, 78, 79.
his retiredness at Lampsey by the great E. of Leicesters means, and the great
Duke of Buckingham, by Sir John Greham, who first spoke of, and commended him
to King James. But yet the way of some is to buoy up themselves, and to become
graduates in grandeur from their own Spontenanscency, and to hew out their own
way to what they wish and would through the Alps of seeming impossibilities and
unconquerable hardships, such Caesar's are they in their own minds, that they
believe their coition with the Moon, and thereby entitle themselves to the
courtesy of taking the profits of all sublunary casualties: which makes Seneca
attribute much to man's spirit, in the adjustment of weal or woe to himself:
For he calls the mind now a King, anon a Tyrant; a King, Animus noster mode Rex
^odo Tyrannus; Rex cum honesta intuetur, salutem sibi corporis commissi ^urat,
and nihil imperat turpe, nihil sordidum, ubi vero imprudens, cupidus delicatus
est transtulit in nomen detestabile and dirum, and sit Tyrannus. Ep. 114.
when it considers virtue, Turkish Hist. p. 947.
and according to it conducts the body to actions worthy, and of good report:
but when it is imprudent, vehement, curious, then it becomes a Tyrant. Which
that it may not be, nor men miss of their ayms, so far as they are approved by
God, good for them, and proper for the public, it becomes them not to apply
themselves to sinister means, such as are rebellion, murder, injury, as that
wretch Amida son to Muleasses King of Tunis did, who betrayed his trust,
forced his fathers Throne and Concubines, slew his brethren; yea, (villain and
devil, as he was) picked out his own fathers eyes with a Penknife; such, such
black, brutish, savage, truculent actions are execrable and indurable paths to
Greatness, while the walker in this wicked way loses his own soul to gain a
triffing and momentary government in this world: but the lasting and virtuous
way to greatness is to comprecate God, that he would not interpose nor cast
cross accidents athwart the way of their endeavor; for, if he do, the eggs of
men's ambition will be addle, and the edge of their confidence turned and become
blunt; which truth is hardly to be drilled into the beliefs of those boisterous
spirits that are the Virago's in this kind; For to tell them of Gods
inclination of great men's wills to favor them, and of his adaptation of them
to their favors, without which those bounties would be unsavory, and the soul
and spirit of them evaporate, and become ineffectuall to their hoped for ends,
is to bespeak them to prejudice against, and censure of, such discourse as
madness and bigottry. They are all for gay clothes, spruce looks, high rants,
facetious drolls, pleasant froliques, hot spirited mettle, all or most of which
they ascribe more to in the motives to and merits of their favor, then to any
thing else; when as truly they are mistaken, for these things, though in some
sense notable seconds to the most noble fruits of virtue and ability, yet are
not to be attributed to, as to Gods permission so to have it, is be
acknowledged; though therefore I am no friend to ambition or confidence, yet
because I know it a way to Rise and Wealth, if it will be limited by reason and
religion, it shall have my Godspeed to it, though I must own to all the world,
that I value more a grain of content then a pound of ambition, and a mite of
modesty then a treasury of self-confidence, because the one works in them that
have it a satiation of mind in their present enjoyment; the other an
irrequietude by reason of another more prosperous estate then theirs. Which
Seneca says is the bane of happiness, (...) faelix quem torquebit faelicio^
minus habeo quam speravi sed fortasse plus speravi quam debui. Seneca lib. 3,
de ^ra c. 30.
which is never attained till the mind be brought off thoughts that it deserves
more then it enjoyes, and possessed that it enjoys more then it deserves, or
could hope for if it had what is due to it. But this the Grandees of nature
think below them; so did Alexander to reside in Macedon; Persia and the India's
he is for; and the ambition that led him to that hardship, preferred him to the
gainful and glorious consequence of it; yet had his intern pride a notable
stagger put to it by that Dilemma of the Gymnosophists, who seeing him look on
himself as a God, having Immortality in his power, and being invited to ask of
him what they would have, answered, Immortality. Alexander replied, I am but
mortal myself, and therefore cannot give Immortality. Siergo mortalem te esse
cognoscis cur non contentus patri^s sedibus omnibus i^festus totum orbe^
subjicere conars. Cicer. lib 1. Tuscul. Quest.
They replied to him, If thou know thy self a mortal, why art thou so vast
in thy desires as to exceed the bounds of thine own kingdom, to the injury of
others. If these reasons would have audience and suasion with them; and if
these thoughts did possess men, they would be more sparing to set values upon
themselves above their intrinsique worth, and crowd less upon Greatness to take
notice of them, then they do: for most hard, and against the hair of worth is
it, to beg Fortunes sordidly; or use them, given, illiberally; and as brave
minds, when they have accomplishments to public service, will not reproach
the favor of Gods providence by a sneaking unwillingness to the convenient and
commendable show of them; so will they not preproperate their such appearance
by any mean prostration of themselves below themselves, which men of looser and
less ingenuous Principles submitting to, run them down in the seize of
preferments, and in the improvement of the effects of them. For as a faint
heart never winns a fair Lady, so sparing to speak it sparing to speed; such as
a man values himself, other men usually valuing him; so little is the World now
acquainted with the magnanimity of true virtue, that it think^ meanly of them
that are little in their own eyes, and believes there is always a worth in that
Pile, which has the grace of a well-composed Frontispiece, though it be
fallaciously set to view, to grace a rude and inartificial Structure.

SECT. XXIV.
Shows, that Callings and Employments, exercising the mind and body, to both
which they are gainful, are Advances to Men and Families.
FOurthly, Callings of Employment to mind and body are now great Rises of Men
and Families, by the Honor and Wealth that attends them: For, England being an
Island, and by Trade made a Continent, the Commodities of all Nations being
brought into it, and the men of all Countries coming unto it: by reason thereof
the Learning, Law, and Tillage of the Natives is wonderfully encouraged. For,
by such Intercourse and Exchange of the mutual Endowments of Nations, which God
has purposely so modelled, that the tide of Charity might be reciprocated, and
benefit Mankind in the variety of its movency to them, there is no Ingenuity
practiced abroad, but has a means of avenew to us, and no thrift or improvement
that we make, but has its vent abroad; by both which, the Nation has its Profit
in the employment of its Inhabitants, and in the multiplication of its
Shipping. This I premise to make way to the rich and honorable

effects that Learning and Correspondence, first introduced by Trade, do
evidence now beyond what formerly they did; for, whereas when Trade was less,
and People fewer, and those less vicious, because less knowing in the vices of
other Nations, the transactions civil, and the cures corporal, and so the
Lawyers and Physicians required to them were not so numerous, so esteemed, or
so thriving; now, in the multiplication of Trade, and luxury, by the traffic
with, and travel into them, room is made for more numbers, and better
Entertainments of Lawyers and Physicians; and the more they get, the better
they thrive, and the richer all Callings that those vent themselves into.
Though therefore there are no arts, callings, or ways of life, but have, and
do yield Estates and Honors to those that are industrious, and fortunated by
God in them: and more especially the noble, generous, and copious Study of the
Imperial Laws, the practice of which by the learned Civilians is in its due
sphere favored by the Laws, and by the Masters of it, the Reverend and Learned
Judges, who hate to confound Jurisdictions, and the Profession of Physic, the
Doctors, wherein are now as great Oracles of Learning, as I think any sort of
men, for the number, in the Nation are: Though these Professions, I say, do
arrive the diligent, knowing, and fortunate Practicers in them at considerable
Estates; yea, and Husbandry, which Socrates in Xenophon highly applaudes,
(...). Xenonophon lib. de rei domesticae Administratione, p. 831.
as beseeming the Noblest Men, is a way to acquire Estate and Honor; yet
because the Rises of Persons in Callings are not so great; nor so general, as
those of Law and Trade are: I shall single out those two, as the Tropiques by
which diligently followed men arise; or neglected, set themselves and their
Families.

For the Laws, I mean the Common and municipal Laws of this Land, as they have
been the collections of the best Laws, added to, by the experience of Time, and
men famous for observation of what was congenial to the people, and enacted to
rule them; so have they, and ever, I hope, will be, the love, honor, and
freedom of the Prince and people, protected, and regulated by them; and, as
they are looked upon as sacred, and not to be temerated under grievous
punishments, (being the standing Arbiters of good and evil, and the divine
sentence of the King in his Parliamentary Majesty and circumvallation,) so is
there in the peoples minds and mouths great honor and regard given to the
makers of it, and the professors and students in it; to whom (because theirs
is in the study, pleading, conveyancing, and Clerkly parts of their Profession,
which comprehends a vast number of men of considerable Fortunes and Families)
the Nation yields a great part of their Estates and respects; for they are the
most knowing men in business, of any Profession, and they contrive settlements
of purchase and marriage; these frame Wills of bequests and disposition; these
exhibit Bills and Petitions in Courts of Equity; these draw Pleadings in Courts
of Law; these are Pleaders at the Bar, Counsels in their Chambers, Officers in
Courts, Attendants on Circuits, Stewards in Manor, Undersheriffs in Shires,
Judges in Corporations, which shows their abilities, and their possibilities to
improve them to their enriching: For by this they know the nature of Estates,
and the condition of their Owners, and can thereby pleasure themselves more and
surer then other men can. And, if to these their patebility to honors be added,
when the High Chancellourship, the Chief Justice, and other Justiceships,
Mastership of the Rolls, Presidencies of the Privy Council, Attorney,
Solicitor, Sergeantship to the King, which are, for the most part, all Trusts
and honors of Lawyers. If these so great rich, trusty, noble places be theirs,
and theirs they will be, while the Inns of Courts yield royal Wits and noble
Minds to deserve and manage them to the Kings honor, the peoples content, and
their own renown, as thanks be to God and his sacred Majesty, whom God long
preserve and keep, their and our Royal Master, they now are. The conclusion,
that they study and practice of the Law is a rise to honor, and riches, is
very easy to be made. And, how can it be otherwise, since the Students and
Practicers of the Law, being knowingly bred, well-descended, richly fortuned,
amply allied, assiduously versed, or bred under such, as are these, or the most
of them, but that Riches and Honor should fall in to them, and be conspicuous
upon them. For, as they they drive a trade of gain with no Money-stock, nor
hazard their gain by no credit, nor exhaust themselves by no charge upon their
Chambers, (their Inns being their Sanctuaries, and their Attendance on Courts
their Privilege;) so need they not, nor seldom do they let their money lie dead
any time by them, but either they know where safely to place it, and hedge it
in by a legal and undeceivable Security, or else they have Attorneys and
Negotiators that depend upon them, who can serve them in that Expedition. Hence
come they to purchase the best Seats, the noblest Royalties, the best to be
improved Lands in the Nation, and to match their Children with least Portions,
and to most Adv^ntage of any men: Quid enim aliud and Iuris Consulti domus quam
Oraculum Civitatis. Cicero.
Add to this, their Influence on the People, whose Kindred, Counsel, and
Stewards they are, by which they become presented to the Parliaments, as their
Deputies, no Parliament having less then many of the Long Robe, of which the
Speaker is mostly one, and those potent in passing Laws; and their Power with
Courtiers and Favorites, whom they are allied, or useful to, as Counsel or
Stewards, they become presented to the King, honored by him with Knighthood,
See the most ingenious and learned Preface of that renowned Lawyer.
and so enter their Posterity into Riches and Honor, See Sir John Davis his
Irish Reports in the Epistle dedicated to the Lord Elsmore.
which Sir Edward Cook* the Learned Chief Justice, and Helluo of Experience,
taking notice of, has collected near 200 Gentile and Noble Families, there
named, in England, raised by Lawyers; most of which, and many added since to
them, do continue in great Wealth and Honor, which he gives as an
Encouragement to the Students of the Law in these Words, Cast thine eye upon
the Sages of the Law that have been before thee, Preface to the 2 Re^ort.
and never shall thou find any that has excelled in the knowledge of these
Laws, but has sucked from the breasts of that divine knowledge, Honesty,
Gravity, and Integirty, and by the goodness of God has obtained a greater
Blessing and Ornament then any other Profession, to their Families and
Posterities; for, it is an undoubted Truth, That the just shall flourish as the
Palm Tree, and spread abroad as the Cedars of Le^anon, Psalm. 91. 13.

Nor has the Law only been thus fertile of Rise and Honor to Families; but
Trade in Cities and Corporations, ^hiefly that of Famous London, I dare say the
glory of England, and that which is known, where England is not: This City, the
City that I glory to be born in, In mandandis honoribus nobilitas majorum
claritudo militiae, illustres domi arts spectandae. Tacit. 4. Annal.
and to have long lived in, though I thank God of a Family Knightly (I hope I
may without vanity say) out of it, has been the place wherein many men of no
generous breed and blood, and many of generous breed and blood, have raised and
augmented estates, and dignifyed Families no less then the former; and though
some of them seated near the Town, where they are subject to vices of waste,
have not kept their estates so long, nor married so advisedly, as those
further-off Gentlemen do; yet is not their impermanency to be attributed to the
ill-acquisition of those estates left them, but to the accidents of snare that
attend this populous City, which is the common randezvous of all both good and
bad, See my Discourse of Arms and Armory. Printed 1660.
and to the liberality of Citizens, who prefer their Daughters with great
Portions, whereby the greatness of their Sons is detracted from: nor do I
believe but that Trades may be as gentilely managed, and as becoming free and
noble bred Persons in it, as other Professions may; and I may self have known
as genesincere, royal minded men Traders, as ever I have done either Noblemen,
Lawyers, or Divines, as zealous to God, as true to their Prince, as free to
their Relations, as charitable to the Poor, as good to their Servants, as
patient to their Debtors, as ready to reward merit, as restless to be indebted
to it, Take notice of this ye despisers of London.
as real in friendship, as pregnant in business, as wary against fraud. These I
have known and seen living freely and dying wealthy and creditable: and to the
honor of the Societies of London, which consist solely of Freemen, it may be
with much truth averred, that they are the truest and most unbyassed Trustees
of any in the Nation; their Works do praise them in the Gates. For alas,
sharking in Trade is but of a late date, since luxury and high-living came into
general use. For when Traders lived low, and rose by degrees, suting their port
to their estate, to be honest in word, and current in payment, was their
ambition, and the life of their thrift; but when they began, as in these late
combustible times they did, to be vain and boundless, then they cared not to
undervalue their words, over-ask in their wares, shirk for one another
Customers, steal Excise and Custom, cavil and sue Neighbors, contract vast
Debts, and pay them with becoming Prisoners. These are the flawes that are
disparaging to Tradesmen, and to all others that practice the like, and all
because they spend high and live pleasurably, as if their Trades would maintain
their riot, and be kept together without their diligence. This loose attendance
of Trade, together with its diffusion into so many hands, every of which must
live and thrive as they may out of it, causes Trade to be visibly pregnant of
great estates less then of old; not because Trade is not as much and as
profitable as then, but because many more are of it, and draw succulency from
it, and mind it less intently then heretofore; and thence are the Estates less
great though more general: which considered, it is easy to divine whence the
decay of Estates in Tradesmen comes, not from Trades infertility; for it is a
Mine of gold and golds-worth, which many have, and yet find, who come to it
poor younger Brothers live in it plentifully, and leave it honorably, while
their Estates gotten by it, subsist their Children in Knights and
Knights-fellows Degree. But that which is the mall and mar of Tradesmen, is,
Men run into it without fear or wit, and know not when to leave while they have
something; for Trade is such a tender thing, and so dangerous, that not to
prosper in it, is to decay; and not to venture, is to forswear to thrive. And
there is no Argument of Gods blessing stronger to me then this, that men trade
for great Sums, sometimes with men they never see, nor from whom they neither
give nor take any Security, nor can perhaps legally prove the agreement of the
price, quantity, delivery, payment, or other terms of their being indebted or
discharged; yet to one pound thus ventured lost, there is a hundred, a thousand
currantly paid for; and that notwithstanding these hazards, and infinite
others, Trade should be thus gainful, and in twenty years (for more then that
few men have gainful times (their Trade being to seek and settle till they are
thirty years old, and their children breaking their Stocks for breeding and
Portions when they are fifty) That, I say, in twenty years, or some few more or
less, there should be 10, 20, 30, 40, 60, or a 100 thousand pound clear Estate
and more raised, besides expenses and losses which may be, or at least half
more necessary to be gotten (the clear Estate being that which survives expense
and loss) is an instance of a multiform blessing, and a signal discovery of
Gods love to men's industry and honesty in Trade. And though, in Trade, as in
all other undertakings, the race is not to the swift, nor success to the
knowing and diligent; yet to one that miscarries that so does; there are ten
thrive: For, as in all learned and mechanique Professions, there are rules
beyond which none must go that will be reputed worthy credit; so in Trade,
there are courses that those which follow them not, forsaking the path, will
fall into the dirt and ditch of miscarriage. When then I mention Trade to be a
way of Rise and Riches to men and Families, I intend, Trade well-managed; as
Foreign Trade, I suppose, thus transacted, though I am like to err, which if I
do, I crave the Merchants pardon: Good advice of a Staple or Market, proper and
requested Commodities, those well-bought, of a good sort and cheap, after,
fitted for their Port, then well-shipped, then safely ventured, then assigned
to a careful and responsible factor, then put off to current men, or bartred
for ^alable Commodities, then sent home, then sold, and the effects of them
well pursed: These Methods, blessed by God, and not made null by the dreyn of
an expensive Waste, nor defeated by neglect of Correspondence from abroad, and
of heeding the alteration of Markets at home, (which do sink or raise the price
and Profit of Merchandises) must needs in the revolution of twenty years, make
a wealthy Merchant: So in Home-trade, to buy wares well, and sell them warily,
letting little Stock lie dead, nor debts lie out, but keeping Shop, and looking
over Books and Servants diligently and thoroughly, and maintaining the credit by
good payment and honest dealing, is not only the way to get and keep, but to
thrive by a Trade; and a firm Estate once gotten, which is done by diligence,
forecast, frugality, and royalness, it will increase on a man to yield him and
his, Support, Credit, and Plenty. Thus it has, and thus it will yet, I hope,
ever give Encouragement to its Followers; and though it yield the attainers, to
the highth of its reward, but the Temporary Office of a Lord Mayor, or the
Title of a Knight; yet if with it, it convey fortune and honor too, whereby
their Posterity become Knights and Peers, it is enough to confirm it to be a
Rise of Riches and Honor.

And such not only famous Q. Elizabeth esteemed and found it to be, and
therefrom (as from the Metropolis of Money, Men, Trade, Regularity to the whole
Nation,) received such service and supplies upon all occasions of Peace and
War, as rendered Her the Mirror of Monarchs, the desire of Friends, the dread
of Enemies, throughout her Reign; but also the two last Princes, Father and
Son, the glories of learned and pious Thrones, held her also in such esteem,
calling her The Kings Chamber, the Seat Imperial of this Kingdom, and renowned
over all the parts of the Christian World; in respect whereof, and of ^he usual
residence of His Majesty's Court so near it, with the confluence of Foreign
Ambassadors and Strangers of great State and Eminency, Proclamation 2 Maii,
A^n. Reg Car. 1. Annoque domini 1625.
thither, His Majesty is most graciously ^arefull to neglect no means of
lawful policy to provide for the Continuance and Increase of the Honor,
Liberty, Health, and safety of the same. And the same Genious of regal goodness
now steering and impregnating the Nation, the same aspect and encouragement is
not to be diffided to his Majesty's so great a Mart of Trade, and Mint of
Money; yea, maugre the malignity of her opposites, she that has above 1500.
years been the glory and abridgement of the Nation, and which for orderly
government, and for rich, charitable, bounteous, inhabitants, is not to be
matched in the World. She, I say, I hope shall further continue and increase,
that there shall be ample reason to account Her a praise in the earth, and to
praise God for his promises accomplishment, That Kings shall be Her nursing
Fathers, and Queens Her nursing Mothers. And if this blessing be continued, and
improved in her, she will, as the head of, and in proportion to all other
Corporations, be a Rise of Honor and Riches to Men and Families.

SECT. XXV.
Shows, that Ecclesiastical Promotions and Incomes are a great Rise to Riches
and Honor.
FIfthly, Ecclesiastical Promotions and Incomes are now a great Rise to Riches
and Honor: For God having reverted the Churchmen to their wonted and legal
luster, and therewithal to the growing advantage of their suppression and
interstitium; the chasm whereof, though it ruined many learned and worthy
Bishops, and Dignitaries deceased, and reduced their living remains to straight
and necessitous conditions; yet has it so added to the Ecclesiastiques that
came first to the Crop, after that 18. years Fallow, that there cannot but be
great accrewments to such as were possessed of them, who God knows in a great
measure needed it; the injury and hard usage of the late distractions falling
chiefly on them; and their needs and pressures, by reason of those
sequestrations and ejections, being many and importunate; (and those not to be
relieved but by courtesy received, which was to be requited; or money
borrowed, which ought to be repayed: when true consideration is had of Debts to
be discharged, Palaces repaired, Houses furnished, Equipage provided, and
incident charges allowed, the Great advantages so noysed, will receive a
considerable defalcation. Notwithstanding which, the estate of the Clergy will
be most considerable, and appear moderately and discreetly used by the
Incumbents (where Piety, Hospitality, and Magnificence are not impeached by
such providence) a very great Rise to Riches and Honor: For in that the
Statute of 8. Eliz. c. 1. declares what was of old stated and acknowledged, (
That the st^te of the Clergy is called one of the greatest States of the
Realm,) we are not to take this declaration for a complement: or in reference
to the Estates in Parliament, of which the Bishops are one, and the first
nominated; yea, though but 25. in number, yet are, for the reverence of their
Persons, Learnings, and Callings, made Peers in Estate to the greater number by
far, of the lay Nobility; but also with relation to the Spiritualities they
have, and the Revenues of value that are annexed to the support of them; which
though they were abated and curtayl'd by H. 8. yet are so considerable, that
the Rents, Leases, Livings, Offices, Royalties, and other accomodations and
perquisites of them, are notably to be valued: For as the Primitive Church
introduced the order of Bishops as secondary Angels and Apostles, and them
preferred in dignity and degree above Presbyters, whom they were to direct,
Institute, send forth, and take account from, of Doctrine and Manners; and
therefore did in the Counsels take order that Bishops should be pious, Council.
Aquisgravense apud Binium c. 9. de sacerdotibus. Tom. 6. p. 143. and 364. To 4
p. 440. T^m. 9. p. 680 and 575. Tit de ^piscopis Tom. 9 p. 579. Tom. 6. p. 231.
Tom. 4. p. 876. To. 1. p. 434. To. 6. p. 406. To 6. p. 243. To. 7. p 841.
learned in the Scriptures, Humble, Chaste, Hospitable, Conscientious, Resident.
Nor did they provide only that Bishops should be personally good, but in their
Actions, Family, diet, habit, recreations, such as not only became the Gospel,
but such as prevented all scandal; and above all, that they should, as the
chief Episcopal Gift and Grace, Preach. The seed of the Gospel being committed
to them as Christ's continuing Apostles in his Church; Apostoli in quorum locum
Eipiscopi successerunt satis nobis apparuerunt verbi dei predicationem esse
praecipuum illorum munus qui in Episcopali sede collocantur. Council. Medio.
lanens. 1. To 9. p. 449. Council. Aquilans. To. 9. p. 694.
which is the sanction of the first Council of Millain, and confirmed by other
Councels since. I say, as the Church did require of Bishops and Priests holy
services, and self-denying lives; so did the Princes and Christians that were
rich and able, add supports Temporal to these Ecclesiastiques, whereby they
independed on people, and were more vacant to their Spiritual function; the
cares of the world being not pressing on them, and the opportunities and means
of relieving, supporting, and obliging men to become Christians, and already
Christians to be more and more holy, as Christians ought to be, being afforded
them. And though I shall not engage in assertion of Constantines donation, Tom.
1. Council. p. 310.
as not being over credulous of it, nor altogether incredulous; but of
suspended belief, as to it, because I see it as well opposed as maintained: Yet
I shall thus far declare my self, that I believe, the Endowments of old to the
Church, being fruits of gratitude to Christianity, and signs of the love of God
working in men's hearts, and thereby appearing in their deeds, were acceptable
to God, and are by ^their Dedication to Him become Sacred; whatever the
mis-imployment of some of them in some part of the Christian Church
superstitiously be. I say, as the Primitive Church thought no Attribution too
eminent, no Honor too great to be given to the Bishops and Fathers; so neither
did our Nation, in its first Christianity, or since in its Christian procedure,
begrudge the Bishops the best Titles, and fattest Patrimonies; but confirmed
and defended them unto them and their Successors: That as our Kings were the
Founders of their English Hierarchies, and Baronies: 5 Rep. de re Eccles.
Spelman. Council. Inter leges Aethelst. Regis c. 11. Spelman. p. 404. Constit.
Odonis Archiep. Cantuar. Spelman. p. 416. and p. 246. and 787. 11 H. 7. 9. 34
H. 6. 14. quoted 5 Rep. Act 1 Eliz. was not an Act introductory of a new Law
but declaratory of the old. Judgment of the Judges in Caudeys case. 5. Rep. de
re Eccles p 8. and p 32. ^.
and our Councels the declarers of their Duties and Offices; and our Christians
the amplifiers of their Revenews, and our Presbiters the observers of their
Canons, and our People the partakers of their learned labors: so our Lay laws
have been the Recognizers of their Rights, and the Assertors of their Spiritual
Jurisdictions, and required all men to obey them, where they themselves obey
the Laws of Christ, and command nothing contrary to the legal and learned
expositions of them. And therefore the Ecclesiastical promotion of this Nation
being at this day so great, they cannot but be occasions of gathering wealth,
and so making way for the Honor of Children and Kindred that are Executors to,
or endowed with it.

And truly why should it not be so? why should our eyes be evil, because Gods
and the Kings is good to them? why should not they that minister Spirituals
partake of our Temporals. No reason do I see, no Religion can I read to the
contrary; but that what Gods blessing on the prudence and favor of
Ecclesiasticques, devolves of Estates upon them, should enrich their Wives,
Children, or Relations, (Charity, Hospitality, Verum enim vero non adeo suo
sanguini indulge^ quin etiam extraneis si honesti sunt Munifice and Magnifice
provide at eoque propinquioribus and consanquineis anteponat. Petr. Bles. Ep
38. de Mag suo Archiepis.
and convenient Bounty not being thereby impeded.) Yea, I think, what Man or
Churchman soever, having a lawful occasion to advance his Family, being
honest, and wel-reported of, and yet does not, but neglects it, comes within
the Apostles censure, of denying the Faith, 1 Timothy 5. 8. And blessed be God,
this Church of England, as it has had rich and powerful, so Religious and
generous Prelates in it, who have not only been sage in Council, (as was that
Bishop of Veradium, of whom Ferdinand the Emperor, speaking to King John of
Hungary, his Sovereign, Turkish history p. 697.
I envy you for nothing that you have, but for one Hooded fellow, (meaning the
Bishop) who was better for the defense of a Kingdom, then Ten thousand with
Helmets on their heads: but also serious in the things of God, Holy in their
lives, Fervent in their prayers, Frequent in their preachings, Exact
inspectors, Just censurers, Liberal benefactors Of Learned minds, of Incessant
study, of Matchless ingenuity; in their Writings eloquent, in their Disputes
strenuous, in their Discourses florid; Optandum est ut ii qui Episcopale munus
suscipiunt quae suae sint partis Agant ac se non ad propria commoda, non ad
divitias non ad luxum sed ad labores a^ solicitudines pro gloria dei vocatos
esse intelligant: ne^ enim dub^^andum est and fideles reliquos ad religionem
innoe^ntiamque facilius inflammandos si praepositos suos viderint non ea quae
mundi sunt sed animarum salutem a^c caelestem patriam cogitantes. Sess. 25. c.
1. de Reformat. Impr. Romae, Paul. Manutlo. edit. 1564.
good Masters in their Families, good Friends in their Neighborhood, good
Commonwealths-men in their Countries, good Fathers in their Diocesses, good
Examples in their Conversation and Subjection, well born, well bred, well
resolved: and therefore so influential on others, because presidential to
others, and Imperial over themselves; This even the perverse Council of Trent,
being overcome by that Interest which Truth and Piety had gained upon the
Ingenious Fathers and Learned men in it, who, being busy and vigorous
Assertors of it, gave such testimony to the consequence and conscience of
Reformation in Churchmen, notwithstanding the pestilent design of Paul the
fourth, then Pope, and his Politic and Atheistique creatures in it, who
craftily designed their own grandeur, and the Churches diminution; I say, the
Majesty of Gods cause managed by those few Zelots in it, did, by Gods aid, so
lord it over their contradiction and influence, who were bent and conjured
against it, that, That Counsel concluded it the most effectual way to make the
Church prevalent in Christ's way upon the people, was to mind Churchmen that
their main work in the Ministry high or low, is to renounce the World, to seek
not themselves, but the peoples salvation, and example them by their own lives,
to become holy.

And therefore when I consider what renowned Bishops and Presbyters the Church
of England has had in all Times, Sacrosancta Ecclesia Anglicana in st^tu
Praesulum intra Regnum Angliae, per Angliae Regem, and ejus Progenitores, ad
populum in Lege Dei instituendum, hospitalitatem colendam, Eleemosynam
erogandam, and ad alia charitatis opero exercenda fundata faisset. Stat.
Carleoli. 25 Ed. 1.
and how fit they have been for, and real in Execution of their Charges,
Dignifying their Dignities: When I read the learned Sermons, and hear of the
ample Charities, and Christian Lives, of so many of them, who have left their
Praises and Pieties for their Remembrances: When I remember that renowned
Archbishop Bradwardine, whose Grace kindled in the cause of God to confront
Pelagianisme, when it was in power and request; Cambdens Brit. p 206.
and Generous Bishop Grandison, who prevailed with the Clergy of Exceter
Diocese to leave their Estates to his dispose, discharging his trust right
piously in endowing Churches, and in building and adding to Hospitals, Domini
Papae, and Regis redargutor manifestus, Praelatorum correptor, Monachorum
corrector, Presbyterorum director, Clericorum instructor, Scholasticorum
sustentator, Populi praedicat^r etc. M. Paris. in H. 3. p. 876.
converting not a doyte to his own use; and Stout Grosthead Bishop of Lincoln,
who durst, when Enormities were raunting, reproach and withstand them,
approving himself The zealous Reprover of Pope, King, and Prelates, the
Chastiser of the Monks, the Director of Priests, the Instructor of the Clergy,
the Supporter of Scholars, the Peoples Preacher, the Incontinents Prosecutor,
the exact Scripturist, the Mall and Hater of Rome, at his Table, plentiful,
pleasant, courteous; at the Lords Table, and in Spiritual Exercises, full of
tears and mortifyed contrition; in short, a Pastor, industrious, venerable,
vigilant, as Mat. Paris characters him: When I muse upon the later Parallels to
these antique Heroiques, The Jewels, the Andrews's, the Abbots, the Halls, the
Vshers, the Kings, the Lauds, the Davenants, the Carletons, the Mountagues, the
Bilsons, the Brownriggs, the Sandersons, the Potters, the Whites, the Gaudens,
preaching and writing Bishops, and others since, no less worthy to be remembered
and honored, who are mentioned by a better Pen then mine, Eloquent and learned
Bishop Gauden in his Hieraspistes.
as Stars of the first Magnitude in our Firmament, and must be honored as
Champions to our Religion as it opposes Popery. I say, when these and others,
Prefermentaries in this Church of England, are thoroughly considered, and their
virtues have their due valews with us, I think a sober consideration being had
of the learned and pious succession of Bishops since the Reformation of our
Church, I persuade my self, I may with much truth, and if I did not think so, I
would abhor to write it, (my Spirit being (I bless God) too bigg to flatter
either Bishops or their Betters) That the Church of England has had since the
times of H. 8. more holy, Episcopi officium est authoritate divina fiducialiter
and veraci^er absque ullo timore, vel adulatione, loqui verbum Dei Regibus,
Principibus omnibus dignitatibus, nunquam veritatem subterfugere, nulli
parcere* neminem injuste damnare, neminem sine causa excommunicare, omnibus
viam salutis tam erbis quam exemplis demonstrare. Council. Calcuthense
Legatinum. ad Annum. 787. Spelman Council p. 296.
learned, preaching Bishops, then any Church of its capacity in so many years
at any time, since Christ's time, ever had. And I hope it will still continue to
deserve the same attribution from succeeding Times. And therefore, how can the
bounty of our Kings, and the Justice of our Laws, and the Gratitude of our
Piety, express it self by any other, or less commendable way, then by wishing
them a prosperous enjoyment of what Riches and Honor they now have? and how
can they evade the desert of rude, ungrateful, and absurd, who malign these
Rights so usefully vested in them? Yea, I think I may say it without offense, I
am sure without falsehood, that the splendour of Bishops, and other Dignitaries
in our Church, is that which makes our Clergy most considerable abroad, and
most powerful at home. For by reason of their port and place are they
capacitated not only to entertain Strangers, Beneficia Ecclesiastica
conferenda sunt propter officia, putae propter veritatem doctrinae, sanctiatem
vitae, equitatem justitiae, haec enim personam faciunt dignam Ecclesiastica
Praelatura. Augustine Triumphus de Potestat. Eccles. quaest. 47. art. 1. in
Resolut. p. 252.
gather out of Libraries and Universities, the choicest books and learned
men, prefer those that are virtuous, but also to become Intercessors for the
Subjects to their Princes, and to persuade Greatness to be reconciled to God,
and Regular, as he commands; yea, and to forward the enaction of good Laws in
the Lords House, of which they are Members. And if men preferred to those
Dignities be of strict Piety, convenient learning, resolved diligence, exact
prudence, serious charity, conscionable residence; if they devote themselves to
be God's, to conform their lives and actions to his Word, to comply with the
motions of his Spirit in the voice of Conscience, to love and value Gods Image
in the meanest Christian; if their desire be to God, and to remembrance of his
name, and their heart is toward those that are faithful in the Land; if they
think it their duty and delight to pray for and teach the people the word of
God, and the duty of love and subjection, Which are most profitable to the
Estate of this Realm, upon which the mercy, favor, and blessing of Almighty
God, is in no wise so readily and plenteously poured, as by Common Prayer, due
using of the Sacraments, and often preaching of the Gospel, with the devotion
of the Hearers: Stat. 21. H. 8. c. 13.
These are the words of the Statute 5 and 6 E. 6. c. 1. If these things they
do, as by the Laws of Religion they are to do, and as by themselves, and their
Substitutes, the Parochial Ministers, they are presumed to do; The Honors they
have are too little to set them out by, Binius Conciliorum Tom 9. p. 698. To.
1. p. 63. To. 1. p. 539. Council. Sardiense. Sine dubio magna cautio est
habendae in regimme animarum, quia aliorum vitid sunt statim corrigenda,
aliquorum vero leviter sunt increpanda aliquorum vero ad tempus sunt
dissimilanda: nam quia ars artium est regimen animarum, qui tale art carent ad
Praelaturam assumi non debent quantumcunque sunt instructi in aliquibu^
scientiis and vigeant aliqua doctrina speeulabilium. Aug Triumph. q 3 de
Potest. Eccles. art. 3. Resol. ad 3 argumen p. 30.
and the riches they may accumulate, not suitable to the labor of their love,
and the desert of their zeal and worth; For as a Husband that is kind to, and
resident with, his Wife, deserves all she can bring to him, and is conspicuous
as her Husband irradiates her; so a Bishop that is married to his See, and
resides upon it, inspecting it as becomes a waking Watchman, is not so much
honored by his See, as his See by him. Nor do they, who traduce this Order and
begrudge the Promotion and Revenues of it, know the travel of their souls and
the importance of their zeal, who are conscientious and prudent Governors in
the Church; for did they, they would bless God for calling forth such useful
Instruments of Order, and by a ready submission to them, in things lawful and
honest, prevent their trouble and diversion from other their weighty concerns:
For till Lay People desist their factious levity, and troublesome recusancy,
Sacerdos quippe est ut populus, quando ea agit is qui spirituali officio
fungitur, quae illi nimirum facinnt, qui adhuc de studiis carnalibus
judicantur. St. Gregor. Pastor. part. 2.
and Clergymen intend constant residency, fervent duty, regular exemplarity,
vigilant Fathers in the Church are enforced to be Strangers to their Complaint
of Archbishop Laud in Epist. against Fisher. Lege Didacum e Castello de Ornatu
and Vestibus Aaronis Illatione. Sanctus Bernardus Sermon. Christ. in Cant. Cantic.
Books and Pulpits, wherein they cannot study and preach as they would, but are
necessitated to be at the Stern of Government, lest for want of good steerage,
the leaks of those storms and wanders procure Shipwreck.

Alas! it is not their choice not to preach frequently, God forbid they should
be so misunderstood, who understand so well their Duty and Comfort, Habent
Vbera, sed non vacua, their Spiritual Breasts are full of the milk of the Word;
and it cannot in Charity be thought less then pain and grief for them to
withold from those good words of reconciliation, which their Commission from
Christ purporteth, They have wisdom to apply to men and times, Gandere cum
gaudentibus, Flere cum stentibus norunt.
and thereby to ingratiate themselves with men whose conversion and conviction
they are to negotiate. O, but that which impedes their frequent preaching
Exercise, is the weight of Government, the Care of the Churches, which is not
like to be lightened, unless Priests and People pray for, submit to, and comply
with established Government: Happy would our Fathers in God think themselves,
Non sunt profecto matres qui cum sint de Crucifixi Patrimonio nmium incrassati,
impinguati dilatati non compa^iuntur super contritione* Joseph* Idem.
if Men's Follies, and the Churches Peace, would take up less time in
Government, and allow more to Devotion.

This I presume to write in obviation of vulgar cavils, and to mollify the
tumor of weak or seduced minds, whom solid reason and soft kindnesses will
sooner sweeten and reduce then rigidness or harsh speaking, which Charles, the
Fourth Emperor of the Romans, practicing on a villainous Conspirator against
him, Nesciebam, inquit, qualis Carolus esset, nunc liberalem and clementem
principem ferire nullo modo possum. Aeneas Sylvius lib. 4. de doct. and gest.
Al^onsi.
(to whom he gave a thousand Crowns for a Portion for his Daughter, more ready
for a Husband and a Portion, then the Conspirator her Father was to give it,)
sent him to his Partisans, a Convert, and so overcome with kindness, that he
not only disclaimed his fore-intended Villainy, but drew off all the rest; and
so not only secured the good Prince his life, but won the wanderer unto a
virtuous course. And this further I write, to declare, that as the preferred
Clergyman is to honor his Preferment by his personal and public virtue; so
he may expect and honorably take to himself, as his right and due, the
emoluments real or casual of his Preferment; and thereby the intendment of this
head is made good, That Ecclesiastical promotions are a Ground and Rise of
Riches and Honor.

SECT. XXVI.
Discourses of Dealing and Trust in Noble and Great men's Estates, a great way
to Rise, Riches, and Honor.
Sixthly, Another means to raise Estates, and thereby Honor to Families, is
Trusts and Agitation in and about great men's Estates; not because the Estates
of Nobles and Great men, are vaster now then wonted; or those large Collops,
and gainful Cantlings, which dexterously and by dishonest Arti^ice may be
slipped off them, and not missed in them, if looked judiciously into, are of
greater worth then ordinary: but because the owners of them (grown lofty,
careless, and in spirit and mind as high above looking to their Estates, as
they are beneath the skill of judging the posture of them,) wholly put
themselves and their fortunes into the power and ordering of their Servants and
Officers, who, by acting all themselves, and soothing their Masters in courses
of pleasure, and impatience of business, secure to themselves the dispose and
privacy of all transactions: especially, if the pleasures of London seduce
their Master from their Country residencies; their influence and power is so
absolute, that their Master or Lord is shrivelled up, and they are published
sole Rulers. For their Lords or Masters absence and expenses in high Diet, rich
Clothes, frequent Treatments, Fashionable Equipage, added to by great Gamings,
lend Compotations, exhausting Suretiships, perilous Quarrels, Amorous
caressings, dreyning him of all Exuberances, forces him to be more greedy upon
his servant to return moneys, and more to accept him when he returns him money
supplies. By reason whereof, as the Tenant looks upon the Steward or Trustee as
the Lord in deed and power, because he only executes his pleasure toward him:
so does he propitiate the Steward or Trustee, by such tenders and presents as
have amollient and inclining operations; which renders the condition of these
Favorites and Agitators (well salaried, free from all charges, subtle to
flatter their Lords and Masters into needs and want of money, and not visibly
redeemable deemable, and set a float, but by Mortgage or sale of Lands at
undervalues, both as to Rent, Purchase, and Perquisite;) probable to produce
them Rise and Riches. For these that now-a-daies put themselves upon, and are
accepted into Services and Trusts, are not of the temper of those wonted
attendants on Greatness, who descended out of worshipful Families, came into
Noble Fetters, not so much to live upon, or get by them the matter of their
future subsistence, (though sometimes by accident this worthily befell them)
but to learn the way of Noble breeding, and to be under the view and regency of
exemplary virtue; and to report from them the glory and fame of fidelity well
accepted and acknowledged: Which motives to, and practices in, their services
and houses, were less dangerous and diminutive to the Great men and Lords, by
reason these Eagles of great spirits, abhorring vulgar preys, proposing no
reward but what was the bare entertainment of their time and pains, and was
un-detrimental to their Principals, and uninjurious to their Tenants, and
others to whom they in their Offices are friendly. I say, these having no
design above praise, and a good Match, if their service and breeding there may
opportunize them thereunto, must needs be more profitable for them to
entertain, then the creatures of late admission and countenance in those
places; who being taken poor lads, and kept in mean condition, when advanced
prove rapacious, cunning, insolent, and obliged by nothing but gain, which they
are so crafty contrivers of, that they have hoards of money ready in other men's
names to accommodate their Masters with; provided they may, as they will (for
they are both Demandants and Consenters) have the best security he has to give,
and they can have made to them: so that they so carry matters^, that they will
be seen and known in every transaction: Nor will nor almost can, their Lord (as
things are ordered by them, and permitted by him to be) do any thing without
them: or refuse any thing they prefer or allow preferred unto him. Whence we
see they rise, thrive, and are full of Money, when their Lord or Master with
his great Estate is needy, uncurrant, reproached, and altogether creditless. So
that, when Children come to he married, or disposed abroad to travel, home
study, or any other Caling, the good word of the Steward or prime Servant must
be had* before any thing toward such provision or expense can be raised, and
the manner of its supplement settled. Which too true in every days experience
seems to be a flaw of depreciation in the Jewel of greatness. Nor do I
understand how great minds do to, themselves answer the sola^cism of being
patient to be needy and narrow, when things of import and honor call upon them
for aid and supply; and in matters trivinl and absurd, on which there is
nothing of Nobility and virtue impressed, nor from which can they from either
of them be added to, ^express a termless, and abyss freeness and grandeur.

SECT. XXVII.
Shows the Gift of Tenacity, or close holding what we have, or can come by, a
great means of Rise or Advance.
SEventhly, Resolution of Hold-fast, is a great Rise to Riches and Honor. This
humor of Frugality, which is the softest and least blemished sense of
Hold-fasting, being a great advance to Estates: Nor do I think it is excelled
by any way of acquisition practicable. For it consists of all those ingredients
that in their simpls are conducing to thrift; and therefore in their
conjunction must amount to it. It implies knowledge of worldly casualty, and of
that vertigo and fluency which swinges and tides to and fro worldly things, and
worldly men; and because these conversions are oftener from better to worse,
then from worse to better, it practices wisdom of preparation for, and
prevention of, the fatality of Humane Contingencies, and provides in plenty for
Want, in health for Sickness, in Riches for Poverty, in Peace for Distraction:
and this by a Mortification of appetite in those exhaustions, that are too
liberal to be lasting, and too expensive to be sober: Hence it spins its thread
into as large an extent, as its tenuity will bear; and require^ no more then
needs must from the greatest advantage it has; and that because it would more
confidently press upon it, and be supplied from it in need. It expresses a
right judgment of things, eying Fame as a windy noise, which passes without any
foot-step or remarque of its consistency; and cherishes that which maintains a
full purse, and a fore-hand fortune. It values Friendship of independence, and
un-endedness; and as it resolves it self will not, so others shall not by their
confidence oppress it. It gratifies no humor of costliness, because it has an
adjunct mischief; nor is led by any prepotent addition, Titulo Imperator, animo
Petuniae miserabile mancipium, de Iustino apud Valor. Max. lib. 9. c. 4.
to advance its charge, or neglect its luster; its in short, wholly a creature
of this world, living by and to it, studying all the intrigues and mysteries of
it, and refunding all its diligence and satisfaction into it. This is the
nature of Hold-fasting, which is not only relative to money, which it scrapes
basely, and keeps sordidly; (...). Stobaeus Fo. 755.
but to words, writing, yea, even thoughts: and this it does, not so much to
anticipate the waste of time, as the vanity of openness, and to raise a fence
against the inrodes ann injurious dishonours of it. And though wise men often
crack their credit by this kind of heedlesness, which is so fatal to them, that
they hardly ever claw off the scair and mortal wound of it; as did that Famous
Sir Henry Wotton, who by not withholding his hand, wrote that which Scioppius
made use of to his Master's upbrayd, and was turned upon him in his Masters
disfavour: Or if he had preserved to himself that Present which the Emperor,
gave him, and not given it in a Complement to the Countess of Sabrina, Sir H.
Wet^ods Works. p. 253. p. 483.
he need not to have professed, he had no Riches but his Books and Miseries,
and complained to be the man of all men laden with unfortunate baseness: yea,
though State-Holdfast be that which brave men can hardliest learn; their
spirits being so great, that they think it too sensual and mean for their
condescentions, and believe that their selves and parts will bear a better
value in the Age, To (...). Thucyd. Hist. lib. 2.
and be a stronger obligation to the men of it, then to put them to shift and
prog for their subsistence and amplitude, whose the command and greatness of
their times are not too great to be presents to their eminent merits; yet has
it been found more Sovereign to their exigencies, and the straights of life to
which they in common with others are subject, and by which made unhappy beyond
others, then all their other agitable accomplishments: Especially when it has
been regulated by Honor and Conscience, and by a wise and observant discerning
of time, and use of reason, avoided the censure and curse of wicked policy, and
injurious te^acity; which good and grave men abhor, as a breach of morral
kindness, and religious charity, seldom or never without the breach of every
restraint: therefore called an evil covetousness, Hab. 2. 9. Iniquity, Isa. 57.
17. A companion of theft, Mark 7. 22. Uncleanness, Ephesians. 5. 1. Idolatry, Col. 3.
5. Exclusive of Heaven, Revel. 22. Which is the woe against it, Hab. 2. 9. Yet
for all this, the Misers of this world are so deeply wounded with the love of,
and so wedded to the practice of it, that they will sooner let go their hold of
Heaven, then of this World, and the perishing pelf, and fading beauty of it;
for the securing of what they have, and to hold fast their possessions, They
will oppress the afflicted, Prove. 22. 22. Amos 4. 1. And ruin a man and his
Heritage, Micah 2. 2. Wrong the widow and fatherless, Zach. 7. 10. And though
God threaten to break in pieces the oppressor, Psalm 72. 4. yet they trust in
oppression, Isai. 30. 16. and make lies their refuge. If they get a man at
advantage, they will handle him without Mittins: if his Inheritance be their
pledge, his security their prey, his reputation their secret, his supply their
advantage: no Commiseration, no Justice, no Civility will they express; all is
violence, and advantage that comes in the Net of these Crafts-men, and into the
Beak of these Cormorants; all is profit that these finger, all is their own that
these Leeches and Harpyes have any colorable title to. Genesis 34. 26. 1 Kings 21.
To be at their mercy is for Hamor and Sechem to be subject to Simeon and
Levi's, and for Naboth to part with his Patrimony; to be kindly dealt with, is
to be devoured by them, that nature may know an end of her misery, and not to
be miserable by protracted degrees, and to buy their courtesy, is to pay what
Judas did for the High Priests company and power, to apprehend Jesus, Ones
soul. Thus malignant is their vicious Holdfasting, that it is the devils livery
and seisin of the whole man, soul and body. For in this sense that it is
culpable, it has exceeded the bounds of pure frugality, and is become every
gainful vice in appetition, and so far as it is cumularive to it in fact. Show
me a Holdfast that resolves to be Rich, and cares not what he does to answer
his desire; and I will show you an Esau for profaneness, a Cain for murder, an
Ahab for oppression, a Saul for falsehood, a Simon Magus for Sacrilege, a Judas
^or treachery. No vice but this ministers to, no virtue but this defies, no
Attribute of God but this contradicts, no Command of God but this transides, no
menace of Gods but this huffs at, and resolves against; yea, take it as it is
eccentrique, as I before said, and it is brutish rapacity, savage Cannibalism,
yea monstrous treason against the general good of mankind: For he that thus
loves himself more then he ought, loves not his neighbor so much as he should,
no not at all; for he makes his life a trepan to those he converses with, and
is pleased with nothing but the subversion of humane society: for he would live
alone in the Earth, Isai. 5. 8.

And yet God knows, that which this industry arrives at, is, but to write a
name in dust, and to fix a family on a quick-sand: For though it is but a
little time that prosperity thus founded lasts; yet great Rise and Riches are
for a time procured by it. And therefore do I account it now a way to advance,
not because the Age accounts it a virtue, but because the general transport of
pleasure and luxury indisposing men of fortune to know and practice their
security, leaves them a prey to such courses. So true is that of Solomon, in
this sense, Prove. 22. 7.
A negligenborrower is servant to a diligent lender, who will not only be sure
to be paid, if it be to be had, alleging for his Canon and Creed, that self is
first to be served, and his own child first to be christened; but also even
where it is not with mercy or conscience to be had, even from the bones of his
Creditor, and the bellies of his Relations: Thus rapacious is Holdfast, that it
never parts with what it can hold, nor ever pays what it can by force stave
off, or by fraud evade; so much like Hell and the Grave is it in its Call,
Give, Give; so little of the Spirit of Goodness has it to return what is due
to be returned.

SECT. XXVIII.
Shows, That Flattery and False-faced-complyance, is a way and means to wards
Rise, Advance, and Riches.
LAstly, Flattery and False-facedness is a great art and means toward Rise and
Advantage. This seen in the deviations of every foot, and heard in the
dissimulations of every word, and work almost of men, arraigns the Age of not
only Vanity, but delighted in Wickedness; so that if John the Baptist, Though
he burned with zeal, John 5. 35.
and shined in holiness; or Aristides, who was (...), without welt or guard,
were alive, the one would be the scoff of wits in their Lampoones, and the
other, the abuse of those that are in and out at every pass of shift and
prevarication: This having a Heart, and a heart is that God complains of, Is.
29. 13.
This people draw near unto me with their lips, when their heart is far from
me; and this the Holy Chost in Scripture severely brands, There is no
faithfulness in their mouth, Psalm. 5. 9, 10.
their inward part is very wickedness, their throat is an open Sepulcher, they
flatter with their tongue, There is their Sin: Then the Psalmists Imprecation
on them, is v. 10. Destroy them, O Lord, let them fall by their own Counsels,
cast them out in the multitude of their transgressions, for they have rebelled
against Thee. Indeed, God being a God of Truth, and designing the heart of man
for the Temple and Palace of his Residence, looks upon deceit and falsness
crept in thither, as an Usurper upon him and inconsistent with him; and
thereupon loads it with his reproach, that it might be un-requested and
ashamed. Prove. 7. 21.
Hence the Histrionicism of flattery is ascribed to the Harlot, Prove. 2. 16.
and the poison of Aspes is said to be under these lips, Romans 3. 13. For Lips
and looks of pretended love, and intended evil, are the unavoidable rocks of
kindness and credulity; nor can men of sincere aims and candid natures, avoid
their abuse if not ruin, which is the reason why wise and holy men have
desired Gods Protection from, seduction by seeming friendship, and feigned
sanctimony: For as the heart of man seduced, does ever act an ill part against
its interest of rectitude; so does Satan and the World, by the industry and
invisibleness of their motion, endeavor man's subversion and outwitting: Thus
was it in Moses his time, All that the Lord says we will do, Exodus 8. 9. Deuteronomy.
5. 27. Thus in Ioshuah's time, Josh. 1. 16. Thus in David's time, Psalm. 12. 2.
They speak vanity with his Neighbor, every one with flattering lips: Thus in
our Lords time, the Scribes and Pharisees are said to tempt him, and ask him a
sign, Matthew. 16. 1. So Matthew. 19. 3. Mark. 10. 3. Mark. 8. 11. John 8. 6. in
all which places, their appearance of learning from him, for betterance of
their knowledge, being only an aim to cavil at, and inform against him, and by
perversion of his words, to subvert his doctrine and person, is called a
Diabolical Fallacy, tempting of him: Thus further has flattery and fallacy been
carried on in all Ages of the World, as that Pionery and subterraneous
mischief, which is at its mark before discored, and is possessed when but just
admited in. And indeed as this fucacity and assimilation to something good has
wrought it self into great favors, commands, and trusts; so has it by
progresses suitable to its Rise, seduced Men, Nations, and Ages, into a
coparcenry with it in its joint stock of seduction and effrontery, the leaven
and suppuration of which has sowred and deturpated the nature and manners of
mankind, and made it monstrous, faithless, and brutish: This has brought in
Superstition upon Piety, Tyranny upon Subjection, Lust upon Love, Injury upon
Trust; yea, an universal inundation of Confusion in all kinds, in all Persons,
in all Degrees; Intu^ Nero, Foris Cato totus ambiguus. S. Hieronymus. Quaenam
istae sunt pelles ovium nisi nominis Christiani extrinse^us super^icies? Qui
lupi rapaces, nisi sensus et spiritus subdoli ad infestandam gregem Christi
i^trinsecus deli^e scentes? Tertull. c. 4. de Praescrip. adv. Haereses.
yea, he that can best act this part, and most creditably formalize it, is
thought, The most agible and preferrable, though he be within, Nero, without,
Cato, and in both ambiguous. This Piracy and Pestilence of depravation, as it
is praevious to spiritual Seduction, by a vigor of Insinuation, that
randezvouzes in the will of man subdued, and the other faculties at least made
neutral; whereby Gods party in the soul is less assisted and more drawn upon
duty: and such Tertullian expounds the prediction of Christ, to beware of them
that come in Sheeps clothing, but inwardly they are ravening Wolves; so does
it also antecede the general deboysture of moral virtues, and civil, social
honesty and veracity between man and man: Quid ergo Athenis, and Hiero^olymis?
Quid Haereticis and Christianis nostra Institutio de Por^i^u Solomonis est? qui
and ipse tradiderat Dominum in simplicitate cordis esse quaerendum. Id. eod.
libro.
so that (if not St. Paul, or St. John, or Athanasius, or Cyprian, those
sincere Christians, and Nathaniels, in whom there was no guile;) but even a
Plutarch, a Seneca, a Cato, a Socrates, should arise and peragrate the World
and come into these Northern Parts of it, most remote from Asian Crafts and
Profusenesses, He would cry out, O Tempora, O Mores, and rather choose to go to
his Grave and be still there, then live, and move, and speak, and do
contradiction to Reason and Religion. Indeed, if there were no other Argument
to arraign this Age, the request and respect done to flattery, and the
advantages that come by it, is enough to pronounce it guilty, and condemn it.
We are all of us in a vain shadow, and we love to have our follies called
wisdom, and our flatteries, Civility, our luxury, Liberality, and our profane
scoffing, Wit, our idle time, Good-fellowship, our pride, Fashionableness, our
cold zeal, Moderation, our idlenesses, unavoidable Diversion, our pleasures,
Health, our prodigalities, noble Entertainment; so that it is hard to find this
Serpent hissing, without some note of more sweet Incantation; and all this
while we smile in our sleeves, and cry, What evil have we done? and applaud our
own secret Atheism, which no eye of man discovers: when God, whose Holiness,
Power, Purity, Presence, Patience, this provokes and despises, laughs this to
scorn, and has the policy and clancularity of it in d^rision; yea, and will
make it appear, when he has reversed those unjust judgments in the Tribunals of
our transports and degenerations by a Writ of Error, before the Peerage of
rectified Reason, Religion; which as it requires, so gives the Guerdon to being
what we appear, and doing what is honest and of good report.

I like the actions of men, inscribed with the Motto of that Nobleman's Gate at
Verona, Patet Ianua, Cormagis, which, tho Aristides truly made good, yet when
Themistocles came to rule, he was banished, and so poor, that hardly out of his
estate could the bearing of him to his Grave be paid: now though it be counter
to the interest and advantages of great, wise, learned men, who love to be
soothed up, and have creatures soft and pliable, whom they sutably reward and
endear; yet is it upon God, and ^ntegrities account practicable; tho if any man
would be counted intelligent, eivil, moodish, acceptable, he can know and
practice no better methods to the rewards of these, in the sense that Greatness
understands them, then to observe their humors, bear their burdens, admire
their actions, attend their commands, without weariness, dispute, or
curtilation, and then he is likely to be accounted of; so indulgent are the
Aristoxernus's of our Age to those flowers in the garden of their love, that
they well water them with wine, honey, and other delicates, that they may not
only grow great, but be more and more by their flatteries acceptable to them;
else, though a man have the Piety of Enoch, the Prudence of Moses, the Valor
of David, the Integrity of Samuel, and would use all these in a method proper
to their designation, to procure blessings, and repel miseries from Persons
and Nations; yet, shall he be accounted a vain man, that is easy and has no
guard of himself, for Qui nescit dissimul^re, noscit vivere: Notable therefore
is that of Sir Henry Wotton, who had paid dear enough for openwording, I have
no Riches but my Books and Miseries, which are Mansueta Mala to what I have
deserved; therefore I will spend my Opinion, which is all my Freehold, without
Fear of Parliaments, or Hopes of Courts. And therefore while these supple and
plyant natures, that are as twinable as Adders, swimm, and are patronized by
those they sting to death, and by their nearness to, destroy, Truth and plain
dealing is repudiated as spurious, impertinent, tedious, intolerable. This
makes every man that aims at advantage to represent himself above and beyond
himself; The Divine in the Pulpit, the Advocate at the Bar, the Physician at
the Bed, the Servant at the Board; This, the Suitor to court his Mistress, the
Gamester to cogg his Prey, the Merchant to make his barter, the Courtier to
design his Boon, other ways then he appears; so much is Man in love with
himself, that he accepts, Agathoniam Cantionem, every thing that admires him,
and regrets whatever is less pallataable, though more wholesome: which
considered, to distinguish rightly of men and things, and by the ingratiation
of Flattery to prevail, our designs accomplishment is to those that can
practice it, (which I thank God I cannot) a hopeful Rise to Riches and Honor;
for, nothing can Greatness deny to him and his, who in himself, and in his, is
a vassal to, and an expecter from, that which he admires, and is both able and
willing to oblige him.

SECT. XXIX.
Herein follow the Means and Vices that probably now in England tend to the
Decay and Ruin of Men and Families.
ANd as this our age has particular specifique virtues and means, by which
Hononrs and Riches, as before said, are attained to, so has it as signal Vices
and deboysheries, by whith Honors grow despicable and Estates Impair and Cease.

The first whereof is Profaneness; the great Deicidial evil that in its
Effrontery denies the purity, and defies the power of God. This is either that
close and covert hostility against God, which men transact and improve by the
aid of Sacrilege and Sectarism: Pro^^anum quod Fani religione non tenetur.
Festus. Contamina^ione semel sacratae rei committitur sacrilegium Gu* Paris de
Sacramen to Ordinis p. 501.
Or that lewd and Meretricious boulstring out of Immorality; which in spite of
Law, Example, Natural conscience, absurd minds hatch, and in absurd actions
produce; now both of these Prophanations being the violation and contempt of
what is sacred, whether things dedicated to God, or men commissionated by God,
as Magistrates are, and power distributed by them is. Both of these, I say,
abounding in this time, threaten the Ruin of Men and Families in it. Of the
first kind is Sacrilege and Sectarism; which though they are not Identique in
every circumstance or punct of definition, yet in the Tantamount are one; for
both of them are a reduction of Gods Ordinance and propriety, Prophanum est
quod ex r^ligioso et sacro in hominum usum potestatemque conversum est.
Trebatius Iu^iscons. apud Tholass. Sy^tagm Iuris lib. 1. c. 146.
to man's norm and royalty, which is such a degradation as amounts not only to a
Scab or Tetter, but to a Plague Sore in affairs, and becomes pestilentially
infectious: for as in Sacrilege men violate the propriety of God, in time (
sanctified and hallowed that is separated from all profane uses, says the
Stat. 5 and 6 E. 6. c. 3. So 1 C^r. 1. ^. 1. and 3. c. 1.) In places,
Sacrilegium est Sacrar^^ rerum Furtum. Tom 5 Cencil. p. 468. Sacrilegium est
omne quod ^it ad irreventiam Sacrae rei^ Stus Thomas (...). daeq 99.
as Churches and Chapels, and Patrimonies, and in Appurtenances to them: so in
Persons particularly devoted to him, as men in Holy Orders, and Magistrates who
are Gods Deputies, to see both Tables kept, is there (by vulgar esteem of, and
violent contempt toward them) Profaneness and Sacrilege committed: And if
God punished these sins (for they are the unhappy Twins of Antique
Iuciserianism) in Corah and his company, Number. 16. A^t 5.
and in Ananias and Sapphyra; in Arnolph the eighth Emperor of Rome, (...),
etc. Plato in Euthyphron. p. 4.
eaten up by lice; and in multitudes of others: Yea, and if the very light of
nature taught men to censure them to death that were predacious upon God in any
kind, or concealers of such Enormities, as Plato asserts the law; and as in our
own Land the punishment of Sacrilege has been, Holingshed, p. 704.
Temps E. 4. Five for robbing St. Martins le Grand Church, were put to death,
three hanged and burnt, and two pressed to death.) Sacrilegium vero tanto est
gravius peccatum qua^to commi^^i non potest nisi in de^^^ St^s. Argust^ (...) 4
Contra Cresconium Gram 198 Edit. Froveni.
If these things be true, as undoubtedly they are, then all Grave, Good, and
wel-minded Christians are to avoid profaneness as introductory to Sacrilege
and Sectarism.

When therefore I rank Sectarism with Sacrilege, I take Sectarism not for a
temporary dissent in things accidental and less consequent: (For that may be in
men wise, learned, humble and loyal, through some preoccupations of breeding or
other consortial imbibings, where there is no premeditated restiveness, or
stubbornness of resolve; yea, it may be through a tenderness and timoriety of
spirit; which God may raise and continue in men, as his opportunity to some
further work upon them; such adhesions, barely to comply with the present
satisfaction and light of a man's conscience, regulated by reason and Scripture
in any tolerable sense, I do not understand to be the mate of Sacrilege, For
that in matters Divine Gods word is all in all, the which so soon as a godly
man has received, he presently yields and submits himself; I^ rebus
divinis vox dei debet esse instar omnium quam nonquan^mens pia semel accepit,
statim cedit and manus dat, post tergiversatur and expectat alios, id^elligit
se non Pontificis, aut c^ncilii arbitrio oportere credere sed voluntati dei,
ejus autem voci obtemperandum esse invitis omnibus Epist ad Scipionem Nobilem
Venetiam de Cecilio Tridenti^o.
he is not wavering nor expects others; he understands that he is not bound
to give ear to the Pope, or to the Council, but to the will of God, whose
voice is to be obeyed, though all men say Nay, as Renowned Bishop Jewels words
are. But that Sectarism which I make profane and Sacrilegious, Sacrilegium e^l
sacrae Personae l^sio. Bonaven^^ra Centiloqua 1 Part. Sect. 24.
is that which bends its brow upon Princes, Gravius est Sacrilegium contra
personam qu^m contra lo^um St. Thomas secunda secund. eq 99. (...). Plato lib
9. de legtb p 91^. Edit Ficmi.
and clinches its fist against Laws, and hardens its heart against kindnesses,
and stiffens its neck aganst the yoke of discipline. This insubjection to the
higher powers in their enactions, where they are Christian, according to the
purest ages practices and professors; yea, according to the Scriptures
Canonical, which commands order, decency, and obedience to the Higher Powers,
Kings, and under them Parliaments, and according to them to inferior
Magistrates, opposition to which Plato calls (...), The dissoltiou and menace
of all, is not to be thought a small, but great, yea all sin: For in that it
tends to detract from and lessen the Ordinance of God, the Supreme Magistrate,
and exalts insolence and selfwill against his Law, and will no longer be
subject then power makes it (christian conscience being suffocated and
vertually non-ented by Interest.) Sacrilegus dicitur qui sacra violat. Binius.
Council. Tom. 5. p. 468.
There is a necessity for the Magistrate to assert Gods power in his manadgery,
Or else he will bear the Sword in vain, and lose the praise of Just and Trusty;
so true is that rule of Theodorick, He that will live without, and do against
Law, Dicam plane quod sentio, qui sine lege vult agere cunctorum disponit regna
quassare. Cassiod Var. lib. 3. c. 3,
meditates the subversion of all Government, Quod enim dicunt qui contra suas
impietates leges justas constitui nolunt, non petisse a regibus Terrae
Apostolas talia nan considerant aliud suisse tunc Tempus and omnia suis
Temporibus ugi. St. Augustinus Ep. 50 ad Boni^acium, militem Caesaris.
and drives, Iehu-like, to confusion.

And therefore it was piously prayed, and wisely advised, which I find from a
great Prelates pen, presented to the late Divine King; where speaking of the
confidence of Jesuits and Popish Priests, and all that are confraternal with
them, Arch B. Laud pre^ace to the King against Fisher.
I humbly beseech you see to it, that they be not suffered to lay their Weeles,
or bayt their Hooks, or cast their Nets in every Stream, lest that Tentation
grow both too general, and too strong, and I know they have many devices to
work their ends; but if they will needs be Fishing, let them use none but
lawful Nets, lets have no dissolving Oaths of Allegiance, no Deposing or
Killing Kings, no blowing up of States, to settle Quod volumus, that which fain
they would have in the Church; with many other Nets as dangerous as these. Thus
that wise Prelate wrote; for thus all Faction, peremptory and sanguine, in its
opposition to Fundamentals and necessaries, intends: Which considered, no man
can rationally plead a Dispensation from the Law of obedience, so positively
proposed, and so indefinitely enjoined, Let every soul be subject to the Higher
Powers; For if every soul be the subject, Si omnis anima and vestra, quis vos
exce^it a^ universitate, si quis tentat excipere, conatur decipere. Stus.
Bernard, Ep. ad Henricum Epis. cop. Senopens.
and the Higher Powers be the object of obedience, which God has enjoined; then
to exempt ones self from it, where it is an universal Rule, is to implead the
power of Gods Legislation, and to contemn the Magistrate who is the Minister of
Gods commission, and so becomes Sacrilege, and thereby becomes penal; for the
Magistrate is not bound to protect those that will not subject^, but may take
the punishment that is legal on him that refuses to give him the obedience the
Law prescribes.

Which the Primitive Christians well knowing, kept themselves, Intra limits
disciplinae; and though they did not partake with Heathens in their Idolatries,
which were by Edict commanded, yet did they pray God for the life, answer to
the summons, acknowledge the power, and fight for the Rights of their
persecuting Emperors, and therefore had the Returns of their panoply prayers
and tears in Gods signal Presence with and their success through him, and that
because as the weapons of their Christian Warfare were not appointed by God to
be carnal but spiritual, so they relied on, or acted by, no other Militia but
that of Faith, Fear, Humility, and Patience; neither did they disobey the
Magistrate Ethnique in his nefarious Commands, because they would not re^ede
their sturdy Resolutions, or lessen their Credit with their Party, but su^^ered
willingly the loss of their Fortunes, Favors, Liberties, yea Lives, that they
might make a Confession of their Faith worthy them, knowing that as the
Conscience of well-doing was their warrant, so the reward of well-doing would
be their Crown.

This I thought good to declare here, not with intent to reflect on sober
Dissenters, who cannot be guilty of Obstinacy and Mutiny, but to evidence that
there may be some danger in withdrawing from obedience to Magistracy, though
never so closely shrouded, and that such an aversion may be troublesome and
fatal; for, as it is no new thing, for men to be great Pretenders to Peace and
Unity, who will admit neither, Archbishop Laud, Preface to the King against
Fisher.
unless they and their Faction prevail in it, as is truly charged on the
Jesuits; so is it no new thing too, for pious and wellmeaning men to believe
their reluctance against Establishments is zeal for the rights of Christ, and
ac^ordnig to the expectations of God from them; when it is to be feared, it may
be some self-will, or other private passion, which God has promised to keep his
from, that wait upon him, and do not reject the things that tend to Peace and
Unity: For as good men, when suffering according to the will, and fully in the
cause of God, are never unhappy, but glorious, as Christ was in his suffering,
and may joyfully bear the spoiling of their Goods, and the renouncing of their
Lives, as pious Martyrs; so in causes not clearly and palpably Gods, nor
directly and avowedly referrable to his Glory, to suffer either personal
disgrace or fortunary diminution according to Law, is so far from being an act
of Martyrdom, that I cannot esteem it other then a signal weakness, and a
display of more contradiction then courage.

Now, though the former Profanation and Sacrilege be very much to be
discountenanced, abhorred, 1 Samuel 15. 22.
and declined, Because to obey is better then Sacrifice, and to hearken then
the Fat of Rams; and not to obey, Romans 13 1, 2.
is, to resist the Ordinance of God, And they that resist shall receive to
themselves damnation; yet the sorest lash is to be given to the profaneness of
debauchery; not but that the other is as high a sin, but because it is not
thought so notorious and daring, nor so epidemique, because this mostly is the
sin but of some of the common people, who are more addicted to follow novelty
and to pity sufferers, because they know no better; when this is the scarr of
men of high degree, of great place, great parts, great fortunes, after the rate
of usual calculation; yea, though his Gracious Majesty, not only decrys this
in his sober example, but has declared against it, as Gods dishonor, his
disservice, See his Proclamation against Propha(...)
and his Lands defilement, his good peoples offense, and his bads seduction;
yet has it so wrought it self into the loves and lives of men, that it is pity
to think such opposites to Religion, civil life, and good Laws, should prevail
over them; or that the words and deeds of men should be so loose, that it (...)
almost as impossible to fear them worse, a^ improbable to hope them better,
witness the excessive drinking, vain play, vilde Leachery, profuse Diet, and
chargeable Company, that every where is found, all which conspire to draw off
the mind from Gods fear, and men's shame, into (...) broad and lawless course of
life, tending to bestial and paganish lubricity: which, as it is the mischance
of our Peace, and the by^blow of Gods mercy to us; so will hardly have from God
the Portion of an Isaac, For his mercy is on them that fear him, but threatens
us with all the cursings of our blessings, which man's sins can merit, and Gods
justice inflict, and especially with Ismael's pittance to be sent packing out
of our good land, which may spew us out, Lev. 18. 28. and c. 20. 22, For, as a
Fruitful Land is turned into a barren Wilderness, for the wickedness of them
that dwell therein, Psalm. 107. 34. so may evil be brought upon a Land, to cast
the Inhabitants out of their Possessions, for casting God behind their backs,
Regnum Angliae, reg^um Dei.
and living as without God in the World. Indeed, considering Gods peculiar
Propriety in England, the security of its situation, the Paradise of its
Pleasure, the Fertility of its Soil, the Plenty of its Inhabitants, Note
Englands Mercies*
the Generalness of its Accommodation, the Glory of its Laws, the Freedom of
its Subjects, the Order of its Composition, Full of Plenty, Peace, Riches,
Renowned for Learning, Famous for Valor, Envyed for Affluence, above all,
considering the Residence (as it were) of God amongst us in his Worship
Primitive, and Orderly, as in no Nation in the World; Considering all these, to
find Profaneness and Despite of God, Exorbitancy and Contempt of Manhood, so
frequent and consident amongst us, is a Prodigy of Ingratitude, and an Omen of
Menace to us all. And though I think that none of the least Profaneness, which
many good and wise people think chargeable, upon such wicked Sons of Belial, as
make the Sacrifice of God to be abhorred, 1 Samuel 2. 17. I mean those irregular
and immoral Clergymen, who being devoted to God in their Orders, are truer
Factors for Satan in their lives, such being too like those, Columna, General
of the Navy to Pope Pius the Fifth, in the battle of Lepanta, told Don Alonso
the Jesuit, Vos alti Padri, di Ihesu havete la mente al cielo le manl al
mundo, l'anima al diavolo.
His Order were, Men, who seem to have their minds in Heaven, but have their
hands in the World, and lease their souls to the Devil: (Such bibbing,
brawling, gaming, effeminate, swearing, jocular Priests, being the blot and
blemish of Priesthood, Deformatur honestas (Clericulis) cum Clericus se
immiscet saecularibus nego^iis, item incedendo m^mis and joculatoribus, item
Tabernas ingrediendo nisi tempore itineris, item ad aleas and Tallellas ludendo
vel elsdem interessendo. Gloss* ad Lindwood Provincial. lib. 3. de vita and
honestate Clericorum, p. 61. Spelman Council p. 276, 277, 284. Binius Concll.
Tom. 7. p. 1169. Tom. 1. 12. To. 7. p. 811, 1150, 1186. To. 8. 156. To. 9. p.
706. To. 1. p. 308. To. 9. p. 460, 704, 716, 706, 265. To. 1. p. 13, 300, 721,
930, To. 6. 225. To. 7. 1169, 709, ^82, 229, 265, 328. Tom. 9. 706.
yea even of Christianity; and notwithstanding all their boasts of Conformity
and Canonical Obedience, the greatest Enemies to, and Opposers of, the Church
of Englands Establishment, Glory, and Success, and the sacrilegious Prophaners
of that holy Calling and Profession they are entered into; though I leave the
severe judgment of these to the Reverend Fathers of the Church, whose care and
cure they properly are, and who I am sure do really discountenance them; and
so not only testify their own abhorrence of it, but in a sort expiate by their
severity to it, the inquination of it:) yet ought it here to be touched upon,
as a great blemish which gives Adversaries too just occasion to reproach us:
But the great Cry that I have to make, is against the Civil and
Lay-prophaneness, which is monstrous and temptative of God, to dishonor and
desert us. O the formidable Oaths, the monstrous Loves, the devilish Frauds,
the Bacchanalian Jovialties, the furious Quarrels, the wasting Suretyships, the
bloody Murders, the endless Debts, the infamous Shifts, which Debaucheries put
men to, which engages too many of our Gallants to be passionate, idle,
humorous, needy, unstable, yea, and keeps them in resolution to justify
themselves and their Courses against the Commands of Superiors, the Counsels
of Equals, the Exception of Inferiors, till at last the upshot of these
Exorbitancies, not only proves scandal to their Degree, and worse then a
battoon of abatement to their Honor, but a Backdoor to their Estates, which
are not only wasted by the squitter of these Vices, but burdened with
Penalties upon the public ill Example and consequence of them; for were the
Penalties of the 21 Jacob. c. 20. of twelve pence upon every Oath that out
common Swearers blasphemously utter, levied upon them; and were the Penalties
for profanation of the Lords Day, according to the Statutes of 1 Car. 1. c. 1.
and 3 Car. 1. c. 1. and the Penalty for sitting in Tippling Houses, and unlawful
Meetings together, levied upon them: Those, with the satisfactions for taking
off Prosecution upon Recognizances for heinous Crimes; with other like
Expenses, I persuade my self, some in this Nation would pay great Sums for
their Offenses: But when Consideration is had to Gods dishonor, and the Lands
guilt by reason of it, and when Children are often charged with their Fathers
sins (as in Cases of Treason against the King, so in Cases of Blasphemy against
God) then Debaucheries may well be accounted a ruin to Men and Families, and
God may bring upon the Chieftains of Wickedness in them, Judgments remarkable.

Certainly there never was in the World a prophaner Cannibal then Hatto Bishop
of Mentz, who in a time of Famine which pinched the Poor, caused a great
Company of them to come into a Barn, as if he would relieve them; but when the
poor wretches were in the Barn, he caused it to be fired, Non differunt hi a
Muribus, qui multum comedunt, and in nihilum utiles.
unmercifully saying these words, They differ not much from Mice who devour
much and are good for nothing, but God brought this cruelty home with a
vengeance upon him, for the Mice daily so tormented him, that he was like to be
devoured by them, at last he put himself into a strong Castle upon the Rheine,
but God brought the Mice swimming down the Rheine so irresistably upon him,
that they not only devoured him, but eat his name out of all Hangings and
Places: a memorable Story in punishment to Profaneness, Murder, and Cruelty.
O, if these Roysters would consider the Blasphemies and Prophanations of
Senacherib, Nebuchadonosor, Antiochus, Nicanor, Scaeva's Sons, Julian,
Elpidius, Olimpius the Arrian Bishop, the Boy in Gregory Towers, Lib. 4. c. 18.
and sundry others in old and late Stories, they would fear to provoke the
great God of Heaven by them.

For do we not read of God cursing and blowing upon Families, as is threatened
against the Swearer and the Stealer, Zach. 5. 3. Ier. 23. 10. upon the Liar,
Murderer, and Adulterer, Hosea 4. 2. upon the violent, Ezech. 28. 16. upon the
profane, Amos 2. 7. and c. 3. 1. Ezech. 22. 3. and when he curses, who shall
bless? and when he scatters, who shall gather, and when he subverts, who shall
establish? And if none can reverse his Sentence, or evade his Power, then how
ill Ancestors are they to Succession, how ill Englishmen in this Age, that
challenge God by their prodigious Impieties to commence his quarrel against us,
and to fix his arrows upon us, and to make us a hissing and a byword, and not
a blessing and a praise amongst the Nations that environ us; For though God
will not cast away perfect men, yet will he not help such evil doers, Job 8.
20. But God will break the arm of these wicked ones, Ps. 10. 15. Set his face
against them, Psalm. 34. 16. Yea, cast upon them the fierceness of his wrath,
indignation, and trouble, by sending evil Angels amongst them, Psalm. 78. 15.
and haunt these with evil, Ps. 140. 11. He will punish these for their evil and
iniquity, Jer. 13. 11. which they shall not avoid, Jer. 11. 11. And against
their Families will devise an evil from which they shall not remove, Micah 2.
3. yea, and so aggravate their sufferings to them, that they shall be
uncomfortable under them, and inglorious by reason of them, and not with
Lentulus, Be renowned and cheerful, Pelli potes, cedi, capi, perimi, vinci
autem nisi manum extuleris non potes, neque ornamentis tuis spoliari, cum
quibus quocunque ieris and Civis and Patriae Princip^m unus cris. Petrarcha,
lib. 2. de remed. ute. For^unae. Dialog. 67.
though naked and restrained, being spoiled of nothing in his banishment and
losses, while he kept his Virtue, which alone he accounted his own; because it
rendered him worthy to be accounted a Chief Citizen and Prince of his Nation,
(as the Prince of Wits, in his time, sets it out;) but contemned, meanly
thought on, unpittied; yea, all men shall see their affliction with
incompassion, and some with rejoicing: For they, who vainly profligated that
which with care and sobriety would have honorably supported them and theirs,
are not often thought worthy any support from Generosity or Charity, but rather
are to be separated from the Society of men, who are so contagious to, and so
seductive of them. All which considered, in the punishments of God and man or
substance, (...). Libanius Declam. 35. p 787.
children, body, soul; There is good cause to conclude, that profaneness is a
ready way to run down, and irrecoverably ruin Men and Families; and therefore I
deprecate this guilt, in the words of our Church-Letany, From all Sedition,
Treason, and privy Conspiracy: From all False Doctrine Schism, and Heresy, rom
hardness of heart, and contempt of Gods Word and Commandments, Good Lord
deliver mine and all the Generous Families in England.

SECT. XXX.
Highth of Port and Pride of living, is now a way to Ruin and Decay Men and
Families.
THirdly, highth of living now in England is like to decay Men and Families*
For this Gangrene diffused into all parts, orders, and persons almost in the
Nation, makes every man weary of his National or Vocational limits, and move
into Orbs superior to it, and suffer in the costly and not to be maintained
Port of it: For whereas there was (not by sumptuary Laws, or Magistratique
sanction, but by common agreement, ^and general understanding) as it were, a
settled way of Garb, Equipage, Nulla toto orb gens est quae Britannos superet
in splendore domestico, Famulitii multitudine, afficiorum ac graduum
distinctione ret quidam admirabilis cuicunque contingit, aspicere cupediarum
quae singulis diequs parantur multitudinem, Albergatus in Relat.
RegniBritannici The sauro Polit. p. 201.
Diet, Housholdstuff, Clothes, Education of Children, and Men of prudence held
themselves concerned in Discretion and Thrift, not to exceed the bounds of
their Degree in any of the forementioned things, but lived, bred, maintained,
married, and provided for their Children, according to the permission of that
understanding and decency, which by mutuality of Intelligence and accord,
Intercurred between degrees of all sorts: Now the mode and rate of them is so
altered and exceeded, that it is hrrd to find so much as a stump of that
ancient pale, unstocked up, but Nobles and Gentry, Gentry and Mechaniques,
Entercommon, as it were, in the lawtess of life: while not only such foolish
and high-flown Prodigals, Vulo^es ace^o liquefactas caen^s appoueret.
as AEsap the Tragedians son, who left very rich, had Pearls liquefied served
in as a Dish at his third course. Or, Muleasses King of Tunis, whose Kitching
brought up the charge of dressing a Peacock and two Pheasants to above 100.
Ducats, so laden and overcharged with Perfumes were the Sauces, Turkish Hist.
p. 745.
and Trickings of them, that they were as pleasant to the pallat to taste, as
to the eye to behold. I say, while not only such Epicures by themselves are
excessive, but even all men fashioned into Luxury and State of life: And now
every one prepares a full Table, has good Attendance, keeps Horses, wears rich
Clothes, gives great Wages, retains many Servants, builds Magnificently,
furnishes Amply, adorns Luxuriantly their Bodies, Children, and Houses, by
which many costly diversions not only, the Paunch of an estate is pinched, and
the Succulency suffurated from its Amassation, the Scale of Estates amount, but
also provision for Daughters and younger Sons dock'd, and the evil day not
foreseen in wise forecast for it.

This Excess frequent of old, the wisest of men judged ominous, and decried it
in their practice. The great Morralist Seneca notably delivers his mind
conconcerning it, I love, says he, Household parsimony, not rich Beds, and
costly Arrasses* Tenet me summus amor parsimoniae, fateor placet non in
ambitionem cubile compositum etc. ^ed in usum posita quae nullius con^ivae
oculos nec^ volunta^e moretur nec accendit invidia lib de ^ranq. Animi c. 1.
not Tyres for Rooms, that must be Pressed and Chested, and seen only upon
Grand days, but convenient and comely Vtensils, that may be used fr^quently,
and will not bring too great loss in the damage of them. I love Servants
neither sordidly rude, nor femininely trim, Plate o^ the fashion of Ancestors;
not a Table so neatly set out as if no foul finger were to come near it; none
of these things take me, but such things as neither sill the beholders eyes
with envy, or occasion them by the vility of them to reproach. So Seneca.

For alas, as when several veins of the body are at once open, spirits
evaporating at all of them, the sea of spirits at last grows low; so all these
ways of expense baiting and worrying a fortune, cannot but sink and mortify
the courage, Quid mihi Phocionem loqueris, quid Aristidem? Tune paupert^s erat
saeculi quid loqueris Fabricios, quod Coruncanos, P^mpae ista exempla,
fictilibus fue^unt dii saciles. Senec. Contr. lib. 2. Contr 9. Vos quidem qui
virtutem cul^orem ej^s odi^tis nihil novi ^acitis* nam and ^ole^ lumina ^gre
formi^ant. Et aver^^ntur diem ^pleudidum ^octurna ani^alia. Senec. (...). de
vit. be^^. 21.
and very being of it; which is little now considered by any: For men are so
far from looking upon poverty as an opportunity to virtue, or bearing a
moderate condition contentedly, that they are apt, as Seneca says, to think of
Aristides and Phocion as men fashionable in their frugal conditions, which were
suitable to the then Age; and to the Gods who loved Fabricius Corutcanus, and
the rest, for their homely living, and Country contentedness. Nor is it any
wonder, that men made up of vice, and abounding in deeds of darkness, hate
virtue and the practices of it: for it is so antipodique to them, that they are
excecrable even from the deeds of virtue, which are opposite to theirs, and for
which the doers are honored when they are lightly set by.

Which teaches us to transfer the blame on time to men, the livers in, and
infectors of it; for time is passive and under the tyranny of men, livers and
rioters against the virgin nature of it; yea, haters of those their
Contemporaries, who are most steady and noted for virtue: Sacri erimus and
modica concupiscemus si unus quisque se numeret, metiatur simul corpus,
sciatque nec mul^um capere, ne^ diu posse. Senec. Ep. 11. 4. O miseri genum
vilium comitores usoresque nobtlium ama^is quae nec se, amari sentiunt^ nec
amantibus invicem reddunt. Petrarch^ lib. 1. de remed. Vir. Fort. Dial. 59.
For Cato's presence is no awe to resolved peccants, who make their wills their
laws, and long to be eased of their Estates, that they may have the stronger
leures to vice, from their necessities pressing them and their resolves, to
comply with any course that relieves them. But, O how far is this from a true
rational calculate? If a man considers, that his senses are those quarries, out
of which are dug and hewn the materials of life, the structures whereof are
beautified only by moderation of them, and paring excressences from them; which
when best directed are but a while to be lent us, and subject to many
casualties that little while. If a man consider but this, he would be less
pleased with, and less wedded to their sensual fruitions; for man, the Image of
God, is not made to feed upon air, to be enamoured of vanity, to loose himself
in the pursuit of a vain shadow; but is to consider his Reason, his Guardians,
his God; and as one accountable to all these to live, which they in no so^ mind
to do, who live like beasts to the utmost tither of their unbridled appetites,
which Christians are so far to avoid, that they are not to live as vicious men
do, in surfeiting and drunkenness, not in chambering and wantonness, not in
excess and riot, but walking honestly as in the day, Romans 13. 13. To take heed
lest at any time their hearts be overcharged with surf^iting and drunkenness,
and the day of Judgment come upon them unawares, Luke 22. 34. And when they do
contrary, they do not only grieve good men (as the luxury of Petrarchs Age did
him, when he sadly inveyed against the Foreign habits, and vanities fashionable
in it,) but accelerate their and their families ruin. For nothing reduces a
family to straits, and sale of Patrimony, but vice which is notably advanced
toward in High-living; that is, living beyond ones rank, Ita tamen eunt res,
haec est ^tors nobilum iantt alios. Petrarcha lib. 2. de remed. Utr. Fortunae
Dialog. 108.
and above ones fortune; which folly, though it be not restrained from, or
punished by, sumptuary Laws; yet, has the check of prudence, and the reason of
men experienced in the fatal return of such exuberance, which ought to be the
law to correct the practice and insolence of it: For man is a sacred piece of
divine art, to the compilent of whom, as wisdom and power joined; so ought such
a rare contrivance, Cultus deorum est optimus atque castissimus, atque
sanctissimus, plenissimusque pietatis, ut eos semper pura, integra, and pura
mente and voce veneremur. Cic. lib. 2. de Not. deorum.
not to be defeated and defaced by trite and considerable addictions, which
cannot compensate his intentness on them, and thereupon should not engage him
fondly in the love of them; And if a man consult religion, and the rule of
reason, from which he as a man ought not to swerve, he cannot live vainly, lest
he dye wickedly: for God has given us our reason and judgment, not to betray us
into, but to rescue us from those fallacious surprises that often beguile us of
our interest in God, and our justification by the Law written on our hearts;
which as often accuses for evil, as excuses for good and right doings.
Therefore luxury of life being one of those enormities which brings a lent and
sparingness upon the estates and subsistence of Men and Families is resolutely
to be resisted and set against; for it parselling the estate into many minuite
refractions, at last leaves nothing in the center that is clear, solid, and
value worth; and the curse of God not permitting them to be considerate and
advised, the fortune they have left squitters away without any visible cause of
its exinanition; nor does the running expense of it leave any impress of
respect on the minds of those whom the profusion of (...) aimed to oblige; Homo
sacra res ust, Homo jam per lusum and jocum occiditur. Senec. Consol. ad
Helviam. c. 9.
but as first men are foo^ led into misery, so after are they under it despised.

SECT. XXXI.
Vain and Profuse Gaming, the undoubted way to Ruin and Beggar Men and Families.
FOurthly, Vanity of Gaming is another decay of Estates, because it ventures
that in a moment upon a chance, which would last the gradual expense of life a
long while. This I account in its abuse, for against ^that only I declaim, a
purpresture raised upon the wast of this Age, to the defiance of what ought
more to rule with us, Religion^; which better disciplines the expense of time,
and calls us to more compact and close lives, to the honor of him who has made
our Captivity to return to this degree and unparrellallity of Miracle; yet,
ingrate men that we are, this none of the least of the pack of vices, which was
wont to sneak, and to be modest and timorous to appear, is now confidenced to
take up the day and night of great and mean persons of both sexes; who though
they would think an hours prayers or converse with their Families, like Parents
and Pastors over the souls of them, teadious and irksome; yet they can allow
12. of the 24. hours of the natural day to this fondness. But, O that they
would consider that of blessed King James, To play only for recreation,
Basilicon. Do^ ron. lib. 3. p: 187.
resolving to hazard all they play for, and play for no more then they would
cast among Pages, and play always fair: for neither a mad passion for loss,
nor falsehood used ^or desire of gain, can be called a play. Or rather that of
the Plalmist, Palmares fecisti dies meos, that God has written their mementoes
in their fingers; and that the length of them is but a short entertainment for
the Celerous motion of time, that spends away between accidents of wast and
necessaries of nature; Nam tam benignum ac liberale tempus natura nobis dedit,
ut aliquid ex illo vacet perdere, and vide quam inulta etiam diligentissimi
pereunt. Senec. Ep. 117.
and if frugall imployers of time, yet are often overtaken by it, before they are
prepared for the entertainment of it; what case are the prodigals in, that
spend time as if it had a wick of inconsumption, and a light inextinguishable;
when this I consider, my wonder is great how many of our Gallants do answer
their own reason, in this spareless vanity; yet so it is, that is nothing
thought a Genteeler pass of time, then Cards and Dice, which they have not only
increased, in the severalty of Games, but in the delight they have avariciously
and with grippleness to get by play; which many Gallants so intend, that their
presence is most in the open houses destinated to play; where they have Banks
of Money to stake at it; yea, no bones do they make to pawn Houses, Lands,
Jewels, and give Bonds for Stakes to play with; and hold it matter of quarrel
and dishonor to baulk payment of their losses, or implede the validity of
their Obligation: when their just and due Debts, for Provisions for back and
belly, are underfrayed, lie on score, or perhaps are resolved not to be paid, O
perditum Tempus, Opuerile studium, O curae superv^cuae. O in eptissimi
clamores, stulta gaudia aerique ridiculae, gaudere lucro tax^ illorum tale est
a^si dulci gaudea venena lib. 1 de remed. V^r. Fortu. Dial 29, 26.
if any evasion or starting-hole can be found out. The folly of this Petrarch
compares to the joy of well tasted poison, which for all its pleasing tincture
on the palate, ends in death. Though God knows it is hard to convince men of it
in this Age, so indulgent to it, that whereas heretofore Gamesters and
Gaming-houses were under the lash of the Law, and under the reproach of men;
now they are become practices and courses of Credit and Thrift, and the Keepers
of them accounted meet company for persons of Fashion and Favor. I know this
Trade was merrily driven on by the Germans of old, who so insaniously loved it,
Interseria sobrii Germani aleam exercent, tanta lucrandi, perdendi ve
temeritate, ut cum omnia defecerunt, extremo ac novissimo jactu, de liberate ac
de corpore contendunt. Tacitus de Morib. Germ.
that they would not only play away their money, but their clothes, and persons
also; but they have found this the mother of theft and quarrel; therefore
forbad they not only Soldiers, but other men, and not only in public, but
even in private houses: which Tacitus informs us, and Tholossanus from good
authorities; Tholoss. Syntag. lib. 39. c. l. 2. Art. 5, 6. 4 Ethic. ad Nichom
c. 1.
and so scandalous were common Carders amongst the Greeks, that the Philosopher
ranks them with Thieves and Villains. The Fathers of the Church so detracted
from it, that it is forbidden men in Holy Orders to play at Cards and Dice: See
the Quotations in Fo. 256.
For though there were ever some Games allowed for entertain^of Time, and
exercise of Wit, as were the Quinque Ludi, instituted by Justinian; and Archery
amongst us, 33 H. 8. c. 9. Yet were Cards, Dice, and such like Games ever
disallowed, as enervaters of Virtue and Time. And amongst us in England, though
they have been connived at in private houses, yet never allowed by Law, but in
Christmas time, and on Festivals: and in public houses forbidden, because
Nurseries of vice, and Seminaries of dishonesty, and wast; so 33 H. 8. c. 9.
forbids keeping houses for only Cards and Dice, Bowls, Tennis, Coyles, etc. as
unlawful Games, and the players of them (not exempted by Statute) are to be
imprisoned, without Bayl or Mainprise, till they have found sureties not to use
such gaming any more: Which our wise Ancestors enacted to preserve youth from
seduction by vice, and to sustain Families from that ruin which time evilly
and costlily spent induces upon them: For since they thought Play to be one of
the great Cancres of Morral Virtue, of Oeconomique Thri^t, of cordial and
durable Friendship, they did like themselves, to prevent as much as a
seasonable and well penned Law could, the growth of that mischief which we see
now so fertile of beggary, blasphemy, and confusion. In the History of Luca
there is a notable story of one Iaconto Pietro De Sancto Romano, a young
Gallant of 26 years old, who having lost his Money at Dice, powered out many
blasphemies against God, and aiming with eye and hand to throw the Dice at the
Picture of the Virgin Mary which stood before him, and as he stretched out his
arm, his arm broke in the midst of the bone.

And though the licenciousness of this Age has bettered the report of it; and
use has in a sort Emancipated it, by a deswescency of the rigor of the Law
against it; yet can it not alter the ill natured, and casual malignity of it;
but that it will be known in the bitter and ill boding fruits of it,
Irreligion, Vanity, Fraud, Contention which as fruits of the flesh God hates,
and casts out of his protection as a cursed thing: Delectatio ^unesta and
turpis corruption animi ubi non decor morum, non modestia sit verborum, nec amor
erga homines, non erga deum reverentia, sed ^a^gia and rancores and doli and
perjuria vulaera ad extremum and homicidia quoque, Petrarcha lib de remed. Utr.
Fortun. Dial. 27.
Which if our Gallants and men of all degrees would more think upon, their
prosperities would endure longer, and their children and successions be better;
but because they live careless of themselves, and do not their homage to
heavenly supereminency by which worldly affairs are succeeded, they languish
and die in their top-branches, their heirs, and are not quickened by the thrift
of their younger sons: Yea, I dare be prophetique of general eradication of
virtue and good proof amongst the youth, now breeding, and hereafter to be
bred, if Gaming be not inhibited, or moderated and restrained in a high degree:
For it is not now the recreation of Masters and Mistresses, but of Aprentices,
Serving-men, and Maids; and those not only of high degree, but even Pedlars and
Beggars; to whom every Alehouse and Drab-stall is a school and ^pit of play:
nor will manners be reformed, or Religion be practiced; Till men be made kind
Husbands, prudent Fathers and Masters, dutiful Children, obsequious Servants,
by being denied those avocations that steal away their times, fidelities, and
kindnesses from those relations, I do not hope to see that succession and
increase in the Riches and Honor of Families, which corresponds with former
times, wherein all conditions were more taken in, and less did indulge their
ease and pleasure: For this ease, luxury, and frequency of intermixed converse
that is now in fashion amongst our English Imaliers, or Brethren of Love, who,
Turkish History. p. 477.
as those of Asia, can talk merrily, sing, play, dance, and what not, which is
jocund and passant of time, do by their full feeding, and idle living, prove
oftener Corrupters of Youth and Vitiators of Women, will rather occasion the
same evil, then be the sourse of any thing good or graceful.

SECT. XXXII.
Shows, That pompous Housekeeping, and the Equipage of it, is a great Decay to
Families.
FOurthly, Pompous Housekeeping, and the Equipage of it, Petrarch. lib. 1. de
remed. utr. Fortun. Dial. 34, 36, 37, 41. O scelestem, O ^lagitiosam Pompam, O
crudelem and impiam luxum inanem, qui illustrium domos dissipas optimatum
cognationes disperdis destruis regna, and omne sublime Imperium subver^is, and
nemo est qui te caveat, te rejiciat, te contemnal: Lege Ricium in Exhort.
contra Turcam. To. 3. Germ. Scriptorum.
is a great Decay to Families, and the Persons of it; For it is a daily sluice
to the Estate, which is eat and drunk out by it, or lies fallow in the costly
Furniture in it; which Petrarch long ago, and Ricius since in the Diet at
Spires declaimed against, as the subversion of Livelyhoods, and the povertizing
of Children; which is to be understood not of Housekeeping in the neatness and
decency of it, with consideration to men's Descent, Fortune, Relation, Place,
failure in any of which, is too great a breach in discretion for any to salve,
and too visible a scarr for any to palliate; there being nothing in the world
more imperative of pleasure, more adaequate to the Genius of Wisdom, then to be
exercised in Oeconomique Regiment, wherein, as a man sees the circumvallations
of Variety, that derive themselves from the Center of Headship, and the Returns
that those Emanations make to their Principle, so is there a very great
Enablement derivable thereby to the contemplation of God's good and great being
manifested in the Government of the World, his expansed Family, and to the
Education and Institution of Men in the Method and Delight of public
Government, wherein there is no Dimension so Magnalian, or Mystery so secret,
but has its resemblance and shadow in the close and common government of the
House: The truth of which has inclined men of staid and compact minds to put
themselves into the managery of this, that therein they may, by the Conduct of
a Fly-boat, learn the Steerage of a Royal Vessel, and surely as they make the
best Masters of great Vessels, that are taken into them from Pilots and
Fishermen, who like lean and rascal Cattle, improve notably when they are
transplanted; so are they the most probable to be knowing and calmly vigilant
in public Government, who know with order and quiet to govern their Family, by
acting themselves the duty of Heads, and exacting the conformity of Members
from all their Inferiors, and this by a majesty and sweetness of compulsion,
ungrievous to the submitters to it.

Which, Ornanda est dignitas domo, non ex domo dignitas tota quaerenda, nec
domo dominus, sed domino domus honestanda est, and ut in caeteris habenda
ratio, non sui solum, sed etiam aliorum, sie in domo clari hominis, in qua and
hospites multi recipiendi, and admittendi hominum cujusque generis multitudo,
adhibenda est cura laxitatis. Cic. lib. 1. Officiorum.
as it is done by a particular knack of steady Order, so is that order in
nothing more signal then in reducing Families to a regulable Stint: Too few
Servants make Families inconspicuous; Too many, monstrous and unruly: Too large
an House is a Wood wherein a Family is lost, and a Fortune unnecessarily
wasted; Too little an one is a Prison, in which every Room is a Little-ease,
and every Convenience a Clogg: Too free a Table renders the Keeper of it but a
Victualler to absurd Confidents; and too scant an one but a Miser to his
Neighbors, and a blemish to his Condition and Relations: To invite all Comers,
is never to be free; and to welcome none, is ever to be bound: To have too many
Children, is to have more Cares and Corrosives then we can undergo; and to
have none or too few, is to dye a Debtor to Nature, to be in Arrears to
Mankind, to decease a Banckrupt to Succession: To spend all our Income, is not
wisely to prepare for a foreseen evil Day; Magnus animus sine magna potentia,
magna stul^ina. Petrarch. Dial. 33. de remed. utr. Fortunae.
and to spend nothing proportionable to what we may, is to make Money our God,
and to deny our selves the service of our Servant: Greatness of mind is seen
in brave and a quanimo^s Designs, proportionated by such an aequature as has no
less or more then the true poise and ingredients that it ought; the recession
from which, causes excesses of both hands, King James Basilicon Doron Book 3.
p. 181.
whence the unwelcome and defaming fates are, which they avoid that model
things in and out of the house after the temper of true Harmony, wherein every
note has its location and air peculiar to it, and conform to the consent of the
whole, Ad legem naturae revertamur, divitiae paratae sunt, aut gratuitum est,
quo egemus, aut vile, Panem et aquam natura desiderat, nemo ad haec pauper est,
intra quae quisque desiderium suum clu. sit, cum ipso Jove de felicitate
contendat. Epist. 25.
which is sutably ornamental and beauteous in Housekeeping to other things, For
though small things and tenuous Diet, after the Prescripts of Nature, will make
a man unmiserable; yea, not in felicity beneath Jupiter, as Seneca' s soar of
Eloquence blazons contentedness of mind to amount to; yet do we see that few
think themselves happy at that rate, and according to that Standard: That, they
account it the allowance of a miserable Prison, not the Viands of a free and
pleasant House, (the Inundation of good Treatment,) wherein is the sin and
folly of Houskeeping; for that which is the houskeeping of Virtue, is Plenty,
Variety, Frequency, without waste, exclusion, or rudeness; and this, stinted to
hours, and persons, in a decent measure, is so far from lessening, that it
augments an Estate: but when it degenerates into dainty food, rich liquors,
full drinkings, prodigal doles, illimited entertainments, of persons
unnecessary, and in manner extravagant. In these and such courses, which fall
under the capacity of their Heads, is the pomp of Houskeeping ruinous, as well
to virtue, which seems to be part of the reason of the Act of 2 and 3 Ed. 6. c.
14. as to Estate: So true is that of Seneca, A well-taught belly is a great
part of Freedom to him that has it, Magna pars^ felicitatis est been moratus
venture. Ep. 123.
nor can he be miserable by curiosity, who rests not too much upon toys, Non
magnam rem facis quod vivere sine Regio apparatu potes, quod non desideras
miliarios apros, nec linguas Phoenicopterorum, and alia portenta luxuriae: Tunc
te admirabor si non contempseris etiam sordidum panem, Ep. 110.
and cannot be well unless he be accomodated with Baths and Ointments, and
other Fooleries, which are beneath the expectation or satisfaction of Virtue;
for mingled and strange-cooked Diet do but confound the stomach and destroy
health, Simplex erat simplici causa valetudo, multos morbos multa fercula
fecerunt. Ep. 95. etc.
which is frequenter now then wontedly, because luxury, the waster of Sea and
Land, prevails, and virtue, which contents it self with dry bread and cold
water, is unfashionable; (...), etc. Lib. 6. de Legib. p. 870.
which argues men degenerated from what they were in Plato's age, when none was
wont to be extravagant in drink, except it was in the Feasts of the God of
Wine, which was indulged by the Rites of that Worship, but not othewise,
because it hindered the offices of Sobriety. By all which I introduce the
stabiliment of that Experience, that irregular, profuse Housekeeping, together
with the costly Furniture, many Servants, and great Charge and Waste of them,
is the Decay of Estates and Families.

SECT. XXXIII.
Evidenceth, That the Multitude of illchosen Acquaintance, and the Consequences
of it, are a means to decay Men and Families.
FIfthly, Multitude of Acquaintance, together with the consequence of it, Verae
amicitiae rarum bonum usque adeo, ut qui unam longa licet in aetate quaesierit
negotiator rerum talium sat industrius habeatnr. Petrarch. lib. 1. de remed.
utr. ^ort. Dial. 50.
is a means to decay Estates and Families now: For Friendship, that rare
comfort and support of life, the nearest relation in nature, and the strongest
bond of Souls, and cement of Senses, is so rare, that to find one Phaenix of
this sort in an Age, is enough for any man to account himself happy in: Nor are
there many that in long and plentiful lives attain to it; for though
acquaintance be cheap, and havable, provided men feed those Flies and Wasps
with the sweets and delicates of Advantage and Encouragement; yet the Company
of true Friends are small and diffused: nor is their accidental distance, and
the recollection of them to a nearer-hand impartment, facile, or almost
possible, which is the reason that Wisemen have made it one of the top Projects
of their lives to know and be known, not so much to the many, and most, as to
the few and best of men their Contemporaryes, whom they have sought after, and
relieved their Solitudes from, by Conversation, Letter, or Thought, the Ternary
of fruitional Felicities: For, though it be granted that latency of life is
incontributive to the reward of generous Virtue; nor must any man, who
propounds to be valued as a noted Virtuoso, practice it, Note this.
lest he be covered over with the Cloud of his own Contrivance, and honor the
ingratitude of men with a suspicion of his own will to have it, and his own
fault that it is so with him: yet is it as true, that by being private and
exempt from the too often tyranny of publickness, a man is subject to less
extravagancy, and less foiled by the irruption of temptation upon him; I
confess it is a glorious Comet and noble blazing Star of Conversation, that
some witty and raunting gallants amaze the world with, and thereby attract
their admiration, by the Heraldry of which they are Titularly valuable, amongst
those who being Creatures of air, and youth, are captived by every such
appearance; which they conclude the truest attendant of Generosity, and the
reallest Emblem of a Noble man, and Noble mind. Hence come they to extravagate
so far beyond their proper degree, that they keep in no punct of proportion
with it; they love breeding above their fortunes, marrying beyond their degree,
spending without limit; by which more then ordinary show, they fancy men think
more then ordinary of, and will do more then ordinary for them: the frustration
of which, leaves them beyond almost retreat or salve miserable; for being they
increase this their knowledge, they increase their sorrow in contracting
amities, which produce, first charge, then trouble, and at last Ruin, or what is
little better, Suretiships, Gamings, Quarrels, Incontinencies, Expensive
Entertainments, all which are Goodwins sands to estates, and back-doors to
Thrift.

Hereby become Parents unnatural, Children disobedient, Servants loose, Wives
dis-loyal, Credit los^, Money scant, and then shifts practiced. Which because
grave and wise men will avoid, Generosissima res est bonus amicus, non ^erbi^
non carminibus magicis movetur non auro aut gemmis non ad extremum Ferro
flectitur, amando vincitur col^ndoque. Petr. lib. 1, Dial. 59.
they chuse^ them friends who are cordial and cheap to keep, when beloved as
they love, admitting others only so far as civilly they may, and in such
measures as they may harmlesly be either their ornament, delight, or only
present use; at which distance they being fixed, and nearer approaches not
encouraged, but obviated and impeded, when discovered Pullulating, and
throbbing toward Maturation; there is great benefit, and no damage by
acquaintance: for from them he either learns something beneficial to him to
know, or to them he imparts to publish, what he would have known in or of him,
which he himself, may not without impudence, impart.

Thus qualified and sorted acquaintance many and different in way and skill, is
very behovefull. Nor is any man possible to be conspicuous (unless he be the
sole meriter, and only Regaltade of his Age) but by his ampliation of himself
into these several conducts of his compleatness, by the Sympathy of which so
loud an Alarm is given to men, that every Quarter of worth is beat up to take
notice of it, and every mouth overflowing with the discourse about it; and but
for this, the links of association that the worlds familiarity is sodred by,
seems to me of dangerous Import; for no Moths are more infective to Clothes, no
Worms to Vegegetables, no Traitors to Princes, no Diseases to Bodies, then
acquaintance too many, are; where they have ends upon, and practice ends
toward those they are known to: who (as many active Traders manage great
Comerces without any Stock of their own, purely upon the credit they have from
one, and another, which their industry ordering and actuating by it, works
out profit and Riches) do so press upon their friends, Qui non amicorum
solummodo: matrimonia usurpant sed and sua amicis patientissime sub ministrant,
ex illa credo majorum and sapientissim^rum discipl^^a Graeci Socrat. and Romani
Catonis, qui uxo^es suas amicis communicaverunt etc. Tertul. c. 39. Apolog
advers. Gent^s.
by the encouragement their friends civility gives, and their own confidence
takes, that they work out in the issue great ends; and if they be wise, and
worthy to deserve them, are not to be defamed for so innocent self-seeking; for
to do another good by counsel, countenance, speaking, assistance, uninjurious,
and consistent with a man's own good, is to be like God, who is the perfection
of all excellency, but to be lurch'd as Cato was by Hortensius, to whom he lent
his Martia; and Socrates, who accomodated his friend with his Wife. I say,
Friendship thus costly and saucy, is intolerable, because it i^sensual in it
self, (...). Plutarch in Catone. p. 771.
and detrimental to the man that permits it, and becomes exitial to the vitals
of its being, and exertion. And in this sense Multitude of acquaintance proving
chargeable and afflictive, becomes the decay of Men and Families.

SECT. XXIX.
Instances, That disdain of thrift as Pedantry, to be a way and means to the
Decay of Men and Families.
SIxthly, disdain of Thrift as Pedantry, is a great advance to Decay and Ruin
of Men and Families: for most men are so raised in their ports and minds, that
they think nothing Genteel, and praiseworthy, but what is wastefull and
unfrugal. Hence comes it to pass, that all invention of the mind, and improving
of experience to abate luxurious Expense, is judged Pedantry, and unfit for any
person that calls himself Gentleman; yea, not only to buy things at the best
rate, and dispose them when bought into meet hands for distribution, to avoid
unreasonable charge, and advance expedition, is censured and exploded; but to
be known by any badg of a profession, or any note of a relation, is wholly
declined, and in the Ceremonies omission, the real signification of it, lost;
we are all so intumour'd and sick with self-conceit, that as we are ashamed
almost to own God the giver and contriver of our mercies; so are we altogether
regretters of owning the rock from whence we were hewn, and the breasts that
gave us suck, and the means of our rise and improvement in the world; I
confess, if this were the temper of Kings, and Kings Companions, it were to be
less wondered at; (it being usual for, and not uncomely in them, being great, to
love little things dear bought and far fetched, the better for their high
price, and pretended scarseness, as did William Rufus, who Not caring for any
thing of a small price, Hos^nshed. p. 27.
had on a day by the Groom of his Chamber a pair of new Hose brought him to put
on, he asked the varlet what they cost; he answered Three shillings four pence:
why, thou whoreson, said the King, do a pair of that price become a King to
wear; go thy way and fetch me a pair that shall cost a Mark of Silver. The
Groom went and fetched him a pair that cost not full so much as the former; when
the King asked what they stood him in, and he answered, a Mark, He was well
satisfied, and said, Yea marry these are more fit for a Kivg to wear, and so
drew them on his legs.) I say, If great personages used this nicety and state,
it were excusable in them) but for pitiful underlings, and vulgar subjects to
affect height, and state of life, is intolerable. For the Priest to disdain
his modest hair, and to be Perewigg'd; for the Lawyer to scorn to carry his
bag, and the Citizen wear his Apron, and the Pesant bear his frock, and the
Vallet his Livery: for men to have minds above their professions, is altogether
impertinent; yet this is the leaven of all men, and the Lethargy of our present
Virtue; though the way of wise men be to be at the one end of their affairs, to
permit as little to be done by servants as may be, and as much to do themselves
as possibly they can, to pen up all the ways of getting, that the stream of
their Estates may rise and increase upon them, was their practice and project;
and in this they did in their generation wisely, and throve accordingly; but
since men are so dainty and choice, that every thing of pristine diligence and
commendation, is grown cheap and low rated, and forms of pride and garb
introduced, Men sink in their Fortunes, retrograde in their Credics, abate in
their abilities, to provide for their Families, and expend upon charity; and at
last leave nothing to remember them, but prodigal and high-bred heirs; that are
loath to be accounted their fathers sons, or to own their fathers possession
and residence; though but for their fathers industry, and thrift in that very
place and profession wherein they to good purpose lived, they, their sons and
descendants had never been Gallants, nor ^at so much the bread of Idleness and
scorn as they do.

Nor is there any power of words, or arguments of reason can defend that charge
upon them of sloth, which such humors deserves; Nor is it probable but such
persons, instead of bearing the rule of diligent ones are with the slothful
reduced under Tribute, Prove. 12. 24. and that which their Father took in
hunting they roast not, Verse. 27. but their supineness raises a hedg^ of thorns
to interpose and stave them off, Prove. 15. 19. Whereas the way of diligence to
thrift is very obvious; yea, so great are the Incomes of it, that it brings to
Riches and Honor: which sloth does not, for the Preacher terms it, brother to
wasting, Prove. 18. 9. Letting the belly star^^ rather then feed the mouth with
it, Chapter 19. 24. Killing ones self with desire, Chapter 21. v. 25. Creating
discouragements for well-doing, Prove. 16. 13. Casting men into deep pits, Chapter
19. v. 15. A decaying of the building, and a dropping down of the house,
Eccles. 10. 18. Thus this sin branching it self into haughtiness, is opposed by
God, who sets his eye against it, 2 Samuel 22. 28. and who brings them to their
fall by it, Prove. 16. 18. Indeed as there are great promises to Industry, and
Humility, so there are answerable threats to Pride and sloth, The haughty he
humbles, Isa. 10. 13. and makes them to moulder away and languish, Chapter 24. They
are taken away by judgment, Ezekiel. 16. 50. Yea, God is not only said to blow
down the haughty, Isa. 2. 11, 17. but to lay low the arrogance of the proud,
and terrible ones, Isa. 13. 11. By all which men ought to be dissuaded from
haughty thoughts, and spurred on to comply with Gods designs in their
night-dress, and ungaudy Manifestations of themselves. For surely that is the
best discovery of a great mind, which propagates virtue by just and comely
means conducing to its attainment; which since careful inspection over men's
worldly affairs, does, and by keeping them in a state of support, wealth,
independency, adds to the liberality of their minds, which receive abatements
and dislustres by the incumbency of need on them, which tempts them to, and
nourishes them in, a servility of compliance with those whose benefactions they
are relieved by. I say, since men cannot be accommodated with wherewith to do
great Actions, and to stand single sighted in their Judgment, without
convenient frugality and prudent looking to their fortunes however placed, it
is contrary to reason and gratitude not to intend and honor that course of
life by which men subsist, and without which, if they would not be miserable, I
am sure they could not be happy; and not to think that service, Slavery, which
brings in Penny-savoury: For, as it is no ungentile thing to blow the Nose, or
vent the Belly, when the excrements in them are burdensome, nor to dress
wounds when they are foul and tormenting; nor does any man, how great soever,
in a Storm or Siege refuse to tugg at the Oar, or digg in the Trench, or pump,
or carry scaling Ladders or Buckets when Houses are on ^ire, but every ones
State is then reduced to common Notions when the danger is common and
desperate; so is no man how well born, bred, or fortuned soever, when ^n the
high-noon of them, disparaged in applying himself to, and complying with,
Maxima quaeque bona solicita sunt, nec ulli fortun^ minus b^ne quam optimae
creditur. Senec. de B^evit. vitae. c. 17.
the lowest works of that Calling or Employment, which is his Sanctuary and
Supply; for this life being a Scene of Inter^^udes and intermixed Varieties,
there can be (...) better harbor against the Storms and Entertaiment of the
uneven Pulses and Motions of it, then this Resolution, To bear whatever comes,
and to be whatever we ^^ust and ought to be, ubi enim quaeratur modestus animus
si foedent violenta Patricios. Theodoric. Rex Ep. 27. apud Cassiod. Var. lib. 1.
with silent and tho^ow-paced Fortitude and humble Gene^ousness, and to
venerate that Calling and ^^ate of life which God affords to officiate ^o their
Despairs, and to dispell their ^louds of want and Contempt; nor does ^e deserve
such a mercy, who thinks a manly thrift below him, when, without it, ^e must
unavoidably become poor, if not ^ant and be undone. It is rather becom^^g the
greatest Spirit and gratefullest Vir^ue, to follow the Patriarch Jacob, and To
^mfess to God devoutly, as did he, I am not ^orthy of the least of all the
mercies, and of ^ll the truth, that thou have showed unto thy ^^rvant; for with
my Staff I passed over ^is Jordan, but now I am become two ^ands, Exodus 32. 10.

SECT. XXXV.
Shows, That immoderate coming to, and long staying in London and the Suburbs,
from Greatmens Country Residence, is a ready way to decay Men and Families.
LAstly, Immoderate flocking to, and residing in, London and Westminster* and
the Precincts thereof, from the several Quarters of the Country and Nation
where the Nobility and Gentry reside, and their Seats are, is in my Opinion,
but if (...) err, I crave pardon, a great danger to destroy persons of Worth
in their Virtue and Fortune, by drawing them from their retirements, where they
may live thriftil^ and usefully to the King, Country, and themselves, into the
public, where they are taken off their local Service, and assaulted by
Delicacies and vices of Cos^ Effeminacy, and Inconsistence with all abode of
Virtue.

And this judgment the Glorious Martyr King and his Council had in An. when the
great flocking to Town first appeared in Request, as I have been informed, and
I hope truly; for there issued out a Proclamation, That no Person of Country
Residence should live out of his own Country where his Estate was, above
certain Months in the year; which Proclamation, when it found not that
obedience and command with some Gentlemen that it ought, but that
notwithstanding they stayed in Town, his Majesty was pleased, I had here
inserted the Proceedings of the Star Chamber, but I could not meet with the
Records soon enough.
with advice of his Council, of which his Grave, Learned, and Honorable
Chancellor, the Lord Coventry, was Chief, to command Informations against some
of them, to be exhibited in the Star Chamber, where they were sentenced and
fined.

I confess, there are great Magnetisms in the Court and City to work upon men
and women's desires to come near them, Quicquid humani generis floris est,
habere curiam decet, and sicut ar^ decus est urbium, ita illa ornamentum est
ordinum caeterorum. Theodoric. Rex Senatni Romano. Ep. 13. Var. lib. 1. Cassiod.
the influence and cogency of which seems to apologize for the casual offense
of them: For there is the Kings Court, where the Person, Order, State, Officers
of the King are pleasurably and with great satisfaction beheld, there are the
Flower of the Nation, Lilia mixta rosis, both for beauty, bravery, ^arriage,
and attendance; and who that ^ath senses to gratify, and fortune to present
him a meet Spectator, or what is better, Servant thereto, has not enough to do to
keep his passions from the pleasures of those Objects of Attraction and
Fascination. If the eye be never satisfied with seeing, nor the ears glutted
with sounds, nor the other Senses stupefied with things of Delight, but are, by
a longing after them unweary of them, no wonder that men consisting of those
impulses, and ridden to^ often by them, are easily drawn to, and kept with, Hic
propria est bonitatis prudentiae literarum culturae seeds, omnesque virtutes
tutum and stabile habent profugium. Discurso Politico Albergati. Dissertatione
de Imperii Eccles. Cura. p. 303.
them: To this, (...) the Center of Greatness and Pomp, Fashion and Civility
Honor and Advancement, d^ all Persons of Ambition, Luster or any remarkable
Conspicu^ ity, come, Affuit mandatis regalibus eloquens and decorus ornatur,
permulcens etiam inspectus, quos gratissimos reddebat auditus, tales enim decet
esse anlicos viros, ut naturae bona judicio frontis aperiant, and possunt
agnosei de moribus cum videntur; taeens enim plerumque despicabilis est, si eum
tantum lingua nobibilitat, semper autem in honor manet, si cujus est
tranquillus animus, eum quoque serenissimus commendat aspectus. Alathane Rex
apud Cassiod. lib. 8. Variarum. Ep. 14.
in hope to mak^ their Interest in, and their Ad^vance by it: Hither comes the
proper man, who is fit to stan^ before the King, in hopes to (...) taken notice
of for a Favourit^ and the delicate Woman to ad^vance her self by an honourabl^
Match, and the eloquent Divine to get Preferment by (...) Courtly tongue and
appos^ Discourse, and the wealthy ^^squire to be presented to (...) nour, and
the witty Younger Brother (...) be accepted into profitable Service, and the
Tall Yeoman to be looked upon as fit for one of the Guard; so that it is not
strange that the Court thus embellished, thus capacitated, thus apprehended,
should ruff the whole Nation of those Persons who are fit to be Courtiers or
Courted. And for the City, that, is a Collection and Digest of all men and all
things, to all ends and accomplishments of life, Learned, Mechanique,
Religious, Civil, in all Faculties, of all Nations, of all Ages, of all
Humors, of all Sexes; There are the best Preachers, the best Physicians, the
best Lawyers, the best Traders, the best Artsmen in the Nation to be had and
met with; There are Commodities the best and most general for all purposes to
be bought, for Food, Clothing, Medicine, Muniment, Thrift, Recreation, serious
and pleasant; There are to be seen and obtained, Rich Wives, Spruce Mistrisses,
Pleasant Houses, Good Diet, Rare Wines, Neat Servants, Fashionable Furniture,
Pleasures and Profits the best of all sorts; There are Friends of all kinds,
for all seasons and conditions; There is the best Exchange for Money, the best
Market for Wares, the best Security for Wealth, the best Employment for
Children, the best Nursery for Wisdom by Conversation in the Nation; Thither
drive all Ships of note, and Caravans of Merchandise, which are marketable
there when no where else; yea, there, if any where in England, a man of parts
may live and thrive if he have diligence and frugality, both which he may as
profitably expend there as any where; Ubi enim dignius cloquens quam in
Civitate proficiat literarum, ut ibi declaret meritum, ubi nutrivit ingenium?
aptum est omne bonum locis suis, and laudabilia quaeque sordescunt nisi congrua
sede potiantur. Theodor. Rex Senatui Romans apud Cassiod. Var. lib. 5. c. 22.
yea, I persuade my self, take one time and thing with another, as we vulgarly
say, a Family may live as handsomely and cheap in London, as in any part of
England; for though Rents are dear, and Rates upon Commodities and Estates
higher, then in any other part, yet is it balanced by little Hospitality,
Fewness of Servants, Variety of food of all natures haveable with money in an
instant, and that in what proportion Houskeepers please, and their Houses can
spend: Here is the way of breeding Children, buying Necessaries, improving
Money, following Suits of Law, Remedies for Sickness and Infirmity to be had,
and at a cheaper rate then in any other part: Hitherto London and the Suburbs
of it is to Foreiners and Great Persons of other Residences, no harm, but good,
in their residing in it. But the great detriment that the excessive repair to
and abode in London and the Suburbs from all parts of the Nation, consists in
this, That thereby they put themselves upon folly of Fashions, multitude of
Acquaintance, practice of Vice, defense of Atheism, contempt of Regularity,
admiration of Foreign Travel and Aeryness, cunning conduct of Fraud, bold
ventings of Fury; which, with other the like mischiefs, leure off the mind from
Modesty and religious Sobriety, and burden the fortune with unnecessary and
insupportable Charges, which Seneca charged to be the unhappiness of Rome,
Expulso melioris aequiorisque respectu, quocunque visum est libido se impingit,
nec furtiva jam scelera sunt, praeter oculoscunt, adeoque in publicum missa
nequiti^ est and in omnium pectoribus evaluit, ut innocentia non rara, sed
null^ sit. Seneca lib. 2. de ir^. c. 8.
which aggravated Vice as it increased in People, For Now, says he, Vice is
not modest, the occupier of a Corner, but the usurper of Publickness; so that
there, Innocence is not only rare, but not at all to be found, so daring is
wickedness grown, that it out-confidenceth Virtue: thus Seneca. Which being too
true of London and the Suburbs, in regard of so many frequenting it, these
ill-consequences follow thereupon, Desertion of men's Native Seats, Cessation of
Hospitality, loss of Interest in their Countries love, Disservice to the King,
in not keeping his peace, suppressing disorder, propagating love between man
and man, and giving opportunity to a dangerous ambidextral Justice, who looks
one way while he rows another way, and is resident to dispatch the Countries
business to their ease and security, to root himself more in their love, and to
do more with them by his Influence, then forty greater men then He, whom the
Country know absent, and have no love, by reason of it, for, shall by all their
power and rufflling, do with them: For it is with People in Countries, as with
Armies in Fields, be the Commander in Chief never so famous and great, yet if
he be seldom with them, the Chief Field-Officer that is ever, day and night, in
wet and dry, cold and heat, danger and safety, with them, shall have most power
with and most love from them: Besides this constant absence of Lords and other
Gentlemen from their Country Residencies, opportunizes the nourishment of such
greedy Cormorants and such proud Persons their Servants, who manage all their
Estates for them, that they are more stately toward and more pressing upon
them, then their Masters either would be, or would need to be, if their Masters
and Lords were in place, to observe or to be addressed to: but they not being,
and their expenses increasing by here-living abstracted from all frugality, and
separate from those accommodations of extenuating expense, which at home they
have, they are necessitated to become Projectors of pressures and wild ways to
maintain their Luxury, which Tully terms a high piece of Injury, Delectant enim
magnifici apparatus, vitaeque cultus cum elegantia, and copia quibus rebus
effectum est, ut infinita pacunia cupiditas esset, nec vero rei Familiaris
amplificatio, nemin^ nocens, vitupe^ randa, sed fu^ gienda semper injuria est.
Cic lib. 1. de Offic^
and to press and rack their Tenants to provide and return their Rents at all
disadvantages; their good Ministers are discouraged (by their being not at
Church) to fit themselves worthy their Calling, preaching only to bare Walls,
and giving them only rude Meditations; Country Traders, who live and bear
charge in welgoverned Corporations, are deprived of serving their Persons,
Houses, Servants, and Offices with Merchandises and Commodities of all sorts,
which usually they were wont to do, and were well-paid and in good Sums, which
stored them for their Journey to London: Highways grow out of measure
decayed, and not repaired, which they would be, if men in Commission of
Lie^tenancy and of the Peace, concerned in Counties, traveled them from place
to place upon business and visits, as they were wont, and would do, if they
lived with their Families in the Country; matching of their Sons and Daughters
into other parts, and unto men and women of other Counties, happens whereby
Neighbors cemented together by Marriages, grew into entire Masses of love, and
thereby prevented the feuds and ruptures that in the contiguity of great men
and great estates, (not sweetened and softened by a pliableness each to other,)
is probable, and often falls out.

These, and sundry the like evils occasioned by the irregular and boundless
address to, and residence in these neighbourhoods to the Court and City, seem
to me to bode ill to aftertimes, and not to look well upon present Men and
Families; but to blow up all thrift, whereby Estates are kept free for the
elder Son, and Portions raised for the Younger children; and to tempt Prodigals
to extravagancy, upon the deluding hopes of a sudden and plentiful
reimbursment. I know there are great arguments given to the contrary of this,
by some who because the Sky has let fall a Lark into the lap of some one Lady,
or into the Arms of some one Gentleman, now and then, believe that all the
Larks that are in it will fall; and that their Sons and Daughters shall have
the advantage of rich City-matches, which in their Country retirements they
meet not with; nor would, without the Quaintness of the Town-breeding, Civility
and Courtship, be probable to conquer and attain to. Therefore they say, they
remove their residencies to give their Children, the furtherances God and
Nature has imparted them, their due Theater: I confess I am for this; and I
believe there is something in it. Dote auctus sum opima and opima Tyranide
superbiae conjugalis duo stimuli, Dos and Forma Dos undo ingreditur inde liber
ta^^egreditur. Petrar. lib. 1. de remid. utr. Fort. Dialog. 68.
But I err in my observation (as I easily may, and am sorry for it, if I do;
which upon this submission, and preface, the Generous will excuse and pardon
me:) that to one Gallant that has gotten a Fortune by living high and ranting
out of his Country in the Town, ten have ruined themselves by such Matches, as
they have held great Fortunes, brave Beauties, etc. For the Dames here being
(for the most part so so soft and delicate, that they profess no houswifery
beyond that of dressing fine, turning day into night, and night into day,
launching out deep into gaming, expressing bounty to gallants, frequenting
daily Plays, and Enterludes, vying bravery in Clothes, Furniture, Jewels,
Attendants; while the Country and City Ladies, of Country disposition, study to
serve God, oblige their Husbands, True Wives.
breed their Children, inspect their Houses, discipline their Servants, and
acquaint themselves with their Husbands affairs; like Women of Renown, and
Wives of Virtue, desire to increase their Husbands Fortunes, and come up to
Town only to see and furnish themselves with necessaries, and to breath out
their plurifie of Money, and then return to their thrift again; which when they
set their minds upon (and, as good Women ought to be) are encouraged by their
Husbands who can never too much deserve, or too well repay, their loyal
kindness, and Religious prudence herein) they exceedingly prevent not only the
troublesome and sinful operation of thoughts, which are, if not wholly
non-ented, yet at last in a degree lessned by business, and domestique
employments; but also proceed to notably advance their fortune; whence the
accidents of life, uninjuriously to the Estate, are best born off, Antiqua
sapientia nil aliud quam facienda and vitanda praecepit, and tunc long
meliores erant viri; post quam docti prodierunt, boni desunt, simplex enim illa
and aperta virtus, in obscuram and solertem scientiam versa est, docemurque
disputare non vivere. Senec. Ep 95.
and the younger Fry provided for without the elder Sons diminution, or
clogging. So true is that of that sense worthy Wives have of their duties;
which Seneca says of ancient wisdom, Which consists not in large precepts,
but wise actions; but when it wandered into much learning, it ceased to be
sincere, and became ceremonious; and persuaded the pretenders to it, rather to
seem to be what they ought, then really to be what they seemed or ought. And
whether this be not in this case true, let the wise judge, who know nothing is
held more a detraction from Women, then to be plain-hearted, thrifty-minded,
houswifely-addicted, modestly limited, and constantly affectionate to their
Choice; which yet are Virtues so valuable by wise men, that one grain of them
weighs down in true Intrinsique worth, Note this.
all the Pounds, Millions, Myriads, Abysses of their other more requested and
finer sorted Meritings; such as are Paintings of the faces, Nimbleness of
Tongue, Craft of design, Frequent correspondence, Antique Garbs, Prodigal
Curiosities, Rude Huffings, Unnatural braves of their Husbands; which are such
displayes of Genteelness and high Spirit, as I pray God neither I, nor any of
mine, nor any virtuous Man in this Nation, may be unhappy by. Non faciem
lenociniis ac coloribus polluist^ nunquam tibi placuit vestis quae nihil
amplius quam nudam com^oneret, unicum tibi ornamentum pulcherrima and nulla
obnoxia aetati forma, maximum decus visa est Pudicitia. Senec. Consol. ad H.
loia^. c. 16.
That's the best Ornament of a Woman, which Solomon gives her, Prove. 31. and
which Seneca commends Helvia for, in those words, Thou have not Enameled thy
face with Snares, nor fucuss'd thy Age with Youth of Vermilion; thy Vestures
have covered thy nakedness, not commended thee to Enamourment; one Ornanent
thou have which no Age can deform; no accident dislustre, Modesty; that is thy
Jewel, which renders thee Acceptable and Honorable. Thus he. This I the
rather insist upon, because I see the sober Virtue of Still women is
unrequested, and almost all the applications are made to the Quainter sort of
them; who, because they have the report of great Fortunes, and live as if they
would be thought better portioned then they are; are oftener the Engrossers of
Young Gentlemen's times and applications, then they deserve to be, or then they
in the event find them worthy to be, or are gainers by their so being; For what
what with the cost of Courtship, before they are prevailed with, the great
Joyntures, and expense of life when they are had; the many expectations that
must be satisfied, both in themselves and to their Relations and Children, they
prove greater banes then helps to their Husbands Estates; when as to marry a
serious Woman, near ones Estate, and with a reasonable portion, and of a
Genteel and thrifty Family, is to obtain a convenience which will deserve every
way, if a Husband have Wit to choose, Grace to acknowledge, and Wisdom to manage
it aright; Consider this.
which because too few have, the ambition of Women is so little to excel this
way. For with the most of our now-a-day Husbands, who have too few generous
qualities in them, but must live high, and cannot deny themselves exuberancies,
and impertinent superfluities; not what she is, but what she has is most
esteemed; which makes Parents not breed their Daughters, and Women not so much
addict themselves to steady and serious virtue, as to this levity and gayity of
humor which is such a credential to their reception with modish men, that
nothing seems more: but God knows it is neither virtuous, wise, nor durable;
nor will it make those that delight in it, or choose for it, happy in condition,
or rich in purse: For since that of the Philosopher is most true, (...), etc.
Arist. lib. 7. Repub.
That the life of Men and Cities is then best, when most virtuous; and no
further praisworthy, then it is virtuous. And this way of the Town jollity and
profuseness, (I know so contrary to it, and to the humor of good Husbands and
good Wives, and to the prosperity of the descendants from them,) I will pray
for better endowments in the Choyces and Marriages of either Sex; and humbly
commend to the Nobles and Gentry of England the choice of good Wives, after
King Solomon's precept, Prove. 31. and not hope to find a restoration of
pristine sobriety, frugality, hospitality, and true friendship, together with
an Elimination of all deboyshery and rudeness, contrary to them, till the
Generous spirits, and great men of the Nation, by the circulation of what is
eminent in them thorough the whole body of the people, according to the
respective abodes and influences of them, be restrained to their stays at
home, and not permitted to be all, and almost altogether here; for this, as it
causes an over-growing of these parts, by too much succulency, so will it
atrophize other parts; and what the issue of such inordinateness and inequality
in the body Politic will be, is conjecturable from the effects of monstrosity
and decay that thereby follows, and therefrom threatens. Which wise King James
of blessed memory, a Prince, in whose days Peace, Riches, and Religion, as
much flourished as in any times before him, considering in his notable Speech
in the Star Chamber, Anno 1616. P. 567. Of His Works in Folio.
thus declares himself:

Another thing to be cared for, is, the new Buildings here about the City of
London; concerning which my Proclamations have gone forth; and by the chief
Justice here, and his Predecessor Popham, it has been resolved to have been a
general nusans to the whole Kingdom: And this is that, which is like the Spleen
in the Body, which in measure as it overgrows, the body wastes. For is it
possible but the Country must diminish, if London do so increase, and all
sorts of people do come to London? and where does this increase appear; not in
the heart of the City, but in the Suburbs, not giving wealth or profit to the
City, but bringing misery and surcharge both to City and Court; causing dearth
and scarsity through the great provision of victuals and fuel, that must be
for such a multitude of people: And these buildings serve likewise to harbor
the worst sort of people, as Alehouses and Cottages do. I remember, that before
Christmas was Twelvemoneth I made a Proclamation for this cause, That all
Gentlemen of quality should depart to their own countries and houses, to
maintain Hospitality amongst their Neighbors, which was equivocally taken by
some, as that it was meant only for that Christmas: But my will and meaning
was, and here I do declare that my meaning was, that it should always continue.

One of the greatest causes of all Gentlemen's desire, that have no calling or
errand, to dwell in London, is apparently the pride of the Women: For if they be
Wives, then their Husbands and if they be Maids, then their Fathers must bring
them up to London; because the new fashion is to be had no where but in London:
and here if they be unmarried they mar their marriages; and if they be married
they lose their reputations, and rob their Husbands purses. It is the fashion
of Italy, especially of Naples,) which is one of the richest parts of it) that
all the Gentry dwell in the principal Towns, and so the whole country is
empty: Even so now in England, all the country is gotten into London; so as
with time, England will only be London, and the whole country be left waste:
For as we now do imitate the French fashion, in fashion of Clothes, and Lackeys
to follow every man; so have we got up the Italian fashion, in living miserably
in our houses, and dwelling all in the City: but let us in Gods name leave
these idle foreign toys, and keep the old fashion of England: For it was wont
to be the honor and reputation of the English Nobility and Gentry, to live in
the country, and keep hospitality; for which we were famous above all the
countries in the world; which we may the better do, having a soil abundantly
fertile to live in.

And now out of my own mouth I declare unto you, (which being in this place, is
equal to a Proclamation, which I intend likewise shortly hereafter to have
publicly proclaimed,) that the Courtiers, Citizens and Lawyers, and those
that belong unto them, and others as have Pleas in Term time, are only
necessary persons to remain about this City; others must get them into the
country: For besides the having of the country desolate, when the Gentry
dwell thus in London, diverse other mischiefs arise upon it: First, if
insurrections should fall out (as was lately seen by the Levellers gathering
together) what order can be taken with it, when the country is unfurnished of
Gentlemen to take order with it? Next, the poor want relief for fault of the
Gentlemen's hospitality at home. Thirdly, my service is neglected, and the good
government of the country for lack of the principal Gentlemen's presence, that
should perform it. And lastly, the Gentlemen los^ their own thrift, for lack of
their own presence, in seeing to their own business at home. Therefore,
Proclamation Anno 16 27. 3 Caroli, dated Nov. 28. 1627. entitled, A
Proclamation commanding the repair of Noblemen, Knights and Gentlemen of
quality unto their Mansion houses in the Country, there to attend their
services, and keep hospitality.
as every fish lives in his own place, some in the fresh, some in the salt,
some in the mud: so let every one live in his own place, some at Court, some in
the City, some in the Country; especially at Festival times, as Christmas and
Easter, and the rest. Thus the learned King James. And thus his patrizating Son
incomparable K. Charles: The Kings most Excellent Majesty taking into his
Royal consideration the present state of the times, together with the great
decay of Hospitality, and good Hous-keeping, which in former ages was the
honor of this Nation; the too frequent resort, and ordinary residence of Lords
Spiritual and Temporal, Knights, and Gentlemen of quality, unto Cities and
Towns, especially in or near our Cities of London and Westminster; and the many
inconveniences which ensue by the absence of so many persons of quality and
authority from their Countries; whereby those parts a^e left destitute both of
relief and government, and the Cities and Towns, especially those of London and
Westminster, are overburthened with Inhabitants and Resiants, has thought fit
to renew the course formerly begun by his dear Father of blessed memory, and
therefore commands them to their homes under penalty of his displeasure. This
the wise in heart, I hope, will consider; and the well-affected Englishman,
whose heart is toward those that are faithful in the Land, and who would have
England a praise in the Earth, will not judge me herein to speak as a vain
person, but as one whose design it hitherto has, and ever I pray may be, To
Fear God, Honor the King, Pray for the Church, praise Virtue, and discredit
vice. Which because it too much now abounds, notwithstanding the mercy of God
never to be forgotten, calls for better fruits; and the Kings Majesty's
gracious Prnclamation against deboyshery, then which a more Princely testimony
of Wisdom, Religion and zeal to Reformation cannot readily be published. So
much a follower is he of his wise King Grandfathers maxim, Speech Starchamber,
Anno 1616. p 569.
Take this for a rule of policy, That what vice most abounds in a Commonwealth,
that must be more severely punished, For that is true Government. I say,
because in opposition to all these all kinds of vanity, profaneness, and
impiety abounds, to the scandal of the good, and the animation and triumph of
evil men both at home and abroad, I think it my duty, as to animadvert the
means and vices that raise and decay families in England at this particular
time; which in the precedent discourse I have endeavored, and thus far
finished; so to address to the Nobility and Gentry of England, some Christian,
cordial, and humble counsel, which though it comes not from an Apostle that may
command, or a Prince that may conjure them to the audience of it, yet comes
from the kind and generous heart of a Gentleman, whose person, as it is not
altogether unknown, so his duty and devotion to Antiquity of Families (wherein
he hopes he may without vanity say, he is natively interessed) and the
preservation of them, may undeniably thereby appear: yea, I must profess, that
as my experience has been my best Master in what I have writ; so I have some
jealousy and cause to fear, that the virtues not being, but the contrary in
some of mine and other men's Ancestors, has caused that decay in our Families,
that now is in them. So true is that of our learned Cambden, As virtue and
wealth laid the foundation of generous Families in the North, Britannia p. 748.
and elsewhere; and provident moderation with simplicity, standing contented
with their own estate, H^c est una via mihi credit and laudis et dignitatis
and honoris, a bonis viris sapientibus, and been natura constituti^ laudari and
dilegi. Cicero orat. pro Sextio.
both preserved and increased them; so in the South parts of England, riotous
expense and superfluity, usurious contracts, voluptuous and vicious life,
together with indirect courses, and crafty dealings, have in short time
overthrown most flourishing Houses. Thus Cambden. Mihi omnis oration est cum
virtute, non cum desidia; cum dignitate non cum voluptate, cum iis qui se pa^^
iae, qui suu ci^ibus qui laudi, qui gloriae, nen qui somno and co^vivii^ and
delectati^ni natos arbltrantur. Idem paulo post.
And therefore in the Orators words to the Nobles of Rome, I would beseech and
incite them to imitate their virtuous Ancestors, who arrived at Glory and Fame,
not by Vice and Irreligion, but by the only way of praise and renown; by being
and honoring virtuous men.

For as the Orator said, All my reason and Interest shall be pawned for Virtue,
not sloth; for those who benefit their Ages with good examples, and after Ages
with good testimonies of their love; these shall be the Nobles Imagnifie and
treat of; For they only are truly Great that account themselves not born to be
their own Admirers, but to forward others in those virtues which are not only
ample Displayes of Gods mercy, but also Eternizers of Gods Worthies in the Fame
of their Renown and Beneficence.

SECT. XXXII.
Wherein is contained, The Authors humble Address to the Nobility and Gentry of
England, in certain Particulars of Consequence to their Honor as Great Men,
and their Happiness as Good Christians: The First whereof is, Piety and
Religion.
HAving thus, by the assistance of God, cursorily discoursed of the probable
Means of the Rise and Fall of Men and Families, though not in the Labyrinth of
History, or to that rate which the extent of the Argument would require, and
the bulk of its import bear; yet so, as in some small Degree may either
satisfy the ingenious and generous Reader, or provoke some more exact Pen
further to amplify: My Conclusion shall be applicatory to the Nobility and
Gentry of England, in the humble, pious, and affectionate Presentation of some
(not I hope to be rejected) Remembrances to Them, whereunto I will preface that
of Socrates in Plato, as my Disclaimer of all self-conceit, and my Compurgator
from suspicion of Vanity, (...). Plato in Apolog. p. 17
( I am conscious to my self that neither in great nor in small things, I am
wise:) But if God make my good intent acceptable to himself, and to those ends
of Honor, Virtue, and Good Will to the Great and Gallant Men of England, for
whom I intend it, It is enough, Recte factorum verus fructus est, fecisse;

That then which I do humbly first commend to the Great Persons, Nobles, and
Gentlemen of England, is, The persuasion that Religion and Piety is the truest
Point of Honor, and noblest Quality they can adorn themselves with, and render
themselves conspicuous by: And that because it is the Copy of Gods Original, a
Draught from Perfection it self, God, as I may so say, (...). Nazianz. Orat.
11. p. 179.
in the likeness of man. Now, as true Nobility is likeness to the King in such
Proportions as he is pleased to dispense Honor, which is fontally and
prerogatively his; so is Piety and Religion such a partaking of God, and such
an effigiation of all his gracious Proportions on the Table of the Heart, and
thence on the figure of the Life, as Mortality is capable to take of
Immortality, and Imperfection of Perfection: And though it serves to the
excellent purposes of this World in civilizing and associating men and
Governments into a comeliness and use of order and correspondence, which
without this knot and bond would be unaccomplishable and indurable; yet are
there higher and nobler ends of it, which concern the better part and state of
man, to which this bodily and worldly is but ducent and preparatory: And by
reason of this, Piety becomes not only a Pearl of great Price, to purchase
which the Heavenly Merchant, that regulates his affairs by Gods advice, sells
all he has, and is a gainer by the bargain to, if he can obtain it, but a Grace
of great activity and contribution to Gods Glory; nothing man is capable of,
being more holily prodigal, and unwearyedly advantageous to Gods Prevalence,
then is Piety: For, as it is invited to by great and precious Promises, Such as
are, Gods gift of a new heart, Ezech 11. 19. Is. 51. 5. 19. Ps. 25. 14. Matthew.
25. 34.
and of his comforting with his free Spirit, of knowing his Secrets, of having
his Direction and Defense, of seeing his face with joy, of enjoying his Glory:
All which are those Magnalia Dei, transcending our conception as far as they do
weigh down and overpoise the merit of our work, there being no congruity
between this work of ours, and that wages of his; so ought it to be diligent in
pressing us toward, and carrying us to great undertakings of zeal, selfdenyal,
humility, gratitude, courage, and constancy for God; For, shall the Fame of
Men, and the love of Justice, work a Pagan Tamberlain to conflict with Hundreds
of Thousands Men, and as many Dangers, and keep him in the height of Victories
so sober and satisfied, that he can, being Lord of Constantinople, Turkish
History. p. 222.
and the riches and splendor of it, not only restrain himself from Sacking,
but from seeing it, accounting it an inconsiderable Present to tempt him to be
faithless: Shall a Heathen have that great and divine mind to commiserate the
oppressed, and humble the oppressing Bajazet, and that done, to have his end?
Shall these Fruits come from Trees in the Worlds Wilderness, and Gods Paradise
not yield the like, neither so fair to the eye, nor so ple^sant to the taste?
God forbid, (...) Arri^anus Epict. lib. 1. c. 9.
since the Moralist tells us, that To be holy is to be of Gods cognation,
^well-beloved Cousin and Counselor of his Secrets: For, wherever true and
unfeigned Piety is, it discovers it self in all the fruits of Righteousness and
Holiness, in adoration of Gods Goodness, in admiration of his Power, in
resignation to his Pleasure, in assimilation to his Perfection, in acceptance
of his Denyals, as well as in expectation of his Reward; True Piety fruitful.
which gradations advance it beyond moral Virtue, that has often no Goade but
vain Glory, no Center save that of Fame, which is but a few steps from this
World, with which often it leaves men, or it rests Leidger for them a few years
or ages, when the glory of Piety thus tapering up to God, shall from his
blessing flow into eternity, and be had in everlasting Remembrance, as that
which is true Nobility, and makes the Haver more excellent then his Neighbor
in nature, that is impious. And therefore as the wise King Solomon places this
Fear of God, Piety, in the front of all noble accomplishments, Prove. 1. 7.
calling it, The beginning of Wisdom; and commends it to Youth, as the best
Preliminary to after-document and improvement, Remember now thy Creator now in
the days of thy youth; so does he bring up the rear, and conclude the Honor
of Life and Action, with Fearing God and keeping his Commandments, which is
the whole duty of man. Eccles.

And therefore, though great Spirits, and young Years, are loath to stoop to
Devotion, Religion being (as the Chrysostome-Father of our Church, Famous
Bishop Hall. Decad. 1. p. 254. Epist. to Mr. Newton.
now with God, once wrote it) grown too severe a Mistress for youth and high
courages to attend, and very rare is that Nobility of blood, that does not
challenge liberty, that ends not in looseness; yet is Religion and Piety the
best Rivet to fasten Greatness, and the best Luminary to display it: Whereupon,
though the full Figure of Piety be wishable to be drawn on Nobles and
Gentlemen, by whose influences on its behalf it may prevail, and proselyte Men
and Nations; yet even the Vmbra and beginnings of it in any degree, are
hopeful and encourageable in them: for, such are the Diversions and
Temptations that Greatness is objected to, and so directly does it lie in the
pelt of the Surges, and in the teeth and tendence of the blasts of carnal and
sensual Reason, and of the Pleasures and Accommodations of Sense, that it is
hard to find any man, especially any Great-men, strictly good, precisely just,
exactly modest, solidly humble, and wisely provident; and rare is that Family
of which it may be said, Aluit nutriments, auxit Patrimoniis, ornavit moribus,
and quod edidit Familiae Iuvenes, tot reddidit Curiae Consulares. C^ssiod. Var.
lib. 3. Ep. 6.
as Theodorie wrote of the Decian Family, that It sent forth not more Sparks
well bred, well couraged, and well fortuned, then men fitted for Senators,
Grave, Learned, Religious: I say, such being the Snares of Greatness, though
Religion and Piety in sincerity and truth be mainly to be driven home upon
them; yet the obstacles thereunto being so many and so urgent, even the
superficiary parts of it, are welcome to God and the World, as Earnests of more
real subsequent Fruits, and as anticipations of Scandal; That they keep
religious Exercises in their Families, Note this in order to practice.
That they observe the Rest and Rites of the Lords Day, That they forbid and
forbear open Immoralities, That they be true to their Marriages, Royal in their
Words and Honors, Merciful to their Servants Souls, by releasing them from
subserviency to evil, That they concern themselves in the virtuous Education of
their Children, That they be Countenancers of men and things excellent, of good
report, and prais^worthy: These, I say, are rare advances in them toward the
highest expectable from them: And be they themselves never so blamable, yet
when they are neither exemplary to, nor subsidiary of, others in Vice, but
command and countenance the contrary, they are to be praised for what they thus
nobly do, and prayed for, that they may further be perfected. O, but when
Noblemen and Gentlemen are precisely serious, spiritual Worshippers of God,
when they are burning and shining lights, when they are not only Permitters,
but Approvers, and Doers, of things that are Christian and according to
Godliness, when Piety presents the World with such effiuctions of Greatness, as
that the best men of place and estate, are the best props of Piety, Viri
divi^iarum in civitate sunt domini virtutum. Sanct. ^ernard Sermon. 12. in Cant.
Cantic.
and the stoutest Pillars of Virtue, and when Grace so itches at their fingers
ends of action, that they dare undervalue themselves to cogg men to be fearers
of God, and to accept of their invitation on his Errand; when they will entice
the World by the Charms and Oratory of their Condescension, to pedagogize them,
as David the King presidents them, Come my little Children, hearken to me, and
I will teach you the Fear of the Lord; when this they will and can do, and not
think themselves undone in their Reputation, but if this be to be vile, Primus
prosperitatis gradus est suis non esse damnosum, ut pro quorum compendio labo
amus eorum non videamur asslixisse Fortunas. Theodor. Rex apud Cassiod. Var.
lib. 5. Ep. 10.
resolve to be more vile, that God may be exalted, and his Graces Prepotency
preside worldly Pomp and carnal Pride; when Men of Place, Parts, Honors,
Respect, Popularity, have these Pietatis fragrantia pectora, these sweet
breaths, savoury languages, courageous resolves, carrying to do actions not so
much humane and Christian, as Angelique; ( Singula opera, singula sunt aromata,
as St. Bernard said of Saint Paul:) How great Contributors are they to Nations
Blessings? How unenvyed are they in their Honors? Good men pray for them, and
praise Gods goodness in them; Evil men are afraid of, and ashamed to reproach
them, 1 Pet. 4. 14.
on whom so much of the Spirit of Glory rests, and from whom the rays of that
residence is so diffusive: Those that are above them cannot but be convinced,
that they are the Legion of Angels whose invincibleness is out of question; for
the same power of God that first put them in, will still keep them in, the work
of faith to the upshot of Salvation; And they that are beneath them, seeing
their good works, dare not but acknowledge, that God is in them of a truth, and
glorify God for their Piety and President: So munificent does God make his
Rewards to be to Good Great men. That as Servius the good Roman King is storied
to receive his government besides his expectation, and retain it beyond his
will; (...). Plutarchus in Parallellis, p. 323, edit. Paris:
so does God make Fame the Vassal unto these to a degree of servility
inexpressible, God working them and their deeds into the Pyramid of Time, so
Master-like, that it shall not crumble into any particle, but there shall the
record of it be visible; ps 12. 2. (...) etc. Philo lib de nobilit: p: 909
His posterity shall be blessed and mighty upon Earth, is the promise to the
just man; yea, where there is not this spirit in Greatness, to advance virtue,
and serve the ends of man's creation and elevation. Philo makes some men's
arrogation of blood and place over other men, to be an hostility to mankind,
and a Monopolizing of that which is common to humane nature, and is
impropriable by none but such as are Gods to men, and Goods to Societies.

The consideration of which has made our Holy Mother the Church of England to
mind Nobility and Greatness, what its duty and demeanor ought to be, and to
pray that God would give suitable grace to those hearts, whose bodies are
graced with dignity and procedency. So for the King we are directed to pray, So
rule the heart of thy chosen servant Charles our King and Governor, that He
knowing whose Minister he is, First an second Collect in the Communion office.
may above all things seek thy honor and glory. And in another place, We
humbly beseech thee to dispose and govern the heart of Charles our King and
Governor, that in all his thoughts, words, and works, he may ever seek thine
honor and glory. And in the Letany, That it may please thee, to endue the
Lords of the Council, and all the Nobility, with grace, wisdom, and
understanding. Which last words, Grace as Christians, Wisdom as Nobles,
Understanding as Men, directs us to the right knowledge, that Wisdom and
Understanding of action follows Grace and Piety of design, God giving
ordinarily Wisdom and Understanding to perfect, where he gives Grace to begin
with him, who is both the best giver, and the best gift.

And also our Kings themselves, from the consideration of virtues Nobilitating
Nobles, have bequeathed this actuation of Greatness to their Successors and
Posterities.

So Edward the fourth of this Land upon his deathbed, spoke to the Lords,
Holinshed. p. 709.
I desire you, and in Gods Name adjure you, rather to study to make my children
rich in godly knowledge, and virtuous qualities, then to take pains to glorify
them with abundance of worldly Treasure, and mundane superfluity.

So King James of learned and happy memory, Remember this, that this glistering
worldly glory of Kings, is given them by God, to teach them to press to
glister and shine before their people in all works of Sanctification and
Righteousness: Advice to Prince Henry. Basilicon Doron, Book 1. p. 149.
That their persons as bright lamps of Godliness and Virtue may, going in and
out before their people, give light to all their steps. Remember also, that by
the right knowledgs, and fear of God, which is the beginning of wisdom (as
Solomon says) ye shall know all things necessary for discharge of your duty,
both as a Christian, and as a King, seeing in him as in a mirror, the course
of all earthly things; whereof he is the spring and only mover. Thus King James.

And the pious Martyr King, writing to our now happy and beloved Sovereign,
words his piety thus: With God I would have you begin, and end, Eico^ Basilic.
c. 27.
who is King of Kings, the Sovereign and disposer of the kingdoms of the world;
who pulls down one, and sets up another. The true glory of Princes
consists in advancing Gods glory in the maintenance of true Religion, and the
Churches good: Pretty will make you prosperous, at least not make you miserable;
nor is he made a looser that loses all, yet saves his own soul.

These, and such like instances, confirming that Piety is no abatement to, but
an establisher of, Retinetur a^tem and ad opinionem vulgi and ad magnas
utilitates Reipubl. Mos. Religio, disciplina, Ius, Augurum collegii au^boritas
Cicero lib 2. de Divi not.
and a matchless Jewel in the Coronet of Nobility, Look to it, O ye Nobles and
Gentry of England, whom God has set in the Orb of Grandeur; whose births are
honored with solemnities, whose Infancies are attended with care, whose riper
years are accomodated with plenty; to whose Persons men do homage, on whose
Fortunes and Favors men depend, by whose words men are commanded, and to whose
Vices men are too apt to lacquy: O ye whose faces ought to shine with wisdom,
Forma corp^ris fusta sed ingenio moribusque distortissimus.
be not incommoded with Commodus his Character; disparage not your goodly
persons by godless minds, and graceless deeds, answer Gods requiries; do
justice, Mich 6. 8.
have mercy, w^lk humbly with your God; ye whom God has made Ieshurons for
fatness, do not spurn with the heel; ye whom uncontrouled Power has made
vessels of honor, be not, by enmity against, and ignorance of him, vessels of
wrath; O ye whom he has made Peers, and Angels in the Parliament of England,
ministering Spirits for the good of Gods Elect in all the Nations; Amos 6. 3.
Pro. 14. 9.
be not your own tormenters, by putting the evil day far from you, by making a
mock of sin by not knowing the things that belong to your peace in this your
day, which spends apace, and to which wasted there is no recall possible.
Consult, O consult your own eternity; so use Greatness here, that like the
Sun it may rise to the world above, when it sets in this Sublunary Horizon.
So look after things Temporal, as that you lose not things eternal. By the
privilege of Peerage well used here on earth, to be a Compeer with the King of
Saints, with Angels and Spiirts of just men made perfect. (The three Estates of
the Supernal Parliament) is to make a true and right improvement of a glorious
condition, and a gracious life; for he lives to the truest and most undoubted
sublimity of a Noble mortal, who fits himself best for, and assures himself
undoubtedlest of, Immortal notability: For in that all creatures colland God
for their being, (...). Epict^t.
how mean soever; much more, says Epictetus, should man, who is created to
that end, and whose endowments with reason is to offer God the praise that is
due to him, and an honor of him.

And that those Nobles and Gentlemen only and seriously do, Note this.
who honor the Lord with their substance, his Worship with their presence, his
Day with their devotion, his Law with their obedience, his Priests with their
respect, his Patrimony with their power, his Sacraments with their preparation,
his Providence with their observance, his Works with their ponder, his Spirit
with their entertainment of his motions; yea, all that is his, with all that is
within them: And how glorious will the Crowns of the David's, the Solomon's, the
Iosiahs, the Hezekiahs, the Constantines, (...). Arrianus Epictet. lib. 3. p.
362. Edit Holstenii.
the Edwards, the Elizabeth's, the James's the Charles's be, when the King of
Saints Jesus Christ shall appear to give to every of them his Euge and
addition? what joy and illustricity will the Abraham's, the Nehemiahs, the Jobs,
the Daniels, the Joseph's, have, before the whole world in its great rendezvous,
when their Nobility and favor with Greatness, shall be published to be (with
reverence I write it) Christ's obligation, and have his open acknowledgment; and
when they in the view of all the world shall be declared Faithful stewards,
Trusty servants, prepared Virgins, willing to follow the Lamb to the shambles
of their credits, and worthy to sit with the Lamb in the Sessions universal,
and to reign with him in glory eternal.

O consider this ye Nobles and Gentry, God calls you by his dignification of
you (...)
above others to more expressions of piety then he expects from others: They
that have ten Talents must return suitable service to their entrust; God has
given you, Arrianus Epictet. lib. 2. c. 9. p. 190.
as his Alexanders, great souls, and great hopes to cherish you to great
undertakings and successes. He has kissed you (...)
with the kisses of his love, A happy kiss; which is not so much an union of
lips, as of God and man together; a dignation not frequent, but special and
peculiar, as St. Bernard Plutar. Parallel. p. 342.
devoutly. What have you done for God more then others? If God has heightened
your Honors, enlarged your bounds, Fael^x osculum ac stuqend ^ dignatione
mirabile in quo non ^s ori impuimitur seddeus homini ^ni^ur. Stus Bernardus
Sermon. 2. in Cantie.
elevated your spirits, accommodated your degrees, above, and with what he has
denied, other men not less comely in body, nor complete in mind, then you are;
when yet them, (equally his creatures, and equally allied to the paternity of
his love, and the bounty of his hand,) he has left to crawl on their bellies
and lick the dust, like worms of no value, and not men after his own Image; to
labor with difficulties, contend with wants, lie under disgrace, to lack
coverts, nourishment, necessaries; to know nothing but to obey, to enjoy
nothing but at your pleasure, to fear nothing but your dis-favour; to be
servants to your pride, pleasure, plenty; not only equal with, but in a sort
beyond the beasts. If thus the eye of God has pitied, and the hand of God
advanced you; and ye have not had such severe Masters, Oaks and Beeches, nor
been forced to the hardships of cold and want, (as Nullus habuit praceptores
praeter quercus and fagos. Volateranus de St. Bernardo.
holy St. Bernard is said to have been tutored by:) Let not you reyes be evil
against him, or your hands be heavy upon his worship, servants, patrimony; Do
not put him off with Turtles and Pigeons, when you have Stalled Oxen; nor
Females when you have Males in your Flocks to Sacrifice to him, But come and
offer up to God your selves, souls and bodies, which are but your reasonable
services to him. Take heed of doting on this world; the greatness whereof has
bird-lime to clog the wing of Piety; God accounts it an enemy to him, because
it is in a constant profession of enmity against him. 'Twas a sad complaint of
good Pope Adrian, Read his Speech to Encourt and Hezius his Familiars. Nistory
council Trent. p. 24.
The condition of Popes is miserable, seeing it was plain, that they could not
do good, though they desired and endeavored to do it. And of Pope Pius the
fifth, When I was (said he) a Religious Clerk, I had good hope of my interest
in God, being become a Cum essem Religiosus, sperabam been de salute animae
meae; Cardinalis factus, extimu^; Pontifex creatus, pene despero C. Lapide.
Comment. in c. 11. Numb. v. 11.
Cardinal, I saw cause to fear, God and I were not at a truce; but when I was
made Pope, then I almost despaired ever to see God with comfort: So Pope
Clement the Eighth was wont to bemoan himself. Let not God have cause to say to
your upbraid, The poor receive the Gospel, when Ye Rulers believe not on my
Son, but reject the Counsel of God against your selves; Fishermen have left
their nets and forsaken all to follow me, when those that have great
Possessions think it a hard saying so to command, and resolve not to be guilty
of the folly to obey it: Silly women ministered to my Son in his disertion, when
the great Counselors and Doctors were afraid to own him boldly, or to come to
him openly; Poverty does Sinite, ergo sinite Sapienti, hujus seculi de spiritu
sapientiae hujus mundi tumentes, al^a sapere, and terra^ lingentes sapienter
descendere in infernum; v^s autem dum foditur peccatori fovea, sicut cepistis
stulti facti propter Deum, per stultum Dei quod sapientius est omnibus
hominibus, duce Christo, humilem apprehendite disciplinam, ascondendi in
coelum. Sauctus Bernatdus Epist. ad Fralres do monte Dei.
often cast a charitable mite into my Treasury, when Plenty and Abundance are
close-fisted: Do not, O do not stand upon your terms with God, and dispute your
Privilege till his patience wave you, and you with all your Greatness and
Wisdom descend into Hell amongst all that forget God and themselves; But do ye
as wise and holy Souls, stoop to Gods terms, and accept his conditions, not
thinking it below you to be vile in your own, that you may be lovely in his
eyes, who gave you yours to see him, and will make them happy in seeing him
after you have served him. Let n^^ God complain his gifts of gold are in your
^^hinets become dross, and his ^^naments on your outward Splendor become
Instruments to your inward and outward Rebellion against him: Remember Queen
Eliz. 2 Speech to the Parliament. ^9. regni.
that renowned Monarch, who said, When first I tool the Scepter, my Title made
^e not forget the Giver; and think him best worthy your temporal Greatness in
all the emanations of it, who has prepared for you ^^ansions with himself* and
be Muliu^ quidem merui^ de nobis qui and immeritis dedit seipsum nobis: Sanct
Bern. Tract. de diligendo Deo.
willing to invest his Glory with your Robes of State, It ho has provided for
you the Robes of his Sons righteousness, and in the glory of that will set you
on his Right hand.

Be not offended, I beseech Non numero Hispanos, nec robore Gallos, nec
calliditate Paenos, nec art^bus Graecos, sed pietate ac religione, atque hac
una sapicntia quod deorum immortaliu^ numine omnia regi gubernarique
perspeximus; omnes gentes, nationesque superavimus. Cic. Orat. de Aruspicium
responsis.
you, at this my Address, as if I wished you to your loss, or presented with
what is beneath you to accept; It Is no Pedantry I provoke you to, but the
noblest Act of Divine Generosity and Magnanimity you can express: Think, O
think nothing beneath you that is a service to Him who is far above
Principalities and Powers, compared to whom, your Honor is but Baseness, your
Riches but Poverty, your Wisdom but Folly, your Power but Weakness, your
Duration but Momentaryness: Recall to mind that Great Monarch and Grave
Christian, Who esteemed it the greatest Title and chiefest Glory to be the
Defender of the Church, both in its true Faith, and its Eicon. Bafilic. e* 14.
just Fruitions, equally abhorring Sacrilege and Apostasy. Is Gods Harvest
great? Be ye in what you can the Lords Harvesters, present honest, learned, and
pious Clerks to your Livings, and countenance them in Hearken to this that God
may hearken to you.
their Ministerial Labor; deserve, by sharing with them in the work of men's
conversion, to share with them in the reward of Gods Promise: Be the Lords
Helpers, who has helped you to be Lords and Gentlemen, the Angels your Equals
are serviceable hereto; O draw not back the shoulder: Is Gods cause in danger?
Take courage, and let the Stars be your President, who fought in their order to
help the Lord against the Mighty; O be ye not unactive in this Heroicism: Is
the life of Christ in Humility, Meekness, Purity, Patience, Obedience, and
Constancy, tradu^ed and blasphemed by the Sins and Con^idictions of enormous
men? Be ye, as (...).
was Noah, Gold glittering in the midst of his Ages mud, bright virtue in a
grave of night ^^d death; partake not with them in their Sanct. Basil.
Selencia. Orat. 5.
Basphemy and enmity, but live to their consutation, rule to their suppression,
ex^end your selves to their conviction, appear openly to their confront, and
let them Liquet ^ergo and absque scientia dignitatem esse inutilem, and
scientiam absque virtute damnabilem. Sanct. Bern. Tract. de diligendo Deo.
^ot alone till you have brought them off the evil of their ways, and brought
them (...) to submit to the yoke, to lie down at the feet, to come at the call,
and run at the command of God in his word, and upon the motions of his Spirit
in the Dictates of ^well-informed and regular conscience: When you are to
resist sins, bear your arms in your eyes, that the pride of not under^aluing
your selves may make you abstenious; but when God commands you to duty, carry,
with Noble Bradeas, your Arms in your shoos, trample upon any di^ersion, any
high thought, that exalts it self against the courage and gratitude you owe to
him. Shall one brave Roman ven^ute to ride armed into the deep Pit, where he,
and his horse, and arms, inevitably are swallowed up? And shall another, I
mean Horatius Cocles, and his two Companions, encounter the whole Army of the
Hetrurians, and keep the pass over the Bridge that led to Rome, till the Bridge
behind them was cut off, and that done, leapt into Tyber, venturing his life in
the water, which he had so strenuously hazzarded on the Land? Shall these, and
such other Chieftains of Fame, dare to bid more for the Breaths and Pens of
Men, to be well-spoken and well-written of, as Heroiques and Virtuoso's of
Nobility? And dare you express the cowardice not to offer your selves to God,
to be the footstools of his Throne, the door-keepers of his House, the dancers
before his Ark, the Champions of his Battles? O, think not Egregi^s viros
dico, qu^s e gr^ge hominum vulgarium aliqua abstraxit excellentia, and Dei
justitia, and sanctitas insigais, quod heu nostra aetate perrarum est, vel rei
militaris experientia, ac liberorum copia rerumque notitia singulares s^cit.
Petrarch^ lib. de Reip. administratione.
your Right-eyes, your Right-hands, your Parts, your Fortunes, your Relations,
or your Honors, too great to venture for him who is the Fountain and Founder
of them all, and without whose Support and Providence, they will soon abate:
This to do is more additional to your Honors, then Coronets, Stars, Georges,
Ermines. Baronies; Then Coats, Quarterings, Titles, Revenues, Allyances, all
which are determinable, being the Pensioner of every accident, whenas the
reward of well-doing is permanent, and returns the doers everlasting
Remembrance; yea, shall enter Heaven a Memoire of well-doing, never to be
forgotten or worn out, For the God you serve therein is mighty in Recompenses,
as able to preserve the fruit of his Servants from above, and their root from
beneath, as to destroy the root and fruit of contrary doers, Amos 2. 9. And
pity it will be that ye, who are so rare Masters in the art Diis quam
hominibus conficie idis melior. Quintil. de Phidia statuario.
of captivating Men, should not, with Phidias, express your excellency and
in^^uence for Religion and Piety.

SECT. XXXVI.
Shows, That they should not neglect due politure in their Youth, which gives
the Rise to their after-eminency, or the contrary.
SEcondly, That they would not neglect due politure in their Infant-youth: For,
as every thing has its season, so has instruction and accomplishment; The
seed is sowed in the ground when the earth is shortest and of best mould, and
competently moist; The impression is fixed on the Iron or Wax, when they are
warm; and most susceptive of the incumbent force. The Twigg is incurvated and
plashed to the hedge, when it is young and tractable; the distorted limb
rectified, while it is tender and unfixed in its irregularity: So is youth made
any thing while it is a rasa Tabula, and has no preoccupations or restivenesses
assumed into, or by ill habit imposed upon it. Therefore as the care of Parents
and Guardians; so the duty and willingness of Children and Pupils ought to
exercise it self in forwarding and following youth to its utmost improvement,
that the Seed and Cyons of institutions may loose no season, toward its growth
and flourishing, but may be embelished with, and productive of, something
suitable to its time, cost, expectation, possibility.

And this I rather humbly advise to, because however as the body renews its
flesh, and changes it minutes parts, as it passes through the conducts of
Maturation and increase, answerable whereunto the expressions of the will,
understanding, and other soulary powers are; yet there are gradual rejections
of what we children were. To embrace what we men are, some educational and
habitual touches adherent, which seldom or never are fully discharged and
drawn from us; against which there is no appositer remedy Cloriosa est denique
scientia literarums quia quod primum est in homine mores purgat, seeundum,
verborum gratiam subministrat, ita utroque beneficio mirabitur ornat and
tacentes and loquentes, Theodor. Rex Var. lib. 2. Ep. 33.
prescribable, then to narrowlyregard youth, and to infuse proper and
specifique seasoning into it: True principles of Religion sound rules of plain
reason; to read well, and well to write, to be thoroughly disciplined in
Grammar, and after in Mythology; to intermix with the lusory parts of Learning,
Authors religious, Poets and Prose, and them to read to them, as well as
profane ones: to allow them convenient play, without abuse or violence; to
train them to manly Exercises, (a) Running, Riding the Great Horse, Basilicon
D^ron, 3 book, p. 185.
Fencing, Dancing, Leaping, Wrestling, Tennis, Archery, Vaulting; which, though
an Elegant wit, and Grave judgment, terms, but the varnish of the Picture of
Gentry, Bp. Hall.
whose substance consists in the Lines and Colors of true Virtue: Yet are
Courtly things, and o sweeten and allay the choler and rudeness of these by
Music of voice and touch; which Lib. 3. de Repub. p, 625.
Plato says is contributary to Fortitude, Plato ^u Alcibiade.
and (...), and renders men complete in virtue. When thereunto is added the
conviction of them, that vice and villainy is beneath them; and the nourishment
of emulations to do things wise and harmless, is worthy them, whereby the
suckers and extravagant expression of youth (which do but impair their present
repute, and occasion their after dolor) are rescinded, and they set free from
those follies that first take, and then stupifie the mind, and mortify all
that is hayle and savoury in it. I say, these encumbrances removed, the fruit
of good nurtriture, and generous education will fully and seriously appear to
compensate the cost and care of those that under God have been fountains of the
counsel and defrayers of the charge of it.

Provided there be such adaptation of O levitas adolescentiae deploranda nec
mirum, si enim deus, tibi cursum vitae longiorem indulserit, Flebis aetate
provectior quod ami^tis impubes, nec erit t^nc locus paenitendi cum res in eum
desoldtionem venerit ut resormari non possi, Episcop Rhotomag. Epist. H. 3.
Regi Augl. apud Petrum Blesensem. Ep. 33.
the breeding and method of institution to the nature of the person, and end of
his designation, as is proper and direct in tendency thereunto. For, as no man
ever made a Port, but he that steered to it, (unless by impulse of storm, he
was above and beyond his hopes miraculously befriended by God, who reserved the
glory of his safety for his challenge of praise from such a saved miscarriage,
and gaining loss;) so, no Father, no Guardian, can hope to have his child or
charge well bred, according to the notion of true breeding; but where he
greedily sucks in his institution, and retains it, with a resolution to wind
himself into the love, practice, and mastery of it, which is the fruit of
something occult in nature, depending upon the endowment of God, and annexed to
the Genius of it, as its inseparable vehicle to such and such methods of
ambition and diligence as leads to those concluded issues, and no other; which
being a secret to us, and discoverable only at the time, and in the way of Gods
project in us, is served to in education no otherwise then as education is
fitted to the acceptance and improvement of emergencies; in the closing with
which, as it is fautive to, what is to be eminently subsequent thereto, is the
marrow and soul of probable Felicity and Nobility.

For though it be true, that Miracles have heretofore, and further can, if the
Principal and Regent of them please, turn stones into bread, and advance
ignominy unto Majesty, and by instantaneous qualifyings render them not
unkingly, but as Regally complete as if born from Kings, and bred for
Government. Yea, and fit the Fishers of the Gospel, by sublimation of their
weak and watery Rhetorique, to out-spirit those Oracular Philosophers, who were
looked upon in the world, as so many walking Gods, moving in men's Figures, to
reduce their exorbitancies into a reasonable regularity, and to beat down the
arguments, and flourishes of their Oratory, which did hallucinate and becalm
men into a credulity of transport and veneration. Though God, I say did, at the
first Exoriency of the Gospel thus credit his Implantation of Faith and
Holiness, which was to subvert all antique settlements, and to disgorge all
wonted imbibings; yet the usual and declared way of God, to produce brave
persons, is from Neat and Noble education of their Childhoods: Nor is it often
seen, that men do prove conspicuous, and praiseworthy, where their Youths have
been lax and loose.

And therefore Plato prescribes breeding (...). Lib. 4. de Repub,
of Learning and Manliness in Youth, to be the only way to make them (...),
Grave and well-poysed souls in age: For so penetrative is the tincture of
youth, that it leavens all the subsequent life with its impression, if bad; and
gives it a pleasancy, if good: which was not only the opinion of the Garamant
Sage to Alexanden, who told him, his active Manhood was a spire from that root
of Ambition which his youth had nourished, and his age discovered; Viro enim
turbis ac contentionibus enutrito, ipsa pro quiet inquietudo est. Guevara.
lib. 1. c. 35. Ut liberos daret ingeniosos and acutos. Crebrum infantiae
ploratum adversae mero fortunae esse praesagium. Guevara. l. 1. c. 11.
but even is the experience of all mankind, who therefrom take the hints of
anticipating evil, by prudent means inductive of good: And as they presented
the God Cautius sacrifices, that their children might be ingenuous and acute;
and to their Vagitanus, that they might be cheery, and not full of tears; (they
concluding, children given much to weep, destined to misfortune.) So did they
indespensably train those that they would have brave Soldiers, and brave
Senators, to Learning, as that which must chiefly nourish them in, furnish them
for, and carry them to, the reward of great virtues. For Learning, as it is an
improvement of the Candle of God in a man, being a kind of natural Divinity,
which lets a man into all those varieties of apprehension, utterance, sagacity,
policy, conduct, counsel, which bespeaks acceptance, procures assurance,
extrieates difficulties, prevents surprises, discovers secrets, improves
Sciences; so is it that which without diligence to follow, and resolution to
obtain, will not be arrived to in any conspicuity. And therefore, Oye Nobles
and Gentry, let my counsel Note this.
be acceptable to you; Study books, convers with wise men, get understanding in
the Laws of God, and of the Nation; be humble Christians, valiant Englishmen,
Libros plus quam Saphyros and smaragdos c^aros hobui^ quibus Chrisolitorum
magnam copiam inesse dicebat. Platin. de Pio 2do. Pontific. Roman.
learned Artists, sincere and true-hearted creatures; and you shall have more
honor in life, and comfort in death, from these endeavors and acquisitions,
then from those mistaken recreations, and false delights that are entered upon
with trouble, carried on with sin, and ended in sorrow and infamy. For most
true in this Case is that of St. Bernard, of the Cells of Religious men, A
Cella euim saepe in caelum ascenditur, vix autem unquam a cella in infernum
descenditur nisi sicut dicit Psalmista descendunt in infernum viven tes ne
descendant morientes. Stus. Bernard lib. de vita s^litaria. Ad Fratres de morte
dei.
From the Cell men often ascend up into Heaven, seldom do men descend into
Hell, unless they taste of Hell in their lives afflictions, who in their deaths
are promised and prepared for endless joys. Which is a notable argument for
you not to count Learning pedantry, and studying of Books an effemination of
courage; since Books are, as the Noblest representation of Antique valor, in
the enumeration of their examples and dijudication of their motives; so in the
excitations of the spirit to that time and method of action and expression N^m
fuit Socrates Patritius, non eques Romanus, quem tamen Philosophia non accepit
sed nohilem reddidit. Senec. ad Lucilium.
which is most opportune and seasonable.

Especally since this virtuous Learning was that which made Socrates, Servius
Tullus, Tullus Hostilius, and others Noble, for blood they had none nor came
they from Patritian Ancestors, or Triumphers adopting them; mean and obscure
were their parentage, yet so glorious, and esteemed, by their wisdom and virtue
did they grow that they were held the wonders of their age, and the patterns of
excellent Endowments to all successions of men. For it is not Robes of Purple,
nor Mantles of Ermin, nor Georges of Quis est autem re^um hum^narum adco
imperitus, qui hos censeat nobiles appellandos quorum vita quo turpior fuit eo
citius suorum Nobilitatem extinxit. Platina l^b. de vera Nobilitate.
Diamonds, nor Spurrs of Gold, and Swords keen and well Girt, nor gilt Coaches,
many Lacquies, great Manors, gainful Offices, Noble Relations, that Make men;
in the account of rational and real Heraldry, Noble, and Gentlemen; but the
knowledge of God, and themselves, the pions and generous disposition they have
to be good; and by being such patterns, to make others good also: To serve
mankind by such improvements, as Gods mercy and their time, parts, and
accommodation enables them to do; that declares them Noble and Generous.
Holinshed. p. 709.
Which that brave Prince, E. 4. of England, well knowing, councelled the Lords
whom he left his children with, thus: I commend and deliver into your
government both this Noble Realm and my Natural children, and your Kinsmen; My
Children by your diligent oversight, and politic provision to be taught,
informed, and instructed, not only in the Sciences Liberal, Virtues Morral, and
good Literature, but also to be practiced in Tricks of Martial activity, and
diligent Exercise of prudent Policy. If you set them to Learning, your
Governors shall be men of knowledge. If you teach them Activity, you shall
have valiant Captains. If they practice Policy, you shall have politic and
prudent Rulers. Thus he. And the great Attempts and Conquests of Alexander,
(...). Plutarchus in Parallellis p. 337.
Plutarch refers not so much to his Numerous and Valiant Army; or, to Perdicca
Meleager, Seleucus, and the other brave Commanders, that under him managed his
Army, as to Alexanders Wisdom and Learning of Mind and Council; which
understanding Things, Men, and Times, made his Motions and Actions conform to
them, prosperous and taking. For when Alexander was dead, then the Army
mouldred away, and did nothing splendid; for it was only notable when it had
him its head, who had Philosophy for his Rule, and Valor for his Recreation,
and whose associate Virtue with his Arms made him successful. Which brings to
my mind that passage of Erasmus, That those only are Noble, who adarn their
minds with Virtue; and fill their heads with Learning; and while others give
Lions, Eagles, Bulls, Leopards in their shields, as Tokens of their ^obility,
they giving the liberal Sciences for Pro nobilibus quidem habendi sunt omnes
qui studiis liberalibus excolunt animum, Pingant alii inclypeis suis L^ones,
Aquilas Tauros etc. plus habent verae nobilitatis qui pro insignibus suis
possunt imagines depingere quos perdidicerunt arts liberales. Erasmus Tract de
civilitate morum purerilium.
their Badges are truliest Noble.

Excepting then the extraordinary and ^estival Providence of God, which are
^in a great degree miraculous (whereby unexpected Successes and Advances are
given to men of no luxuriant natural parts, and pregnant Mother-wits above and
beyond the Success of Study, and methodique Institution:) The most undoubted
and known usual way of well-accomplishing Youth to eminent Manhood, is, by
training it up by the novicism and graduality of Arts to the complete Science
of them, which omits no moment of following on, and laboring at, the Forge and
Anvil of them; because every moment then lost is either a Precipice
irrecoverable, or an Eddy against which he that bears his head above water,
must have the courage of a Lion, the Industry of an Ant, the strong wing and
lofty flight of an Eagle, the (...) and vehement addiction to learning that a
Hen has to the eggs which she broods, and would hatch; For God and Nature have
proportioned every punct and step in the prosiciency of time to its peculiar
impression, in which there is a fixability of every good suitable thereunto: and
this is the reason why, if the Stock be planted then, when the Root and Soil
are fitted each for other, the Tree not only thrives, but the fruit it bears
is loyal to its kind; and to expect Winter Fruit from Summer Plants, or Summer
Fruit from Winter Stocks and Cyons, is to invert Natures Order, and to gather
Grapes of Thorns, and Figs of Thistles.

Season therefore is the best express of Wisdom and Success, and the producing
'st Womb of whatever is hopeful and proveable to Industry, which is wholly
lost and bortive, if failhere be either in the time or method of breeding,
which the Historian notes in Robert Vere Earl of Oxford, and Duke of Ireland,
15 R. 2. who dyed at Levain in great anguish of mind and miserable necessity,
Which young Gentleman doubtless was apt to all commendable Exercises and Parts
fit for a Nobleman, if in his youth he had been well trained and brought up in
necessary Discipline: p. 479.
They are the words of Holling shead out of the elder Authors.

Let then rude and reasonless men contemn breeding, and suffer their children
to exuberate and run out into limitless vanity, in hopes to take them up when
they come to Manhood and Discretion; yet my experience tells me, to season them
well betimes, and to keep them in the knowledge of good, and from acquaintance
with evil, is the best way to render their Manhoods grave and gracious; and if
they break forth into the frivolous choices of youth, which are skittish and
insolid, the reserve of hope must be in Gods grace manifested in their clearer
sky of reason, the purity whereof, if it wholly shame not vice out of
appearance, yet will so eclipse and disparage it, that it shall have little to
brave with, but its impudence; which is so much the harder to be tradicated, by
how much the deeper it is soyled, and the stronger it is fixed, which makes me
plead for Solomon's Precept, as Gospel in this case, Teach a Child in the trade
of his youth, and he will not depart from it in his age.

Consider this, O ye Nobles and Gentry of England, and postpone all other
things to the breeding of your Children, who being your selves in the
exemplification of time, render you to have been what they really are: For, men
will hardly believe Parents noble in Blood, and virtuous in Mind, who bring
into the world children fit and possible to be such successive, and yet neglect
them in the conduct of them to be such: Nor did brave Men of old care much what
became of their Sons, Si mei similes erunt nulla^ inindigerent commendatione,
sin secus nolo filii Socratis dicantu^, non enim merentes
if they in their minds degenerated from them: Famous in that reply of Socrates
to his Wife, who asked him dying, whom he would bequeath his sons to be bred
by, replied, To no body; For if they be like me, they will need no care of any
man's, nor any man's commendations: If they be not, I would not have them known,
or said to be my sons. Better Honor Houses, and Manor Seats Fall; better
Parks of Dear, and Breeds of Horses; better Rents of Land, and Royalties over
Estates, abate, then Children, the Heirs of them be not bred, or not well bred.
A Nobleman or Gentleman, without Noble Parts, and Noble Virtues, is like a
glorious George on Hors-back, in a Sign; or a Battle bravely fought, in a Map;
like a Lion, in Gingerbread; or the Sea, insculped on a Cockle-shel. Better be
a brave minded Vallet, then a poor spirited Noble or Gentleman; and more comely
is it to know Arms, and Letters, then to shake the Elbow, (...). Democritus
apud Stobaeum. Sermon. 254.
or sport with a Mistress; Generous recreations do whet the Industry of Virtue,
to cope with toil to gain her excellence: but sordid pleasures do imbell the
mind, and weaken the activity in any course of Honor and Grandeur. I can allow
Greatness as much scope as is by Canon theirs to take, Sieve cupiditatibus
natura nos genuit, sine timore sine suspitio^e. Falsa opinione imbuti summum
malum paupertatem existimamus quod non putarunt Romani illi veteres. Platina
lib. de vera nobilitate.
or man's to give; but the Vessel that is all Sails, and no Ballast, will soon
run a ground or sink. Want then what will, Good breeding, to Masculine and
Christian virtues must not, nature will some times abate some grains and ounces
of the precious part of man; but Education must be the supplement, and if
possible the improvement of whatsoever is tending to Noble conclusions: for if
Study and Arts be for poor and unnoble men's sons, then affairs of State, and
places in Judgment, etc. are for them also; When men of more country concerns
nay intend their Hawks and Hounds, not only as recreation, (which the wisest
and learnedest of men in some degrees practice, and in more degrees allow) but
is the only or chief noble perquisite, which is contray to the sense, and
thosewise, learned, and Noble Gentlemen's practice they must not presume: For
men may properly, and according to the rule of Fame, be Noble, without great
Fortunes. So were many of the Romans, Menenius Agrippa, Valerius Publicola,
Concinnatus Attilius Seranus, and others, who were so far from having Noblemens
Fortunes, that they had harly enough to feed them alive, or bury them dead; Yet
were they great in their time, and in the respect of tha^ victorious Nation.
But without Virtue and Courage, no man, how well born, how wel^ Fortuned
soever, was or can be accounted really Noble. Which digression I make, to
alleviate the prejudice that Learning is pedagogique, and to be bookish is to
become a sot. Of which sort of sots, I wish to God more of the Nobility and
Gentry were^ Though I must own, to the Glory of God, and Honor of our Nation,
I think the English Nobility and Gentry are now as learned as ever in any Age
they have been; and as the Nobility and Gentry of any other Nation is. And such
as so are, ^ am sure, will conclude with me, that such they have been made by
good Education, and provident care of their Youth.

SECT. XXXVIII.
That the Nobles and Gentry of England would affect no Travail abroad, till
they be capable rightly and religiously to improve it.
III. MY third humble offer to the Nobles and Gentry of England is, That they
would affect no Travail abroad till they be capable rightly and religiously to
improve it: For though I should grant that Travail, as it is the opportunity to
see several Persons, Places, Fashions, is an addition to Youths experiences;
and in the variety of i^^ entertainment, gives a keenness to their Invention
and Enquiry; and therefrom ^^ggests matter of Ponder and Disquisition; which
yet the Spaniard, a wise people gain at home, as the brave old English ^ere
also wont, when tho they were not ^ompt in their carriages, and gay in their
^umours; yet were as wise in their Laws, as steadfast in their words, as stout
in their minds, as devout in their actions, no disparagement to us, as we now
are. Suppose I should grant it, yet thence would it not follow, that Youth very
young is fit for Travail. For Travail being in them the gratification of the
visual sense (whose treachery is often mortiferous,) is not at all completive
to a Gentleman, till it be directed and limited by soulary prudence, and a
spirit of discerning; which few Children have in any tolerable degree
proportionate to the danger of miscarriage upon the absence of it; Lege
Petrarch. Ep. 12. lib. Ep. sine Titulo.
nor men till they have passed 24. years of their life, (Prodigies and Miracles
of manhood excepted.) When though their tongues are less plyant to learn
Language, (the keenness of childish imitation, being something blunted and
dis-edged.) Yet is their judgment more mature and general then sooner it can
be ordinarily expected to be: for the vigor of the soul, like the strength of
the body, is advanced by graduals, till it be at its vertex; and then it also
descends and winds off: And if so, as to send them too old men, is to expect
but winter fruits; so to send them to young, is to receive from them no account
worthy their charge and hazard. For, not the situation, not the soil, not the
Cities, not the Ports, are so much the intendment of beneficial Travail,
M^vete feliciter ite moderati, tale sit iter v^strum quale decet esse qui
laborsnt pro salute cunctorum Theoric Rex Gepidis ad Gallias destinalis Var.
Cassium lib. ep. 11.
as to read their untranslated Authors, consider their Government, and Laws,
visit their Universities, and Buildings of note, discourse with their Statists,
understand the Art of their Manufactures, and Improvement of their Land: To
learn their Martial Discipline, and Mechanique thrifts: These, and the like
designs, which all Foreigners have upon us in their Travail hither, are or
ought to be the intents of Foreign Travail. These are the Helens in the eyes
of discreet Athenians; these are the golden Fleeces that such Iasons venture
for to our Colchis: Whereas we Englishmen must so soon as our Noble striplings
are out of their Coats; away with them abroad, Quisquis presentem statum
Civitatu commutari non vult, and civis and vi^ bonus est, itaque qui contrarium
vult procul dubio malus, nec civium nec viru^ bonorum nomine dignus aut
conso^tio. Petrarcha lib. de Repub. opt. Administra.
with a Tutor perhaps careless, or poisoned in principle; Then his Genios must
be the Equator of theirs, and they must be, and must not be, what he will have
them; and while they are so Foreinz'd, that there is nothing English left in
them, then they are thought complete and fit to return, when perhaps they have
attained no more to the stability of their mind, in after Virtue, and generous
Bravery, then to Court a Mistress, wear a Feather, Swear, Raunt, Game, and do
every thing that is their stain and defamation. The not only Tincture, but
Grain-dye thereof, never departs them to their death; but their light, rude,
lewd Youth continues to, and determines in a wavering, passionate and diseased
Old Age.

Therefore I am first for home-breeding, in Universities, and Inns of Court,
which are Courtly Academies, and profitable Hostelyes of Generous Youth:
wherein, besides the Patrial Laws, (which to study, and be versed in, concerns
Noblemen and Gentlemen above others, as they have great Estates, and great
trusts in Government; in which ignorance of the Laws will not well set them
off:) There is no kind of Learning but may be imparted to them, by Masters
proper and near: Not are there any manly Exercises, but there also are gainable
(the Institution of those Societies being in order to those Concomitants
accomplishments as well as to the study of the Laws, In my Commentary on
Fortescue, de Laudibus legum Angliae, printed An. 1663.
as elsewhere I have discoursed.) Yea, there is now a Society The Royal Society
at Gresham-Colledge. Ama quaeso claustrum and abscinde ab animo d^siderium
exeundi si paradesus in hac vita present est, vel in claustro est vel in
scholis quicquid extra haec duo sunt, plenum est anxietate inquietudine,
amaritudine, Formidine, ^olicitud^ne and dol^re. Pet. Bl^s. Ep 13.
Incorporated by our gracious Sovereign, (the Learning and Worth of Many in
which, is much the glory of this Nation,) that promises no small contribution
to the Englishmans compleatness. This I hope the Nation will take notice of, as
a further encouragement to our Great men's institution at Home, which I think
the probablest means to keep them in heart and deed true Englishmen. For the
less Youth knows of the levity, liberty, shifts, profaneness, atheism,
subtilty, and lubricity of other Nations, the more are they probable to be
solid, circumspect, plain, devout, pious, modest. The better Governors,
Husbands, Parents, Masters, Friends, Landlords, Debtors they prove. And I wish
it were considered, whether the bad men, bad husbands, and loose Protestants
that our Nation abounds with be not more the consequence of young breeding
abroad, then of bad wives, or bad company at home.

But if Travail must be (and it may be without danger, and with good profit; if
Gods grace bless it, and prudent conduct accompany it) then I wish nearer
Plato's age might be regarded as the best season, that is, (...). Plato lib.
12. de Legibus. p. 988. Edit Ficini.
Toward 40. years of age, and not then for common persons, but for such only
as are public; such as Spies, Ambassadors, Heralds, and such as may there
lie, on purpose at their return to breed up others to the knowledge of what is
good, and useful in Travail. For when the Judgment is ballasted in point of
Religion, and they are settled well in the belief of our Reformed Truths, which
are but the declarations of Catholic credens; there will be less danger of
their seduction; which has long time been the project of the Romish Factors,
whose practice it is to captivate novices, and them to place beyond the Seas,
in such Convents and Trains as are apt for them, (of which they make such a
Trade, that the late Learned, Holy, and Eloquent Bishop of Norwich,
Incomparable Bp. Hall, Father to to the now Reverend Bp. of Chester. See his
Quo va^lis, p. 641.
( whom I must to all the world own, to be the first provoker of me to compose
and write, my Virgin penn being the Pedisequa of his devout Meditations. He, I
say, has observed it long ago, That one of those Factors for Transfretation of
our English youth, has been observed to carry over six several charges in one
year:) and then, children, naturally taken with toys and outsides, (which are
pleasing Hogoe's in the Romish Ollio's;) are apt to be captivated by them
beyond the solid Reason, Scripture authority, or the pious lives and deaths of
the professors of Popish Religion, So true is that of a learned and witty
Doctor, Dr. Fuller Holy State, lib. 2. c. 4.
now with God, They that go over Maids for their Religion, will be ravished at
the sight of the first Popish Church they enter into: but if first thou (says
he) be well-grounded, their fooleries shall rivet thy Faith the faster, and
Travail shall give thee Confirmation in that Baptism thou did receive at
home. So he. Yea, I am confirmed in the belief that the Statute, 1 Jacob. 4. 3
Jacob 5, 3 Car. 2. all which were inhibitive of sending children beyond the
Seas, to be Popishly bred; are cleanlily avoided and fairly eluded by this
pretense of Travail for breeding. Nor shall there need to be any more favor
done to Popery, then what the fashion and common inclination of persons of
quality have to their childrens Travail, gives it. Which I wish the wise and
great men would look upon as the Inlet to the first neglect, then diseteem,
and lastly subversion of our Church and Religion.

To Travail also, when ever entered upon, I wish settlement in Morrals: For if
the Reins be laid on the neck of Youth, which is unbroken, and not brought to
handiness by good manage, how apt is youth to miscarry in its choice, way,
conclusion? I love when men make resolutions to build their Travailes (with
Gods help) as the sons of Seth, (...). Antiquitatum Iudice. lib. 1. c. 3.
by Josephus are said to leave their love to Learning and succession) on
pillars of brick and stone, that withstand fire and water, the impetuosity of
lust, and the submersion of Multitudes, which like waters are hurried this way
and that way, as the impulses and breaths of greatness drive them, what men of
Fortune and Fashion on travail do, that they will do also, be it never so
dissolute and desperate. My suffrage accompanies them, who bring their practice
to the rule of pure nature and improved piety; who fear the defamation, and
abhor the turpitude of irregularity, though it be backed by Greatness;
foreseeing the fatal setting of those seeming Sun-shines in a night and cloud
of dis-lustre. Let the Nobles of the Isle of Somabarr in East India glory in
the brand of a red hot Iron on their faces, Sir John Mandevils T^avails.
in testimony of their Honor; and other our Gallants of Christendom bring the
testimony of their Veneral Valor in the loss of a Nose, or in some other
visible deformity; let them pride in the sin and shame of their travailes; they
shall be the true Nobles and Gentlemen in my Calendar who keep themselves
unspotted from the world; who are free from the just Tax of profane, prodigal,
proud, absurd, effeminate, light, sordid: from which vices, whoever preserves
himself in travail, must needs be favored by God in the restraint of his
grace, and be applauded for faithful to himself, in a latitude of careful and
diligent circumspection: for he that will not experiment the vices of sense,
must almost not touch, not taste, not handle; it is very difficult to forbear to
be bad, where one is not afraid to be any thing beneath good: nor will he ever
be the faithful steward of Gods restraining grace, as Mr. Ascham was, Preface
to his Schoolmaster.
who delights to stay in Italy above nine days; wherein (as his words are) in
one City, Venice, he saw more liberty to sin, then in London he ever heard of
in nine years. Therefore Wisdom avoyds Travail to early, the very goodness of
which is either Impiety or Superstition. Holy Bish. Hall Quo vadis p. 641.
Nor will any man be convinced of the danger of a long Elopement, but he that
has found the bitter sauce of those adulterate mixtures, and vicious
captivations that associate careless travail: If Seignior Scipioni was a wise
man (whom Sir Henry Wotton, none of the lowest rate men, consulted as an
Oracle) how he should best and safest travail to Rome, answered, Your thought
close, I pensieri stretti, and il viso sciolto.
and your countenance loose, will go safely over the whole world. If this be,
as undoubtedly it is, good counsel, Sir Henry Wotton. Elements Architect. p.
396.
then youths that look at random, and talk what comes uppermost, which wise men
refrain, are not expectable to travail, but in danger: For experience and
years make the fairest Sculptures by being purgations of superfluities; and
since England has ever been accounted Gods Kingdom, I wish from my heart the
Nobles and Gentry of England would, Consider this
in this sense, seek this Kingdom of God, and the righteousness thereof, by
breeding their sons more in the knowledge and love of it, and not seek other
foreine things to be added to them, without which, I dare say, a true
Englishman is more Englishly complete.

SECT. XXXIX.
That the Great men of England would study most, and affect best, the Laws,
Customs and Vsages of England.
FOurthly, I humbly offer to the Great men of England, that they would study
most, and affect best, the Laws, Customs, and Usages of their own Country;
which I (under favor) take to be a great piece of wisdom in them: For since it
is natural for ever man to love his own, and the innate Interest of propriety
calls for the great shares of kindness and benevolence, England being the
natural and native air of Englishmen, and the very relation thereto devolving
a kind of property in it, to every child of it; why should they who have not
only Titular, but Solid and Fortunary superadded right to it, not above all
love, delight, praise God for it, and contest with all animosity, for the
honor and compleatness of it? I see no reason but they should; and wherein
they fail they are unnatural: And if so, why are we so covetous to see foreign
parts, when we ^it still and desire not to Travail in our own Country, where
as much curio^^ty and delight of nature is? Why are we studious of Foreine
Laws, and neglect to know our own, by which our Fortunes, Fames, Children,
Lives, must stand or fall? Why do we admire the Rarities of France, Spain,
Italy, and the East, when we have as much Variety and wonder in Britain, as
elsewhere; or as needs to entertain our Enquiry? why should our neighbors give
us the Standard of breeding, and the code of Fashion, who never could give ^s
Laws, or be Masters of the Seas above us.

Let Nobles and Gentlemen take their latitude, and use their pleasures, in
Fashions, and Carriage, I am not so bold to offer a rule for my betters,
equals, or any; nor do I think these things are under any prescript, but that
of comeliness and conveneince; yet I confess, had I my option, I would pray a
discard of all Exotique trifles, as pestilent to the Religion, Gravity,
Veracity, Hospitality, and common good of England: Let other Nations habit,
live, and do as they think good; nothing is in my apprehension so commendable
in an Englishman, as to love and prefer English Laws, Usages, Customs, and
Fashions, above Foreine ones. 'Twas a brave resolve of the Peers in H. 3ds
time, King James Speech Star Chamber 1616. p. 567. of his Works.
Nolumus mutare leges angliae and consuetudines hactenus usitatas. And it will
be no less English and renowned for the Peers and Commons ever so to say; for
if the wisdom of our Ancestors be attributed to, as in duty we ought to return
to their excellent merit, (We being by the Conscience and Concession of our
Kings, upon the advice and petition of the Lords and Commons his Subjects, all
Englishmen, left a free and happy people.) The admiration of their settled Laws,
(added to by loyal succession of Laws to them; together with the laudable and
convenient Customs and Usages annexed thereunto,) will not only be our duty,
but those Laws be highly honored by us. For though it sometimes falls out,
that time meliorates and experience continues things more thriftily, and to
greater advantage, then Antiquity arrived at, or did discover; yet it being
hard to use moderation, and not often seen the learning of travail, to choose
upon judgment but humor, I am for that retention of respect to the native
English rules and practices, which time rather then men has Endenizend, yea
Naturalized; which bebecause education abroad does divert men mostly from, my
quarrel to that humor is more just, and my counsel to the contrary I hope less
to be excepted against.

Let the world judge how use and converse does alter and winn upon the nature
of men, and what Polypusses they ^^e to custom and how near neighborhood it is
to sameness; and how much requested things foreine are to our Gallants that
have young and long lived abroad; and they will confess, the things of England
will need an Advocate; for by reason of this, it is that Diet, Clothes,
Coaches, Toys, yea even every thing is (by many) thought the worse for being
English; which is the reason that we may well be accounted Christendoms
Scepticks, who seek husks and trash abroad, when there is plenty and bread
enough in our fathers house; and by a ludibrious desultoriness, patch up our
dainties of minute severalties extraneously collected; such linsy-woolsy minds
we have, that if the warp be English, the woof must be Foreine, so undelighted
we are to be all English.

This Tetter began to prick, and burn in H. 8. his days, when certain
Gentlemen of the then Bedchamber, who had in France been very pleasant with the
then French King, riding disguised through Paris, and throwing things in
merriment at the peoples heads, thought to play the like tricks here: they
therefore habited a la mode, ^olinshed. p. 850.
and behaving themselves too unlike Englishmen, and uttering words of disgrace
to the States of England, the Kings Council took notice of, and represented it,
to the King, desiring they might be discountenanced, and for their fantastical
insolence exofficed; which they were, and banished the Court, and four sad and
ancient Knights put into their places. This I the rather mention, because the
English gravity and sobriety is now almost derided out of use and credit, and
men seem afraid to be accounted weighty and serious; the levity of young men's
garb, discourse, pleasure, diet, having disseised gravity even in men of age;
Omnes quippe boni viri hujus regionis jam ^lim sunt mortni, and in his
monumentis sepulti M. Antonim. Philosoph. Epist. ad Pollionem. Guevar Horol.
Princip. lib. 1.
so that, if enquiry should be made, as once the Roman Censor did of the
Citizen of Nola, where the good and grave Citizens of Nola were; the Enquirer
must be carried as he was to the Graves of the old Citizens: the men of counsel
and valor that were per tout English in their words and works, being now in
their Monuments, and in their ashes; for an old English Nobleman or Gentleman
was wont to be in Habit grave, I hope I have not erred in this Character of an
old English Noble or Gentleman.
but rich; in attendants ma^y, and orderly; of his word true and noble; in his
house free and sober; a good Subject to his Prince, a good Husband to his Wife,
a kind Father to his Children, a noble Master to his Servants, a Royal Lord to
his Tenants and Neighbors, an orderly Liver, a strict Iusticer, a true
Patriot, a good Christian; at home honored, abroad admired; f^ithful to his
trust, resolute in his Enterprises, provident in his affairs: in short, the
wisdom of our Ancestors is concludable from this, That they contrived Good
Laws, Favored Religion, Nourished Trade, Advanced Manufacture and Husbandry,
Maintai^ed Peace at Home, and Reputation abroad; Gave Rules to other people,
but Took none from them. And were not these brave Englishmen? and ought they
not to be patterns and praises?

Truly, Ita me, mi Pollio, Dii ament immortales, ita manum in bellis Mavors
meam regat, ut qui nostro ^uo habetur moribus emendatissimus vix cum illius
saeculi dissolutissimo conferendus est. M. Anton. Philos. Epist. ad Pol^onem.
let me speak plain truth, these last thirty years has so altered our temper in
England, that it is rare to find that cordiality, and sincee goodness in any
one, that generally was the Genius of England, and of the plurality of persons
in it; Atheism has subverted Religion, Craft Plain-dealing, Pride Charity,
Complement Friendship, Gain Civil honesty, Pleasure, Frugality, Pomp,
Moderation^ we are all now in a career, driving by excess to the displeasure of
God, Non est locus ut desteam, atque execrer ludibria haec habituum externorum,
quos vobis ab externis mundi finibus fu^ibunda aeta^ intulit, sed Dii
hominesque male oderint has belluas humana effigy. Petrarch
and ruin one of another.

But God, I hope, and our Governors, will give ere-long a check to this
Gangrene, when things so long disordering are once reduced, as they are now
hopefully in a Method to be: And when the Nobles and Gentry of England have
well considered the Fitness of our Municip^^ Laws, the Purity of our settled
Religion, the Convenience of our general and topique Customs, the Consequence
of our Usages, the natural Temper and the Assistance of the Elements to the
primarizing of an Englishman compared to the men of other Nations; (though all
most worthy and as suitable to their Countries, as ours are for our Island:)
When, I say, this has been well-commended to us by good Laws of Advance to
every thing Native, as is in a great measure likely to be, I hope there will be
conceived less reason to sharpen our Goads abroad, when we have such Forges at
home, or to think our Youth unpolished, if bred not abroad, but at home: Surely
this conceit of foreign things, in prejudice to native ones, is either a sign of
envy or pusillanimity, which England was not wont to deserve to be charged
^ith; for there is no vanity in request ^ith us, but (says a holy Saint of our
Church) We have learned from abroad, Bishop Hall of Norwich. Quo vadis. Sect.
21. p. 654.
and ^ virtue that we were famous for, but we (...) parted with in exchange for
foreign ^pperies; So that, I trust, my humble and ^^arty weal to my Country in
this Head, ^f commending the Love of Native Laws, (...) and native Customs,
will not be superflu^us and rejected; or have the fate of the ^^pian Law,
which, Matronae nulla nec authoritate nec verecundia nec imperio v^rorum
contine^i limine poterant. Livius.
though necessary, and ^ged by Cato to be continued in obvi^ion to very
audacious mischiefs, yet ^as by Valerius the Tribune opposed, and ^ favor to
his Party abrogated. I wish ^y Reason and Pen had the Sovereignty ^at the
Stone, Prince Choresky's Wife in a ^ing, Turkish History p. 1366. 1367.
given her by the Prince, when a Ser^^nt to her, had, which, clapped to the
eyes (...) one blind, restored sight, and to the ^^res of one deaf, restored
hearing: But if that I have wrote upon this Head be not ^evalent, I wish our
Gallants would at^nd that which methinks their Ancestors (...) in their ears
in the words of Aeneas (...) Ascanius. ^isce, Puer, virtutem ex me, verumque
laborem:
(...) facito, mox eum matura adoleverit aetas,
Sis memor, and te animo repetentem exemplatuorum;
Et Pater Aeneas, and avunculus extitit Hector*
Which I thus English. Child, if thou will mine Heir in virtue be
Labor of mind and body, learn from me*
So shall thine age' against warping vice pre^ scribe,
Thine ear be deaf, unto deboystures bribe
Son to Aeneas, Hectors Nephew, these
Brave actions move to, in despite of ease*


SECT. XL.
Presents avoidance of unmeet Love, an^ unequal disparaging Marriages, (...)
noble part of Virtue and Wisdom in (...) Noble or Gentleman.
FIfthly, That they would not debas^ themselves by vulgar Loves or vulga^
Marriages; that is, neither by sordid an^ lustful Addresses to pitiful
Persons be^fore, or by rash unlasting and unequa^ loves in their Marriages: the
former (...) these is well to be cautioned against, be^cause this effeminate
hurry is the common Precipice and plague of Youth, whose curiosity is so keen,
and whose ^^re so intent, that it enters upon its desired gratification, as the
Horse does into the Battle, with more courage then consideration: whence arise
not only the minds and bodies devirgination, but a disposition to that folly,
which once actuated, becomes customary, and then natural, and in a sort
necessary; the Piety and Prudence of Manhood lying more in timely anticipation
whereof, then hopes of discarding it, when admitted, shows the flattering and
insinuating nature of this Pregustation, the sensual charms whereof being in
possession, puts all rightfuller claims to Entry in hazard, and nourishes a
lurking adversary in the very Bowels: For, as it is a true rule, Ig^oti nulla
cupido, what the mind knows ^ot sinful, it covets not sinfully; so what it
through corruption finds correspondent to is sensuality, that it sensually
lingers after ^o enjoy and improve. And therefore it is a great blessing of God
to enter upon Marriage unspotted, that is, ignorant of my prefruition to it,
(because then curiosity has no taste of what is alien to its own, nor is tempted
to undervalue what it has for the propriety and frequency of it is accession to
it; (...). Musonius in lib. an Philosophiam impediunt nuptiae. apud Stobaeum.
Sermon. 186.
whereas, when there have been full and free fruitions before, the Matrimonial
ones are mostly undervalued;) so great an antipathy is there in our natures to
virtue, that we prize those enjoyments least that are most lawfully our own,
and those most that are suffurated and come with the curse of God and men to
their enhansers.

As therefore Prevention of greater Thefts is done by checking and reproaching
the injury and iniquity of a pin and a penny; so the way to avoid the most
wasting and scandalous effects of lust, is to avoid those persons and occasions
that are Contributors and Accessaries thereunto: which Demosthenes notably
remembers men of, (...). In Oratione contra Neaeram.
when he tells men, That common Wenches are taken only to satisfy Lust,
Concubines kept for health and convenience, but Wives are honored with the
production of Children and the Government of the House. Whereupon for great
young Persons, to paddle with Servants, Landresses, Curtizans, mean, mercenary
Dames, who set themselves in the way to tempt, and set themselves out with all
advantages, to lead aside their amorous Tempers; or for Persons of Honor and
Quality in their ages to be transported with mean and vulgar dotages, set upon
objects more remedies then incentives to a just and manly love, is to be
treacherous to their Wisdoms, Honors, Self-command, Judgment, and to all that
ought to be dear to them, which depend upon the good or bad of this their
Carriage. And often it is seen that what lust commences, Cruelty determins; so
did ^ene's conclusion confirm Mahomet's lust to her: For he so doted on that
beautiful Greek, that he left all his care of the Com^on-wealth to court her,
and had almost lost all his Acquisitions by his amorous nerligence, which
Mustapha Bassa perceiving, Turkish History p. 351.
and being dear to, and faithfully beloved by him, gravely remonstrated to ^im;
He kindly accepted of the reproof, and commanded Mustapha to summon together
all the Commanders of his Army, before whom he would quit himself of the
effeminacy charged upon him: Before them he brought Irene, and asked which ^f
them would not be taken with such a ^eauty? All consented to the efficacy of
^he Transport: after all, to show his Otto^an Courage or rather Cruelty, he
drew ^^s Falchion, and at one blow struck of ^er head.

But the main Caution that is in debase^ent to be needed, is in point of
Marriage; for Marriage being the Seraglio of life, out of which all the
furtherances to succession are transmitted; the condition and humor, and so
the good or evil fortune of Posterity is probable to be such as the choice good
or ill of the wife, is: nor is there any action of life which denominates
prudence and magnanimity truer, Unde melius nobilitati collegam quaerimus, quam
de vena nobilium, qui se promittunt abhorrere moribus quam refugit sanguine
vilitatem. Cassiod. Var. Ep. 12. lib. 1.
and less fallible, then Marriage does; which was the reason that Theodoric the
Gottish King (a wise man) writing to his Friend, says thus, Whence is it
likely to find a Noble Associate but from Noble Stocks and birth of Honor, who
hold themselves bound from that baseness of action which they abhor in the
dignity of their degree and quality as beneath it; and King James o^ blessed
and pious memory has positived the truth of this, Basilicon Doron. 2 Book p.
172.
If a man marry basely beneath his rank, he will ever be the less accounted of
thereafter; whereupon it wa^ ever the counsel of wisdom to avoid debasing, by
entering upon equal Marriages which Pittachus, (...) Laertius lib. 1. Par pari
jungatur conj^x quicquid impar dissidet. Reg. Iuris.
being asked by one, whether he should marry a rich, or a sutabl^ Wife?
answered, by turning the Inquirer to the Boys then at play, and the Cry tha^
was from them to each other, which was Take thou thy like, which the Civilians
accord to in their rule, Like to like do well i^ marriage; for whatsoever is
unlike, discords. And this our Law commends as necessary; and thereupon Magna
Charta, c. 6. and 20. H. 3. c. 6. Command Wards, who are usually men of great
Blood and Estates, shall be married without disparagement. That (...), Stat.
Merton. c. 6. Instit. upon Littleton Sect. 107. p. 80, 81. (...) Plutarchus in
Nuptial praeceptis. (...) Philo lib. de Praemiis and paenis p. 918.
not to people beneath them, villano (...) Burgensi, or to others unmeet for
them, (...) Sir Edward Cook enlarges upon it: for (...) marriage be the merry
age of persons that are willingly, and with a virtuous ^^ncerity of condition
and humor brought unto that Estate, then to be defeated of ^^eir aim, makes
the Estate marriage, the ^^ne of all content, and the depth of mi^^ry. For as a
Glass set out with Gold and ^earls avails nothing, unless it represent (...)
true likeness. So says Plutarch, is there ^ comfort in marriage, if there be
not a ^^ness of conversation and concord of Hu^^ur. For marriage, in Philo's
words, is a ^ind of pitched field, wherein the soul and ^^^son of man musters
up its virtues, to op^^se their contrary Vices, in it Prudence op^^ses Folly,
Constancy Wavering, Frugality ^^xury, Fortitude Rashness and Fear. And (...) to
these Noble designs there ought ^o be care preceding.

I know it is often seen, that as men of ^^eat parts, spirits, and forecast, do
err in point of Conduct, Perit judicium cum res transit in affectum.
Scholastie. Surius in Commentarium rerum gestarum ad Annum 1539.
as did the Emperor Charles the fifth, who, notwithstanding Francis the first
of France, his disgrace at Pavia, and his imprisonment in Spain, would pass
thorough France to Flanders upon a safe conduct of King Francis, and H. 3. of
France, when he slew the Cardinal of Guese, beloved of the Nobility and
Commons, having neither Money, Army, nor strong place after to make good the
fact. I say, as men of great parts often are ove-ruled by providence of
discovery or punishment to over-shoot themselves in other affairs. So in the
great affairs of marriage, in which pas^^sion is an ill guide, and men
conducted to love by the fire of youth contracted in the burning-glass of the
eye, and thence intending it self in the action formed according to the engaged
mind Idea, may be deceived into a captivity to an unmeet object; and yet in all
other actions be prudent. Yet because this i^ the Master-choyce of life, and is
in fluential on all the after-actions and de^grees of a man's condition: No man
re^taines a good reputation, that degene^rates in this from the merit of advise
and prudent; not that any man can avoi^ what is concluded by God to be his
por^tion: nor is the force of resolution and caution vigorous enough to dispel
the impedencies of Fate, which is (according to nature) Quae Fato manent non
facile vitantur. Tacit.
as inseparable from the subject it attends, as the effect is from the cause.
But then men are causal of their own woe, and detractive from their well-doing
and happy enjoying, when they delight to be solely privy to their actious, and
refragate all counsel, which is better from a stranger than their engaged
selves, whose judgment is drowned in their resolved pertinacy; Nemo inde s^rui
potest unde destruitur, nemo ab eo illuminatura aquo contenebratur. lib. de
Praescrip. advers. Haeretic. c. 12.
so true is that of Tertullian, in this case, which he uttered in another
sense, No man can be built up by that which is his ruin, nor enlightened by that
which is his Eclipse. And yet so great is the seduction of man, and so
stone-blind his error, that he is less curious and advised in this, that is the
great secret and sacred concern of his life and well-doing, then he is in
trivial matters, which do neither make him happy in having, or miserable in
wanting; while in this that is the Heaven of Earth, (...). Philo lib de de
victimas offerentibus. p 856.
and the Haven of life, there is not so much the honor of God, which Philo
calls the cement and indissolvable bond of conjunctive benevolence, as sudden
thoughts, and transient humors consulted with, which the very man that uses
them in aid to marriage, would not be guided by in a purchase of Land, drift of
a bargain, loan of money, bodily distemper; no not almost in the choice of a
servant, while in choosing a wife, (to which, as the best of mercies when good,
and the worst of curses when bad, all others are triffles,) men go passionately
and without judgment to like, court, present to, and marry, considering not the
consequence of it. When as God knows in the lesser things of moment, there is
no care thought too great, no counsel too much, to be taken. They will have
their Clothes made by the best Tailors, their Evidences drawn by the knowingest
Conveyancers, their Bonds signed by the solventest Obligers, their Children
taught by the best Masters, their breed of Horses from the best Strain, their
store of Lambs from the best Flock, their seed for Corn from the best Vein of
Land, their Guns and Bows from the best Makers, their Plants from the best
Nurseries: only in their Wives they are not so curious, because either they
love them not, or they care not to breed upon them; or that their breed should
be blessed, and brave after them; but think any thing that is of the producing
sex will serve for exercise of their Manhood, and to bring Children of Charge
and Trouble into the World, to wedge and force them out of it; a Mistress
forsooth they I have choice and spruce, bligth and bright, and to her they will
pay kindness full and frequent; their Lands, Jewels, Persons, Lives, are
Presents too little for her to accept of: But the Wife who deserves as far
beyond the Mistress, as the Sun transcends a pitiful Rush light, must be chosen
for Interest, addressed to by halfes, humoured not at all, presented to but
coldly, accompanied with but seldom; and all this, because not equality of
temper and condition biased the choice, but some sinister Regents, which after
had, are no longer in season and favor. (...). Lib. de Specialib: legibus p.
778.
Which Philo reports, most contrary to the rule of nature; for that teaches to
accept Wives as the best blessing of life, and to account the Children of them
the most Noble and preferrable to rule; and so the Persians of old thought and
did, says that Author.

Indeed every man when he marries, being to lay the foundation of his politic
life, should consider, the convenience, discouragements, and other accidents
annexed thereunto, or contingent thereupon, and whatever he resolves to pardon,
and dispense with the absence of, not to admit failer of love; (...). Hier^cles
in lib. de nuptiis apud Stobaeum. Sermon. 186.
and that upon the surest basis of it, both piety and likeness, which are the
sine qua non's to concord. Likeness, do I say, not ever of person (though the
common opinion is, that the stronger and most radique loves are those of visual
likeness) nor of mind, as to the specifique adunation of mind; but likeness of
shade and compliance, likeness upon fixation of resolution, and testimony of
Matrimonial Oneness; likeness of proportion to the Ornament, and convenience of
the marriage Fabrique; though not likeness of articulate Figure, (...). Dictum
Mytele^norum Thucydid. lib. 3. p. 177.
yet of resolved humor and fidelity. This is so absolutely necessary, that
where ever it is wating, marriage is abused and debased; which Francis son to
John the fifth, Duke of Britain, probably meant, when he being to marry Isabel
of Scotland, and told, that she was very wise? and comely, but had some
imperfection in her Speech, replied, I marry my Wife for Posterity, not for
Eloquence; Talem volo posteritatis causa, non Eloquentiae, satis prudens est
uxor si penulam and interulam mariti dignoscere possit Aegidius Corrozetus lib.
de dictis and factis Memorab.
wise enough is a Wife, and worthy enough to be beloved, if she can distinguish
between the Shirt and Snapsack of her Husband. Intending, without doubt, that
the most wively virtue, next to production of Children, is care of and
tenderness to her husband, at home in kindness, and abroad in fidelity. For
sure it is that greatness of mind is not arguable from little or great, (...).
Arianus Epictetus. l. 1. c. 12.
high or low growth; but it is denominated from the determinations of the mind,
which are great and lasting where a great soul is; according to Epictetus.

This is that which I make the undoubted felicity of Marriage: For though I
know that God can, and sometimes does, by a special overflood of bounty correct
contrary dispositions, and make them harmonize in some expedient, equivalent to
sameness, and prosequutive of the same Noble issue, content: yet this is no
ground for men to relax their care upon such a presumption, that God can do,
because his power and will, though they be one and the same in him, yet are not
ever concurring in the declaration of them to us. God may, and ever has power
to do that which perhaps he wills not; and so in this case it may be, which
denies prudence to venture on the Seas of casualty in a schiff of presumption;
nor is God frequent in his gratifications of so bold and presumptuous
adventures, where there are safe passages to the Port, to affect devious ways,
is to provoke God to leave men to wander and naufrage.

And therefore, if any man of Honor and Worship would be a wise chuser of a
Wife, and be a happy Husband in her, let him look up to God, in an humble
petition, to have his counsel and conduct; and then let him look to the Stock,
the Breeding, the Relations, the Company, the Complexion, the Years, the Humor
of her he wives, and consider the agreeableness of them to his own condition,
according to the Sympathy or Antipathy whereto he may conclude himself happy,
or otherwise: For Gold and Copper, Silver and Tinn, Oil and Water, Light and
Darkness, do not kindly cooperate in a mixture; nay, matrimonially do not mix
at all: for consent being of the essence of marriage, and that not permanently
using to reside in unsuitable dispositions and qualities, their corporal
junctions are but the outworks of marriage, and their souls yet unengaged by
ties of affection, wander from each other to more adamated objects; which errancy
of nature from its true central conjugal loyalty, arrives the proceed of it at
Ideotism, Bigottry, Leudness, and unpleasing deformity of soul, or body, or
both.

Which ought well to be considered by the Nobles and Gentry of England, whose
glory it has ever been, and ever I hope will be, to be Courageous, Beauteous,
Civil, Sage, Noble Englishmen; and as to marry their equals in Birth and Blood
(or in that which is as true Nobility, express and notable virtue, which most
often is associated with Honor of descent, and Worship of parentage, whereby
not seldom great Fortunes, and additions to Families come (as is instanceable
from the learned Cambden, and is otherwise to be supplied to a greater number)
Thorough out every Shire of his Britannia.
every Family of the high and low Nobility having more or less Land and Arms
from Matches with Heirs Females, with whose persons sons their Families, Lands,
and Coat Armours come to their Husbands and Children, and their Descendants.) I
say, the Nobles and Gentry of England, whose Honor it ever has been, and may
with Gods blessing further be, as to marry their equals, so will it be their
Honor also to be virtuous Examples to, and valewers of, their own Wives, their
own Children, and their own Paternal, or other acquired abodes; and to live
with and in them; which they will most contentedly do, when they love whom they
choose in marriage, and devote conscienciously their most generous spirits and
kindnesses to them, and to them only; the fruit whereof, besides peace of
conscience, salve of Honor, increase of Fortune, and popular Renown, will be
contented and kind Wives, (who like Alceste, the loyal Wife of King Admetus,
will die to redeem his life; and like the renowned Queen Philip wife to Edw. 3.
Holingshed p, 404.
whose three petitions of the King declare her a Noble Lady,) Beauteous and
observant Children, in whose faces, and on whose bodies the Sculptures of
conjugal Chastity are fairly and symmetriously wrought, by the Master-hand of
Nature; and to whose minds God the Naturater of Nature has assigned suitable
Virtues, of Holy softness, pure Modesty, unprovoked Patience, humble Meekness,
commendable Thrift, courageous Grandeur, domestique Ingenuity, resolved
Fidelity, indefatigable Goodness: These having an Indian wealth, and a felicity
of Paradise, associating and attending them, will be good seconds to the narrow
Fortunes of younger Children; Nullum majorem haereditatem, possunt filiis
parentis tradere quam rerum been gestarum gloriam, and integritatis ante actae
vitae, Iodocus Chicthoneus. tract. de Nohilitate c. 5. and 7.
as well as great Contributers to the preferment of elder Children: For no
Greatness will stick to marry into a Stock that is worthy: in Parents, Great,
Grave, and Good, and in Children worthy, them to bring into, and breed, and
bestow in the world: For, if a Gentleman that has courage to serve in Arms with
a Prince, be a brother in Arms to him; a Gentlewoman that has Virtue to
deserve, and Prudence to guide it, may is well be a Sister, nay a Wife in Arms
to a Prince, to whom she may perform as good service to perpetuate his
posterity by the fruit of her body, and the fervor of her prayers answered by
Gods grace in, and blessing upon them; as by all other means that reason of
State, and worldly Interest can imagine, set a foot, or bring to pass, to make
him happy.

This I the rather press, because one of the great mistakes and mischiefs of
our Age, (...). Epictetus Euchirid. c. 62.
is dis-esteem of wives, and that upon conceit that any thing, if woman, serves
for a wife, if she have but money, be she never so otherwise incomplete, they
think all is well: when if men of Honor and Fortune would well weigh the
vanity and fallacy of this conception, they would abhor the ^ucacity, and
resolve against the prevalence of it; for if any thing be valuable in this
world, it is a Wife; and if any thing be in a Wife contributive to a perennity
and principality of glory, it is in a worthy and wise wife: not such an one as
that of ^arnard Newmarch, the famous Norman, (who when her only son by
Newmarch, called Mabell, reproved a young Gentleman that was too familiar with
his mother, took it from her son so heynously, that to be revenged of him,
she took a public solemn Oath, that Mabell was not the son of Newmarch her
husband, Cambden Brittania, p. 620.
but got by another in Adultry: This Oath she took before H. 3. which act of
hers, she grievously paid for; for within few years after she was cast into
prison, and famished there:) But in such a Wife as does not only adorn life
with all friendly and contenting Domestique comforts; but conveyes to Posterity
the fruits of Piety, Chastity, Kindness, Constancy, Frugality; and that not
only by imparting so much of her soul and body to them as is Emanant from
Motherhood, wherein her participations are concludable to be more, from her
long fostering them in her, then they can be thought from the father, from whom
they pass in a Whirlwind: but also from those actions of virtue which she will
breed them up to know and exercise: And if men of great value and place would
not debase themselves by vices, and deeds of clancularity in the Gins and Traps
of which they are by vulgar persons snap'd and ecclipsed, they would find their
Honors more valuable, their Posterities more proveable, their Lives more
Exemplary, their Deaths more Christian; for poor Spirits advanced do know
neither Moderation nor Gratitude; Quid jactitas genus tuum? quem teipsum facis?
vaga and incerta est hominum generatio, and quandoque putatur filius Principis
qui filius est culinarii Histrionis. Petrus Blesens. Ep. 3. ad Nobilem.
nor do they think any thing below them, whose souls are so lowly minded to be
vicious; nor are Great Personages by any thing more diminished, then when they
forget unlikeness, the Curse, and Disparage^ent the Cross, of Marriages.

SECT. XLI.
Suggests the Convenience and Commendation of Great men's living within bounds
of their Fortune, and by such frugal living not contracting Debts.
SIxthly, That which I shall further humbly beg of them, is, That they would
live on, and within bounds of their Fortunes: For, to spend beyond what is ones
own, is to borrow of others, and to pay them either in the ruin of the
Creditor, or the misery of their Debtor in his Imprisonment, or what is worse
then it, an ill Conscience, which abuses the Law into Patronage of Injustice:
For what greater abuse can be offered to the Law, which is the Rule of Right,
then to make Prisons her Punishment, to become Sanctuaries to dissolute and
injurious men, whose Vices have run their Fortunes into Arrears, and whose
resolves are to pay them off only by the color of Imprisonment, which is a
privilegiated freedom. And what readier way is there to become infamous for
dishonesty, then to borrow and pay not, promise and perform not, be security
for money, and thereby insecure the money they subscribe to pay; and all this
when they have reason to tell them they ought, and fortune to enable them, to
answer their undertakings. Indeed it is one of the things to be deplored, that
many men of Place and Fortune, who in their places are examples to common
People, and Ministers of Justice and Government over them, should be so remiss
to their own reputations, as to lesson them in their practice the evasion and
prostitution of the Equity and Majesty of the Law, of which they themselves are
Conservators; yet so it is, that moral virtue and conversational Justice and
Sobriety, is less Debtor usually to Greatness then to Communities: What a shame
is it that the Houses of Greatmen should be receipts of Vice, and lodges of
Luxury, nests of Idleness, and pests of Profaneness, which ought to be the
shame and bane of such Courses; Sed hac domo ut cum familia dominum
comprehendam nihil est damnabilius ad meritum, nihil seditiosius ad consortium,
nihil inhonestius ad mores, nihil sordidius ad conscientiam, nihil cul^abil^us
ad famam, nihil perniciosius ad exemplum. Petrus Bles. Ep. 18.
or that those who have ample fortunes should pinch Virtue to pamper Vice by
them. It is the great Cry and Clamor of the People against men of Estates,
That they let their Lands at a Jewish wrack, maintain their Servants at a
thriftless highth, spend their Fortunes at a merciless rate, gratify their
vices beyond measure, spend their bodies and souls for that which is a pitiful
exchange for either, disoblige their Neighbors, neglect their Children,
overlook the Poor, discourage their Minister, undo their Creditors; To please
the state of an humor, and conceit that to look after their Fortunes does not
become them, when as indeed there is nothing so praiseworthy and noble, as to
be aforehand and pay ^ell, and nothing so ungenerous as the ^^ntrary, when the
effect of pride and care ^^sness. If therefore the Nobles and Gen^^y, (whose
Residence is Country, and who (...) the major part of the considerable men
(...) in England, (Officers of State excepted) ^ould either please to look over
their Fa^ilies, and cause them to be over-looked and not augment the Expenses
of it; if ^^ey would raise their Cattle, Bread, and ^^her Viands from their
own, proportion servants to their degree, amputing unnecessary suckers, allow
them free and complete salaries, without taking Fees from their Lords Farms, or
cutting large Thongs out of his hide, supply other provisions at reasonable
rates, by just and seasonable payments, necessitate no dreins out of their
Estates by vices, which suck them dry, leave them needy, and then borrowing,
and then mortgaging or selling; breed their Children to honest and gainful
Callings, and furnish them with competent Portions to follow them; and marry
their Daughters in good time, and not let them out-stay their desire or prime,
till they forestall their fathers intents, and engage to their own undoing. If
they would come to London but to furnish themselves, and see fashions, and
after a whiles stay here, and the Fever of their purse breathed out at their
purs-strings, re^turn to their Country; if this they would do, they need not
be behind hand for mo^ney, questioned in credit, denied to bor^row, dishonored
by Writs, and Summo^ to answer Suits, and give bayl to Act^^ons; but would be
rich, full of credi^ free to prefer their Children, and to kee^ their Estates
from Engagement; and (...) nothing to full and free living, would the^ be
wanting.

But the misery is, there is nothing thought so un-genteel a quality, as
honorable Thrift, and virtuous Frugality, the best title to which, that most
of the high-flown spirits give, is narrowness and misery of nature; when as the
discreet and creditable Thrift (for I commend no course or port of life beneath
the degree of Nobles and Gentry) is the only display of true Oeconomique
Magnificence: For as he that over-sayls his Bark, or over-lades his Boat, will
sink them; and he that over-stocks his Ground will starve his Cattle; and he
that over-charges his stomach will surfeit his body, and ruin those which he
intends his health good to; so to overcharge an Estate, and make it answer more
rent-charges then it can defray, is to destroy and null it. And therefore, when
as men will study beyond their strength, and lift above their power, and run
beside their breath, and wrestle beyond their match, there is more desire then
discretion expressed. So, when ^en live and spend beyond their ability and
degree, their necessities will become their punishment sooner then their ex^ess
therein be accounted their Magni^^cence. Indeed it is a brave humor, to be
free and generous, and it well becomes Royal minds to appear in Royal actions.
But then the actions that men Royally do must have a rectitude of Justice in
the end, and in the means to it. If Alexander give a Talent to a Cynick, that
desires only a mite, Alexander has considered himself right in giving what
becomes him, whose the Talent was; but if Alexander had had of his own but a
Mite, and gave a Talent which he borrowed, and knew not how or when to pay, the
Magnificence of the gift is no addition to its Donor, though a pleasure to the
receiver; men may be free of what is their own, but to do great things by
contracting debts which are not possible or probable to be paid, is to be
Generous and Noble in the sense that Solomon the Great Turk was Magnificent,
who throws away 80000. men at Vienna, and yet went without it, and brought
500000. men before Gouza, losing a good part of them, and got it not, though a
small Garrison: It Is to be magnificent by sacrificing men's lives to satiate a
humor, and to violate sacred faith to please a lewd Bassa, as his Magnificence
did in the case of John the King of Hungary, Turkish History p. 712.
and his Wife and Children. As this was Magnificence in Soly^man, so is living
beyond men's abilities Generosity and Nobleness in them, and no otherwise; for
though extraordinary cases may make wise men evade their limits, and exceed
their boundaries; yet is such profuse erogation in them no greatness of spirit,
but the unhappiness of their encumbrance, and the consectary of unprofitable
accidents cogent thereunto; that's true Nobleness of mind which keeps Vice lean,
and Virtue full; which can deny it self to promote a general good, and abate
superfluities to advantage Virtue in Men and Things.

Mistake me not, I beseech you, O Nobles and Gentry, as if I were senseless of
your avocations, or knew not Ye that have great Estates, great Honors, great
Relations, have great temptations, and great expenses attending them; I know
not England, nor the Great Men, and Estates in it, so little, as not to
consider these as their apologies and defalcations: but have ye not, O Nobles
and Gentlemen, great Fortunes, and high Tides of Revenue, to set you a float,
and bring you off these quicksands? are not your Estates well napp'd with
Timber, and well laden with Mines and Minerals? have you not Casualties,
Offices, Royalties, Alliances, and other means to bestow and prefer Children,
then meaner men have, whose Estates are less complete, and accommodated with
casual profits then yours are; and if so, how comes it to pass, that you are
wanting, and needy of money, when others less Estated and Nobly living also,
are in Cash, and can give ready Money Portions, and make decent settlements on
their children, without selling Land, felling Wood, signing Rent-charges,
granting Lives, passing Leases, or enfranchising Coppy-holds; which are Docks
and Bars to the Royalty and Freedom of Estates: when many of ye are fain to do
some of these in every childrens dispose, or other sudden change in their
lives: Whence, O whence can this disparity be, but from the ones frugality and
resolution to look after, and live within compass of his Estate, and your
pleasure and inadvertency, rather then Gods curse, unless it be a curse (as it
is very like one) to live above the rate of prudence, and the Income of ones
Estate? The benefit of avoiding which, those Lords and Gentlemen know and find
who are their own Bailiffs, Treasurers, and Overseers, that is, who take
account of what their servants do, and of what they do not, and adjust the
proceed of their receipts and payments.

For Fortunes, like Cattle are best in ^ase, where inspected by the masters
eye, and their Children and Tenants are best provided for, and dealt with,
whose fathers and Landlords are frugal and forehanded men; who need neither to
wrack their Lands, require their Rents before pay-day, or draw their Tenants
into engagements for them. Nor are children tempted to pray for their parents
deaths, or prey upon their parents credits, to supply their short allowances
from their parents; when their parents living within their bounds, save the
matter of such relief, and yet are in statu quo ^s to their Lands; so great
advantages come not only by the real, but even reputed forehandedness of
Noblemen and Gentlemen, that in letting of Lands, marriage of Children,
Purchase, choice of Security for Money, cheapness of House-accomodations; yea
in the common love and talk of the Country, it is a great grace and
furtherance: for it is one of the great leures of the common Peasants to
Markets, to talk of men and Country news, over the Pots and Pipes of which
meetings they will arrogate the making men Angels or Devils, rich or poor, as
they find them free or straight, needy or aforehand; so potent is the Purse of
great men to purchase their adoration and good word, that there is no secret in
Country life more gaining and useful, then not to be known to want money; for
he that does, shall be pelted with as many detracting verdicts of the
high-shoos, as they have Tongues to utter, Ears to hear, Opportunities to meet
with, and envy to detract from a needy man, who shall need no other misery then
to become cheap in his Country neighbors thoughts, and to need their supply
before he may command it as his due. For as rich Princes, and sage, in the
treasuring up their Revenues, and other accessions, never shall want love from
the subjects they oppress not, nor fear hatred from the Foes and Traitors they
are able by themselves to reduce and repel; so shall great men never be abated
the good respect and character of those they live amongst, or deal with, where
they spend nothing but what they can allow, and not pinch or defeat them that
are to subsist upon what they serve in to support that greatness. Which I hope
in the main irrefragable, makes me (in conclude to live within bounds of
Fortune and degree is worthy Noble and Gentlemen's consideration.

SECT. XLII.
Advises Great men, To conform to the Laws, and to be Patrons of Order and
Virtue.
SEventhly, I do heartily beseech them to conform to the Laws, and be Patrons
of Order and Virtue: For the Law being the Standard of right and wrong, and the
size, according to which Order and Virtue in its demonstrative and referential
capacity is stated, for Great men not to be Presidents of conformity to, and
propagation of it, is unbecoming them. And since the Laws, Culpae genus est non
^e fecisse quod summum. Theodoric. Ep. 5. Var. lib. 3.
the measures of good and evil in every Nation, are contrived by the Council,
and promulged by the Majesty and power of the Nation, not to conform to them is
to refragate the visible Divinity and express Image of God in the Nation, and
to sin against the light of humane Nature, in the contexture of civil
Societies; to which Laws are as necessary preservations and furtherances, as
Food is to Health, Air to Motion, Water to Nutriment, or any thing is, that is
necessary to the being and well-being of creatures: and thereupon though men
that have protection by, ow ex debito subjection to the Laws, Hot enim intrarem
in curia nostram decet, qui ad primos ho^ores non expendunt meritum suum, sed
cum magna susceperint iterum majora pro^erentur: haec est enim gloria, haec
indubitata sententia, frequenter potuisse mereri, per quod Homines constat
ornari. Alatharic. Rex apud Cassiod. lib. 8. c. 22
as Tutelars to them, yet are Peers and Gentlemen more especially obliged to
assert, and subserve the Laws, because they are in some measure the Law
Contrivers, Regulators, and Passers; and how ludibrious will the Nomothetique
power be made to be, when the Law is by such remarkable men traversed and
impleded? It Is no good character Petrarch give of some, nor is it at all
suitable with true Greatness, In their chairs they are dogmatica, In Cathedris
Philosophantur, in actionibus insaniunt, praecipiunt aliis, praeceptisque suis
primi obstant primi legibus a se latis derogant, and signiferos se professi,
primi ordines deserunt, primi virtutis imperio rebella^t. Petrarch. lib. 2. de
vita solitaria Sect. 7. c. 1.
in their actions they are lewd, they command to others what first they
themselves resolve to disobey; they profess themselves Chief^ains of
Athletiques for the Law, and throw down their Gantlets in defiance of all
Opposers against it, and God help them, they are the Master-rebels who will not
be subject to the virtuous mandats of it; so much of Volusius Metianus his mind
and pride are they, that they take pleasure to boast that there is no law in
the world that they know not, rather then in doing according to what they know;
Die mihi Ma^gister est ne ulla lex in mundo quam praestes and observes. ^uevara
lib. 1. c. 3.
as M. Antoninus smartly replied upon his vapouring Tutor.

It is of consequence therefore, that Great should also be good men, and good
in observance of, and obedience to the Law; for as when Salt has lost his
savor, it is unsavory: so when Lord-lieutenants, Deputy Lieutenants,
Parliament Men, Justices of Peace, and all Officers of Justice, are not
exemplary, in not offending the Law, the Commons will be less careful, and
contented to be obedient to the Law; which wise King James of famous memory
considering, applies to his Son thus: Therefore my Son, since all people are
naturally inclined to follow their Princes example, Basilicon doron. 2. book p.
166.
let it not be said that ye command others to keep the contrary course to that
which in your own person ye practice, making so your words and deeds to fight
together; but by the contrary, let your life be a Law-book, and a Mirror to
the people, that therein they may read the practice of their own Laws, and
therein they may see by your image what life they should lead. Thus wrote he
who knew in book and practice what consequence the example of Great men's
conformity to the Law is: and thus has Greatness with Goodness ever demeaned it
self. For though privilege is by the Law due to it, (...). Arrianus Epictetus
lib. 3.
yet not to take it when it may be taken, but to live and do above common
persons, in exemplarity of Piety, Justice, and Integrity, is chiefly and most
unquestionably Heroic. Which Ciala Bassa followed, when there being a custom
in Constantinople, that the owner of the house, with all his family whose the
house is, first set on fire, should be burned for his negligence; and it happened
that in the Emperor Mahomet, father to Achmet, the Serail was set on fire; he
very bravely presented a petition to the Emperor, Tu^ kish History p. 13^2.
that this custom might be abolished, holding it unjust that other men should
be put to death, and the same be let pass in the Emperors own house. Thus did
the brave John of Gaunt Beaufort behave himself, temps R. 2. for being by the
King created Marquess of Dorset, which H. 4. in hatred of R. 2. deprived him
of, the Commons of England in Parliament loving John of Gaunt very dearly, made
earnest suit to H. 4. that the said dignity of Marquess of Dorset might be
again restored to him: but he himself distasting this new Title, and never
heard of before those days, A rare President. Camb^en Britannia p. 217.
utterly refused the same: which probably he did, not more to avoid the envy of
a new ^oyned Title, then to show his voluntary ^^bmission to the Law, which had
damn^ed it, and in whose judgment he was to ^xquiesce.

For, next the mercy of God in good Governors and good Government, no^^ing can
be a more real help to Reformation and Ease of Government in this Nati^n, as at
all times, so more especially now, ^hen Great Men's regularity and exempla^^
Virtue; (a good and laudable life is the ^est Herald, and makes the most
popular ^roclamation of Nobility and Generosity,) which will serve the King and
his Laws ^ore by the fame and attraction of it, ^hen by all the noise of
Titles, the raunt^^gs of Visceration, and the luxury of car^ival Hospitality;
for the Commons of ^ngland are knowing, judicious, and wellgiven people, and
they are not cogg'd unto belief of good from those that are not good in their
souls and lives; nor do they ^illingly subject to Laws or Government ^^nded to
them by men obvious to their ^^ception, or taken by them, for loose and
^^eligious: But where a sober and learned Prelate, Baron, Parliament Man,
Justice, (...) Gentleman dwells, and is active, it is ^erceived the Country is
more orderly then elsewhere; for those Great Men's actions, are the Commoners
Rules, and they are ashamed and afraid to provoke Power where Comorade to
Virtue. It Is a notable Note Platina inserts in the life of Pope Paul the Third,
who was a wise and worthy man, Nulla unquam a multis saeculis comitia
sincerius, simplicius, concordiu^ve, inita peractaque suntquam nullo livore
protracta, nullo ambitu corrupta, nulloque demum met^ precipitata fuere.
Platina in vita Pauli tertii.
and showed his judicial goodness in this, That he kept the Conclave sincere,
single-hearted, and united; so that, as Sentences therein were not
precipitated, so neither protracted, but calmly and impartially expedited,
which was not wont to be the Character of Popes. In like manner, if the Nobles
and Gentlemen in their Precincts and Jurisdiction be knowing, and diligent, how
easily, and with general acclamation may they lead the* willing, and convince
the obstinate to a ready obedience? And if the Fear of God be in a loyal Great
Man, and when he sees men offend God, he can convince them by the reason of a
Religious Argument, and make their souls tremble by pressing the Law of God
violated by them upon their consciences, and touch them by the dint and dart of
God in their tender parts; (which (...) Tutouring of Gods, (...) in Mino^.
Plato calls (...) Gods Scepter and Power in good men's Custody and
Dispensation:) Then are the people readily awed by them, and become useful to,
because obedient according to Law and Policy of Government; (...). Arrianus
Epict. lib. 3. c. 24. p. 333. Ed. Holst.
nor is there any rigor that can so prevail with the people of England, as
this swasion of conviction from Virtue and Piety in those that are Governors,
and ought to be Examples and Promoters of it in others, which Petrus Blesensis
made excellent use of in his Defense of his Chaplinship to his Lord His then
Grace of Canterbury, which was aspersed by a Schole-Master, as a life of
lazyness; though he evades the taunt, and vindicates the truth thus, In the
House of my Lord the Archbishop of Canterbury, In domo Domini mei
Cantuariensis Archiepisc. viri literatissimi sunt, apud quos invenitur omnis
rectitudo Iustitiae, omnis cautela Providentiae, omnis forma Doctrinae; Illi
post Orationem, and ante Comestionem in lectione, in disputatione, in causarum
decisione jugl^er se exercent, omnes questiones regni nodosae referuntur ad
nos, quae cum inter S^cios nostros in commune auditorium deducuntur,
unusquisque secundum ordinem suum sine lite and obtrectatione ad been dicendum
mentem suam acui^, and quod illi conciliosius videtur, and sa^ius de vena
subtiliore pr^ducit. Petrus ^lesens. Epist. 6.
there are lodged continually the most learned men, with whom is the
uprightness of Justice, the wariness of Providence, all good method of
Learning: these, after Chapel and before dinner do exercise themselves in
reading, disputing, and stating ^f Judgments; all difficult and knotty
questions are referred to our resolution, every one in our common meeting
according to his Seniority and Place, declaring what he most judiciously and
with greatest weight of reason conceives: thus Blesensis. And by this he purged
his life from Idleness, and his Lords house from uselesness. I say, when
Greatness is thus advantageous to the public, it comes with all the force of
prostration upon every thing that opposes it.

This I would not be thought to present under any notion less generous then
public good, and serious courage for Piety and good living, though it be by
some branded with the Title of Puritanism or Phanatacism: For though I know the
Donatist or Gnostique in any man is a shrewd advance to antisubjection,
Venistis rabidi, venistis irati, membra laniantes Ecclesiae, subtiles in
seductionibus, in aedibus immanes, ^ilios pacis ad bella provo^antes, de
sedibus suis multos seci^^is extorres, cum conducta manu venientes. Basili^as
invasistis. etc. Optatus Milevitand. lib, 2. p. 54, advers. Donatistas.
and to meditative Rebellion, and Schismatical disunion, and men of such
deceitful Sanctity, and Pharisaical vapor, are pests to Societies, and dead
flies in the Noblest politic Composition: yet is Holiness and Morral
exactness of conversation, in any man, so proper a companion of, and obliger to
Loyalty and subjection to Government, that it is impossible to find it separate
from it, or to expect truth of fidelity upon Noble grounds any where but in
such well tempered and well instructed souls. And therefore to rebuke those
Hot-spurs, who think S'blood, S'wounds, Rammee, Damme, (words not for a
Heathens mouth.) Those that think to Drink, Drab, Raunt, Profane, the only and
best Cryterions of loyalty and trustableness, Vbi enim regnat ebrietas, ratio
exulat, intellectus obtunditur consilia devian^, consilia subvertuntur. Petrus
^les. Ep. 7.
do I profess my prealledged sense, That the King is best and most effectually
served by Pious, Quorum exitio intelligi possit eorum imperiis Rempublicam
amplisicatam qui Religionibus paruis^ent. Cicero lib. 2. de Not. deorum.
Moderate, Sober, Learned, Well-directed Gentlemen, whose resolution is to
observe the Laws themselves, and thereby to invite others so to do, Note this.
or to shame and punish them that obstinately oppose themselves to it: Quod me
corripi putes affectio est, ideoque mihi acceptiora sunt vestra verbera, quam
eorum ubera qui me lactant. Idem Ep. 6.
For as he is not a good man that desires to live without Law; so, he is not a
good Subject, that having a good and just Law, dares wilfully and propensedly
violate it; Nor does he deserve any better Title, then singular and proud, Adeo
non erit Christianus qui eam negabit quam confitentur Christiani, and his
argume^tis negabit, quibus utitur non Christianus. Tertullianus lib de
Resurrect. Carnis, c. 3.
who vehemently reasons against National constitutions, though they conclude
his private liberty and judgment; for there must be in the Nation some Civil
ultimate Judge, which surely is in England the great Judgment of the Nation,
the King in his Parliament, and by them particular Subjects must be bounded in
their judgment of Civil duty to the Laws of their Establishment: And I pray God
I may live no longer then to see the Law in power and credit, against all
opposition of private and seduced spirits.

SECT. XLIII.
Commends the Meditation of God, Death, and Judgment, to Great men in their
Conversations, Actions, and Counsels.
EIghthly, and lastly, I do humbly commend to the Nobles and Gentry of England,
That in all their Lives, Counsels, and Actions, they would think of God, Death,
and Judgment. Of God, the Sovereign being, whom to know, is life eternal; whom
to love, is to be holy; whom to live with, John 17. 3. Chapter 14. v. 15.
is to be happy. Of Death, the common and inevitable state of mankind; into
which the greatest pride, and gallantest pomp must be resolved, and with which
be veyled and vanquished. Of Judgment, the Just Assise, wherein distribution
shall be of rewards unutterable, of Torments intolerable. These three well and
thoroughly debated, and then applied, as incitations to Virtuous and Godly
demeanours, and dehortating terrors to the contrary, will be notable both
Defensatives and Cordials.

Concerning God, though the thoughts of him are precious, yet there are some
that have a specifique tendency to the whole latitude of godly life, and godly
action; being not only Therapeutique and Medicinal, to heal the flaws and
gashes that the violence of depravation has made in the soul, but Energical and
Incentive to exercise of spiritual faculties to spiritual purposes. And these I
suppose may be reduced to five heads, (in which the whole of a Christians
meditation of God, in order to sins anticipation in its prevalence over man, is
most effectually visible,) The purity of Gods nature, the power of his Hand,
the preception of his Eye, the obligation of his Mercy, the severity of his
Sentence. These well considered, and applied, by that serious digestive faculty
that sincere piety discharges its thoughts into, and from whence it draws forth
its Spiritual Artillery upon occasion of Spiritual conflict, and Satan's
temptation, make the first degree of my commendation of this Head to Great men's
meditation.

1. The purity of Gods Nature is the ^ourse and Womb of all purity; for the
created Purity, being but a Ray of that Purity increate; as to the quantum it
is short, to the quale, it is incomparable to it: God is pure Fontally, as
Purity is his Essence, and as Purity is in the verity, though inutterability of
its being. Thus pure he centrally himself only is, who is light, and no
darkness. Now, in as much as to this Divine purity there is no possibility of
attainment, 1 John 1^ 5. In Deo est magnitudo virtutis and perfectionis non
autem magnitudo molis. S^us. Thomas part, 1. q. 42, art. 11.
because it is incommunicable, (assumption of Manhood into the Godhead, being
only in the Hypostatique union of Christ, and without possibility of after
condescension or assimilation; that which of Purity ^s attainable by man,
(being but a following of his president, and an obedience to his precepts,) is
yet as close an access to God, and as full a price for glory as Mortality can
attain to, or offer for it.

And therefore since God is perfect and unalterable purity, as his command is to
be pure, so his acceptance is according to the truth of purity in men and
things. For so far, and no farther does the purity of God admit mortality, as
it is defecated by purity of intention and sincerity; God, that made the heart,
loves purity in the Cabinet of his Residence, and Treatment; and therefore,
^eb. 11. 6.
as he that will come to God, must believe his being, that he is: so he that
will converse with God, must be pure, as he is, For God hears not sinners;
John 9. 31.
nor does purity correspond with defilement: and thereupon thou art, 1 Pet. 1.
15, 16.
O man, by Gods purity called upon, to be pure as he is, if thou will be happy
as he is, Matthew. 5. 8.
because blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God. And as thy
heart, so thy deeds must be pure; nay, if the heart be upright, the Emanations
from the heart (transports and temptations only excepted) will not be halting,
or downright lame. Christianity is a votal regularity, a holy Order of
reclucism; Note this.
a temporal exinanition; it is an abstraction of the soul from the body of sin,
and an oblation of all that is worthy, to him who is worthy all; because Wise,
Pure, Merciful, Powerful above all. And thereupon the consideration of Gods
Nature, has an avulsive operation; it makes the Christian sit loose from, and
be indifferent to this world, 1 John 2. 15, 16.
which is so hostile to, and quarrelsome with Purity.

It considers it self under the vow of God, to be as he is, as far as imitation
of him can have being in it; The true Puritan.
now the serious and practical Puritan commands his thoughts to be holy, Psalm
139. 17, 23.
his words to be edifying, his works to be warrantable, 1 Cor. 14. 26.
his gate to be composed, his pleasures to be innocent, his company to be
Angelique, his soul and body thoroughly spotless. Psalm 119. 63. 2 Pet. 3. 14.
This Notion the Purity of God portends, and the Idea of this it raises in the
mind and resolution of every holy contemplater of, and active man in it. St.
Bernard writing to a Religious order of his time, Quod geritur in caelis hoc
and in Cellis, Quid non est hoc? vacare deo, frui deo, Quod cum secundum
ordinem pie and fideliter celebratur in Cellis audeo dicere Sancti Angeli Del
Cellas habent pro caelis and aeque delectantur in Cellis a^ in caelis. S^us
Bernardus lib. de vita solitaria ad Fratres de mon^e dei.
exhorts them That they would make their Cells Epitome's of Heaven, as men that
were vacant to, and only at leisure to welcome God, and to enjoy him, to be as
Angels Holy and serviceable, that the Angels may frequent and delight in their
Cells as their Heaven. Thus St. Bernard. For I have often thought a Militant
Saint in mind ascended, is Heaven Triumphant in content and transport
descended. And the grace of us pupils in Earth is the joy of those Angels, Our
Guardians, in Glory.

And how should it be otherwise, but that the consideration of Gods purity
should transform his to be pure, who are commanded to it, as their principals
enaction, and are enabled to it by their Principals adjutancy and
corroboration^ Fer it is God that works both to will and do purity. Contemplate
then, O ye Nobles and Gentry, what purity is; that it is the patefaction of
God, and the accommodation of his ineffability to humane under^tanding, and the
sublimation of the soul (...) life, to that achme of rarefaction, that is ^xxt
degree to perfection it self; and then there is argument enough to draw your
desire and compensate your vehemence.

Look, O look upon God as altogether ancircled with purity, and not accessible
^o, without it; and thereby consider the consequence of that grace which is so
gra^ed with neerness to, yea oneness with God. Say to thy soul, is God pure?
Yes, bure, and therefore God; How pure? All ^ure; How can he be not all pure,
whose being is purity, and without whom purity (...) nothing? for what it has,
it has from ^im: His Eyes are pure, Hab. 1. 13. his Word is pure, Psalm 12. 6.
Faith in, and Charity to him is pure, 1 Timothy 1. 5. His blessing is upon the
pure in heart, and way, Psalm 119. 1. Yea, there is nothing beloved by, or
abiding with him, but is pure; his Religion is pure, Iam. 1. 27. his Wisdom is
pure, Iam. 3. 17. his Saints minds are pure, 2 Pet. 3. 9. his Jerusalem is
pure, Revel. 1. 8. the gold of it pure the water of it pure, Rev. 22. 1. the
light of it pure, Rev. 22. 5. his Ways, Spirit, Attributes, all pure: And if
the Principles of Wisdom direct men to attain their ends by the conduct and
employment of proper and adequate mean^ thereunto, then to enjoy the purity o^
God, as it is God, that is to see and be with him in glory, is to becomepure.
This meditation sadly thought upon and pressed up^on the soulary powers, is
able to traduce more the vanity of this world, then any enamourment can commend
it; for in that it is a creature of so pure an Architect, and is so loveless,
because so unlike its Creator, it is then to be hated and avoided, not only
because it is impermanent, but also more chiefly as it is the snare and
diversion of purity.

But if the Purity of God be not, O impure Christian, thy shame; yet know, that
the Power of God ought to be thy restrainment and curb: Consider his power that
made the World, and all in it; and can dissolve it, and make that not to be,
that is misused to so ill purpose; this Power of God is his Thunder and
Lightning after the Former, his Still voice neglected and depraeciated; by this
Terror of his Power is he in the eyes of the world glorious, Deuteronomy. 9. 19. Job
37. 23.
Exodus 15. 6. By this display of his Grandeur does he cherish his dejected
ones, who therefore praise him for their comfort by, and protection from it,
Psalm 21. 13. Psalm. 59. 16.
By this Reyn and Bridle does he moderate the world, and repress the
Phae^ontique hurry of it, Psalm 66. 17. From this does he batter down the
confidence, and damp the merriment of his enemies, Psalm 50. 22. According to
this is he had in awof those that are too wicked, for reason to work upon, or
for death almost to Master.

Consider then, O Nobles and Gentlemen, the great Diana of your boast, Malos
principes faciunt nimia licentia, rerum copia amici improbt, satellites
detestandi. Vo. piscus in Aureliano.
the rock of your confidence, not only mated, but even undermined. If your
actions are so craftily manadged, or your persons so high in favor, that the
Tribunals of the world can neither discover your guilt, nor punish your
greatness, yet there is a hand of power stronger then your whole loins, which
can reach what ever its eye discovers, to revenge the insolence, and rescind
the contextures of their enmity. Nothing more becomes High blood, and Great
place, then to understand God and its self aright, and to entrench nothing on
that prerogative which can as soon remedy its injury, Eccles, 5. 2.
as discover it, If God be in Heaven, and we men on Earth; if he be absolute,
infinite, in all attendencies of reward and punishment; if the whole creation
be his Army, the Angels his Janissaries, the Elements his Bailiffs, and his
creative word recalled, determines the commission of life and being: What
madness possesses the Viragoes of flesh, and the Furious drivers of this
sublunary World, That they live in contempt, speak in contradiction, enjoy with
forgetfulness; when all these repasts to life are but Flowers of pleasure,
which God pleases to bedeck his Garden and Nursery with, to entertain our short
life, and to while out the labor and vanity of it; which though every man must
give account for, according to the proportion of the sweetness and recreation
he has exhausted from them; yet supereminently must they that are the Sons of
the Morning, the Giants of flesh and blood, who run in their lawless races over
all enclosures; and prostrate all seperations; Consider this seriously.
will God, think ye, be easily put off in his demand of satisfaction for abused
Patience, and derided Purity; for ill used Parts, and not used Talents? will he
allow it for a good plea, I ruled according to reason of State, and with
reservation of those secrets, that are neither to be detected nor parted from:
I was virtuous at the rate of the Age and Peers to me that were in it; and had
I done otherwise, I must have been singular; I loved no liberty, but such as
was suitable to my port, and such as those took that are called good Subjects,
Non admittit status fidei allegationem necessitatis nulla est necessitas*
delinquendi quibus una necessitas est non delinquendi. Tertullianus lib. de
Coron Militis.
and good Christians? O but, O ye Nobles and Gentry, consider this World and
Gods Tribunal judges by different rules, and values at ^nequal rates; and
having in your Bap^ism renounced this World, and accepted the Cross of Christ
for your Signature, the ^w of Christ for your Rule, and the love ^f Christ for
your Magnetique; your ^^eerage is by another Compass, and your senses to be
superelemented. This worlds love, joy, fashion, example, content is to ^e alien
to you; not men's examples, or ^our own conveniences, are to engage or ^^gulate
you; but ye are to weigh your obligation and conform to your Allegi^nce: You
are not not to be conformed (...) this world, Rom 12. 2.
but to be transformed in the ^irit of your mind; Matthew 1.
not to revenge, but for^ive enemies. Haec sunt quae carnis opera appetitus
anxietatis and vecordiae actus abominationis and immunditiae exitus
paenitudinis and verecundiae. Petrus Blesens. Ep. 15.
Not to do as the most, but the best do; and to hate those actions which are
troublesome in their desire, abomi^able in their act, penal in their
consequence, (...) Blesensis notably expresses them. And ^f this ye do not, the
wrath of God im^ends you, and the terror of God will ^cede you, and the
comforts of God will ^oid you, and the plagues of God will ^nihilate you. These
are the sentences of severe inquisition, and the Decrees (...) the Star Chamber
of Heaven, Indignation and wrath, Tribulation and anguish, upon every soul that
obeyes not the Gospel: Romans 2. 8, 9.
upon the Jew first, and also upon the Gentile. An^ is not this hand of God so
impartial, (...) sure, so terrible, considerable to your im^pedement and
avocation from sin.

Yet further ruminate the intentness, in diversion and penetration of Gods eye
always upon, always within thee, an^ thy actions, in the visible denudation,
an^ clear scrutiny of thee and them, Heb. 4, 13.
All thing are naked and bare before the eyes (...) him with whom we have to
do. No ab^struse design, no Tenebrious corner, (...) Eclipsed Horizon, no
profound Cave (...) secret from him whose Microscope mag^nifies the least
atome, and whose vehicl^ carries to the perception of the most re^mote object;
He it is that knows the im^ginations of the thoughts of man's heart to b^ evil,
Genesis 6. 5. And as they are wicked, a^bominates them, Isai 59. 7.
Prove. 6. 26. Bringing ev^ upon men, Chapter 66. v. 18.
as the fruits of their thought, Ierem. 6. 19. And if such insect
pullula^tions, and sinful nonentities, as I may (...) say; if such putid
inarticular Embrio (...) are discoverable to his Omniscience, wha^ plain and
full view shall we not think h^ (...) of the daring Effronteries, that chal^nge
the Noonlight; those monsters that (...) begot, fostered, and produced by the
^homoths and the Leviathans of lubri^iy and violence? Isa. 48. 4.
How will the brow of ^iss, Ier. 3. 3.
and the whores forehead, Ier, 17. 1.
have the con^^ence of proclaiming their sin, Isa. 3 9.
like Sodom, ^d not hiding it? Omnia prorsus and in quandam caenosam latrinam
confluxerunt flagitia ne^ vel unum ei vitium deerat, Apuleins lib. 9. de Sergio
Galba.
How will the Worlds ^soloms, that are impudent on hous-tops? (...) the Ammons,
that are kept at distance (...) no lines of nearness? the Reubens, that (...)
parricide their fathers pleasures? the ^^liogabalusses, the Sardanapalusses,
that ^blish their wantonnesses to prostitute ^dicity? Loquebar enim leges
spiritu in illic praedict^s exhortationibus, de terribili sententia distincti
and extremi judicii, and diceham, Quod necappellationis remedio nec
supplicationis suffragio nec action infactum subsidiatur nec all quo
restitutionis beneficio poterat attentari, Petrus Ble^ensis. Fr. 8.
How will the wickednesses in ^^gh places and persons hope for a covert (...)
apology? will he not look upon these ^iscreants, and their mischiefs, with his
^oody and enraged eye, and ride to the ^venge of them upon his pale horse? and
^ite these with his sharp Sword, and ^ound these with his envenomed arrow? ^ill
he not vex these in his sore displea^re, and turn down the lees and dregs of
^ell upon these settled and daring sinners? ^ho have no respect to the Holy one
of Israel, (...) the godly have, Isai. 17. 7. Though they have (...) away the
evil day far from them; and ^ough they say, no eye sees us, and conclude ^eir
to morrow of sin shall be as this day, and much more abundant. I say,
notwithstanding all their braving and roystery, may not God bring a woe on
these sha^dowing their wickedness with wings (...) Isai. 17. 1. May not God
prove to these a Lion of dilaceration, and a Moth o^ corrosion? May not he
bathe his whetted Sword in the blood of these Nobles and Great men, which are
as the Constellations of Heaven, above the reach of earthly contradicting? Yes
sure: for these sin^ and sinners, God may justly Turn the streams of Nations
into Pitch, Isa 34 9.
and the dus^ into Brimstone, and make the land as burning Pitch. And all this
prefational to Hell, the last and unreleasable lodge o^ impenitent sinners: And
this he will do^ to vindicate the perspicacity of his eternal eye, from which
nothing is conclaved^ not the adulterers stolen pleasure, no^ the Oppressors
injustified cruelty, nor the^ Curtizans impudent sorcery, nor the Divines
practical Atheism, nor the Lay-man^ profane Sacrilege, nor the learned man^
withholding the truth in unrighteousness nor the Nobles and Gentleman's
persistenc^ and confidence in wicked pleasures, and beastly sensualities. And
when the eye of God is thus lift up to scorn the scorners of his Holiness, and
to remove from them the pleasure of their eyes? How bitter will the remembrance
of their folly be? and how anxiously will they reflect upon their wisdom,
Knowledge, Greatness, that has perverted them, and curse those ravings of
theirs, that are thus rewarded with their own shame, and their Gods curse. O
Lord, what a Hell will be in the conscience of a sinner, when the fire of his
torment and auguish of his conscience shall be fed by the fuel of abused mercy,
and contradicted goodness: and how shall it aggravate his dolours, and burst his
spirit for very abhorrence, Quid tibi and pauperi sacellano (superbe and Fatue)
Tu eminentiam generis tui tua gravitate deprimis and conculcas, ille in medio
suorum sancta and honesta conversatione praeradiat. Petrus Bles. Ep. 3 ad
nobilem Iactantem.
to see a poor Commoner, a soul that he would not breath upon, look toward, or
give a good word to, when this wretch, whom his lofty looks thought fellow only
to the dogs of his flock, shall be ^iducially quiet, and hopefully courageous,
to encounter death, and shall have a seat at Gods right hand; when this great
and wise disdainer shall be extruded Heaven, and intruded into the place of
Devils?

Hearken to this, In compendiam mittimus mala si presentia facimus esse
judicia. Cas^iod. Var. lib 6. c. 2 1
O ye Nobles and Great men, that too often think of death never ^ill it comes,
and are too often unprepared for it when it comes; who ought to be the Lights
of your Countries, the Tutors of your Neighbors, in all morral literature, the
terrors of your ages Exorbitancies; be not blind Guides to your seeing
Countrymen, be not dead Flies in the oytment of Grandeur, cause not the way of
Honor, and the worth of Blood, to be depreciated by your oblivion of, and
contraition to God, but let this eye of Gods condescension, (in these
distinguishing external mercies, expressed to you above others,) provoke your
eyes to be lifted up to him, in holy gratitude, in humble love, in fixed faith,
in exemplary charity: That you may expiate for the failings of some Great men,
by the virtues of you Great men, that are Great and Good.

And that this Ye may do, consider the mercy of God ought to melt, and the
patience of God to shame, you into this holy Justice to it and your selves.
This the Apostle presses upon his Romans, Romans 12. 1. I beseech you therefore
(says he) by the mercies of God, that ye present your bodies a living
Sacrifice, holy and acceptable to God, which is your reasonable service. Where
the Apostle enforces his argument on them, from not only his Apostolic
condescension, in beseeching them whom he might command, but from Gods goodness
to them, not barely in the mercy of his Ministry, which though he knew
salvifique to them, De quatuor ^iliabus magnae mise^icordiae dictum est, quae
sunt immistio amaritudin^s, substractio opportunitatis, v^rtus resist e^di, and
sani^as affectationis. Sermon de Tripl. misericord. and quatuor miserationibus.
Ostendit uno exemplo ei ritualia perf^ci per res solidiores quae unibris istis
ex adverso respondeant, Iudaei offerunt corpus mortu^m vos corpus vinum, id
ect, una cum corpore actiones ejus, n^m agere est vivere. Great. in locum Hostia
vivens est corpus pro domino afflictum, A^selmus in locum.
yet he magnifies not amongst them, but by the mercies of God, which are
exemplified by Godly sorrow wrought for sin, by defeat of opportunity in which,
to commit it, by gift of grace to resist it, by confirming them in a constancy
of good resolution. I say, the Apostle does not only press them by these, which
St. Bernard calls the daughters of Gods great mercies; but moves them to become
Gods in their bodies fully, no member, no faculty exempted, freely (for that's
offering our selves,) without any compulsion or mercenary respect; and this by
holiness, tending to acceptance with him: From the consideration, that thus to
do, is to be reasonable ereatures, and thus to offer is to offer to God
reasonable service: For if God made the bodies, and has honored the bodies of
men above other creatures, with the inhabitation of reason in them; is it not
reasonable, that their bodies should be devoted to God, who is the giver of the
life and luster of their bodies, by the inspiration of their divine souls, to
quicken their bodies.

And this Gods Spirit provokes Ye to in the conviction of your reason, and the
convulsions of your conscience. That God has made you among Creatures, Men;
^mon Men, Christians; among Christians, Freemen; among Freemen, Noble and
Gentlemen, are cogent exertions of mercy, in retributions to which, your lives
are too short, your parts to low, your fortunes too narrow, to give mercy a
suitable return; and when you do the utmost you can, and above, (as it were)
your selves, if yet you are short of that you ought, how unlike your selves,
and your just acknowledgements to your God, are of ye among Noble and Gentlemen
who by Oaths and Blasphemies, Adulteries, Oppressions of poor Neighbors and
Creditors, indiligence in your Charges, and heedlesness of Gods service,
endavour to provoke God to determine your pace, which is yet as a river, and
your righteousness as a wave of the Sea. Isai. 6. 18.

For when sins of Great men are enormous, Exemplary, Truculent, and the
sufferers by them have no Earthly remedy, God takes them to task, and sets them
home in the fatal return of them, which leaves them wretched, pittiless,
remediless. For who shall gather, when he scatters? who shall bind up, when he
breaks in pieces? who shall power in Balm, when he causes the wound to rage,
and the plaster to be invalid? Remember, O remember, He that has, waited that
he might be gracious; Isai. 30. 18.
and been discouraged any longer to wait, that he might be gracious, has a Fan
in his hand to purge, Ier. 15. 7.
a Fining-pot to try, Mal. 3. 2.
a Hammer to break in pieces, Iur. 23. 29.
and an Ax to hew down, Ier. 51. 20.
impenitent sinners: and such all will appear that are rather vitiously Great,
then virtuously Good; and then, what ever silence, your power, and men's
civility favors here your vanities with, the Truth, the whole Truth of them
then will out; and then shall ye appear to be the sinners whom the
long-sufferance of God has not led into, nor kept in, continual repentance, nor
worked into amendment of life. O therefore forget not Saint Bernards
Meditations, Consider whence you came, Vnde veneris and erubesce, ubi sis and
ingemisse, quo vadas and contremisce Sermon. de primordiis mediis and noviffimus
nostris.
and be abashed; where, and what you are, and be sorrowful, and perplexed;
whether you are passing post, and be amazed, and tremble. And, O Nobles and
Gentlemen, having thus meditated of God, and approved your selves Candidates to
his favor, you will be the better disposed to die comfortably, and appear in
judgment courageously; to die in the comfort of God lived unto, Primo
dominandi spes in arduo, ubi sis ingressus adsunt studia and ministri Tacit.
Annal. 4.
is to prepossess God lived with: It Is to have a chair of connection between
the upper and lower Worlds: It Is to be Magnetique (as I may say) of God into a
Man's soul, and to breath out Hyperhumane Hallelujahs: It Is to contend and vye
with Angels in comfort of condition, rapture of Intuition, and delight of
permanency: It Is to be what God is, fixable on a Created stump, and improvable
into an increated attainment. This is the true Nobility and Generosity that God
designed, our nature little lower then the Angels: For in that he has made us
Kings and Priests to himself by effectual vocation, testified in an holy life
and death; what has be done less then superiorated us to Angels, who are but
ministering spirits to the Elect, and so under service inferior to our
Coparcenry with him in Sovereignty. This is to be in Nazianzens words, (...),
Nobles Indeed, Orat. 23.
not in the sense that is ordinary (...), as referrable to ancient descents and
inscriptions of Monuments of Ancestors, who hundreds of years since were men of
renown, but as Nobles by virtue, and Nobles by the fear of God first in their
own hearts, and then in in the effects of it, Piety in others.

O Nobles and Gentry, how zealous is my soul to bespeak you for Christ's
Virgins, whose Lamps he has filled with Oil of gladness above your fellows in
Manhood? how great a present, and how welcome a boon to my holy ambition would
that Oratory be which might entice you to be Enamoured of Gods mercy, and winn
you to be reconciled to Gods love, and grateful to his Sons condescension and
bounty in his purchase of you? How do I long to obtain a Starr-ships Oriency
in Heaven, upon procuring though but one of you convert to God, upon this my
humble address to you; and (I hope) my honest zeal for you. Be not heedless of
your own good, who are so supplicated to be wise in this your day, for
Eternity; fear not any undervaluation For this prudence, which has the promise
of this, and of the life that is to come. Consider that Golden saying of That
Magnificent Heroique, I care not much to be reckoned among the unfortunate,
Eicon Basilic. c. 23.
if I be not in the black List of Irreligious, and Sacrilegious Princes; no
restraint shall ensnare my soul in sin, nor gain that of me which may make my
Enemies more insolent, my Friends ashamed, nor my name accursed. For never man
served God for naught, nor are the Indempnifyings of the name against
dishonor, and the soul against Hell fire, small seize, or insuasive
motives to love, fear, follow, and resign to God, our trusts for the obtaining
of what is best for us. And in order thereto to do nothing that is contrary to,
abhorred by, or inconsistent with, his Regency over, presence with, approbation
of, remuneration to, Men and Things.

And that, O Nobles and Gentlemen, this humble Application may not savor more
of a weeping and soft devotion, then of a solid reason, and preventive
prudence; give me leave to offer my reasons for this Importunity. The first
whereof is, to alloy the vanity of life, which though it be a bounty of God,
and a delight of natures, yet is no other then a center of Ciphers, which in
their connumeration makes no sum of real consistence, or durable amount. For
it is but a Termer to Gods pleasure, and in a great degree servile to every
accident, the compliance of which therewith does not more beautify and sustain
it, then the contrary does perstristate, eclipse, and null the contents of it;
which Hegesius the Cyrenean Philosopher did so accurately, and with such
affectionate passions, set forth the miseries of, that Many to avoid them, laid
violent hands upon themselves. Indeed there needs no fuller comment on the
nature of life, then that curt determination of Solomans, which comprehends at
once both (...) sum of his own wisdom as a King, and his own misery as a man,
placed in a ^orld, all the arrivals in which are but ^^nity and vexation of
spirit; Eccles. 1. 14. Ch, 2. v, 11. and v. last.
vanity in re^^d of its Elementary composition, and (...) tenuours connection of
sublunaries, which are the arteries of its motion, and ^he ligaments of its
fastening; and vexation (...) spirit, in order to that penal calamity, ^oth
present and future, which, without Gods preventing and condonating mercy, ^t
betrays man to merit, and delivers ^an up to suffer for, while, for the
enjoy^ent of a minuits sensuality, and a few years wander from his chief good,
he not only hazzards, but forfeits and incurs, both the eternal loss of the
best good, and the eternal passion of the worst evil, Gods displeasure, and the
frustration of his bles^^d intuition and fruition.

In as much then as the vanity of life ^easured up in a Beauteous face, a Strong
body, a Learned brain, a brave Fortune, interest in Favorites, Conquest of
difficulties, Enjoyment of ends, Evasion of snares, Gratification of passions,
Exemption from Diseases, prosperity in Families, accession to Honor, and the
like; which are the greatest seize of life, are difficult to come by,
uncertain to hold, vexatious to part with: which made hi^ in Plutarch to cry
out, Where is the cons^^stency and pride of Power? where the great Lydian
Monarch Crassus? (...), etc.
where Xer xe, who glutted Hellespont with his ships? Ar^ they not all passed
and entombed? is no^ their glory ingrav'd with their bodies? an^ all the tumor
of their Equipage vitiated by a putrid superduction of more numerou^ Worms, who
worry and feast upon their Carcases. I say, since Concillorum naturae
participem. Plin. Not. Hist. lib. 2. c. 12.
Hyparchus natures Counselor, and Eudoxus the Suns intimate, and Archimedes
the Worlds Operator, and Solomon the Universal Librarier, since the
Philosophers, Conquerours, Princes, Theologues, Preach. 9. 8.
Artists of the several ages of time, are incinerated and remember nothing of
their own, nor know nothing of our affairs, but are all after the favor,
honor, pleasure, command of life, receded into silence, and laid asleep in
oblivion, what a vanity is it to affect life, or any thing in it, impetuously;
while what is considerable in them, is so coy to obtain, so unfixed to
prosecute? Or, how can men wisely compose themselves to their service, under
which no man is or can be free; Or, lament for their loss, which are thievs to
all that is virtuous, serene, and communicative in us

Yet thus are all the best of sublunary glories, and requests, vexatious and
anga^ious to men; they disturb the mind, they ^^pede the rest, they debilitate
the ap^etite, they bedull the fancy, they distort ^he judgment, they trouble
Friends, wast ^ortunes, corrupt Modesties, destroy Re^utation, deboyst Youth,
seduce Age, in^ect the retirements, and entrench upon ^he devotions of men; and
yet are not ^woyded, but made the Mistresses they Court, the Altars they
Immolate to, the ^dols they bow down before, the Marks ^hey aim at: when God
wot all that these Datisses, have ever in their mouths, (...) their repast and
ditty, (...).
I sing, I fare well, (...) rejoice, is but a vain shadow, a trouble to get, a
torment to keep, a labo^ynth to engage in, a lethe to live to, a ^oss to be
everlastingly ruined for, much like the titillation of Atepomarus that rain
Petty Bellicose King of France, who would not retreat war against the Ro^ans,
till he and his Army had lustfully satisfied, themselves with the Wives and
Daughters of the Romans, which he demanded them to send forth to that purpose;
when as, God knows, and Stories tell us, He and his men had their pleasure of
Women sent out to them from the Romans; but they were but She-slaves, on whom
the French men were so enfeebled, that being layn to sleep to recover their
wasted spirits and enfeebled strength, they all a sleep were surprised by the
Romans and slain. Thus, and thus only, are the snares of sense, and the
pleasures of life, to be accounted of: True joy is terminated to virtue, and
obtainable only from Supralunaries, non capit has pompas humilis domus; The low
roof'd lodge of mortality entertaines no such Gyant-like joys and altitudinous
assurances: which Bernard phrases, Iubilus cordis non strepitus oris, motus
gaudiorum non sonus labiorum, voluntatum non vocum consonantia.
The hearts joy, not the mouths motion, the sense of the souls joy; not the
sound of the lips agility, a consonancy not of syllables and airs, but of
wills and desires. I confess to live, is the greatest and most acclamated
natural privilege; it is that which is the great evidence of natures perfect
work in us, Stus. Bernardus Sermon. 1. in Cantic. Cantic. Sunt ista bona
consequentia summum bonum non consumm ^n tia. Seneca de vita beata c. 15.
and Gods vital word to us; but if life be considered by the description of
those that have clearest light into the discovery and reallest experience of
the result of it, it will appear, is but a vacillating transient futile thing.
The wise Eliphaz in Job terms it a wind, Job 7. 5. and Job in Chapter 24. v. 22.
says, No man is sure of his own life. And David tells us, his life is spent in
grief, and his years (...) sorrow, Psalm. 31. 10. And King Solomon, Who knows
what is good for a man in this (...), all the days of his vain life which he
^^ndeth as a shadow, Eccles. 6. last. And ^^iah professes his Age is departed,
and is ^moved from me, like a Shepherds Tent, ^ have cut off like a Weaver my
life, he will (...) me off with pining sickness from day to (...), even to
night will thou make an end of (...), Chap. 38. v. 12. And when St. Paul ^^lls
the godly, that if their hope were of ^^is life, they were of all men most
miserable, 1 Cor. 15. 19. What does he less then di^^inish this life into
nothing of real good, and true contribution, to good men.

And therefore, if a man will only summon ^s own experience to enquire and
ver^ict this, the result of that Justice which ^^at will do to it self, and its
entrust, ^ill confirm, beyond all scruple, That (...) is nothing but a Sea of
misery, a Ren^ezvouz of cares, a Mint of diseases, a ^^ine of dangers, a Rode
of Misery, a ^^ss to Forgetfulness. Nor is any man ^appy further to live,
Eccles. 7. 14. Chop. 1. 11.
then he lives to ^lorifie God, to oblige men and immor^allize himself; which
they do best who honor God with their Honors, as David, Josiah, Hezechiah,
and all godly great men (...) to do, with their Parts* as the Prophets,
Apostles, Martyrs, Primitive Bishops and all Christian learned Clerks and
Gen^tlemen, have, and ought further to do, and who oblige men by their
examples, wri^tings, and actions of virtuous Charity and diffusive goodness; in
which none of lat^ ages has deserved beyond the Famou^ Pereskius, who, if
Gassendus do not Hyper^bolize of him, was the true Pandora, that ha^ the
collection and amassation of all virtue in him, above the expression of any
Enco^mium or Panagerick, Epist. Philippo Valesio ante opera Gassendi.
and that not only be^cause he was a Mecaenas of Learning, but on that never
did in his life any thing mean o^ little; which, because the most of me^ fail
in, they ought to fall short of the glo^ry of this Divinity. For since they
live as beasts, not men; as Pagans, not Chri^stians, whose god is their belly,
whos^ glory is their shame, whose lust is their law, whose strength is their
confidence whose sensuality is their conscience, whos^ interest is their
friendship, whose falshoo^ is their wisdom, whose shift is their de^ceit,
whose words are snares, whose loo^ are ponyards, whose actions are poisons
whose religion is rebellion, whose faith i^ ^action; because they live in this
riot a^gainst reason; and in this breach of the Peace of their Sovereign Lord
the King ^f Heaven in their souls. Therefore are ^^ey to be strangers from the
comforts of (...) Almighty, and to be tormented with ^uilt, before consumed
with fire.

O Lord, what Monsters are we men? how ^^attique is even Europe in its
production (...) Satyrs, Oedipusses, Centaurs, Apes, Pea^ocks, Lions, Wolves,
Serpents, Adders, full ^^all Venom and Mortiferanism; which if re^^esentable to
sober eyes, in that posture and turpitude of action, in that evidence of
^^onstrosity and Peccant villainy, wherein God sees it, nothing but shame,
amazement, and horror would possess the seers or hea^^rs of that sad spectacle,
and and dismal ^^rrative; Good God, when a man con^^ders, that God has
bestowed upon man (...) share of Divinity, and endowed his soul with reason,
(...). Hetrussio. legati apud Dionis. Halycarnass lib. 5.
against which he ought to do ^^thing, it being the direction and line of (...)
termination, and enlargment; that its ^^te the body is but the ring in which
(...) Jewel soul is set, and life the foyl by which it is set off to a
transparency: Now ^^at men of mortal bodies should have immortal vices, and men
of divine souls have ^^vellish projects and designs to disho^^our the divine
excellency of it by, is ^ strange Nonsense, and Manless brutish^ess; yet such
is the sinful eddy, and prevalent current of life, that it bears every mortal
down the stream of its vanity into the torrent of enmity against, and
displeasure from God; if Adam should be presented to us in his innocence,
environed with pleasure, attended with plenty, exempted from sin, consorted
with a beauteous mate^ privileged with converse with God; and yet This great
model of incarnate Divinity, This creature, that had the Prerogative to be the
Viceroy of God; and had the terror of his Power, and wisdom, upon all the
creatures, who durst not come into This persons presence; (...). Philo de Adamo
In lib. de nobilitate p. 906.
nor, into the view of his Majestique eye, nor deserve the rebuke o^ his
terrifying voice; or provoke the power of his armed hand; if this Adam that was
this all, that God could put into the Power of the second, to himself, to
manage; i^ Adam thus secured, thus accomplished, be considered, for all this
tempted to, and prevailed by, the hising of a Serpent, that crawles on the
earth, and licks the dirt, and the redness and sweetness of an apple^ that God
had reserved to himself upon the tree of Knowledge, Nec Adam de Baradiso
descendisset nisi delectatione deceptus esset. Stus. Ambrosius c. 1. lib. de
Fug. siculi.
separate from him, and inappetible in Justice by him) to forfeit all his
primacy; and prelature, his pleasure and command, his natures custody from
decay and his posterities sustentation in perfection, and inputrefaction, and
to make himself and all mankind in all parts, of all ages, to all purposes,
miserable and sinful; if, I say, consideration be had of this pristine
instance of man's vanity, there will be cause to conclude the life of man to be
a vain shadow; the show and semblance rather then the truth of any thing to be
desired to have, or having to hold.

For, If the vanity of man in his thoughts conduct and life was so notorious in
this none such heroique, who was not made man by the power of Mortal
Generation, but by Miracle of almighty creation; the morning Masterpiece of
Gods Architectonique Power Wisdom and Goodness; how much more vain and visible
will the vanity of men prove in their verticle and declination, when sin has
led them from their central rectitude, so far, and so long? how will not only
Cains murder, Sampsons dalliance, David's folly, Solomon's seduction, Peter's
fear, but also Judas his treas^on, Iulians apostasy, Caesar's ambition,
Alexanders curiosity, Mahomets imposture, Arrius his pertinacy; all the great
and prodigious actors and actions of the several ages of the world, anatomized
and ravelled out in the severalls of their projects, and particles of their
rise, procedure, conclusion? how will these placed in rank and file, and
brought to orderly and distinct trial, aggravate the life of man with sins,
shifts, weakness, wantonness* and make man the Tennant of it, a pitiful and
treacherous subject to reason?

Upon this survey of the forest of vanity man's life, the verdict of its Court
of Air, Jury would be very much abasive of him, and all that comes from him.
How flat would his briskness, how effete his boasts, how inform his designs,
how improper his instruments, how sinful his projects, how frustrate his hopes,
how dishonorable his Reward? Qui vult ascendere, non laeta saeculi, non
amaena, non de. lectabilia, sed plena doloris and ^^etus sequatur. Stus Ambros
lib de Fuga saeculi c. 1,
No insect more deformed, no stench more noisome, no Figure more Torvous, no
Spectrum more formidable, no rabble more unruly, no confusion more amazing,
then the lives of men would be, if they were denuded, and a lecture of truth
read upon the lymphatique vessels, the Cavous veins, the abstruce Meatuses,
the Occult Fibers, the unriddleable Meanders of them. If men were so thoroughly
possessed of the obligation of their duty, and of the dishonor of their non
performance of it, according to the law of their being, and the requiry of
their Principal, they would be ashamed to live so little like, and so much
unlike, themselves.

God sends man into this world to lade himself with the Gold and Silver of
Reason in his Soul, Nuncii vestri a Romana curi^ redierunt. exonerati q^idem
argento, onerati plumbo. Non multum indumentis aut evectionibus honorati.
Blesensis Ep 41. Henrico 2. Regi.
and Religion in his actions. But he returns, as Henry the seconds Ambassador
from Rome did, with no Penny in his Purse, no Pater noster in his Prayer,
having lost the assurance that Faith gives him, to call God Father, and parted
with the Penny of Reason and Religion, that is of great price with him. And
what has he in exchange? the Lead and Wax of Bulls, and Bawbles, much in sound,
but little in signification; so that, if a sober man sits down and considers
the Skepticism, Excentricity, and narrowness of men in their actions and lives;
and views how greedy they are to taint and tarnish the virtuous fame, and
durable consistence of their Persons and Families, he must needs wonder they
should flatter themselves to be wise, under such burdens of sin, and in such
engagements of madness. To begin a war with Heaven, to levy Subsidies on Gods
Subjects, against him their Sovereign; to hope to thrive by Blood, Oppression,
Parasitism, Adultery, Avarice, falsehood, is to make God not good, nor Great.
For if good, he must hate evil; and if Great, punish it: And if God command
Justice, Kindness, Chastity, Constancy, Charity, and Contentation; and has
annexed his Blessing to them: Beatus plane quem delectatio non revocat quem
voluptas non inclinat, qui ad inferiora non respexit. Stus Ambros. lib. de Fuga
saeculi c. 1.
then, because he is Just, he must prosecute the contrary to these with his
Malediction, and disappointment: Yea the doctrine of Morality is so direct
against these courses, that by the teaching of that, there is enough to decline
Injury, love Rectitude, and value Contentation. For the Conquests of Alexander,
the Tyranny of Dyonise, the Factions of Rome, the Gottish Irruptions, the
attempts of Solomon the Magnificent, and Mahomet the Great, the discoveries of
the new World, the Colonizing of Places uninhabited, which were the great
actions of the Worlds curiosity and ambition: though they are good for mankind,
as God overruled them by accidental advantages, yet in the nature of their
intent, did but hatch the Cockatric^ egg of a bird and brat of vanity.

Ask the conscience, survey the consequence of the greatest proficient in
natures secrets and masteries, what he aims at, by his restless and bold
spirit, courageous heart, undaunted enterprises; and he will reply to you, to
be talked of, feared in, esteemed for a gainer by them; and what is that above a
vanity? when the Cream and skimming of that collection of courage and
curiosity, serves but for a present to a curious eye, a flattered ear, an
amorous touch, an enchanting tongue, of a temporary and blandiating mortal,
whose palate devours, whose train consumes, whose foot treads upon, whose
prattle coggs away, whose fruition swallows down, the riches, power, delights,
wits, labors of Men, ^ountries and Continents; and is not t^^s vanity? and the
life of its transaction vanity and vexation? When men of parts, person,
ingenuity, success, grind in the mill of danger, and dive into the bottom of
seas, to fetch thence that Pearl that serves only for a Mornings-draught, or a
bodies Ornament, or a sacrifice to the insatiable Vorago of a Mercurial
Philosopher, who if he had the Indias would exhaust them to feed his fancyfull
intense expensive Fire, which sooner finds out the bottom of his purse, then
teaches him to find the Aurifycating Elixar; and is not this vainity? Yea, when
the gravity of Counsels, the wisdom of studies, the results of Negotiations,
the force of Armies, the pleasure of Countries, the power of Governments, the
prevalence of Words, the prudence of Actions, and all that is additional
hereunto, is but preparatory to death, and departure from his world, wherein we
shortly sorrowfully, sinfully live, is not life a vanity and vexation? And
since the wisdom and power of the world with all its accumulable structures and
artifices, are but to expatiat and adorn man's moment, that with greater pomp
and more visible disgrace he may be outed his part of state and be passive to
his resolution into dust; how vain are our unquietnesses to start, pursue, and
overtake those fugitives, that neither make us happy when we have them, nor
miserable when we want them; To live so as to have our life hid with Christ in
God, is to live above, and to be Lord over, the vanity of life.

And is this, O Nobles and Gentlemen, not worthy you most to think upon who are
deepest engaged in and probably most responsible for the vanity of life? or can
you but think civiily and kindly of him that is your Monitor to this that is so
much your security, renown, interest? And that you may not take my report of
the vanity of life, and the beseemingness of your considering it such, and as
such providing against it; Be, O Gallants, consulters which Solomon, whose
latitude of knowledge was a notable second to his Regal dignity; by both which
he commands his credit with his readers. Truly the light is sweet, and a
pleasant thing it is to behold the Sun; but if a man live many years, and
rejoice in them all, yet let him remember the days of darkness, for they shall
be many; all this comes to vanity, Eccles. 11. 7, 8. verses. And our King
Solomon the second, so experimentally confirms it, who after so long knowledge
of the light and dark side of the cloud of Greatness, Eicin Basilic. Meditat.
upon Death, cap. 28.
sets down this conclusion, As to the last event, I may seem to owe more to my
Enemies then my Friends; while those will put a period to the sins and sorrows
attending this miserable life, wherewith these desire I might still contend, I
shall be more then Conqueror through Christ enabling me; for whom I hither to
have suffered, as he is the author of Truth, Order, and Peace; for all which I
have been forced to contend against errors, Factions, and Confusions. Thus he.
Whereupon I conclude, that if, as Heliogabalus measured the greatness of Rome
by the many Cobwebs found in it, which being weighed after gathering, came to
10000 pound weight; so we calculate the miseries of life by the Impertinent
trifling vanitys of it, there will be found such a mass of them that we shall be
forced to despise our selves who are so by sin deteriorated and impaired; which
was the Sentence of the Preacher, I said in my heart, concerning the estate of
the sons of men, that God might manifest them, and that they might see that
they themselves are beasts, for that which befalls the sons of men befalls
beasts, even one thing befalls them, etc. Eccles. 4. 18.

SECT. XLIII.
Shows, That to think of God, Death, and Judgment, prepares to encounter with
the varieties of humane state here in the World.
MY second Motive to you, O Nobles and Gentlemen, (...), etc. Maxim. Tyrius
dissert. 25.
to think of God, Death, and Judgment, is that thereby you may the better
encounter the varieties of this your humane state; For though God himself be
immutable, and has a permanency of being, by reason of which he is complete
and indefectuous, neither capable of addition to him, or liable to substraction
from him; yet we men, and all things attendant on, useful to, and created for
us, being compound, and Elementary, are not only alterable, (...). Mac.
Antoninus lib. 2.
but are to be made reputatively complete, and according to our capacity happy
by those gradations and motions of ascenr and retrorsion which circulate our
revolution and cursory circumambiency; and therefore Inconsistency being our
conditions punishment, (...). Arrian. Epict. lib. 3. c. 10. p. 285. Edit.
Holstenii.
and in a very full sense ascribable to it, we ought to arm our selves by
patience, piety, and wisdom, against the mo^ion and malevolence of it. This
Epictetus makes the sum of all Philosophy, to be ready and prepared for every
mission of Gods, good or evil; for let us look upon the best condition of us
men, and we shall find it, not only unlike God, who is without variableness,
and shadow of turning, being the same yesterday, to day, and for ever: but
even so unlike our selves, Lege Doctissi mum Gatakerum Annotat. in lib. 2.
Antonini p. 54, ^5.
that to morrow we are not what to day, nor the next day, what the anteceding,
but are turned from one side to another, till we are turned topsie turvey, and
our Proteus repeated change brings us captive to the unchangeable state of
death.

Thus we pass from our first conception in the womb, to articulation, thence to
further mutrition, thence to birth, thence to childhood, thence to youth,
thence to Adultism, thence to Manhood, thence to Old age Declension and thence
to the dust of death; and as our bodies, so our minds and manners vary, we
first are discovered animate by motion then by invigoration, then by expression
of our inward wants by extern Organs of notice; Then we mark what is said and
done, then we imitate, then we enquire the reason, then we judge and improve,
then we design and fabricate, then decline in Memory, and Counsel, and at last
again are Children in Understanding.

Answerable to these are the stations and Agible terms of our lives, we are
apprentices to Mysteries and Studies, before we become Masters, when we come to
be Freemen we profess what we desire to live by, Omnis saeculi faelicitas dum
tenetur amittitur, imo antequam tenetur elabitur. Stus Hieron in c. 38. Isaiae.
Sr. Hen. Wotton p. 12.
when we think our selves settled an accident disjoynts us; then we stop our
leak by another Engine, which we hope more successful, but that fails perhaps
in the meridian or vespers of our lives, when for the most part all Horizons
are charged with thick and unpleasant vapors; and then we give our selves for
lost yet God makes this shipwreck our port, this defeat our victory, this fall
our rise; sometimes in youth we are Princes, and in age Peasants; in the summer
of our lives War^^ours and in the autumn Confessors; while ^^ch scatterers and
lewd, undoing and un^one; in poverty recalled, serious, pru^ent; in sickness
peevish, moopish, nasty; (...) health, good humoured and neat; ^hile in counsel
severe, and short of ^^ech; but in converse affable, and open: ^^ow in the
presence of Kings, beloved, ^^ppy, affluent; anon discarded, out of ^^vour,
despised, miserable; which well ^^ewed and considered, made Seneca cry (...) of
the instability of worldly things, Humanorum rerum circulus hinc inde rotatus
Fortunat^s esse homines non sinit.
and resolve to keep virtue fixed what ever (...) in or near man be volatile,
which would ^e ambitions of our nature circumvolve, and by the restraints of
them prevent ^he Fate of their consequence, men of ^reat emulation would live
more serene, and dye more happy then they mostly ^oe.

Lord, what a Pageantry is this sublu^ary Greatness? what Regal and Pea^^ntly,
what wise and waggish parts does ^ put men to act, whom it neither makes ^^ng
Great by vice, nor keeps mean for ^ertue? What Tennis-balls does it render men
of great parts, and great births, while it leads them to be what they are ^ot,
and divests them of what really they are? When Flaccus Attilius, the great
Favorite of Tiberius, falling into disgrace with his master, shall be bereft
of his wits and bemone himself poorly, and with meanness of spirit shall wring
his hand^ and complain, How am I fallen, that wa^ once the wonder of Alexandria
and Egypt* how miserable is my condition, Philo lib. in Flac^um p, 988.
who a^ now to believe my prosperity was rather a dream, then a truth? I am
deceived, my honors were rather the shaddows then realities of Good, and so as
he bemoaningly proceeds. When Pompey the Great, after the victory of 22 Kings
in the East, Longa ^ita Pompeium magnum vertenti ^radidit Fortunae. Livius lib.
9.
and the government of the Roman Empire shall yet at last be forced from all,
and fly for his life unaccompanied and miserable. When Tomombejus, the great
Sultan of Egypt, Turkish History p. 550.
the first and the last that enjoyed the height of that command, when he who
had warred so successfully, and settled himself so ^irmly, is assaulted and over
come by Selimus, and exquisitely tortured yea, from being the glory of Egypt,
becom^ a captive and a scorn to the very Egyptians, raggedly clothed, set upon
a mea^ger Camel, with his hands bound, le^ through Caire to be derided, and
after al^ stangled with a Rope. Turkish History p. 280.
When the great Bassa Carambey General of Annieaths ar^ my, when overthrown by
Hnninades, wa^ taken Captive, and valued but at ten ^uckets; when the fortune
of Amurath, (...) conquering all that he would, turned and broke his heart upon
the declension ^f it; p. 331.
when Scanderbeg, who was the ^errour of the Turk, and could not sleep ^or
desire to fight him, and that with his ^rm bare; and that with such fierceness,
that the blood often gushed out at his ^ips; p. 424.
yet even this man must become ^eaths prisoner, and his dead body be ta^en in
Lyssa, and happy that Turk that ^ould get any part of his bone to set in Gold:
when Techelles the Hermit, who was so fortunate a General against Baja^^et the
second, p. 473.
and all others, yet comes to be burnt alive at Tunis; when Belisa^ius the
great Conqueror becomes ex^culated, and a beggar by the highway side; and
Dyonisius the Tyrant of Sicily, (...) Musique-master for his living. When we
shall consider the examples in our own Land, of Henry the great Duke of Exeter,
who married the sister of E. 4. driven to such misety, Cambden in De^onshire p.
205.
that he was seen all tattered and torn, and barefooted, to beg for his living
in the Low Countries: And Roger, the great Bishop of Salisbury, taken from a
Mass-priest, and put in highest authority next King Stephen, and yet become so
under his displeasure, that not only his Castl^ at the Devizes and Shirburn,
And in Wiltshire 244.
were taken from him, with all his Goods, Movables and Riches, but also he
himself kept in prison so low, what with misery and hunger, that between the
fear of death, and torment of his life, he neither had will t^ live, or skill
to die. When to these w^ add the Myriads of Examples of al^ ages, which have
been tossed to and from with various treatments, and in various postures of
condition; we may and must conclude, that great is the variety of state, which
God inclines Man to exercises him by, and concludes him in and that it is
rather a wonder, that we have not more and greater, then fewe^ and less;
Considering that our ingenuitie are as Mutable from God, and as fixed to evil,
as pravity assisted by Satan ca^ provoke us to be.

When I consider men's restlessness to do^ mischief, and their impatience to be
prevented it, I bless God that Eustace the Son of King Stephens Condition,
Holingshed p. 60.
to run ma^^ before they enjoy the least of their end and after dye defeated as
he did, is not the condition of such men. And when I contemplate the fast and
loose that men are a with God; they will and they will not* Is it not a Mercy
that God makes not their condition like a storm at sea, full of ridges and
rollings, up and down, like the rebounds and descents of a ball, banded and
touched by a vigorious arm against a marble wall; or a brazen footing? was it
not thus with the great Nevill Tempt. H. 6. Who though no King was, says Mr.
Cambden, above Kings, as who deposed H. 6. a bountiful Lord and Master to him,
placed E 4. in the throne, after deposed E 4. and restored H 6. engaging not
only England in a cruel Civil War, Cambden Britania p, 570.
but himself in those troubles, that made him styled the Tennis Ball of
Fortune. And with Cecilia Mother to E 4. who saw Richard D. of York her
Husband, even then when he thought himself sure of the Kingdom, and her Son
the Earl of Rutland, slain together in a field battle, and some ^ew years
after her Eldest Son E 4. enjoying the Crown, deprived of it by untimely death;
when he had made away her second Son, and his own brother George D. of
Clarence; after she saw her Son the D. of Gloucester aspiring to the Throne by
the murder of his Nephews, and slander of his own Mother, with the greatest
dishonor; and after he had thus impiously obtained the Crown, she saw him
slain in Bosworth field, and those Her miseries (says Mr. Cambden) were so
linked together, Idem p. 511.
that the longer she lived the greater sorrows she felt, and every day was
more doleful then other. When, I say, these examples direct us to many of
semblable import, how much to be admired is the patience of God that these
smart and earthquake providence which shatter all about men's ears, and swallow
them up in the rage of them, do not befall men oftener.

And therefore it is no wonder that the Spirit of God portraits our life as a
Passing so Job. 14. 20. Thou washest away the things that grow of the dust of
the earth, and thou destroyest the hope of man, thou prevailest for ever
against him and he passes; thou changest his countenance and sends him away;
so Psalm. 78. 39. As for man his days are as grass as a Flower of the field si
he flourishes. For the wind Passes over it and it is gone, Psalm. 103. 15, 16.
so Psalm. 144. 4. Man is like to vanity, his days are as a shadow that Passes
away, Nor does the spirit of God Toul this passing bell over Mortal changes,
but Rings it out to its utmost extent and note, of Proclamation, that this
variety man's state is subject to; As the whirlwind passes so is the wicked no
more, Prove. 10. 25. No motion more phrensic and celerous then that of an
Earthquake, and a Whirlwind; yet thus is an impious life, as all men's is,
associated; sin makes the earth quake under its burden, and Gods Whirlwind
scatters the severalties of it, so that it is not consistent, but passes, as
the chaff before the wind: so God causes the terrible ones to pass away, Isai.
29. 5. as the stubble that passes away by the wind of the Wilderness, God
scatters those that forget him, and trust in falsehood, Jer. 31. 25. As the
morning dew, and as the early cloud passes away; as the chaff that is driven
with a whirlwind out of the Floor, and as the smoke out of the chimney, so
shall they pass, that are sinners more and more, Hosea 13. 3^

This instability of terrene station purposely fitted by God, to welcome the
better change to his, Heaven, made Saint Paul, Nihil desperemus, nulli rei
fidamus, cum videamus tot varietates, tam volubuli orb circumagi Plinius lib.
4. Ep. 24.
and the other Apostles of Christ, with the Primitive Martyrs and Confessors,
to account themselves Strangers, Pilgrims, and Wayfaring men here, to use the
world as their diversory, but to lie loose from it, ct long only for their Own
Home, not anchoring in this rode of storms and calms, where ofner shipwracks
then securities betyde them; for as in the case of sufferings they comfort
themselves, that God wills, either affectively, or permissively, all their
contingents; and thereupon they relieve themselves with that spiritualized
which Libanius brings in Hiperides consolating Demosthenes, (...) Declam. 17.
p. 477.
Thou brave man are in servitude, a base condition, much beneath thy merit and
worth; O but Orator, thou art not the first brave person that thus has been
dishonored, nor shall thou be the last, nor art thou alone. If any man
deserved of life, being by his virtue and prudence a singular Ornament to it,
we may think among the Heathens Xenocrates was the very he, who though he had
Learning, and Art of equivocation, and dubious speaking, and could regulate his
steps so even, that none should perceive him tripping: yet was no double
dealer, but so plain and upright that the Judges of his time made his word
equally Sacramental with any man's oath; yet even this man, Vt ita in e^ilio
degens frangeretur.
that was so sincere and useful, did the Athenians sell, and that designedly,
that grief of banishment should break his heart. Indeed since God has made this
Bisk of varieties, in which are hotchpotch'd high and low, sad and cheery, rich
and poor conditions, the lot for our designment, we must accept of, and
Magnanimously manage; knowing God the Lord of the Lottery, as well bounteous in
his blanks, as in his prizes, both being his pleasures to his creatures, whom
contentedness and submission becomes rather then repinings and moans: For since
Kings to day, to morrow may die, Ecclus. 10. 10. and Clowns to day, to morrow
may live to aggrandization, and the projects and resolves of men are never
nearer defeat then when puffed up with the Timpany of mortal pride, to which
God is professedly opposite, and which he mostly humbles by defeat and
disappointment, (as he did in Fransperg, who commanding an Army of desperate
Dutchmen, pertinaeiously marching against Pope Clement the seventh, whom he
threatened to hang, carrying a Halter with him in his Ensign, History Council
Trent p. 42.
but was taken with an Apoplexy, whereof he died, before he came near either
Rome, or the threatened Pope:) Because, I say, these anticipations are possible,
Mundus dicitur quasi undique movens, est enim in perpetuo motu. Stu^ Anselmus
lib. 1. de Imagine mundi c. 1.
and usual encounterers of our resolutions relative to this world, various,
insolid, troublesome, sinful; how prudent is it to make the perfection of
Heaven our ambition to ascend to, by the profession and action of sincere love,
obedience, faith, reliance on God, to draw us by our change to his presence,
and to the sight of the beauty and fellowship of the pleasure of it, where we
may actuate those divine qualities that the varieties of our condition here
deny the freedom of their Omnes virtutes in gloria erunt in actu, non erunt ibi
habitus dormientes, omne enim impedimentum, omnis difficultas omnis retractatio
procul erit ab omnibus virtutibus. Guliel Parisiensis ^. 1 de retribut.
Sanctorum p. 309.
activity to.

And therefore, since this world is so full of vanity, and men's states and
conditions in it so vertiginous and unstable; how necessary is it to press the
knowledge and reverence of God upon you, O Nobles and Gentlemen, whose
Greatness is variable, whose Blood is capable of taint, whose wealth is casual,
whose power is servile to unthought, unheard of accidents? How should ye, whom
God has made companions with his son in the order of nature, Pensa mi Frater
saepissime and scio certissime, quia quos allicit dulcedo saeculi eos occupat
aeterna amaritudo. Amicus hujus saeculi est quicucque sacuailos delecta^ion's
amicus est, Stus Anselmus Ep. 8. ad Helvinum.
the badge whereof is a red Cross in a Field vary, sharp afflictions in a
changable life, to follow the Sovereign of your order, and the Captain general
of your Angelique band, Thorough Honor and Dishonor, Good report and Bad
report? How becoming your selection is it, for ye to make your selves of no
Exin^^ivit se, non formam dei ami^tens, fed sormam servi ^ccipiens. Idem in c.
2. Philip.
reputation, (if to be virtuous and self-denying to a degradation be such;
which if it be, it is a blessed one, above the opinionated Honor of
self-magnification: I say) if Christ has thus exalted your nature in his
condescension and exinanition, go and do likewise, after your proportion; Lib.
7. Ethicorum. c. 1.
manifest to him (...), as the Philosophers words are; your sincere love,
hearty courage, invincible constancy; and by this procure your safe conduct
through this world, Magnus praedator qui ascendens in oltum captivum duxi^
captivitatem nec tamen abstulit quic quam sed magis ipse dona dedit hominibus.
Stus Bernardus, Ser. 1. in vigil. nativ ^ lomini.
to him who is ascended, and leads captivity captive in the next. This will be
to avoid the dangers, and settle the varieties of life into their fixation.
This will be to get that Peerless thing, which a great Statesman sought long
for, followed hard after, but never could overtake in transactions of State,
Animas sapientiores esse quiescendo. For, Sir H Wotton in his Advertisement to
the Reader.
though Princes here in the world often do, and sometimes are constrained,
their opportunities not being able to grati^ie the merits of all their
servants, let many of them lie like deserted Castles unguarded, unregarded,
weather-beaten tattered; Noble in nothing, but in the Moss of time, and the
Moulds of Bullets, discharged against, but repelled by them: Though, I say,
this may be the misfortune of deserving men, Sir H. Wottons letter to the Duke
of Buckingham.
who yet are like those ^ell-fishes, which sometimes, they say, oversleeping
themselves in an ebbing water, feel nothing about them but a dry shore when they
awake. Yet in Heaven, whither, O Nobles and Gentlemen, I hope, by the mercy of
God, many of you will come, there will be, as no preterition of you, nor no
separation from your glory; so will your glory keep your virtues in constant
actuation: Omnes virtutes erunt ibi in effectu and potenitalitate, tarditate ac
difficultate operandi omnino sublatis, erunt itaque in continu^ actualitatis
suae. Guliel^us Parisiensis c. 1, de trib. Sanctorum.
And when you have considered this compensation promised and certain, your
mortal varieties of state ought not so much to fear you to encounter with, as
your immortal stability and unalterableness encourage you to overcome them. And
is not God a good Master, and the thoughts of him a notable cordial to provoke
you to despise, (...). De corpore Christi Stus Athanasius Orat. de Salutari
advent^ Salvatoris advers. Apollinar p. 648. Tom. 1.
and carry you through whatever this life (which Athanasius calls a
sequestration from glory) can inamour you with by its power, or discourage you
in by its policy; which is nothing at all to a good man, whose treasure is
magazin'd where nothing malicious or injurious can come; yea, in spite of
which God will speak peace by the voice of conscience, whose me^^age is as
solacing as that to Leo the ninth was, Ego cogito pacis cogitation^s non
afflictionis, Platina in Leone 9.
I think the thoughts of peace, and not of affliction. For God makes this World
to Holy men what the Father calls affliction, (...). Stus Basil. Selenciae
Orat. 6. p. 37.
The Schole of Virtue, the Safe of Nature, in which are deposited the Laws and
Rights of it, the admired shadows, the victorious Tree of the Cross.

SECT. XLIV.
Shows, That by thinking of God, and the account Nobles and Gentlemen are to
make to him, better preparation is made for Death.
THirdly, Quantumlibt enim vivat diutius, somnium sibi esse videtur, quod vixit
cum moritur, non ergo longaevitatem homo hic habet, ubi quandoques mori^urus
est. Anselmus lib. de similitud. c. 58,
by this ye Nobles and Gentlemen, shall the better prepare for the suddenness
and inevitability of death; which, being the wages of sin, and the doom of God
upon culpable nature, is to be expected till, and welcomed when it comes; for
alas what is life, which death is the intruder upon, and the determiner of, but
a wind that soon passes, a vapor presently dissipated, a tale ending while
telling, a Flower in a moment faded; a Flash of Lightning, as instantly
departed as darted; a bubble that with the least touch is pricked and flatted;
and when life so tender, and mercenary to every trifle, is trod upon by death,
and trampled upon by its insultings, then all the Pageantries of men's visible
greatnesses, gives way to their recess into silence, and forgetfulness: the
meditation of this Epictetus commends to men, (...). Euchyrid. c. 23.
as that which renders life not much to be desired, or death much to be feared;
for in that life is rather lent and deposited by God with us, then given to us,
as Retrarchs notion of it is; wisdom calls upon men to reckon themselves ever
accountable, Homo quippe vitae commodatus est non donatus, sapiens in hac vitaa
sic dies stude^ agere transitorias ut in futura die^ aeternitatis inveniat
Petrarch. lib. 1. de vera sapientia.
and to be willing to return it every moment; which is confirmed by holy Moses,
whose desire for Isreal's, useful and practical good, was, That they were wise
to consider their latter end; and I suppose upon this ground is that of the
Wiseman, Better go into the house of mourning, then into the house of laughter;
because the mourning house is disciplinary of mortality, and referential to
that fatal period, which sin and sorrow, the two unhappy Twins of life, have
set to them: Indeed sin is so natural to life, and so true ^n alliance of
sorrow, that it is not ordi^arily possible to separate their conjuncti^n, or to
disanul their cognation. Hence ^t is, that because we are all in the shadow of
death, life being but glittering death, Job 10. 11. Job 30. 23.
and death as it were but ecclipsed life; all that man who is born, can look
for here, (...) to die; that is, to ravle off the bottom of his days, and to
become what he was, when he was not man, that is, dust; and to ^he expectation
of this, nature and expe^ience do every day manifoldly summon and lesson him.
For in that we see all ^ges, all conditions, all sexes, render themselves
prisoners to death; how Noble is it to die daily, and to cherish life but as a
present good not worth delighting in, or progging for, further then as the
season to sow what in eternity we would ^eap.

Death being thus stated and certain, God has mercifully seconded Nature with
his premonitions to man, how to encounter and overcome the force and fear of
it; and that by not only meditating upon Gods decree, For all men once to dye,
but also by pawsing upon those written parts of Gods pleasure introducing to
the maine conclusion; Thus we are told of Sorrows of death compassing us, Psalm.
18. 4. and of being in the valley of death, Psalm. 23. 4. of being harassed with
the terrors of death, Psalm. 55. 4. Of being brought near the gates of death,
Psalm. 107. 18. before we sleep the sleep of death, and are not these notable
Monitors to vigilance and excitations to watch against deaths approach to us as
a thief in the night of our security, in the Moment of our unpreparation; in
the midst of our dreams of dainties, dalliance and sensual sinfulness? and
ought not the possibility of this dismal approximation of death, in this moment
before the next put us upon prayer to God to fit us for himself, (...).
Arrianus. Epict^t. lib. 2. c. 5. p. 179.
by giving us new hearts, and forgiving us our old sins, that we may be living
for him, dye in him, and after death reign for ever with him. Ought not the
discovery of the truth, that man who is born must dye, Persuade us to live, and
do, and think, and dye as those who have Magnaminity, and are inspired with
thoughts above fearing death; or charging God with indurable love, or
determining goodness; For in that he suffers revolutious to be, he does not
impair his power, or kindness, but improves them, as by them he makes way for
the worlds Circum^erence, and the succession of the Elementary Vigor in its
Specifique appearance, and respective usefulness.

Hearken to this, O ye who pish at the day of death, and live as if ye were
born ever to live, and never to dye, and be judged and Condemned for an evil
life and an impenitent death: Consider this ^ee Nobles and Gentlemen, The
mortality of whose ancestors has made way for your being and bravery; and since
ye being born of corruptible seed, must be corruptible in your bodies, do not
live as if you never meant to dye or come, for an evil life, to judgment. Can
you hold out the seige of deaths terrors, and repel the force of his
assaults? can you peep into the Counsels of the Almighty, and seize his
judgments, for your prisoners? are your eyes all light, your feet all wing,
your fingers all force, your weapons all steel, your armor all proof? can you
make time stand at your big words, or diseases keep off for your grim looks?
Have ye the art to fix the fluency of life, wrapping up its motion in a punct
of consistence beyond which it shall not stir? are ye Masters of those
millions of accidents that your sins have (...) against, made mischievous to,
and masterfull over ye? Can ye corrupt the last Judge? Can ye dwell with
everlasting burnings? Can ye turn your sins red as scarlet to become white as
Wool? Are ye stronger then he that made the world and all in it? Or wiser then
he that rules the world, and all the concerns of it? Or durabler, then he that
is from everlasting to everlasting? If thus ye be furnished, then reproach his
Champion; Marshall your Forces, produce your Artillery, beat up the Drums, and
sound the Trumpets of your defiance, and reverse the sentence of death by
Force, and enact your privilege from the fate and certainty of death: But if
ye have less force to encounter, less prudence to regulate, less certainty to
overbear and vanquish death, (...). Thucyd. lib. 2. p. 158.
then death has to subdue you and your Fancyed greatness, Then kiss the Son
of God, while you are in the day and on the way of life, to death; and so
compose your selves in life against your change. That your death may not become
your torment, nor your dissolution your despair.

O Consider, God holds the glass of time in his hand; and as he has appointed
to ^very thing its season, so is it to act, and not otherwise; and though in
the course of nature, Youth has a larger Circuit, and greatness a probabler
trench about it then age or meanness has, which ^(as it were naked) exposed to
every haz^rd; yet so can God errand accidents, and so leaven the advantages,
that most ^rprise and detain you. That they shall ^ miserable Comforters to
you, What de^ght do Titles, and Honors give to ^e torture of the cout? Or what
ease ^o Treasures or Manors present to the ^exation and anguish of the stone?
What ^eliefe does the fame of strong, beautiful, ^eloved, Minister to the
torment of a ^roken limb? or what comforts come to a ^angreen'd body, from
Fomentations of ^^sts, and Baths of pleasure? Do the ^^lls of Couscience own
suppling from ^ires of Music, or the Hells of despair ^^ap cooling from merry
company? does ^ot God often reach Pharoah's power and pride, with Armies of
Insects, and ^ortify the First born of Countries to ^proach the folly of
Mortal insolence? ^ould Herod's Oratory, that spoke him a ^od, free him from
dying like a man, or ^^ther like a beast? Or Selymus the Firsts ^mbition, who
vowed conquest of Europe ^ of Asia, Turkish History p. 561.
not meet with a Canker that ^ulled him back to burial? He that can ^ise up
death and envigour faintness ^ Cebelits to be his Executioner upon the p. 209.
victorious Amurath; and can disselse the subtilty of Duns Scotus by an
Apoplexy which shall conclude his Learning with his life; he that is the Lord
of life and death, and does whatsoever he pleases in order to life and death,
he only is the Fountain of content and the hope and happiness of the Soul,
and to him and to his joys we are carried by death, and hereupon because death
is beneficial to good men, it is desired, entertained, resigned to, Mors
timenda non est quia vita adimitur, sed quoniam acerba mors nihil aliud est
quam vitae sceleratae Carnisex. dict^m Bruxilli morientis ad Senatu^^* Guevara
Horolog. Princip. lib. 1. c. 6.
by them with all cheerfulness* The very Heathen said, Death was not t^ be
feared because it determined life, bu^ because a bitter death was nothing else
bu^ the Executioner of a wicked life; And Christians, inasmuch as Christ has by
tasting death sweetened it to and victor'd i^ for them, ought to meet it at Gods
time and upon his account, with joy and spiri^tual Triumph, as it is Vehiculary
of the^ to Christ, as it is the conclusion of their sorrows, and the burial
of their sins as it is the expedient that only can unit their hopes and fears,
their faith wit^ their fruition, whereupon St. Bernar^ writing to his friend,
uses this Meditation I would have thee if not escape, yet not at a^ to fear
death, sor a holy man, though he cannot sometimes avoid death, yet ever ought ^
^ beware fear of it; Volo te mortem etsi non effugere, certe vel non timere,
justus quippe mortem, and si non cavet, tamen non pavet, bona. mors si peccato
moriarts and justitiae vivas, Bona mors justi propter requiem melior propter
novitatem, optima propter securitatem, mala mors peccator^m in mundi amissione,
pejor in carnis separatione, pessima in vermis ignis duplicis contritione.
Stus. Bernardus Ep. 104. ad Gualteruns de Calvo mon^e.
for if it be a good death which a good man dies to sin and lives to
^ighteousnesse, it is an ill fear that makes a ^an avoid, so Good an expression
of Gods ^race and mercy, the death of a holy man is Good, for therest he has
from his labors, ^etter for the change he has of his life, his ^bour, his
Company, his reward, best, for (...) security he has against lapse or ^^verter
of evil to him, whereas the ^eath of the wicked man is bad in the ^ss of the
world his Paradise, worse in the ^peration of his Flesh, worst in the worm of
^^nscience and fire of Hell which after it he ^ust everlastingly be punished
in. Thus St. ^ernard.

And is death thus advantageous to ^ood men, then is the thought of death the
^ost necessary and healthful theme, the ^ul at its senses can take Comfort
from: ^ust death come because it is appointed, ^y God the wages of sin? Must
the se^ond death follow where in the sting and ^orrour of it, the first is not
passed? Must ^e day of death be hidden from all men ^at they may always be
solicitous about ^, preparing for it, expecting of it, joy^ll at it? does it
come as a thief in the ^ght, in the cloud and umbrage of a ^ontemned accident,
with a potent and not to be refused errand, in the moment of thy Jollity, in
the height of thy youth, in the glory of thy preferment, when all eyes are upon
thee, and all tongues applaud thee, and all knees bow to thee, and perhaps all
backs bear burdens for thee, in defiance of thy power, in Confront of thy
Learning, in ruin of thy designs, without pity of thy relations, without fear
of thy fury, without diversion of thy policy? Will not thy bags buy off its
execution, nor thine eloquence soften its stroke, nor thy bravery transport it
to kindness, nor thy charms bind its hands, but with its rapacious claw it
must seize, and by its mall burst asunder, the fabrique of soul and body? Must
these things be without bail or Mainprize, or saving of the Contenement? Then,
O then, what manner of men ought ye, O Nobles and Gentlemen, to be in all Holy
Conversations? How ought ye to be tuned Heavenward, (...). Nazianz in Encomio
Athanasii p 22
and as it is said of Athanasius, to have your lives, words, and works
unisonous, full of harmony and concent, not jarring and combatting one with
another? How ought your vessels to be pure, your lights to shine, your Lamps to
be trimmed, your loins to be Girded? How ought ye to anticipate deaths terror
by dying daily in terror to your lusts? How ought ye to take Heaven by force
(as it were) while you live, for whom, if penitent, the possession is
purchased, when you dye? what is the graves visage to one that is dead unto sin
and alive unto God? Quid caput strophiolo aut Dracontario damnas diademati
destinatum? nam and Reges deo and patri suo fecit Jesus Christus. Quid tibi cum
flore morituro, habes Florem ex virga Iesse, super quem tota divini spiritus
gratia requievit. Tertulli^nus lib. de Corona Militis cap. 15.
What is the dissolution of Soul and body to him at any time, whose resolution
is to make Christ his at all times, and to live no longer, nor other, then to
please God always, and to be pleased with Gods pleasure concerning him? How
can the expiration of a Mortal life be troublesome to him, who lives as one
born to, exercised in, assured of a most glorious and durable life, consequent
to it: And this no man being possible to attain but by Meditating and living in
a daily exercise of Christian severity and fiducial Mortification; How
important is it to press upon the Memories and Consciences of Greatmen, not to
be infected with Pride, not to be buried in secular affairs, Parvi defectique
anim^ est de subditis non profectum quaerere subditoru^ sed quaestum proprium.
Stus Bernard. de consider. lib. 3.
not to be glewed to and glutted with varietyes of pleasures? Happy that Prince
that can say, I received my Life and Crown from God, and as I managed them for
him, so I am willing to resign them to him: happy that Peer and Gentleman who
can appear before God in the Coat armor of humility, and dare to appeal to God
for his Justification, That he has walked before him with an upright heart, and
desired to do the thing that was right in his sight? Isai. 38. 3,
Happy that Prelate who has deserved Athanasius (...), In vita Athanasii.
Fortes fuere in bello non molles in sericis. etc. Si ^tlius es Apostolorum and
prophetarum and tu fac similiter, vendicae tibi nobil^ genus similibus moribus
quod non aliunde nobil^ quam morum ingenuitate and fidei Fortitudine fuit. Stus
Bernard. lib. 2. consider.
his character to be a living and immovable Pillar of Virtue; whose life has
bin a continual sermon of Moderation, self denial, charity, diligence, who has
followed the Apostles, Martyrs, and Confessors, in their prayers and private
agonies, in their care and tenderness to teach and keep together the flock of
God committed to them, and whose Consciences on their death beds can solace them
that they have preached and lived and ruled not for their own fame and pomp,
but for their Masters honor, and their fellow laborers encouragement, and
their flocks edification to life eternal: this will be the sweetest and
takingst cordial to the departing soul to consider that their labor in the
Vineyard shall have the penny of eternity, and their denying themselves for
Christ shall be recompensed with Christ's imparting his glory to them, and their
taking up Christ's Cross in self contempt and self abasement shall return them
a partaking in Christ's crown and glory with him. Happy he and he only that can
so live and so dye, that living and dying he may be Gods. Which the Meditation
of death is a great furtherance to, because it both keeps from folly of action,
and keeps in eye eternity of joy or misery, for in that life's determination,
gives entry to death, and that to particular Judgment, it is a high part of
Christian Prudence to ruminate on death in the summer and brightest day of
life, and by a quotidian view of it, to lessen the terror, and usher in the
treatment of it, by such diseases and other loosenings of life from its basis,
as God uses to make the access of death understood by us, and this whoever does
will not only possess his Soul in patience and prevent the exorbitances of his
passions, (whose evolations are not easily leured home or whose tumors are not
presently assuaged) but also settle in the mind, ready to leave the world, the
sedatenesse of a prelibating Saint, whose earnest of heaven appears in a
sensible senselessenesse of what is tumorous, troublesome, avulsive, and
incongruous with his departing sublimity, God that has called his heart to
heaven in the Divinity of its Love, having left the faculties of the soul, yet
resident in the body, to expressions of themselves suitable to their origin,
Office, and other circumstances by which they subsist and serve the conjunction
of soul and body, Peregrinus nimirum potest facile occasion viatici plus quam
oporteat and detineri quaerendo and praegravari portando mortuns si desit ipsa
sepultura non sentit, sic vituperantes ut laudantes, sic adulantes audit ut
detrahentes; imo vero nec audit quod mortuus est. Stu^ Bern Sermon. 7. in
Quadrages.
by reason of which they being dead to sin, and alive to God, in their option
of dissolution as well as in their ligament of faith, and in their assurance of
acceptance, rather are detained by, then living in or to the world; For the
world being nothing to them but their prison, Death, which brings their Habeas
Corpus, must needs be their joy, and Gods Writ of Ease their gratulation; for
Men having set an end to all their desires, and seen a period of all their
labors, by the enfranchisement of their departure, become from Earths
villains and life's vassals, Gods freemen, yea Kings and Priests to God.

The just consideration whereof (if the dictates of pure nature and the
assurances of Gods word had any power with men) would lenify the thoughts of
deaths trouble, in the worlds adieu and the body and Souls dissociation,
because the incontinuity of them does but resolve them into their respective
Principle; the Body retiring to the dust from whence it came, and the Soul to
God that gave it; Nor is any man happy in life further then he has provided for
a good death; or in death, if he have not the testimony of a good, yet of a
penitent life; my meaning is, if before he dye the errors of his life be not
expiated for in the palliations of his guilt, and Gods ignoscency of them, and
in the acceptance of his sorrow and person with Gods agnition of him for a
dyer in him, That is in the belief and assurance of his forgiveness and
filiation; which once had, the soul cannot but trample upon despondency, and
bid defiance to despair, since Christ justifies it is too late for any to
condemn, if life makes us debtors to nature, (the whole Creation being but as
one lump of power and mercy masshed together in the common fatt and fate of
vicissitude, and the providence and wisdom of God brewing us together till we
work out the Lees of sin and nature and become defecate, or as near it as the
pleasure of our maker designed us to arrive at, and by our respective
proportions to auxiliat the productions and gradations of succession toward
perfection) then to dye when we have lived our time, and outlived our
innocence by as many degrees as we have at all lived, is but the payment of our
debt to nature and the surrender of our forfeiture to God, and we are to
account that a Good death, which not so much takes away as betters life,
because it does rather advance the Soul then depresse the body; Bona mors quae
vitam non aufert sed transfert in melius, bona qua non corpus cadit sed anima
sublevatur, rerum enim cupiditatibus vi vendo non teneri, humanae virtutis est,
corporum vero similitudinibus speculando non involvi angelicae puritatis est,
utrumque tamen divini muneris est, utrumque excedere, teipsum transcendere est.
Stus Bernardus, Sermon. 52. in Cant. Cant.
for to be in Soul an Angel while in state a man, is to be an arriver at what
ever God requires, and man can attain to, in this under-age of Glory.

And, O Nobles and Gentry, If death be thus Emolumental, if it be the Ladder to
heaven, if it be the disarray of those uneasy harnassings that sin and life put
upon you, such as Job often calls shaking of the bones, Job. 4. 14. piercing the
bones, Chapter 30. ver. 17. and David calls vexing the bones, Psalm 6. 6. If it
brings no rest to the bones, Psalm. 38. 3. breaks the bones, Psalm. 51. 8. if it
streightens the compass and disedges the Divine soul and its faculties in their
raptures and sallies, and fill the heart with grief, the eye with tears, and
the countenance with wanness and disspiriting; then to be by death enlarged and
to have a separation of a troublesome match, Vivebas antea O beata, anima sed
in specioso carcere, nunc immensus ether palatium est; vid^bas, sed non nisi
per fragiles atque angustas corporeae Massae ^enestras, nunc libere sine
transenna sine velamine, audiebas, sed per sin^osos aurium meaus mortalium, and
eos ing^atos sape sermones, nunc dulcissimam caelorum Harmoniam, and aeternarum
intelligentiarum concentus precipis. Ludovicus Fabritius in Orat Inaugurali
super mo^^em Domini de Saletione.
and an assignation of body and soul to their proper Spheres, is to be released
from both the labor, and the guilt of sin; and to be in the road, and upon the
march to the Hercules pillar, beyond which there is nothing but hope of being
more, and belief of becoming more then you unclarifiedly are; and is not this
a great motive to be ready to dye, and to be advanced by dying well; (...).
Stus Basilius Mag. p. 229.
for as the Sea and the wind, and the stars, and the compass, and the industry
of Seamen, and the titeness of the ship, well rigged, and well steered, are all
furtherances to the one attainment of the Port; Habitatio ista nec deserviret
hominibus ut patria cum in ea nullus nasceretur, nec deserviret ut exilium cum
in ea nullus exulare mereretur. Gulielm. Parisiens. part 1. de universo part
3. c. 48.
nor do men ordinarily come thither safely and seasonably, but by the
subserviency of these, to the purpose and project of the mind, where the
designs upon the port are united; so neither does any man attain the Vision of
God, the Clarification of his nature, the Comprehension of happiness, but by
the pass of death; Which lets us out of toil, and combat, into pleasure, and
quietness; And that not as pleasure and quietness is notioned here; which is
Planetary and moving, as well as tired with vexation and confusion, but as it
is in Gods presence, fulness of joy, and pleasure for evermore. Thus shall a
good death befriend the providers for it, who only have Confidence in, and
comfort from it; For though God did translate (...). Stus Basil Mag, Orat. p,
65. ol 1.
Enoch without sight of death as an example by himself of a Celestial man who
(in a sort) lived above sin and was taken away without death; yet the grave is
the usual Supersedeas to life, and death the Port of Man's march off; and
therefore since nature, piety, and the interest of both, tends to death; to set
your souls, O ye Nobles and Gentry, in Order to receive deaths charge, is to
discharge your selves of being surprised, and to receive your charger and enemy
with Courage; and by victorying his terrors, to be victors of the joys
consequent to it, which St. Paul intended in that Epinichion, which he
athletarily chanted out, 1 Timothy 4. 7.
I have fought the good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith;
Henceforth is laid up for me a Crown of righteousness.

SECT. XLV.
Evidences, that to meditate of God, and the great concerns of the Soul, is the
way to come unto, and come off from Judgment Honorably.
MY last, and not least Argument to beseech ye, O Nobles and Gentry, to think
of God and of the great concerns of your souls, is, that thereby ye may come
off honorably in the day of judgment. (...) Stus Basil. Mag. Epist. ad virgin
laps. p. 755. operum. 2 These. 2. 8. 2 Pet 3. 10.
For this indeed is the true end of a virtuous life, and of regular and
exemplary actions, to appear happy, accepted, and approved of God, in that
great day, when the secrets of all hearts shall be disclosed, the Cabinets of
all Junctos ^riffled, the Legerdemains of all Politicos tried, the seeming
piety of the worlds Sanctimonists weighed, and the frothy Learning of the
worlds flatterers repudiated; when God shall come with truth and terror of
judgment, with legions (a) of Angels, Armies of Saints, and summon the Juries
of men's consciences to their impartial verdict; when the elements shall melt
and the earth be burnt up and the randezvouz of all Creatures great and small,
be, and the Mat. 25. 32, 33.
Angels referr them to their respective Stations; when the persecuted Son of
God, whose life was the scorn, and whose death and wounds are the curse of the
lewd world; when the Saints, that have undergone the reproach of Christ, shall
attend the Lord Jesus to judgment. and to give approbation and acclamation to
his sentence: Then, Then to stand in judgment, Luke 21. 28. Matthew. 19. 28.
Matthew. 10, 37.
To lift up the head with joy, as those that have followed Christ in the
regeneration, and have not bin ashamed of him before men; but have loved Christ
more then Father or Mother, or House, or Land, or Honor, or Preferments, Nil
magis proficit ad vitam honestam quam ut credamus eum judicem futurum quem and
occulta non fallunt, and indecora offendunt, and honesta delectant. Stus
Ambros. officiorum lib. 1. c. 26.
will be the privilege and peculiarity of Gods Jewels, To whose illustrations
nothing is more contributive, then this day of Judgment; because it sets every
being upon its own bottom, and gives every action its due testimony, and every
actor his deserved essay. Therefore Goodmen look upon Christ's second Advent
Judicial, not Ministerial, as their Jubilee, the restitution of Gods Kingdom of
content, quiet and victory to his Israel, In which none can be bold, and added
to, but Gods hidden ones, Who have exercised themselves to keep a good
conscience, void of offense, both toward God, and toward men; and who have
mourned in secret, Acts 24. 16. Ezech. 9. 14*
for their own and othermens sins; these are the contenders for, Revel. 2. 17.
v. 28.
and obtainers of, Revel. 3. 12.
the New name and the white stone, Revel. 3. 4, 5.
and the Morning starr, these are to be pillars in the house of God. These are
to be clothed in white as Citizens of the supernall Jerusalem; Matthew 22, Isa^.
26. 1.
for these, not Tophet is prepared of old, but salvation for walls and
bucklers; John 14. 1.
These are they to entertain whom the Marriage feast is made; John 12, 32.
and on whom the wedding Garment is put; and for whom Mansions are prepared;
and to glorify whom, Christ sits at his Fathers right hand; to draw them up to
heaven after him; and to place them in Heaven, on the right hand with him. Quod
enim ibi honoratur and glorificatur* non sua utili^as sed hominum slcut cum sol
videtur non ipsius utilitas est, sed viven^ium, sic and dei glorificatio and
honoratio tota perfectio animarum nostrarum in ultimitate suae completionis,
Gulielm. Pariscensis partis 1. de universo part 2. p. 709.
This is the honor that God does his Saints; the glory of whose translation
and association adds not to God, who in perfection is unaddable to,
undiminishable from; but the luster that thence is reflected is purely
remunerative to them who have bin in the holy war with him against sin, Satan,
and the world.

And, O Nobles and Gentry, is any thing so Magnificent and Royal as to
compartizate with Christ, to preside above Angels, to be released from a
troublesome life, into a plenary vision, and fruition of good? Or can any
change parallel this that changes a light and Lovelesse world, For a weighty
and eternal Glory? 2 Cor. 4. 17.
And this the day of Judgment will devolve upon every particular Worthy, whose
vessel, according to its receptivity shall be brimfull of glory, and stowed up
with unutterable Comforts; and whose ^idelity shall have the Test and Seal of
Truth and Power for its Security and Commendation, which will be denied to
those caytiffs, whose power has trampled upon the necks, and whose cruelty has
rolled their Garments in the blood of Christ's Martyrs and Confessors; and whose
mouths have blasphemed Christ's holiness, and whose weapons have suppressed his
Gospel: Yea, even to the Iudases and Demases of Christ's own Family; (those
irreverend Clerks who have withheld the truth in unrighteousness, Romans 1. 18.
and have rejected the counsel of God in the Motions of his spirit, and the
convictions of their own Consciences:) When such Viragoes and Illuminates shall
cry to the Mountains, Rev. 6. 15, 16. a Wisdom 5. 3, 4, 5.
fall upon us; Verus honor qui nulli negabitur digno, nulli defertur indigno,
ad quem nec ullus ambiet indignus ubi nullus permittetur esse nisi dignus, vera
ubi nihil adversi, nec a seipso nec ab alio quisquam patietur, ubi praemium
virtutis erit deus i^se qui virtutem dedit, ubi ipse erit and vita and salus,
and copia, gloria and honor pax and omnia bona. Stus* Augustine. lib. ult. de
Civitat. Dei.
and shall beshrew themselves for very anguish as those in ( a)) Wisdom do? We
fools counted his life madness, and his end to be without honor: How is he
numbered among the Children of God, and his lot is amongst the Saints?) When
these, I say, are reserved, for the Destruction of the great day, Jude ver. 6.
Then shall the righteous lift up their hearts with joy and cheerfulness, then
shall their faces be cleansed from blubbers, and their eyes be wiped from
tears; Then shall their ears be filled with transporting Echoes, and their
living sincerity be compensated with unutterable comforts; the Judge, our Lord
Jesus, shall own them his Members, and embrace them in his arms, and possess
them in his joys, and confirm them in all the perquisites of his purchase, and
in all ^he merits of his life and death, and say unto them, Matthew. 25.
Come ye blessed of my Father ^^herit the Kingdom prepared for you from ^he
beginning of the world. This shall be ^he Portion of those contemned and
des^ised ones whom the world vilipends, a^uses, disgraces, casts out.

And therefore, Nulla splendidior gemma in omni praecipue ornatu summi
pontificis. Quo enim celsior cateris eo humilitate a^paret illustrior and
seipso. Stus Bernardus lib. 2. de considerat. ad Eugen.
O ye Nobles and Gentry, Consider your selves, and the advantages God has above
others indulged you, and do not neglect your eternal splendor; ^hink nothing
small that God expects as ^he way to him, and will accept for wor^hy to dwell
with him; be not solicitous of securing your honors and families against
temporal diminution, while you make no provision, for your souls salvation, and
your Gods blessing on your poste^ities; would ye share with Christ in his
glory? inoculate him into the stock of ^our glory; (...) Nazianz. Orat. 18. p.
283.
be not ashamed of his Cross, ^e not defiers of his humility; be not ^ghters
against his prevalence, provide ^y prayers and tears, by self denial and
^ove-like meekness, against the siege of death, and the scrutiny of Judgment.

Which, because the wicked of the world do not, therefore are the thoughts and
dread of Judgment so terrible to them: As God is not in all their thoughts, so
neither is the account they are to give to God ever before the eye of their
consideration: this makes the worlds Felixes, when they are discoursed to, of
Temperance, Righteousuesse, Acts ^4. 15.
and Judgment to come, to tremble, and either to wish, that assize not to be
at all, or themselves not at all to be when the Sessions of it is, This does
not only touch aci'dly, and with twitches of torment their natural conscience,
which yet has some part of it tender, and relucting; but it rends themselves
from themselves, and makes an Earthquake that confounds all that is in them,
and makes them dubious of their futurity in any thing but woe. Venerable Bede
tells a notable story of a Monck who lived very profanely, not observing any
regularity, when his brothers were at Chapel he would keep in his Cell, Sicut
Beatus Stephanus vidit caelos apertos, ita ipse in^ernum, and Iudam and
Cajaphum, and Pilatum in medio eorum, and alios item Crucisixores domini, and
sibi misero non long ab eis locum esse paratum. Historia Anglorum, Folio. p.
943.
when they were praying he was bousing, and delighting himself sensually; at
last God brought sickness upon him, and then he had smitings of Conscience,
and told his brothers in great anguish, that he had seen in a vision his future
estate; as St. Stephen saw Heaven opened to him, and Christ ready to Crown him,
so he saw Hell open, and in it Judas, Cajaphas, Pilate, and others, the
crucifiers of our Lord and not far from them a place for his soul, full of
horror and torment, And when Greatness is begirt, when the delicate and proud
mind of it is thus gashed and sawed between hopes and fears; when it feels the
Gravel of despair, fretting and wounding its tender vessels, and knows not how
soon the soul of such fools may be required from them, then it is bitter in
tears, and sad in countenance, then it forbears feasting and keeps a Lent too
late, and knocks for entrance when the door is shut; (...) Greg. Nis.
then these Esau's seek a place for repentance but are denied it; when as the
Mourners for sin and the Sealed for salvation, come into this furnace of
judgment for Trial and come out of it with Triumph; they are not only sure to
be quitted, but to be blessed, Psalm. 1. 1. and that because they have not
walked in the way nor by the Counsels of the ungodly; but because their
delight was in the Law of the Lord, and herein they exercised themselves day
and night; their ^eaf, the lightest part of them, shall flou ^^ish, and
whatever they do shall prosper; when sinners shall not stand in the
Congregation of the Just, but shall be filled with ^eeping and wailing for the
torment of ^he ^ire, that never shall extinguish; and (...) with gnashing of
teeth, by reason of the worm that never dies, Ibi erit fletus et stridor
dentium; Fletus quidem ob ignem qui non extinguitur, stridor vero ob vermem qui
non moritur; Fletus ex dosore stridor ex furore. Sermon in Psalm. Qui habitat.
as St. Bernard on that place, Matthew. 24.

And happy it is for good men, that they have another world to confide in, and
rest upon; For (God knows) here they have but cold comfort and hard usage,
exposed to the injuries of power, the prejudices of envy, the censures of
mistake, the extremities of want, the violences of death; but when the other
world comes uppermost, when Martyrs and Confessors are court Cards, and they
trump all the Diamonds, Hearts, Clubs and Spades in this pack of Cards, which
is so much the game of our lives and the desport of this world; then it is well
with the righteous, Micha 7. 13.
for the fruit of his works are given him. Then what the Duke of Guise replied
to the Emperor's General, D' Avila, (That whatever the Condition of the man he
complained of was, while in the ^ield, now he was entered the bowels of France,
Caeterum regni Franciae id Iuris esse ut quicunque servilis conditionis pedem
in ea posuerit Mox libertatem recuperet. Thuanus volum. 1. lib. 11. p. 343.
Heb. 4. 9.
he was free; Mal. 3. 17.
for that France admitted no^ servility, or baseness of degree into it, but
presently enfranchised whoever was commorant in it,) becomes true with infinite
advantages; when the day of judgment comes, then commenceth the rest of the
people of God; then shall they appear Gods Jewels, and be ranked as his sheep:
the^ shall they sit to Judge, Matthew. 19. 28.
not stand to be Judged, and cry out for vengeance on their malevolent
persecutors, who were deaf, when to them they cried for Mercy; then shall they
acknowledge Gods promise, In quo enim quemquam invenerit suus novis^imus dies,
in hoc cum comprehendet mundi novissimus dies quoniam qualis in die illo
quisque moritur, talis in die illo judicabitur. Stus August. Ep. 80. H^sychio.
the Basis of their faith, and his spirit the mover of their consciences, and
his Word the directory of their conversation; then shall not only the Judge
purge them, and their fellow Saints rejoice in them; but their own consciences,
being the charter part of Gods record, shall acquit them; and the testimony of
that is instead of all witnesses; For if our consciences accuse us not, then
have we boldness before God; 1 John 4. 17.
O, Romans 2. 15. c. 9. 1.
I say when a good conscience, 2 Cor. 12. 1.
which Saint Paul glories so much in the testimony of, 1 Timothy 1. 5.
bears witness of the Souls sincerity; Heb 13. 18. (...). Dictum Antipho^t.
apud Stobaum Sermon. 106.
what comfort and confidence thence results? no tongue can utter, no melody
parallel, no thought conceive; Fancy what, O ye Nobles and Gentry, in nature
or art you can, the strains of which are most hallucinating; and the aires
most inebriating sense; and by the kind and pleasing raptures of it, forcing
nature from her Staple and leading reason captive to their spoil; let the
Music of the Orbs and the Queristers of the air; let the Sirens of the Sea,
and the Nightingals of the Land; Let the Lutes, Vyalls, Harps, Offerialls, be
touched with the sweetest singers that ever moved string, and follow the
delightfullest notes that ever were composed; Let them have all the advantages
of the Natural and Artificial Echoes, that the best artists can find out and
highthen their prevalence by: Yet are all these nothing to the mirth and
satiation of a good Conscience; This is that inartificial light that burns
bright, (not as those Roman ones which attended the urns and monuments of
Famous dead men) but as that light in Heaven, which is ever in Oriency to bear
witness to living worthyes, giving their merits legibility and vindication in
the deadest and dismallest night of Oppression and Misrepresentation: this is
that name, that is better then that of Sons and Daughters; eternizing them
beyond Marbles and Pyramids; and more invigouring them then thousands of
Cordials: when a man can lead a life in the Sunshine, and leave a life in the
shade of a good conscience, he need envy no Monarch, (...). Greg. Nisse^.
exchange happiness with no Favorite, vie pleasure with no Operator; his all
is in himself, it is Heaven compendiated and abridged into a devout breast; it is
the holy Spirits residence in a moving Tabernacle; it is Gods Pot of Manna, and
his Rod in a Mortal cask, the externity whereof may perish, but its eternity is
secure; O Familiaritatis gratiam, O honoris culmen. O prerogativam securitatis
perfectae. Sermon. 8. in Psalm. Qui Habitat.
O the grace (says St. Bernard) of divine familiarity, Si. vis scire quam
nihil mal^ sit in paupertate compara interse vitam divitis and pa^^peris,
sapius panget ^idelius ridet nulla solicitudine concutitur, in alto est. Senec.
inter excerpta.
O the dimension of this glory, O the Privilege of this Confidence, O the
Prerogative of this complete security. This is the holy link that makes God and
holy souls inseparable, for while they are in the exercise of a good Conscience
God is in them, and when they are exercised with sorrows for a good Conscience,
the glory of God rests upon them; and when an evil conscience convicts evil
men and makes them mute, John 8. 9. when it seares them as with a hot iron, to
utter lies in hypocrisy, 1 Timothy 4. 2. when by the defilement of the mind and
conscience, (...) Plutarchus lib. de Tranq. animi.
nothing is pure Titus 1. 15. Then the life is a little ease, and the spirit
is, Inter cudem et malleum, Ground to powder by distrust and despair, then
Minstrells will not lay Saul's evil spirit, nor solenesse secure Cain, after the
murder of his brother, nor Judas his thirty pieces bear down the rising of the
lights of his clamorous conscience; but that it shall break out and ruffle him
into self execution; Psalm 50. 21.
Thus God is said to set men's sins in order before their faces; and to Muster
them in rank and file before them, that they may be terrifyed before condemned.
O the emphasis of that cry, Genesis 4. 13.
My sin is greater then can be forgiven me! O the anguish of that, Psalm. 51. 3.
My sin is always before me! O the pangs of Hell, O lignum aridum and inutile
aternis ignibus dignum quid respondebis in illa die, cum exigetur a te usque ad
ictum oculi omne tempus vivendi impensum qualiter expensum. Stus Anselmus.
that the worlds Spira's have, when God inspires them with the fire of
conversion, and immerges them in the water of contrition! no fiery furnace, no
sulphurean boots, no coats of brimstone, no pains, no wrack, no wheel, no
athretick torture comes near the hell of conscience, accusing, Judging,
condemning, a remorselesse sinner; when God lets loose Satan to accuse, as well
as the Flesh and the world to betray; nothing comes of it but confusion and
horror: There was not in the world a wickeder man then Alfonso King of Naples,
whose delight was to murder Noblemen, take forfeit of their honor and
fortunes, Philip. Cominae^^s in vita. Caroli 8. Guiccard. lib. 1.
lay grievous taxes on his people, and cruelly force them, as he had unjustly
levied them; God called his conscience up to torment him, so that he was mad
day and night, and was possessed with such a fear, that he flew out of his
Kingdom and cried France, France, and dyed tormented grievously in Sicily: and
our Richard the third, a little before his end, dreamed that he saw all the
Devils in hell hayling him in, Non esse somnium sed conscientiam scelerum,
Polydor. Hist. A^g. in R 3.
and tugging him to pieces, which Polydor says, was no dream but the real
torment of his conscience.

Add to these, Filefac in Sel^dorio lib. 2. p. 235.
the torments, that Tiberius, Nero, and others have this way felt and bin made
miserable by; and then it will be granted to be an unspeakable happiness O vere
quietis locus in quo deu^ non quasi turbatus ira, nec velut distentus cura
prospicitur visio illa non terre^ sed mulcet, inquietis ^uriositatem non
excitat sed sed^^, Bernard. sermon. 21. in Cant. Cant.
to have a good Conscience; and that to be the best array, and the adorningst
Jewel in the day of doom. Consider this, O ye Nobles and Gentlemen, and be
concerned to purchase this Jewel, if already ye have it not, and to preserve
it, yours, if already ye have it; do not disturb the peace, disfigure the
beauty, dismay the chirrups of it, by sins of premeditation, and malicious
wickedness, or by approaching too near things forbidden; despise not the
lectures of the least providence, or the entreaties of the least mercy, when it
knocks for entertainment and admission, begs to have audience, and is by God
directed to your amendment; be not obdurate to its meltings, nor querulous of
its importunity, nor rude to its applications; be hospitable to your own good
in entertaining these Angels who unawares bring the love of God, and the peace
of your souls to you; Judge every good motion and every serious reproof a step
to your conviction for sin, and conversion to God; And by this purge your
Consciences from dead works to serve the living God; do, Heb. 9. 14.
do, O do, what he commands, and he will perform what he has promised;
Believe, and you shall be established; Isai. 7. 9.
repent and your iniquities shall be forgiven you; Acts 3. 19.
Keep good consciences, and you shall be kept from the portion, of evil men;
follow God in all imitable virtues, and he shall follow you with his comforts,
and overtake you with his heaven: Forsake all for him, where he and the world
are not accordable in your love and practice, and he shall give you all by
giving himself, who is the owner of the upper and lower springs; keep your
selves his virgins, and he shall crown you with his glories; for though the
worlds confidents and servitors are often put off with poverty and discredit,
yet those that serve the Lord are sure to be inheriters of the sure mercies of
David, and the rich merits of Jesus, and of those glorious Mansions at Iehovahs
right hand; for he whom they serve, he by whom they are to be judged, does
accept their service, commend their constancy, ratify their work, reward their
sincerity; and that by signally owning them members of his body, Audiant ^ac
Prael. qui sibi commissis semper volunt esse Formidini, utilitati raro,
erudimini qui judicatis terram subditorum matres vos esse non dominos, studete
magis amari quam metui, and si i^terdum severitate opus est, paterna sit non
Tyrannica, matres Forendo paires corripiendo extubeatis. Stus Bernard. sermon.
2^. Cant. Cant.
objects of his love, Jewels of his care, subjects of his bounty, instruments
of his propagation, instances of his graces efficacy; and as vessels fit for
his doles, prebendaries, thrones, Give them everlasting preemminence; amongst
which favorites to be at the last day, is, O Nobles and Gentry, the great and
only Philosophy man can attain to; let it therefore, I beseech you, become your
study and emulation to excel in it, to know how to make the day of the Lord,
which is Amos 5. 18.
darkness to evil men, light to you, is more then to turn Copper into God, or
Tinn into Silver. This is the call to the Mountain of greatness, be ye
removed from your prejudice against, and opposition to Christ Jesus, and by
faith to effect it; this is not only to subject your selves to God, but to
subject devils to you; it is to cast out the devil of pride, uncleanness,
Atheism, Rebellion, and to become pure, that ye may see God; and to become meek
and lowly, whereby you shall find rest to your souls in God; and to be little
in your own eyes, that you may be exalted with Christ, Phil. 3.
who also made himself of no reputation; and thereby has obtained a name above
every name, both in heaven and earth; this is to be taught of God, as dear
children, and to be portioned by him, as dear children; this is to be virgins
here with lamps ready and lighted; and to be virgins hereafter with clarified
backs clothed, and clarified heads Crowned, for though it be a great
happiness to deserve the character that our learned Cambden gives the Lord
Burleigh, that he was one, Britannia p. 206
whose wisdom for a long time was the supporter of peace, and Englands happy
quietness: Yet to love Christ more then these outward honors, and secular
splendours, to be one of those Heavenly Philosophers, (...). Nazianz. de
Laudibus Athanasii p. 17. To. 2. operum.
that are studious to love and live with God, and to take heaven by the force
of their faith, even while they are on this side of it in condition, as
Nazianz. writes of famous primitive Christians; and to enjoy a free and serious
soul; big to God, and full of good works, in the midst of, and maugre the
temptations that beset and often besot greatness, is to be a Peer and a
Gentleman indeed, and to entaile Gods blessing on a family and posterity, which
shall subsist it, when the aires of fame, and the sands of power separate from
and adverse to God, shall become ill foundations to them, and only passing
memorials of them: for it is God alone, that is the rock to build upon, the
security ^o fly to, the anchor to be stayed by, the ^ower by which
resuscitations are made of things and men, past hope of recovery without him.
There is a memorable story of Walter Constable of Gloucester, who had five Sons
men of especial note; Cambden Britannia p, 621.
yet every one of them, were cut off by untimely death, after ^our of them had
succeeded to one another in their fathers inheritance: And therefore, (...)
Nobles and Gentry; as my first design in ^his poor and plain discourse is, to
beseech your avocation from vanity, subversive of your families, and vitiative
of your fames; so my conclusive application shall be to the same purpose: Let
God be (O Heroiques) your chief aim, his love your Loadstone, Consider this and
follow it.
his fear your wisdom, his purity your pattern, his patience your conviction,
his law your delight, his poor your pity, his reproach your ambition; when you
are high in your own and others thoughts, Meditate on Christ higher, yet ^ower
to merit for you, and to extend bounty to you; when your desires are irregular,
moderate them by the stint that God has set, and desire rather the best things,
which are not stinted, in which there is no excess: when you think most of
your families, think most of God, and sacrate them by comprecating God to b^ a
principl^ of inextinction in them, an^ of indetermination to them; anxiou^
cares and subtle projects move some step^ toward greatness, and often set it
o^ the Pinnacle of the Temple, from which i^ has a vast prospect, Tibi (...)
multa tu ipse tibi solicitudinis materia es Stus Bernard. de vita solitaria ad
Fratres de monte dei.
and under which a dangerous a precipice of Temptation^ but it is the blessing
of God that makes and keeps rich and great; when he says in blessing I will
bless and in multiplying (...) will multiply thee, as he did to Abraham Genesis
15.
he blesses and multiplyes with a witness of this world in earnest, and the
next in promise. And when he sets his face to bring down the mighty from their
thrones and to level high thoughts, and proud boasts? how does he blast with
his breath, and overturn with his wind? root up with his earthquake? drowned
with his overfloate? Morti^ie with his plagues? and bait to ruin with his
every way let loose judgments upon the worlds greatness? while the instance
of Noah's ark (the lodge of all Creatures in their species, though not in their
Number) which was secured against the waters leak, the winds blasts, the
ladings overburthen, and had the discipline of so many, and so different
natured creatures; whose feeding, nature, shape, tendency, were so repugnant;
yet all they governed by eight persons, and kept in order either by no food, or
food unusual; and in a sort contrary to their natures) I say, while there
remains this instance of Gods severity and mansuetude, Lege Bochar^u^^ in
Hierozoon. p. 10. de Quadraped* in Genere.
his anger toward the old, and clemency to the new world; there will be
irrefragable reason and solid ground to build upon God, all our hopes for
stability, so far forth as is good for us, and ours; notwithstanding we see no
apparent probability of good coming to us, or them; for to trust in God who is
powerful, faithful, wise, good, eternal, is to have the security of heaven and
earth for our indemnity, and to excel others (who put their trust in men
whose breath is in their nostrils, or in Armies, Counsels, Conclaves, or what
else of worldly contexture,) as far as heaven does earth, and fruition hopes.
Many things here do fall between the Cup and the Lip, as we proverbially say;
and ordinarily the Babels that we build, in the pride of our hearts, and for
the glory of our names, are the spoils of Gods power, and the surfeits of his
fury; and do not only call us vain in the designs of them, but miserable in
the judgments upon us by them; because Nebuchadnezzar will be above God, God
reduces him beneath man; and he that did not know what it was to be under God,
was taught, what was fitter for him, to become a brute; so falls it out often
with us in our wild Stratagems and monstrous contrivances, O^^lum autem
tentationum and cogitati-num malarum and inutilium sen^ina ocium est. Nunquam
otiosus sit servus dei quamvis a deo feriatus sit. Stus Bernard, de vita
solitaria ad Fratres de monte dei.
but never man that consulted Gods glory, in Gods Method, and by his line and
square, ever built upon a failing foundation: he that aims at no more then how
to please God, and to get above this world to him, and to leave the blessing of
God upon what of his in this world he leaves behind him, cannot miss to be
blessed in the kind he desires, and in a kind suitable to His magnificence to
whom he is so loyal, and with whom so welcomely bold.

This is the Reason, O Nobles and Gentry, I first undertook the application to
you; which as I earnestly beg God to bless to your advantage; so I really
desire it may be accepted by you, (...) Nazianz. in E^comii Athanasii. p. 23.
ad sinem. Tom. 2.
Considering that the motive to its publication came from that humble
generousnesse, which the love of God and men excites in a sober and sincere
Christian, who begs of God like Athanasius the property of those virtuous
stones, the Adamant, which by stoutnesse re^unds the force of Satan's temptation
and men's insolence, and with the Lodestone draws the differences of men
uncharitable to one another into a little compass, Quare imite^ur nostros B.
Camillo^, Halas. Decios, Curios, Fabricios, Maximos Scipiones, Lentiles,
Aemilios, etc. amemus patriam, pareamus senatui, consulemus bonis, presents
fructus negligamus, posteritati and gloriae serviamus, id esse optimum putemus
quod erit rectissimum, speremus quod volumus, sed quod acciderit feramus,
cogitemus vero corpora virorum fortium magnorumque hominum esse mortalia, animi
vero motus and virtutis gloriam sempiternam. Cicero Ora^pro Sextio.
and closes them up into a Christian oneness. These excellencies, that you may
abound in, he begs of God, who desires not more to be happy himself, then to
have the Nobles and Gentlemen of England happy in the Conclusion of, and in the
consequence to, this their present Grandeur; which they can no better, or other
way be, then by following what that Renowned Roman Orator Tully excites his
contemporaries to, by imitating those Noble Patriots, and Ancestors, who have
done great and good deeds for the Public, by obeying the Government, taking
counsel for futurities advantage both in point of profit and glory, by
accounting that most worthy praise and practice, that is most right and just,
by spiriting their courages, from hopes suitable to their wishes, by bearing
equanimously what happens crossely and unpleasing, by accounting their bodies
made of elements, and servile to accidents, Mortal; and not delicating them;
and above all, by Meditating noble Atchivements, and of gaining immortal glory
the reward of them. Thus Tully, and with that I end.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 16. l. 24. dele de. p* 25. l. 16. r* opposite, p. 44. l* 21. r, uprigh^,
p. 51. l. ult, r. delivered, p. 62. l. 22. r. veirges, p 76. l. 5. r. therein,
p. 89. l. 11. r. mortality, p. 119. l. 28. r. unto. p. 122. l. 22. r. may. p.
130, l. 15, r, not, p. 14^. l. 5, dele in, p. 142. l. 6. r. Lueifugous. p. 150,
l. 19, r. libe^ty. p. 164. l 9. add Has. p. 195. l. 15. r. turn. p. 218, l* 26.
r. Pius the 4. p. 233, l. 3. r, needed, p. ^4^. l. 3. Ari^^^xenusses. p. 156.
marg. r. Taxillos, p. 276, l. 5. dele ^, p. 276. l. 27. r. Therein, p. 288. l.
1. r. credits. p. 320. l. 16. r. Effluxio^s, p. 126. l. 24. r. Colla^d. p. 337,
l. 23. r. To, p. 350. l. 13. r. aborrtive. p. 373. l. 14 r. marriage, p. 374.
l. 8. r. Guise, p. 387, l. 24. dele and, l. 27. r. or, p. 416. l. 2^. r.
justified, p, 417 ^. 22. r. His, p. 419. l. penult. r. God. l. ult. r. among.
p, 421. l. 27. r. chain. p. 424. l. 2^. r. pertristate. p. 432, l. 21. r,
hissing, l, 23 r. abstruse. l. 24. Mea^usse's, p. 438* l. 3, r. this.


