THE DUTY OF Self-denial BRIEFLY Opened and Urged.

BY Thomas Watson, Minister of the Gospel.

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Parkhurst, at the Bible and three Crowns in
Cheapside, near Mercers Chapel; and at the Bible on London-Bridg. 1675.

TO THE READER.
Christian Reader,
THE weightiness of the Argument here discoursed on, justly merits a larger
volume: But I have contracted it, because it may possibly come into more hands.
I must profess I know not a more necessary point in Divinity. Self-denial is
the first principle of Christianity; it is the lifeblood, which must run
through the whole body of Religion. Self-denial is learned not out of the
Topics of Philosophy, but the Oracles of Scripture. It is my request to the
Reader, to peruse this Manual with seriousness, as knowing the Practice of
Self-denial is that wherein his salvation is nearly concerned. The Lord work
with his word, and cause the dew of his blessing to fall with this Manna, which
is the Prayer of

Thy Friend and Servant in the Gospel, Tho. Watson.
Dowgate. Anno 1675.
THE DUTY OF SELF-DENIAL.
LUKE 9.23. And he said to them all, If any man will come after me, let him
deny himself.


CHAP. I. A Preliminary discourse, wherein the Proposition is Comprised.
ALL Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable for Doctrine,
2 Timothy 3.16. The Word is compared to a Lamp, for its illuminating quality,
Psalm. 119. 105. And to Silver refined, for its enriching quality, Psalm. 12.6.
Among other parts of Sacred Writ, this is not the least, If any man will come
after me, let him deny himself.

These words are dropped from the lips of Christ, the ORACLE of TRVTH. In the
precedent verse, our Blessed Savior did foretell his Passion, The Son of man
must suffer many things. And his suffering is set down in two expressions:

1. He must be rejected; Thus he was The stone which the builders refused,
Psalm. 118.22.

2. He must be slain. This Diamond must be cut. He who gave life to others,
must himself dye Fusus est sanguis medici, and sactum est medicamen phrenetici:
Aug.
. And as Christ did thus abase himself for us, so we must deny our selves for
him; And he said to them all, if any man will come after me, let him deny
himself. Self-denial is the foundation of Godliness, and if this be not well
laid, all the building will fall. Let me explain the words.

1. And he said to them all] Self-denial is of Universal extent, it concerns
all, it respects both Ministers and People. Christ spoke it as well to his
Apostles, as the rest of his hearers.

2. If any man will come after me] If he will follow me as the Soldier does his
General: if he will arrive at that place of Glory whither I am going,

3. Let him deny himself.] Beza and Erasmus render it, let him lay aside, or
reject himself Abdicet seipsum.
. Self-denial is a kind of Self-annihilation. The words have two parts: 1. A
Supposal, If any man will come after me] 2. An Imposal, Let him deny himself.
This word, Let him deny, is not only a permission, but an injunction; it
carries in it the force of a command: As if a King should say, Let it be
enacted.


The Proposition I shall insist on, is, That a good Christian must be a
Self-denier. Let him deny himself.

CHAP. II. The Explaining of the Proposition.
Quest. 1. IN what sense a Christian must not deny himself?

Resp. 1.1. He must not deny his Promise. A Man's Promise should be sacred, he
is to keep it though it be to his loss, Psalm. 15.1, 4. He who makes no
reckoning of his Promise, God makes no reckoning of his Profession.

2. A Christian must not deny his Grace. He must not dis-own any good Work
wrought in him: He ought not to say, he is a dry tree Isa. 65.3.
, when the dew of Heaven lies upon his branches. As it is a sin for a Man to
make himself better than he is; so, to make himself worse. To say he has Grace
when he has none, is presumption; to say he has no Grace when he has, is
ingratitude: It is a bearing false witness against the Spirit of God.

Quest. 2. In what sense a Christian must deny himself?

Resp. I Answer in general, he must deny that carnal part which is near to him
as himself, that which is as the apple of his eye. But more particularly,

1. A Christian must deny his Reason, I say not, renounce it, but deny it. Some
cry up the Diana of Reason, making it the rule and standard of Faith. Quod
absurdum est rationi debet esse falsum, said a Socinian. Indeed that there is a
God, and that this God is to be worshipped is (...), a Law written in the heart
of Man, and is consonant to Reason; but who God is, and the right mode of
Worship, this is such an Arcanum that Reason can no more find out, than, the
Philistines could Sampsons riddle 2 Cor. 2.14.
. Job 11.7. Can thou by searching find out God? Reason must be denied, in 1
Credendis. 2 Agendis.



1. In Credendis, In Doctrines proposed to be believed.

1. The Doctrine of the Trinity. Puteus est profundus, The well is deep, and
who can with the plum-line of Reason fathom it! The Persons in the Trinity are
distinguished, but not divided; they are three Subsistences, but one Essence
Trinitas personarum non tollit unitatem essentiae.
. The Trinity is purely an object of Faith. There are some truths in Religion
demonstrable by Reason; as that we should fly vice, and do to others as we
would have them do to us: But the Trinity of Persons in the Unity of Essence,
is of Divine Revelition, and must be assented to by faith Scrutari temeritas
est, credere pietas. Bern.
. Those illuminated Philosopher who could discourse subtly of the magnitude
and influence of the Stars, the nature of Plants and Minerals, could not by
their deepest indagation find out the Mystery of the Trinity: This is wholly
supernatural, and must be adored with humble believing.

2. The Doctrine of the Incarnation; That Eternity should be born; That he who
rules the Stars should suck the Breasts Qui regit sidera sugit Ubera.
; That a Virgin should conceive; That the Branch should bear the Root; That in
Christ there should be two Natures, yet but one Person; That the Divine Nature
should not be transfused into the Humane, yet the Humane Nature should be
assumed into the Person of the Son of God; the Humane Nature not God, yet one
with God; here Reason must be denied.

3. The Doctrine of the Resurrection. That the body interred, nay crumbled into
a Thousand Fractions, and the Ashes scattered in the Air, should rise again, is
above Reason to imagine. The Epicureans and Stoics derided Paul when he
preached to them of the Resurrection, Acts 17.32. Here Reason must be
captivated. John 5.28. Marvel not at this, for the hour is coming in which all
that are in the graves shall hear his voice and shall come forth 1 Cor. 15.42,
43.
. The Chemist can out of several metals mingled together, extract the one from
the other, the Silver from the Gold, the Alchimy from the Silver, and can
reduce every metal to its own species. So when the bodies of men are commixed
with other Substances, the wise God can make a sudden extraction, and clothe
every Soul with its own Body; did not the same numerical Body rise, it would be
rather a Creation than a Resurrection Cyprian.
. Acts 26.8, Why should it be thought incredible that God should raise the
dead? God can do it because of his Power, Mat. 22.29. And he cannot but do it
because of his Truth. Sublata resurrectione tota corruit Religio.
The Doctrines of Faith do not oppose Reason, but transcend it.

2. Reason must be denied in Agendis, In Duties enjoined to be practiced. There
are many Duties in Religion which carnal Reason quarrels at. God says, it is
The glory of a man to pass by an offense, Prove. 19.11. No says carnal reason,
it is Cowardice. The Heathens thought it gallantry of spirit to revenge
injuries. God says, the paths of holiness are strowed with Roses, Prove. 3.17,
Her ways are ways of pleasantness. No says Reason, they are severe and
Cynical, I must crucify my delights, and drown my mirth in Tears. God says,
Religion is gainful, 1 Timothy 6.8, Godliness is great gain. It brings contentment
arising from the favor of God Colnel. a Lap.
, it brings Temporal riches, Prove. 3.16, In her left hand riches and honor.
The way to be prosperous, is to be pious. No says Reason, if I follow the
Trade of Religion, I shall break, 2 Chronicles. 25.9, What shall I do for the
hundred Talents? In this case, carnal Reason must be denied and oppugned. He
who will go no further than Reason, will come many Leagues short of Heaven.

2. A Christian must deny his Will. This is Brugensis gloss upon the Text
Abnegare seipsum dicitur, qui abnegat voluntatem suam. Brug.
, The will is the primum mobile, the great wheel in the Soul that moves all the
Affections. The Will in innocence was regular, it did echo to Gods Will; but
since the fall, though it retains its freedom in moral actions, yet as to
spiritual it is depraved. If the Will could cease from sinning (says Bernard)
there would be no Hell Cesset voluntas propria and infernum non erit.
. The greatest wound is fallen upon the Will. The Mariners Compass being
stricken with Thunder, causes the point of the Needle to stand wrong: Man's
Nature being corrupted, causes the Will to point wrong, it inclines to evil.
There is in the Will, not only impotency, but obstinacy, Acts 7.51, Ye have
always resisted the Holy Ghost (...), est e regione more hostili irruere.
Piscat. in loc.
. Now here we must deny our Will, and bring it to Gods Will. If a Stick that is
crooked be laid upon ground that is level, we do not go to bring the ground
even with the Stick, but to make the Stick even with the ground. So Gods Will
is not to be brought to ours, but our Will being crooked, must be brought to
Gods Will. We pray, Thy will be done. The way to have our Will, is to deny it.

3. A Christian must deny his own righteousness, his civilities, duties, good
works. Phil. 3.9, That I may be found in him not having mine own Righteousness.
The Spider weaves a web out of her own bowels; an Hypocrite would spin a web of
Salvation out of his own Righteousness: But St. Paul, like the Be, sucked
Salvation from the flower of Christ's Righteousness. Isa. 64.6, Our
righteousnesses are as filthy rags. Ad optima piorum opera refert. Origin,
Hierom, Chamier.
Our best duties are fly-blown with sin. Put Gold in the fire and there comes
out dross. Our most golden services are mixed with unbelief. The Angel pouring
sweet odours into the prayers of the Saints, Revel. 8.3, shows that they are in
themselves unsavory, and need Christ's sweet odours to perfume them.

Use Duty, but trust to Christ's Righteousness for Salvation. Noah's Dove made
use of her wings to fly, but trusted to the Ark for safety.

And if we must deny our holy things in point of Justification, then much more
our Civilities. A Stake may be finely painted, but it has no root. A Man may
be painted with Civility, yet have no root of Grace; a moral person is washed,
not changed. The life may be Civil, when the heart is Wicked; as the Sea may be
Calm, when the Water of it is Salt. The Pharisee could say he was no Adulterer,
Luke 18.11. But could he say, he was not proud? The civilized person may have a
secret antipathy against goodness, he may hate Grace as much as Vice. Civility
is but a cracked Title to Heaven. A piece of Brass may shine, but wanting the
Kings image it will not go current. A man may shine with moral Virtues, but
wanting the Image of God consisting in holiness, he will not pass current at
the day of judgment. Morality is good, but God will say, Yet lackest thou one
thing, Mark 10.31. Civility is a good Jacobs staff to walk with among men, but
it is a bad Jacobs ladder to climb up to Heaven.

4. A Christian must deny all Self-confidence. How confident was Pendleton of
himself! This fat of mine (says he) shall melt in the fire for Christ Fox Act.
and Mon.
, but instead of that, his courage melted. The same Hebrew word signifies both
confidence and folly (...)
. Self-confidence betrays folly. Peter did presume too much upon his own
strength, Mat. 26. 34, Though I should dye with thee, yet will I not deny thee.
But how soon was his confidence shaken, and blown down with the breath of a
Maid? Mat. 26.71, 72, He denied with an Oath, saying, I know not the man.
Peter's denying of Christ was for want of denying himself. Self-jealousie is
good. Romans 11.20, Be not high-minded, but fear. Si vis esse securus, semper
time.
The trembling reed often stands, when the confident Cedar falls. Who that knows
the fierceness of a Trial, or the falseness of his Heart, will not fear? How
have some professors shined as Stars in the Churches Hemisphere, yet have been
falling stars? Porphyry, Julian, Cardinal Pool, Gardner, Judas. The Apostles
have been called by some of the Ancients, the eyes of the World, Christ's feet,
theChurches breasts Ocuti Mundi, pedes Christi, Ecclesiae mammae.
: Judas was one of these, yet a Traitor. Nay, some of the Saints through Gods
withdrawing the influence of his Spirit, have for a time relapsed. As Cranmer,
and Origin, whose heart fainted in the seventh persecution, and he offered
incense to the Idol. Deny self-confidence. 1 Cor. 10.12, Let him that thinks
he stands, take heed lest be fall. It Is just with God, that he who trusts to
himself, should be left to himself. The Vine being weak, twists about the Elm
to support it. A good Christian being conscious of his own imbecility, twists
by Faith about Christ. Phil. 4.13, I can do all things through Christ
strengthening me. Sampsons strength lay in his hair, ours lies in our Head
Christ.

5. A Christian must deny self-conceit. Job 11.12, Vain man would be wise* In
the Hebrew it is empty man (...) Homo concavus:
. Man is a proud piece of flesh. He is apt to be highly opinionated of himself.

-- Ostendit avis junonia pennas -- Acts 8.9, There was a certain man named
Simon, giving out that himself was (...), some great one. Sapor writes himself,
Brother of the Sun and Moon. Commodus the Emperor called himself, The Golden
Hercules. The Persian Kings would have their Images worshipped of all that came
into Babylon Brissonius.
. Such as view themselves in the flattering glass of self-love, appear bigger
in their own eyes than they are. They think their spark a Sun, their drop a
Sea. They are highly conceited of their acumen, their wit and parts, and are
ready to despise others Luke 18.9.
. The Chinese say that Europe has one eye, and they have two, and all the
World else is blind.

De meliore luto Titan praecordia finxit. Deny self-conceit Bis desipit qui
sibi sapit.
. Romans 12.3, I say to every man that is among you, not to think of himself more
highly than he ought to think. Prove. 23.4, Cease from thy own wisdom. Not cease
from being wise, but from conceiting thy self wise Prove. 3.7. Phil. 2.3.
. That you may deny all high supercilious thoughts of your selves, consider;

1. Self-conceit is no small sin. Chrysostom calls it the mother of Hell. It is
a kind of Idolatry, (...), a self-worshipping.

2. Whatever noble endowment you have, it is borrowed. As he said of that Axe
which fell in the water. 2 Kings 6.5, Alas master, for it was borrowed. All a
Man's Gifts, his pregnancy of Parts, ripeness of Wit, are borrowed from Heaven,
and what wise Man would be proud of a Jewel that is lent? 1 Cor. 4.7, What have
thou that thou did not receive? Uti datis ut innatis est maxima Superbia.
Bern.
The Moon has no cause to be conceited of her light which she is beholden to
the Sun for.

3. Whatever acuteness of Wit, or sageness of Judgment you have, think how far
short you come.

1. How far short do you come of that knowledge which Adam had in innocence? He
was the Oracle of Wisdom, he could unlock Natures dark cabinet, and find out
those secrets which do amuse us. Adam had a full inspection into the causes of
things. He was a kind of earthly Angel.

But how far short do you come of him? Your knowledge is checkered with
ignorance. There are many (...), hard knots in Nature which cannot easily be
untied. Why the Loadstone leaving Gold and Pearl, should draw Iron? Why Nilus
should overflow in Summer, when waters are usually lowest? What way the light
is parted? Job 38.24. Why the Sea should be higher than the Earth, yet not
drown it? How the bones grow in the womb? Eccles. 11.5. What is the reason of
all occult qualities? He who sees clearest has a mist before his eyes. By
eating the tree of knowledge, we lost the key of knowledge.

2. How far short do you come of that knowledge which Satan has. He is called
(...) from his knowledge. We read of the (...), the depths of Satan, Rev. 2.24.
And his (...) his stratagems, 2 Cor. 2.11. Satan is an intelligent spirit.
Though he has lost his sanctity, yet not his knowledge: Though he has lost his
brestplate, yet not his headpiece. He has wit enough to deceive the Nations,
Rev. 20.3. His understanding is nimble, and being compared with ours, is like
the swift flight of an Eagle, compared with the slow motion of a Snail. Why
then should any be puffed up with a conceit of their knowledge, wherein the
Devil far out-strips them?

3 How far short do you come of the knowledge they have, who are perfected in
glory. He who is higher than a Dwarf, may be lower than a Giant. Such as excel
others in natural abilities, are of a lower stature than the glorified Saints.
1 Cor. 13. 12, We see, in aenigmate, through a glass darkly. But the Saints in
bliss, have a full-eyed Vision of God. Their light which did burn here like
fire when it is smothered, is now blown up into a pure flame. An Infant
glorified, knows more than the most profound Rabbis on earth. In Heaven all
shadows fly away, the Sun of Righteousness having risen there with his
illustrious beams. This may pull down the plumes of pride and self-conceit.

4. Your dark-side is broader than your light-side. Your ignorance is more than
your knowledge. Your knowledge is but as the light of a Torch, your ignorance as
the Cimmerian darkness. Job 26.14, How little a portion is known of God? The
septuagint renders it, How little a drop! To think to comprehend the Deity, is
as if we should go to span the Ocean. Christians, the greatest part of your
knowledge, is not so much as the least part of your ignorance. This may demolish
all high imaginations. You have no cause to be conceited of the knowledge you
have, but rather to be humbled for what you want.

5. Think what an Hell of sin you carry about you. Sin is the accursed thing
(...)
. Josh. 5.13. It is the quintessence of evil. It is like a stain to beauty. It
was Typified by the menstruous cloth, which was the most unclean thing under
the Law Nihil in lege menstruato immundius. Hierom.
. What though you have knowledge, sin does eclipse it: As if a Woman should have
a fair Face, but a Cancer in her Breast. Your knowledge does not so much adorn
you, as sin does debase you.

6. Grace can never thrive where self-conceit grows. As a Body cannot thrive in
a Dropsy; so neither can the Soul thrive, which is swelled with this Dropsy
of Pride and Self-conceit. A proud head makes a barren heart.

7. A Supercilious conceitedness is odious, and does much lessen any worth in a
person. It Is like a cloud in a Diamond. The more one values himself, the less
God and Angels value him. Let a Person be eminent, yet if he be self-conceited
he is loved of none; he is like a Physician that has the Plague, though he may
be admired for his skill, yet none care to come near him.

8. Such as are well opinionated of their own excellencies, are in the ready
way to ruin. Either God infatuates them Isa. 29.14.
, or denies a blessing to their labors, or suffers them to fall into some
great sin. Peter, who was so well conceited of himself, as if he had had more
grace than all the Apostles besides, the Lord let him fall very far. He denied
Christ with an Oath, nay an imprecation, Mat. 26.74. Peter wished a curse on
himself if he knew Christ, nay, some think he cursed Christ.

The Lord sometimes lets vain conceited persons fall not only foully but
finally. The Doves (says Pliny) take a pride in their Feathers, and in their
flying high, at last they soar so high that they are a prey to the Hawk. So
when men fly high in self-conceitedness, they become a prey to the Prince of
the Air. Let all this make us deny our selves, let it kill the Worm of
self-conceit. If we are proud of our knowledge, the Devil cares not how much we
know. Let St. Paul be our pattern, though he were the chief of the Apostles, he
calls himself the least of Saints Optima metalla quorum in alto latent venae.
Seneca. Epist. 23.
. Ephesians. 3.8. and 2 Cor. 12.11. (...) -- Though I be nothing. This illustrious
Apostle, a Star of the first magnitude, did shrink into nothing in his own
eyes. It Is excellent to be like Moses, whose face had a luster on it, but he
wist not that the skin of his face did shine, Exodus 34.29.

6. A Christian must deny his appetite. The sensitive appetite is sick of a
boulimy, it cries give, give Prove. 30.15.
. St. Paul did beat down his Body, 1 Cor. 9.27 (...), Metaphora a pugilibus
sumpta cum pugnis antagonistam obtundunt.
. Such a proportion only is to be taken for the recruiting of Nature, as may
help forward Gods service. -- In licitis perimus -- More are hurt by excess in
lawful things, then by meddling with unlawful. As more are killed by Wine than
Poison. Many make their Belly their god, Phil. 3.19. And to this god, they pour
drink offerings. Clemens Alexandrinus writes of a Fish whose heart is in its
belly: An emblem of epicures whose heart is in their Belly, they are devoted to
sensualness. Excess in meat or drink clouds the mind, chokes good affections,
provokes lust. The rankest weeds grow out of the fattest soil. Intemperancy
shortens life; as too much Oil extinguisheth the Lamp. Many dig their own
graves with their teeth Plures periere erapula quam gladio.
. Christ cautioned his Apostles, Luke 21.34. Take heed to your selves, lest at
any time your hearts be overcharged with surfeiting and drunkenness. Seneca
could say, he was born to higher things than to be a slave to his Body Magnus
sum and ad majora natus quam ut sim corporis mei mancipium.
. What a shame is it that the Soul, that princely thing which sways the scepter
of Reason, and is akin to the Angels, should be enslaved to the brutish part!
Deny the sinful cravings of the flesh. What has God given conscience for, but
to be a golden Bridle, to check the inordinacy of the Appetite?

7. A Christian must deny his ease, Prove. 1.23. Ease slays the simple. The
Flesh is full of sloth and effeminacy, it is loath to take pains for Heaven.
Prove. 19.24, A sloathful man, hides his hand in his bosom Manus in sinu, otium
designat. Cartwr.
. He is loath to pluck it out* though it be to lay hold on a Crown. Weeds and
vermin grow in untilled ground, and all vices grow in an idle untilled heart.
How can they expect, to reap an harvest of Glory, who never sowed any seed? Is
Satan so busy in his Diocese, 1 Pet. 5.8. and are Christians idle? Are they
Like the Lillies which toil not, neither do they spin? O deny your ease (...).
Chrysostom.
. Seneca, an Heathen devoted himself to labor, and spent part of the Night in
study Partem noctis studiis dedico. Sen. Epist. 8.
. Hannibal forced his way over the Alps and craggy Rocks. We must force our way
to paradise. Let us shake off sloth, as Paul did the Viper. Never think to be
brought to Heaven as the passengers in a ship are brought to their port
sleeping. 1 Chronicles. 22.16. Arise and be doing. God puts no difference between
the sloathful servant and the wicked Ignavia in rebus divinis est nefaria.
. Mat. 25.26. Those people in Hetruria, who like Drones entered into the Hive,
and consumed the honey, were expelled from others, and condemned to exile. Such
as idle away the day of grace, and fold their hands to sleep, when they should
be working out Salvation, God will condemn to a perpetual exile in Hell.

8. A Christian must deny carnal policy. This is the wisdom of the flesh, 2
Cor. 1.12. Carnal Policy is craft. The Politician consults not what is best,
but what is safest. The Politician is made of willow Ex salice non ex quercu.
, he can side with all parties; his Religion is cut according to the fashion of
the times; he can bow either to the East, or to the Host; zeal for truth is
blotted out of the Politicians Creed. It was a speech of Sir Thomas Moor, he
would not follow Truth too near the heels, lest it should dash out his brains.
It Is judged by some a piece of Policy not to declare against error, for fear
of losing a party. The Politician is a Latitudinarian, he has distinctions
beyond Aquinas, and can digest those things which others tremble at. The
Ostriches wings help her to outrun other creatures. Sinful policy makes men
run further than they can who are of purer Consciences. In short, the
Politician is an Ecebolius; he like the Camelion can change into all colors,
and be as his company is. He can be either serious or feathery. He can imitate
either Cato or Cataline. I grant Christian prudence is commendable, but the
Serpent must not devour the Dove. That Policy is unjustifiable, which teaches
to avoid duty. Deny carnal Policy; dare to be honest. The best Policy is to
hold fast integrity.

9. A Christian must deny his inordinate passions. Jam. 1.26, If any man among
you, seem to be religious, and bridleth not his tongue, this man's religion is
vain. Every member of the Body is infected with sin, as every branch of
Wormwood is bitter; but the Tongue is full of deadly poison, Jam. 3.8. St.
Augustine, compares the Tongue to a furnace Lib. 10. Confess.
, and too often, hot sparks of anger fly out of it. The Holy Ghost once
descended in cloven tongues of fire, Acts 2.3. But the Apostle James, speaks of
a Tongue that is set on fire of Hell, chap. 3.6. Some cannot rule their own
spirit, but are carried away with their passions as a Charet with wild Horses.
Many (says Hierom) who will not be drunk with Wine, will be drunk with rash
Anger. Eccles. 7.9, Anger rests in the bosom of fools. Anger may be in a wise
Man, but it rests in a Fool. There is (I know) an holy anger against sin, but
the fury of passion, is the scum which boils off from an unsavory heart.
Passion disturbs Reason Brevis insania. Sen.
, and unfits for holy Duties. Hot passions make cold prayers. O Christians deny
your selves. Pray that God will set a watch before your lips, Psalm. 141.4.
Labor to quench the fire of wrath, with a flood of tears. It is recorded of
Mr. John Bruen, in the County Palatine of Chester, that though he was naturally
of an hasty choleric spirit, yet at length he got the Victory over his
passions Fortior est qui se, etc. Prove. 16.32.
, and grew so meek and calm, that his very nature seemed to be quite altered.
Grace does to the Passions, as Christ did to the Sea when it was stormy. Mark
4.39, He said, Peace, be still, and there was a great calm. Grace turns the
fierceness of the Lion, into the meekness of the Dove.

10. A Christian must deny his sinful fashions. Romans 12.2, Be not conformed to
this World. (viz.) to the guise and mode of it. Did the old Christians rise out
of their graves, our strange fashions might fright them into their graves
again. Was there ever such excess in Hair? 1 Cor. 11.24, If a man have long
hair it is a shame. More money is sometimes laid out for a Periwig to cover one
head, than would cloth Twenty Poor. One asking Reverend Mr. Dod, why he did
not Preach against those Ruffians who wore long hair, he replied, If Grace come
into their heart, it will make them cut their hair*

Nor can the female sex be excused, for their excess in Apparel Isa. 3.19, 20.
. Seneca complained of those in his time, who hung two or three patrimonies at
their ears; some wear half their revenues upon their backs. Lysander would not
suffer his Daughters to be too gorgiously attired, saying, it would not make
them so comely as common Fulgent monilibus, sordent moribus. Salvian.
. What spotted faces and bare shoulders appear in the Congregations. And that
Professors should symbolize, and comply with others in their antic dresses, is
the reproach of Religion Exterior superfluitas interioris vanitatis speculum.
Bern. in Apol.
. A tear in the eye would more adorn than a tower on the forehead. O deny your
selves. Pull down these flags of vanity. Have not Gods judgments yet humbled
you? 1 Timothy 2.9* I will therefore that women adorn themselves with modest
apparel: let the hidden man of the heart be beautified and bespangled with
grace. Psalm. 45.13, The kings daughter is (...) all glorious within.

11. A Christian must deny His own aims. He must not look asquint in Religion,
and aim at himself more than God. He must not aim at Self-enriching. at
Self-applause.


1. He must not aim at self-enriching. Some espouse the Gospel only for gain.
They court this Queen not for her beauty, but her jewels. It is not the fire of
the Altar they regard, but The gold of the altar, 1 Timothy 6.5, Supposing that
gain it godliness Fac me pontisicem and ero Christianus. Pamachius ad pap.
. Camero a French Divine of Bordeaux, relates of one Santangel a Lawyer, that
he turned Protestant, only out of worldly respects, that he might grow rich.
Judas Preached, and wrought miracles, but his eye was chiefly to the bag. How
do many heap benefice upon Benefice, minding the Fleece more than the flock:
Dumb dogs are greedy dogs, Isa. 56.10, 11. These make use of the ministerial
function, only as a Net to catch preferment. This is in sacred things to be
profane. It Is sordid, and unworthy of a Christian, to make Religion truckle to
secular interest.

2. A Christian must not aim at self-applause. The Pharisees who were animalia
gloriae Hierom.
, were herein guilty. They prayed and gave alms, That they might be seen of
men, Mat. 6 Ambitio scenam desiderat.
. The oil of vainglory fed their Lamp. Verse. 5. Verily they have their reward.
They might make their accquittance, and write, Received in full payment. It Is a
saying of Spanhemius, That there is in every Man by nature, aliquid Pharisaei,
a spice of Pharisaism, a seeking after the glory and applause of the World.
Luther confessed though he was never tempted with covetousness, yet he was
sometimes with vainglory Non curat aurum sed auram.
. Christ's own Disciples were disputing who should be greatest? Mark 9.34.
O this Devil of vainglory! The Moth breeds in the finest cloth, and
self-seeking is apt to breed in the best duties. Sinister aims do corrupt
Religion. A good aim, will not make a bad action good, but a bad aim, will make
a good action bad.

Too blame are they, who when they have done any glorious service in the
Church, take the praise to themselves. Like those Heathens who sacrificed the
Wax to their gods, but kept the Honey to themselves. Matthew Paris speaks of
one, who having in several Lectures proved strenuously that Christ was God, and
being highly applauded for it, he cried out, saying, O Jesus, thou art
beholding to me for thy Divinity this day. Whereupon this Doctor was stricken
suddenly with such stupidness and forgetfulness, that he could never after say
the Lords Prayer, but as a little Child said it to him. Let this cause
trembling and humility in Christians. Several ships which have escaped the
Rocks, have been cast away upon the sands. Many who have escaped the rocks of
gross scandals, have been cast away upon the sands of self-seeking. One said,
he would not have Erasmus his fame and applause for a World Nec minus periculum
ex magna sama quam ex mala. Tacitus.
. Not but that to have esteem in Gods Church, is a blessing: Heb. 11.2, By
faith the elders obtained a good report Joh. Ep. 3.12.
. Much of the honor of Religion, depends upon the credit of them that profess
it. But the sin is, when self-applause is the only thing hunted after. Popular
acclamation, is a golden arrow, which glisters in the eye, but wounds to the
heart. How many have been blown to Hell with the breath of popular applause.

O let us deny, yea, abhor this vainglorious humor. We have a famous example
in John Baptist, who sought to lift up Christ, and beat down himself. John
1.15, He that comes after me is preferred before me. As if he had said, I am
but the Herald, The voice of one crying Mat. 3.3.
, Christ who comes after me is the Prince. I am but the Morning Star, he is
the Sun; I Baptize only with Water, he with the holy Ghost. Thus he sets the
Crown of Honor upon Christ's head. As Ioab when he had taken Rabbah, did not
arrogate the praise to himself, but sent for King David, that he might carry
away the glory of the Victory, 2 Samuel 12.27. So when any eminent service in
Church or State has been done, the glory of all should be given to Christ and
free grace. It is better God should approve, than the World applaud. If we are
faithful, we shall have honor enough in Heaven. Let this be our chief aim in
duty, that we may grow more in love with God, and be made more like him, and
have more communion with him, and bring more revenues of honor to him. 1 Pet.
4.11, That in all things, God may be glorified. We should not only advance, but
design Gods glory. It was a worthy speech of Philip de Mornay upon his
Deathbed, That he had through the course of his life, made Gods glory his end
and aim. As all the Rivers run into the Sea, so all our Actions must run into
God the Infinite Ocean.

12. A Christian must deny all ungodliness (...). Pricaeus.
. Titus 2.11, 12, The grace of God has appeared to all men, Teaching us, that
denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should live soberly, etc. The Turks
say in their Alcoran, That God did not give men lustful desires to be
frustrated Blunts Voyage into the Levant.
. But let their Alcoran go with the Papists Legend. The Scripture seals no
patents for sin. It bids us deny ungodly lusts. It is not likely he will
sacrifice his Isaac, his worldly profits, who will not sacrifice the Ram, his
vile lusts. A Christian must deny his malice, revenge, covetousness,
uncleanness, superstition, heterodoxy. A Man may as well go to Hell for a
drunken opinion, as a drunken life. And let me especially instance in two sins
a Christian must deny.

1. The Sin of rash censuring, Jam. 4.11, Speak not evil one of another. Some
make it a part of their Religion to criticize upon others, and clip their
credit to make it weigh lighter. You shall hear them say, such an one is proud,
factious, hypocritical, Jam. 4.12, Who art thou that judge another? St.
Augustine could not endure any should detract from the good name of others,
therefore wrote these two Verses upon his Table.

Quisquis amat dictis absentum rodere famam,
Hanc mensam vetitam noverit esse sibi.
The root of censoriousness is Pride. A Person thinks by taking from another
reputation, he shall add something to his own. But let him look to it, who
shall raise himself upon the ruins of another fame. Is it no sin think you to
murder a Man in his name Fama pari passu ambulat cum vita.
? Thou who art such a critic, it is to be feared, thou can spy all faults
but thy own Jerem. 8.6
. Like the Lamiae who could see well abroad, but were blind at home Curiosi
sunt hypocritae ad cognoscendam vitam alienam, desidiosi ad corrigendam suam.
Aug.
. O Christian look inward, did thou view thy own spots more, in the
looking-glass of the Word, thou would not be so ready to throw the stone of
censure at others. Deny this sin of rash censuring, or smiting with the tongue,
Jer. 18.18. Thou who speak reproachfully of thy Brother without a cause, the
time may come that he may be accepted, and thou rejected, he may be found gold,
and thou reprobate silver Jer. 6.30.
.

2. A Christian must deny his peccatum in delitiis, his complexion-sin. Psalm.
18.23, I have kept my self from mine iniquity. As there is one master-bee in
the hive, so there is naturally one master-sin in the heart, this must be
denied Ubi regnat peccatum non potest regnare dei regnum. Hierom.
. The Devil can hold a Man fast by one sin. A Jailer can hold the Prisoner fast
by one Fetter. One sin is enough to stop the current of mercy; one sin may damn
as well as more. As one Millstone is enough to sink a Man into the Sea. If there
be any lust which we cannot deny, it will be a bitter root, either of scandal
or apostasy.

13. A Christian must deny his Relations. Luke 14.26, If any man come to me,
and hate not father, and mother, and wife, and children, he cannot be my
Disciple. The meaning is, when carnal Relations come in competition with, or
stand in opposition to Christ, we must hate them. When our friends would prove
snares, and hinder us from doing our duty Ad pietatem nobis obstaculo sunt.
Brugensis.
, we must either leap over them, or tread upon them. Here, odium in suos, is,
pietas in Deum. If my Wife (says Hierom) should hang about my neck, if my
Mother should show me her Breasts that gave me suck, and persuade me to deny
Christ, I would break from them and fly to the Cross. When Peter would be a
tempter, Christ said, Apage, Get the behind me Satan.

14. A Christian must deny his Estate for Christ. A Carnal heart will commend
Christ, and profess him; but will part with nothing for him. The young Man in
the Gospel was Christ's hearer, but not his follower. He did, superna probare,
but terrena appetere as one says Bern.
. When Christ said to him, Sell all and give to the poor, abiit tristis, he
went away sorrowful, Mat. 19.22. When Mercury is in conjunction with a bad
Planet, it has a bad influence: So when Riches are joined with a bad heart,
they do much hurt. The World lay nearer the young Man's heart, than Christ.
Fulgens hoc aurum praestringit oculos. Varro.
Have some of the Heathens denied the World? Epaminondas a Grecian Captain,
who obtained many gloririous Victories, yet he was a great contemner of the
World; he refused vast sums of Money sent him from the King of Persia, insomuch
that when he died, he left scarce enough to defray the charges of his funeral.
Did an Heathen go thus far in denying the World, and shall not Christians much
more? Let the wedg of gold be denied for the Pearl of price. Mat. 19.27, We
have forsaken all, and followed thee. A true Saint esteems the gleanings of
Christ, better than the worlds Vintage. Phil. 3.8. For whom I have suffered the
loss of all things Heb. 11.24.
. Galeacius Marquess of Vico parted with a fair estate, to enjoy the pure
ordinances of Christ at Geneva. When a Jesuit persuaded him to return to his
Popish Religion in Italy, promising him an huge sum of Money, he said, Let
their money perish with them, who esteem all the gold in the world worth one
hours communion with Jesus Christ and his holy spirit.

15. A Christian must deny his life for Christ. This is in the Text, attollat
crucem, Let him take up his Cross Christianus quasi crucianus. Luther.
. Suffering for Christ must be free and spontaneous. He who suffers against his
will bears the Cross, he who suffers willingly takes up the Cross. A fair
Virgin falling in love with Crates for his learning, he showed her his staff
and his scrip; this says he is your dowry. Christ shows us his Cross, if we
will not have him upon these terms the match is not like to go on. Sufferings
will abide us Acts 20.23.
. 2 Timothy 3.12. The Devil is not grown kinder now than he was. Some think of
reigning with Christ, but not of suffering. Joseph dreamed of his advancement,
but not of his imprisonment. The flesh cries out the Cross is uneasy, there
are Nails in the Yoke which tear; but life must be denied, yea hated for
Christ. Luke 14.26, If any man come to me, and hate not father, and mother, and
his own life, he cannot be my disciple. Love to Christ must outweigh life.
Rev. 12.11, They loved not their lives to the death. Paul carried the image of
Christ in his heart as a Saint, the message of Christ in his mouth as a
Minister, and the marks of Christ in his body as a Martyr. Gal. 6.17. The
primitive worthies snatched up torments as so many Crowns, and were content to
shed their blood for Christ, knowing they should exchange their sanguine for
white Robes. The Prophet Isaiah was killed with a Saw, Jeremiah with Stones,
Amos with an Iron-Bar, Luke was hanged on an Olive Tree. I read of Irenaeus,
that he was carried to a place, where was set a Cross on one side, and an Idol
on the other, where he was put to his choice, either to bow to the Idol, or
suffer on the Cross, he chose the latter. Basil speaks of a Virgin condemned to
the fire who having her life and estate offered her, if she would bow down to
an Image, answered, Let life and money go, welcome Christ. Though every
Christian is not actually a Martyr, yet he has a preparation of mind, and is
ready to suffer if God call. Luther said, he had rather be a Martyr than a
Monarch. Let us then take up the Cross. Can wicked men be content to suffer for
their lusts, and shall not we suffer for Christ? We are to look upon our
sufferings as a badg of honor. If when we are reproached for Christ (...)
Chrysostom.
, much more when we dye for him, A Spirit of God and of glory rests upon us.
1 Pet. 4.14. Our sufferings for Christ propagate Religion. Paul's being bound
made the Gospel to be more enlarged. Phil. 1.12. Justin Martyr was converted to
the Faith, by beholding the heroic patience and courage of the Christians in
their sufferings. -- Patiamur ut potiamur -- The Cross leads to the Crown. 2 Timothy 2.12, If we suffer, we shall also reign with him. Who would not be willing
to venture on the Seas, though rough and tempestuous, if he were sure to be
Crowned as soon as he came a Shore Acts 14.22.
? Persecutors may take away from us our goods, not our God; our liberty, not
our freedom of Conscience; our head, not our Crown. Rev. 2.10.

He who cannot deny his life for Christ, will deny Christ. And he who is
ashamed of Christ, Christ will be ashamed of him. Mark 8.38. Whosoever shall be
ashamed of me and my words, in this adulterous and sinful generation, of him
shall the son of man be ashamed when he comes in the glory of his father with
his holy Angels.

CHAP. III. Containing the ground of the Proposition.
THE grand Reason why we must deny our selves is, because we can be saved no
other way. A Town or Castle may have several ways leading to it, but there is
but one way leads to the celestial Paradise, and that is self-denial. Without
self-denial, we can never come up to Christ's terms. If the World be not denied,
Christ cannot be loved. If self-righteousness be not denied, Christ cannot be
trusted; if the will be not denied, Christ cannot be obeyed: Therefore
self-denial, is of as absolute necessity as Heaven.

CHAP. IV. An Inference drawn from the Proposition.
FRom all that has been said, See how hard a thing it is to be a Christian.
Were it only to put on the Mantle of profession, it were easy, even Satan can
transform himself into an Angel of light, 2 Cor. 11.14. But a Man must deny
himself; this self-emptying, or self-annihilation is the Strait Gate through
which a Christian must enter into the Kingdom of God. He is to deny not only
those things which are without him, his worldly profits; but which are within
him, his sins, nay, his righteousness. Self is an Idol, and it is hard to
sacrifice this Idol; but this must be done. Either Carnal Self must be denied,
or Natural Self damned.

CHAP. V. A check to Epicures, and Sensualists.
THis justly indites those who live in a contradiction to the Text, who instead
of denying themselves, let loose the reins, and give themselves up to all
manner of pleasure and licentiousness. Eccles. 7.4, The heart of fools is in
the house of mirth. Such the Prophet deciphers, who do not mortify, but gratify
the flesh. Amos 6.4, 5, That lie upon beds of Ivory, and stretch themselves
upon their couches, that chant to the sound of the vial, that drink wine in
bowls, etc Sub capite spinis coronato, non decet membra in deliciis vivere.
Zanchy.
. Pleasure, like Circe, inchants men's minds, and transforms them into beasts.
There is a place in Africa, called Tombutium, where the Inhabitants spend all
their time in Piping and Dancing. And have not we many who consume their hours
in Plays and Stews? As if God had made them like the Leviathan, To play in the
water, Psalm. 104.26. How will their countenances be changed, when God shall
say, Give an account of your stewardship Voluptates sunt portae inferni per
quas ad mortem descendunt homines. Aug.
! These frolic sensualists live as if there were no World to come. Luke 16.2.
They pamper their Bodies, but starve their Souls. As if one should feed his
Slave, but starve his Wife. Do Epicures deny themselves? Indeed in one sense
they do, for the enjoying their lusts, they deny themselves a part in Heaven.
In the Country of Sardinia, there is an Herb like Baulm, that if a Man eat much
of it, he shall dye laughing. Such an herb is Pleasure, if one feeds
immoderately on it, he will go laughing to Hell. Esau lost the blessing while
he was hunting. O! How many while they are hunting after worldly pleasures lose
blessedness? There is a sad cup brewing, which will spoil the sinners mirth.
Psalm. 75.8, In the hand of the Lord there is a cup, the wine is red, it is full
of mixture. This Wine is the wrath of God, and it is mixed, the worm and the
fire, help to mix the Cup. The Lord will proportion a sinners torment to his
pleasure. Rev. 18.7, How much she has lived deliciously, so much torment and
sorrow give her.

CHAP. VI. The want of Self-denial lamented.
IN the next place we may sadly lay to heart the want of Self-denial. O
Self-denial, Whither art thou gone? -- Terras Astraea reliquit -- We live in a
knowing Age, yet few know how to deny themselves. Selfishness is the reigning
sin of the World. This makes the times have a bad aspect. 2 Timothy 3.1, 2,
Perilous times shall come, for men shall be (...), lovers of themselves. Self
may have diverse Actions brought against it. It is an enemy to the public.
Whence come wars? Jam. 4.1. Whence is robbery and bribery? Whence is oppression
and circumvention, but from those selfish lusts which men cannot conquer? When
Lentulus had in his Will declared Tiberius Caesar to be his Heir, so basely
selfish was Caesar, that he sent and killed Lentulus, that he might have present
possession of his Goods. Self-denial lodges but in a few breasts. It is, Rara
herba, a Sacred exotic herb which is grown very scarce. Luke 18.8, When the
son of man comes, shall he find faith on the earth? May it not be said, Shall
he find Self-denial on the earth? Self-denial is gone a long Pilgrimage, and
who can tell when it will return?

CHAP. VII. Containing a swasive to Self-denial.
MY next work is to persuade Christians to the Practice of this momentous duty
of Self-denial. Man lost himself at first by self-exaltation, and he must
recover himself by self-denial Perit homo amando se, and invenitur negando se.
Aug.
.

1. Self-denial is just and equal. How much has Christ denied himself for us?
He eclipsed his Glory; Phil. 2.7. (...), He emptied himself. What wonderful
self-denial was it, for Christ to leave his Fathers bosom and be incarnate? For
Christ to be made flesh, was more than for all the Angels to be made worms.
Christ denied his name and repute; Heb. 12.2, He endured the shame. He denied
worldly grandeur and riches; 1 Cor. 8, 9. For our sakes he became poor. The
Manger was his Cradle, the Cobwebs his Curtains. He denied his Life, Phil. 2,
8, He became obedient to death. It Is but equity we should deny our selves for
Christ.

2. Self-denial is the sign of a sincere Christian. Hypocrites may have great
knowledge, and make fair pretenses, but it is only the sincere Saint can deny
himself, and lay his life at Christ's feet. This was a touchstone of Moses
sincerity, he denied the pleasures of the Court, and chose affliction rather
than iniquity, Heb. 11.25. I have read of an holy Man who was once tempted by
Satan, to whom Satan said, why take thou all this pains, what do thou more
than I? Art thou no Drunkard, no Adulterer? no more am I; do thou watch? I
never sleep; do thou fast? I never eat; What do thou more than I? Why, said
the good Man, I tell thee Satan, I give my self to Prayer; nay more, I deny my
self: Nay, then says the Devil, thou go beyond me, for I exalt my self; and
so vanished.

3. Self-denial is a rational thing. For, if self be an enemy, then it is
wisdom to discard it. There is a rationality in all Gods commands. Why would he
have us deny fleshly lusts, but because They war against our souls? 1 Pet.
2.11. Why would he have us deny Pride, but because of its noxious quality?
Prove. 16.18, Pride goes before destruction. Where Pride leads the Van,
Destruction brings up the Rear. God would have us deny nothing for him, but
that which will damn us if we keep.

4. There is nothing lost by selfdenial. We shall be abundantly compensated.
Mat. 19.29, Every one that has forsaken houses, and lands for my sake, shall
receive an hundredfold, and shall inherit life everlasting. If we deny our
name and repute for Christ, God will give us inward peace, there is an
hundredfold in this life; and will honor us before the Angels; how many
hundred-folds that amounts to, I am not able to tell. If we deny our Estate, to
keep our Conscience, God will give us a Kingdom Praecipua in caelo reponitur
merces. Brugens.
. Luke 12.32. What does he lose, who parts with a Flower, and gets a jewel? We
may lose all we have for Christ, yet lose nothing by him.

CHAP. VIII. Containing helps to Self-denial.
FOr the attaining of Self-denial, let these Rules be observed.

1. Be convinced of the Incomparable excellency of Christ. He has an equality
and consubstantiality with God the Father, Col. 2.9. He is (...), He is the
quintessence of Goodness In se continet omne quod et expetibile. Corn. a Lap.
. He is compared to an Head of gold, for riches, Cant. 5.10. To the Rose of
Sharon for perfume, Cant. 2.1. To a bright morning star for beauty, Rev. 22.16.
Jesus Christ is all that God can require for satisfaction, or we can desire for
Salvation. He is fully commensurate to our wants. He has eye salve to anoint
us, White raiment to cover us Rev. 3.18.
, the balm of his Blood to heal us.

We shall never deny our selves for Christ, till we see a glory and a beauty in
him. Christ is all marrow and sweetness, he is better than life, estate, Heaven.

2. Endeavor after a Vital principle of Grace. Grace will do that which flesh
and blood cannot. A Man may do that by art, which he cannot do by strength. A
burden of great weight, may be lift up by screws and pullies, which cannot be
lift up by strength of arm. Grace will teach one the art of Self-denial, which
cannot be done by strength of Nature. In particular, labor for three Graces:

1. Humility. A proud Man admires himself, therefore cannot deny himself. An
humble Man lays his mouth in the dust, he has lower thoughts of himself than
others can have of him, he goes out of himself, he renounceth himself, he opens
to God, as the Flower to the Sun. He will do what God will have him do, he will
be what God will have him be, he is like melting Wax, God may set what stamp
and impression he will upon him. The humble Man is the self-denier.

2. Love. Who will not deny himself for a Friend whom he loves? He will part
with any thing he has, he will gratify him he loves, though it be to his own
loss. He whose heart is fired with love to Christ, will stick at nothing for
his sake. Gregory Nazianzen said of his Athenian Learning, he was glad he had
any thing of worth, to esteem as nothing for Christ. Love to God would devour
self-love.

3. Faith. Abraham was a great Self-denier, he left his Kindred, and Country,
and would travel into any place where God would have him. Whence was this? It
was from his Faith. Heb. 11.8, By faith Abraham obeyed, and went out, not
knowing whither he went. He who believes Christ is his, and Heaven is his, what
will not he relinquish for Christ's sake? The stronger a Christians faith is,
the more eminent will his self-denial be.

3. Pray much for self-denial. Prayer sets God a work Mittamus preces cordis
legatos. Cyprian.
, Psalm. 10.17. Some pray for assurance, but want self-denial, as if God would
set Seal to a Blank. Let this be your grand request, a self-denying frame of
heart. Self-denial does not grow in nature, it is a fruit of the Spirit. Beg of
God that he will plant this heavenly flower in your Soul. Say, Lord, whatever
thou deniest me, deny me not self-denial. Let me rather want great parts, nay,
let me rather want the comforts of the Spirit, than want self-denial. There may
be going to Heaven without comfort, but there is no going thither without
self-denial.

FINIS.

