A Warning from the Lord to the Inhabitants of the Earth.
WOE, woe! to the Inhabitants of the earth, and all that have forgotten God,
days without number; I will arise like a mighty man of War (says the Lord);
your day, your day, begins to gather blackness; Flee, flee, as on Eagles wings,
for desolation and desolution hasteneth: Your day, your day, in what does it
set? Oh the night! oh the obscurity! oh the sorrow and anguish! the pain of
soul and spirit, in your Suns going down, that is in wrath to the wicked: My
soul, my soul, my bowels, my bowels; I am grieved with pity, to see what
hastes, and is ready to overtake the world of ungodly, and many there be, that
are already in it. You swearers, drunkards, whoremongers, liars, cursers,
raylers, backbiters, persecutors, slanderers, and reproachers of them that are
good; your day does gather darkness, and a cry is gone over all that in which
your souls does delight, your glory is stained, and the beauty of your
excellency marred: Repent, repent, before light be utterly extinguished to ye,
and the day and hour comes, wherein it may be too late for ye (and that Gods
soul has no pleasure in ye, nor you in the overtakings of that day.)

Therefore let not the day of your visitation be slighted, and the mercy and
loving kindness of God rejected and resisted, least repentance be hid from
your eyes, and you perish in the pit of perpetual darkness and utter
destruction (with and among all the gainsayers of truth of old); for the cry of
my soul is for repentance and amendment of life, that none may perish in their
sins (if it may be); for which cause the sounding of my heart and bowels (to
the Lord) is for mercy and pity to his Creature, and to and in the creature it
is, for a true and through return to the Lord: And if I can be received in that
which wishes and desires the Creatures welfare (wherein the honor and Glory
of God is concerned); how acceptable will it be to the Lord? and to my soul is
and will be refreshment in the day of your visitation, and my mourning for the
returning of souls from a state of its captivity.

This is the desire of my soul, that all may come to the truth as it is in
Jesus. Christ is the Way, the Truth, the Life of God, and Light of men; and
whosoever follows me (says he) shall not abide in darkness, but shall have
the light of life: So as you mind the witness of God (within) that makes
manifest all the works of darkness; and as you join your minds to it, and love
it, and obey it, it will let you see all your bad thoughts, and all that is out
of the truth and way of God; and as you wait low in the fear of God, you will
come to see whom ye have pierced, and to mourn over him bitterly, even as a man
mourns over his first born.

My Life's Greeting to all Friends.
UNto all my dear Friends, that are begotten by the immortal Word of life, that
waits upon the Lord in singleness of heart, and in uprightness of soul, that
gives up all freely at the feet of Jesus, that stands still to be stripped of
all; such shall be clothed with the Robes of Righteousness, and with the
Garment of Praise, that follow the Lamb whithersoever he goes. And so my dear
Friends, give up all freely, and press forward in the pure way, that the Saints
of old walked in, that none may set down by the way, that none may look back at
the Fleshpots of Egypt, that trials, nor tribulations, nor persecutions, may
not hinder by the way; but all to press forward, like valiant Soldiers. And
to all you Mourners in Zion, a word from the Lord I have to you, you shall be
comforted; and all you that sow in tears, you shall reap with joy; for he that
has promised to come, will come, and bring his reward with him: For to them
that sear my Name, shall the Sun of Righteousness arise, with healing in his
wings: And they shall go forth, and grow up as Calves for the stall: They
shall be mine, says the Lord, in the day that I make up my Jewels; I will
spare them, even as a man spares his firstborn. And so my dear Friends, Lift
up your heads with Joy, for the day of your redemption draws nigh, and the Lord
is risen with Power, and with great Glory, and everlasting praises be given to
him for ever and for evermore; for he has revealed the Mystery which has
been hid from Ages and Generations, but now is made known to his Servants, and
to all the obedient; for it is the disobedient and the slothful, that turns the
Grace of God into wantonness, they dwell in a dry Land. Oh my dear Friends, it
is the desire of my soul, that you may all dwell upon the sure Foundation of
many Generations, that you may all come to eat of the Bread of Life, that you
may all drink of the pure Fountain of Life, that you may all be clothed with
the Robes of Righteousness, and with the Garment of Praise, that the Lord may
be glorified in his own work.

Who am your dear Friend and Sister (in truth) Margaret Waters.


