Imprimatur.

EDM. CALAMY.

The Christian's CHARTER Showing the PRIVILEGES OF A BELIEVER BY THOMAS WATSON
Master of Arts of Emanuel College in Cambridge and now Pastor of Stephens
Walbrook LAND.

He that spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for us all; how shall he
not with him freely give us all things?

Rom: 8.32. Godliness is profitable unto all things having promise of the life
that now is and of that which is to come.

1. Tim. 4.8. Quam divites illi qui omnia possident!

Aretius. The third impression Enlarged.

London Printed by T. R and EM for Ralph Smith at the sign of the Bible in
Cornhil, near The Royal Exchange. 1654.

TO THE Right Honorable, and Religious, The Lady MARY VERE Baroness of
Tilbury, And My much Honored LADY.
MADAM,
I Have presumed upon your Ladyship, humbly to present you with these few
Meditations. As it is a rich mercy to have a spiritual Ioynture, so it cannot
but be a comfort to know what it is. It Is a joy to the young heir to have a
view of his estate; that is the work of this Treatise, to set before you the
Land of promise. While we are here in the combat, we had need look to the
Crown to make us fight the more valiantly. Moses had an eye at the recompense
of reward, and that did animate him against sufferings; yea, our blessed
Savior himself looked at the joy set before him. Madam, Could we live in the
thoughts of these great things to come, what sublime, what sweet lives should
we lead! Surely, if there be any sad^nesse gathers in our spirits, if any
despondency, it comes in at this leak of unbelief. Vnbelif is a bad neighbor,
it is always raising either Jealousies of God, as if he would not be as good
as his Word; Unbelief with Sarah, laughs at the promise: Or scruples in the
heart, whether all these promises belong to us. The Devil shot three fiery
darts into the virgin-castle of Eves heart, whereof the first was the most
deadly, Yea, has God said? He would induce this belief in her, that God had
not spoken Truth: and when he had once wrought her to distrust, then she took
of the tree, etc. All ^he train of tentation that Satan ^ayes, is to blow up
the fort of our Faith. We had need maintain this grace, it is Faith must
maintain us. While the Pilot keeps his ship, his ship keeps him. Right
Honorable, Blessed be the riches of Gods grace, who has set this heavenly
plant in your heart, and has kept you in the faith, insomuch that all the
shakings of the times have but settled you the more; and I doubt not but he
that has begun a good work in you, will perform it until the day of Jesus
Christ. What an unparalleled mercy is it to be kept free in the time of
infection? God has given your Ladyship a sound judgment, and a tender
conscience, both which are jewels of great price. I may say of you, as it is
said of Jehoshaphat, his heart was lift up in the ways of the Lord, 2 Chronicles.
17.12. Yet I have observed, the more you have been lifted up in God, the more
you have been cast down in your self. It is excellent, when the higher we grow
in knowledge, the lower we grow in humility. I speak it to the praise of
free grace, God has crowned your silver hairs with golden virtues, every one
of which does shine as thos^ precious stones, the Sardius, the Topaz, and the
Diamond, Ezekiel. 28.13. Holiness is a beautiful thing, it carries a majesty in
the face of it; even those that oppose it, cannot but admire it. Grace differs
little from glory; the one is the seed, the other the flower* Grace is glory
militant, and glory is grace triumphant. Theodosius thought it a greater honor
that he was a Christian, then the head of an Empire. Your piety is a greater
glory to you, then your Parentage; it is more to be the daughter of faith then
to descend from Nobles, or to have the blood royal running in your veins.
Madam, There is a time shortly coming, when neither birth, estate, or any
worldly embellishments will do us good; you have laid in provision against that
time, and gotten the new birth, when all other birth and Nobility must lie in
the dust. This is that which makes your name smell in Gods Church, as the wine
of Lebanon. Go on, Right Honorable, in those paths which have an immediate
tendency to life and blessedness. We are like to meet with many rubs in the
way before we get to Heaven: It is said of Israel, their soul was much
discouraged because of the way. Number. 21.4.
Had we more grace, we should have need enough to use it: expect we must fiery
serpents; but, the righteous will hold on his way, Job 17.9. Is not every
Christian an Ensign-bearer to carry Christ's Colors? We must resolve to be good
in good earnest. The almost Christian shall be almost saved. It is wise counsel
our Savior gives, that we should count what religion will cost us, Luke 14.28.
It will cost us reproach; this is a part of Christ's livery which we must wear.
Think not that our innocence will privilege us from the reproaches and
slanders of the world; Christ was the most innocent person upon earth, never
did any unholy thought come into his mind, yet his innocence would not shield
him from slander; he was called a friend of sinners. Let us not be discouraged;
shall we cease from being Saints, because others will not cease from being
Devils? Is it a wonder, when an army is in fight, to see the bullets fly
abroad, and the fireballs? when the seed of the serpent is fighting with the
seed of the woman, is it strange to see the bullets of tentation fly, and the
fireballs of slander? But if our innocence will not keep us from being shot
at, it will keep us from being hurt: for as no flattery can heal a bad
conscience, so no slander can hurt a good. Again, Religion will cost us
persecution; this is a part of Christ's legacy which he has left us, In the
world ye shall have tribulation. Our ship would soon overturn, if it were not
ballasted with some afflictions. A Christian is a compounded creature, he has
some evil in him, therefore God afflicts; and he has some good in him,
therefore the Devil afflicts: Hence that of Cyprian Cum coeperis in Christo pie
vivere, ingrederis torcular.
, When a man begins to be religious, he must think of going into the
winepresse: and perhaps the blood of the grapes may be pressed out; but the
meditation of things to come, should sweeten the trials present, and make us,
that though we cannot live without them, yet to live above them. What if the
times are worse, if they make us better? and if our burdens be heavy, seeing
the way we are to go is but short! Madam, I will not hold you longer, I make
bold to devote this Manual to your Honor; I acknowledge how weak and
unfeathered it is, therefore unfit to fly abroad into the world; but the
importunity of some friends, and principally, the many favors received from
your Honor when I was in your noble Family, and which have been since
continued, did press upon me (yet not without some reluctance in my own
thoughts) to commit it to the public. I hope the discourse may be seasonable,
and doubt not but it will take some impression if it be as a nail fastened by
the great Master of Assemblies. I have drawn but the (...), or dark lineaments
of that blessed condition which the Saints shall arrive at: expect not to see
it in its orient colors till God himself give you the Pattern, and you shall
both see and enjoy it at once. The Lord preserve your Ladyship, and all those
Noble Branches descended from you, which is the prayer of,

From my Study at Stephens Walbrook. Feb. 5. 1651. MADAM, Your honors most
humble and faithful servant, THOMAS WATSON.

THE CONTENTS.
CHAP. I.
THe preface, and entering into the words. p. 1, 2 An Objection answered. page
3. All things in heaven and earth are a Believers. p. 6
CHAP. II. Reasons showing how the Believer comes to have this rich Charter.
1. Because he is an heir of the Covenant. p. 7. 2. Because he is so nearly
related to Christ, who is heir of all. p. 10.
CHAP. III.
The unsealing of the Charter. p. 11. Things present are a Believers. p. 12.
Section. 1. That Paul and Apollo are his. p. 12, 13. The first inference. p.
15. The second inference. p. 17. The third inference, p. 18.
Section. 2. That the world is his. p. 24. Section. 3. That life is his. p. 31.
CHAP. IV.
The enlarging of the Charter. p. 36. Section. 1. That remission is a Believers
privilege. p. 37* How we may know whether this be our privilege. p. 39, 40.
Section. 2. That Regeneration is a believers privilege. p. 41. Section 3.
That Adoption is a Believers privilege. p. 45. Section. 4. The inferences
drawn from Adoption. p. 51. Section. 5. The signs of Adoption. p. 59.
CHAP. V. The second part of the Charter.
That things to come are a Believers. p. 63.
CHAP. VI. The 12. Privileges in reversion.
1. Death is a Believers. p. 66. Though death in it self be a privation yet to
a child of God it is a Privilege. p. 67. To whom death is a privilege. p 78,
81
CHAP. VII.
The second Prerogative Royal of a Believer, he shall be carried up by the
Angels. p. 84.
CHAP. VIII.
The third Prerogative Royal: the Believer shall be with Christ. p. 89 Six
privileges growing out of this. 1. Vision. p. 92. 2. Union. p. 97. 3.
Nobility. p. 99. 4. Joy. p. 103. 5. Rest. p. 114. 6. Security. p. 118.

CHAP. IX.
The fourth Prerogative Royal: the glorious inheritance. p. 122. Which has six
Properties. 1. Sublimenesse. p. 124. 2. Magnificence. p. 125. 3. Purity. p.
126. 4. Amplitude. p. 128. 5. Light. p. 130. 6. Permanency. p. 131.
Concerning the glory of this inheritance four things superadded. 1. It is
ponderous. p. 135. 2. It is satisfying. p. 135, 136. 3. Though others have
their portion paid out, there is never the less for us. p. 137. 4. The souls
of the Elect enter upon possession immediately after death. p. 138.
That the New creature only is the heir of this new Jerusalem. p. 149.
CHAP. X.
The fifth Prerogative Royal: our knowledge shall be clear. p. 153. Five
Mysteries God will clear up to us in heaven, so far as our humane nature is
capable. p. 154. 1. The Mystery of the Trinity. ibid. 2. The Mystery of the
Incarnation. p. 155. 3. The Mystery of Scripture. p. 159. 4. The Mystery of
Providence. p. 160. 5. The Mystery of Hearts. p 163.

CHAP. XI.
The sixth Prerogative Royal: our love shall be perfect. p. 165.
CHAP. XII.
The seventh Prerogative Royal: the Resurrection of our bodies. p. 171. Several
Corolaries, our Uses drawn from the Resurrection. 1. Use. p. 182. 2. Use. p
185. 3. Use. ibid.

CHAP. XIII.
The eighth Prerogative Royal: the bodies of the Saints shall be richly enameld
with glory. p. 187. Five properties of glorified bodies. 1. Agility. p. 188. 2.
Clarity. p. 189. 3. Beauty. p. 190. 4. Impassibility. p. 192. 5. Immortality.
ibid.

CHAP. XIV.
The ninth Prerogative Royal: we shall be as the Angels in heaven. p. 194.
CHAP. XV.
The tenth Prerogative Royal: the Vindication of names. p. 199.
CHAP. XVI.
The eleventh Prerogative Royal: the Saints absolution. p. 203. Where is
observable, 1. The Book of life opened. ibid. 2. The blessed sentence. p. 204.

CHAP. XVII.
The twelfth Prerogative Royal: a public and honourahle mention of all the
good the Saints have done. p. 205.
CHAP. XVIII. Use. 1. Inform. 1. Branch.
The first inference drawn from the proposition. p. 210.
CHAP. XIX. Inform. 2. Branch.
The second inference, showing the difference between the godly and the wicked,
the wicked have all their worst things to come. p. 212. The Reprobates black
Charter. p. 213.
CHAP. XX. Use. 2. Trial.
Second Use of Trial: showing how a Christian may know whether he has any
right to the Believers privileges. p. 227. That faith gives a title. p. 229.
The nature of faith opened In its Essentials. p. 230. The nature of faith
opened In its Consequentials. p. 244. A reply to the sinners Objections. p.
256.
CHAP. XXI.
The Believers Objections answered. p. 259.
CHAP. XXII.
The third Use, Exhortation. 1. Branch. Showing the duties of a Believer by way
of Retaliation. 1. Duty, Thankfulness. p. 270. 2. Duty, Exemplarinesse of
life. p. 274. Walk as Christ did upon earth. 1. In Sanctity. p. 275. 2. In
Humility. p. 279. 3. In Charity. p. 283.
3. Duty, Contentation. p. 285. 4. Duty, Anticipation of heaven. p. 288. 5.
Duty, Cheerfulness, p. 292. 6 Duty, Envy not them who have only things
present. p. 297. 7 Duty, Comfort in the want of spiritual comfort. p. 299. 8.
Duty, All our things must be Christ's. p. 303. 9. Duty, Wait for these great
things in Reversion. p. 306.
Use. Exhortation. 2. Branch. To such as have only things here, that they would
labor for things to come. p. 312* Sublunary things are but 1. Vain. p. 313. 2.
Uncertain. ibid. 3. Vexing. p. 314. 4. Dangerous. ibid.
Our pursuit should be rather after the portion ^hen a few gifts. p. 317.


THE CHRISTIANS Charter.
1 Cor. 3.21, 22, 23. For all things are yours, whether Paul, or Apollo, or
Cephas, or the world, or life, or death, or things present, or things to come;
all are yours, and ye are Christ's, and Christ is Gods.


CHAP. I. The Porch or Entrance into the words, together with the Proposition.
Happiness is the mark, and center which every man aims at. The next thing
that is sought, after being, is being happy; and surely, the nearer the soul
comes to God who is the fountain of life and peace, the nearer it approaches
to happiness; and who so near to God as the Believer, who is mystically one
with him? he must needs be the happy man: And if you would survey his blessed
Estate, cast your eyes upon this text, which points to it, as the finger to the
Dial: For all things are yours. The text may not unfitly be compared to the
Tree of Life Rev 22.2.
, which bare twelve manner of fruits, and yielded her fruit every month; there
are many precious clusters growing out of this text, and being Skilfully
improved, will yield much fruit.

In the words we have the Inventory of a Christian, All things are your; A
strange paradox, when a believer can call nothing his, yet he can say, Eae sunt
fidelium opes, ut vel cum Croeso Rege certare ausint, quantum. vis summa^
premantur and injuria, and inopia. Weinrichius.
all things are his. I have often thought a poor Christian that lives in a
prison, or some old cottage, is like the Usurer, who though he goes poor, and
can hardly find himself bread, yet has thousands out at use: So it is with a
child of God, 2 Cor. 6.10.
as having nothing, yet possessing all things. What once the Philosopher said,
Solus sapiens dives, Only the wise man is the rich man; give me leave to say,
only the believer is the rich man; here is his estate summed up, All things are
his.

Before I come to the words, Object.
there is an objection must be removed, If all things are ours, there seems to
be a community: what is one man's, is another.

Answ. Answ.
The Apostle does not speak here of civil Possessions; Paul did not go about
to destroy any man's propriety; Omniae vestra quae in sacris li^er is non
excep^a. Pet. Mar.
for though he says* All things are yours; yet he does not say, what any man
has is yours.

Object.
Object. But is it not said, (...); They had all things. common? Acts 2.44.

It is true: but first, This was purely voluntary: Answ.
Piscator.
non fuit praeceptum, sed susceptum; there was no precept for it.

If it be objected, that this was set down as an example to imitate.

1. I answer; Examples in Scripture are not always Argumentative: The Prophet
Elijah called for fire from heaven, to consume the Captains and their fifties
^ King. 1.10.
; but it does not therefore follow, that when one Christian is angry with
another, he may call for fire from heaven. Thus the Primitive Saints out of
prudence and charity, had all things common; it will not therefore follow, that
in every age and century of the Church, there should be a common stock, and
every one have a share.

2. I answer; Though the Disciples had all things common, yet still they held
their propriety, as is clear by Peter's speech to Ananias Act. 5.4.
Whiles it remained, was it not thine own? and after it was sold, was it not in
thine own power? It is true in one sense, what the Primitive Church had, was
not their own; so much as could be spared was for the relief of the Saints,
thus all things were common; but still they kept a part of their estate in
their own hand. There is as the Schoolmen observe, duplex jus, Aquin.
a double right to an estate, a right of propriety, and a right of charity. The
right of charity belongs to the poor, but the right of propriety belongs to the
owner. For instance, God made a law, Deuteronomy. 23.24, 25.
That a man must not put his sickle into his Neighbors corn. We read that
the Disciples being hungry when they went through the fields on the Sabbath,
did pluck the ears of corn, there was charity; but they must not put the
sickle into the corn, here was propriety. This I the rather speak, because
there are some, that when God has made an enclosure would lay all common: It
was Satan pulled down Job's hedge. The Lord has set the eighth Commandment as a
fence about a man's estate* and he that breaks this hedge, a serpent shall bite
him. Thus having taken that objection out of the way, I come now to the Text.

And it falls into three parts. 1. The Inventory, (...), All things, 2. The
Proprietors, (...), All things are yours. 3. The tenure, (...), Ye are Christ's.
Which three branches will make up this one Proposition.

Doctr.
Doct. That all things in heaven and earth, are the portion and prerogative of
a believer. A large Inventory* All things: we can have but all. And the Apostle
uses an ingemination, he doubles it, to take away all hesitancy and doubting
from faith.

CHAP. II. The Arguments proving the Proposition.
THere are two Reasons which will serve to illustrate and confirm the
Proposition, All things are a believers.

1. Because the Covenant of Grace is his. Reas. 1.
The Covenant is our Great Charter, by virtue of which God settles all things
in heaven and earth upon us. By sin we had forfeited all, therefore if all
things be ours, the title comes in by a Covenant; till then we had nothing to
hold by. This Covenant is the issue and birth of Gods love* it is the legacy of
free grace. This Covenant is enriched with mercy, it is embroydered with
promises: you may read the Charter, Jer. 31 34 (...)
I will be their God. And there is a parallel to it, Ps 5^.7 (...)
I am God, even thy God: This is a sufficient dowry. If God be ours then all
things are ours.

Eminently Good. One Diamond does virtually contain many lesser pearls: the
excellencies in the creature are single, and want their Adjuncts. Learning has
not always Parentage: Honor has not always Virtue. No Individual can be
the receptacle and continent of all perfections: But those Excellencies that
lie scattered in the creature, are all united and concentred in God, as the
beams in the Sun, the drops in the Ocean.

Superlatively Good. Whatever is in the creature, is to- be found in God after
a more transcendent manner A man may be said to be wise, but God is infinitely
so; Powerful, but God is eternally so; Faithful, but God is unchangeably so.
Now in the Covenant of Grace, God passes himself over to us to be our God; I
am God, even thy God.

This expression, I am thy God, imports three things: 1. Pacification.
Donation. Israel said to the King of Syria, 1 King. 20.4
I am thine, and all that I have: This is alvearium divini mellis, an hive full
of divine comfort: all that is in God is ours: his Wisdom is ours, to teach us;
his love is ours, to pity us; his Spirit is ours, to comfort us; his mercy is
ours, to save us. When God says to the soul, I am thine, it is enough, he
cannot say more. Duration. I will be a God to thee, as long as I am a God.

Reas. 2.
2. Reason. All things are a believers, because Christ is his Jesus Christ is,
(...), the pillar and hinge upon which the Covenant of Grace turns. Without
Christ, we had nothing to do with a Covenant. The Covenant is founded upon
Christ, and is sealed in his blood. We read of the Mercy-seat Exo. 25.17
, which was a divine Hieroglyphick, typifying Jesus Christ. There will I meet
thee, and I will commune with thee from above the Mercy-seat* ver. 22. To show
that in Christ God is propitions. From above this Mercy-seat he communes with
us, and enters into Covenant. Therefore it is observable, when the Apostle had
said, All thing are yours, he presently adds, Ye are Christ's. There comes in
the title, we hold all in capite. This golden chain, Things present, and things
to come, is linked to us, by virtue of our being linked to Christ. By faith we
have an interest in Christ; having an interest in Christ, we have an interest
in God; having an interest in God, we have a title to all things.

CHAP. III. The opening of the Charter, Things present are a Believers.
AND now I come to that great question, Quest.
What are the things contained in the Charter?

Resp. There are two words in Answ.
the text that express it, Things present, and things to come. I begin with
the first.

1. (...).
1. (...), Things present are a believers. Amongst these things present, there
are three specified in the text; Paul and Apollo, the world, life, etc. Here
is, me thinks, a row of pearl: I will take every one of these asunder, and show
you their worth, then see how rich a believer is, that wears such a chain of
pearl about him.

. 1. Paul and Apollo are yours.
1. (...).
1. Under these words Paul and Apollo, by a figure are comprehended all the
Ministers of Christ, Summi and in^imi. Pareus.
the weakest as well as the eminentest. Paul and Apollo are yours, viz. their
labors are for Vo^is ad bonum inserviunt. Aretius.
edifying the Church. They are Beza.
adminicula fidei, the helpers of your faith. The parts of a Minister are not
given him for himself, they are the Churches (...). Oecumenius in locum.
. If the people have a taint of error, the Ministers of Christ must season
them with wholesome words; therefore they are called Mat. 5.13.
the salt of the earth. If any soul be fainting under the burden of sin, it is
the work of a Minister to drop in comfort, therefore he is said to hold forth
the breasts as a nurse 1 These. 2.7.
. Thus Paul and Apollo are yours: All the gifts of a Minister, all his graces,
are not only for himself, they are the Ephesians. 4.8.
Churches. A Minister must not monopolize his gifts to himself, this is to
hide his talents in a napkin; such an one makes an enclosure, where God would
have all common. Paul and Apollo are yours: The Ministers of Christ should be
as musk among linen, which casts a fragrancy; or like that box of spiknard,
which being broken open, filled the house with its odor Joh. 12.3.
: So should they do by the savor of their ointments. A Minister by sending out
a sweet perfume in his doctrine and life, makes the Church of God as a garden
of spices. Paul and Apollo are yours: They are as a lamp or torch to light
souls to heaven Rev. 1.20.
. Chrysostom's hearers thought they had as good be without the Sun in the
Firmament, as Chrysostom in the Pulpit. Paul and Apollo are springs that hold
the water of life: as these springs must not be poisoned, so neither must they
be shut up or sealed. A Minister of Christ is both a granary to hold the corn,
and a Steward to give it out. It Is little better then theft, to withhold the
bread of life. The lips of Apollo must be as an honeycomb, dropping in season
and out of season. The graces of the Spirit are sacred flowers, which though
they cannot die, yet being apt to wither, Apollo must come with his water-pot 1
Cor. 3.6.
. It is not enough that there be Grace in the heart, but it must be poured into
his lips. As Paul is a believer, so all things are his; but as Paul is a
Minister, so he is not his own, he is the Churches. There are three corrolaries
I shall draw from this.

Use 1. If Paul and Apollo are yours, Use 1.
Every Minister of Christ is given for the edifying of the Church; take heed
that you despise not the least of these; for all are for your profit. The least
star gives light, the least drop moistens. There is some use to be made even of
the lowest parts of men: There are gifts differing Romans 12.6.
, but all are yours. The weakest Minister may help to strengthen your faith. In
the law, all the Levites did not sacrifice, only the Priests, as Aaron, and
his sons; but all were serviceable in the worship of God; those that did not
sacrifice, yet helped to bear the Arc. As in a building, some bring stones,
some timber, some perhaps bring only nails; yet these are useful, these serve
to fasten the work in the building: The Church of God is a spiritual building 1
Cor. 3.9
, some Ministers bring stones, are more eminent and useful; others timber,
others less, they have but a nail in the work, yet all serve for the good of
this building. The least nail in the Ministry serves for the fastening of souls
to Christ, therefore let none be contemned. Though all are not Apostles, all
are not Evangelists, all have not the same dexterous abilities in their work;
yet remember, all are yours, all edify. Oftentimes God crowns his labors, and
sends most fish into his net, who though he may be less skilful, is more
faithful; and though he has less of the brain, yet more of the heart. An
Ambassador may deliver his Embassage with a trembling lip, and a stammering
tongue, but he is honorable for his works sake, he represents the Kings person.

Use. 2. Use. 2.
If Paul and Apollo are yours, all Christ's Ministers have a subserviency to
your good, they come to make up the match between Christ and you: then love
Paul and Apollo. All the labors of a Minister, his prayers, his tears, the
pregnancy of his parts, the torrent of his affections, all are yours; then by
the law of equity, there must be some reflections of love from your hearts
toward Paul and Apollo, such as are set over you in the Lord Phil. 2.29.
. If they seek your establishment, you must seek their encouragement; if they
endeavor your salvation, you must endeavor their safety; What an unnatural
thing is it, that any should strive to bring them to death, whose very calling
is to bring men to life* The Minister is a spiritual Father 1 Cor. 4.16.
, it was a brand of infamy on them, Hos. 4.4. For this people are as they that
strive with their Priest. Was there none to fall out with but the Priest, even
he that offered up their sacrifices for them? and what is it, think we, for men
to quarrel with their spiritual Fathers? even those whom they once had a
venerable opinion of, and acknowledged to be the means of their conversion?
Either love your spiritual Fathers or there is ground of suspicion that yours
was but a false birth.

Use. 3.
Use 3. If Paul and Apollo are yours, they are for the building you up in your
faith. Then endeavor to get good by the labors of Paul and Apollo, I mean
such as labor in the word and doctrine. Let them not plow upon the rock:
Answer Gods end in sending them among you. Oh labor to profit: you may get
some knowledge by the word, such as is discursive and polemicall, and yet not
profit.

Quest. What is it to profit?

Resp. The Apostle tells us, Heb. 4.2. When we mingle the word with faith, that
is, when we so hear, that we believe, and so believe, that we are transformed
into the image of the word; Ye have obeyed from the heart that form of
doctrine, (...), into which ye were delivered* Romans 6.17.
It is one thing for the truth to be delivered to us, and another thing for us
to be delivered into the truth: the words are a Metaphor taken from lead and
silver cast into a mould. This is to profit, when our hearts are cast into the
mould of the word preached: As the seed is spiritual, so the heart is
spiritual. We should do as the Be, when she has sucked sweetness from the
flower, she works it in her own hive, and so turns it to honey: Thus when we
have sucked any precious truth, we should by holy Meditation work it in the
hive of our hearts, and then it would turn to honey: we should profit by it. Oh
let the labors of Paul and Apollo have an influence upon us. A good hearer
should labor to go out from the Ministry of the Word, as Naaman out of
Jordan, his leprous flesh was healed and became as the other: So though we came
to the word proud, we should go home humble; though we came to the word
earthly, we should go home heavenly: Our Leprosy should be healed. Ambrose
observes of the woman of Joh. 4.7.
Samaria, that came to Jacobs Well: She came peccatrix, she went away
praedicatrix; She came a sinner, she went away a Prophetess. Such a
metamorphosis should the Word of God make. Let not the Ministers of Christ say
upon their deathbeds; the bellows are burnt, and the lead consumed; they have
spent their lungs, and exhausted their strength; but know not whether they have
done any thing, unless preached men to hell. Oh labor to grow: some grow not
at all, others grow worse for hearing; 2 Timothy 3.13.
Evil men shall wax worse and worse, as Pliny speaks of some fish that swim
backward: they grow dead-hearted in Religion, they grow covetous, they grow
Apostates: It were far easier to write a book of Apostates in this age, then a
book of Martyrs; men grow riper for hell every day. Oh labor to thrive under
the spiritual dew that falls upon you. Let not the Ministers of Christ, be as
those which beat the air. Is it not sad, when the Spiritual clouds shall drop
their rain upon a barren heath? When the Ministers tongue is as the pen of a
ready Writer, and the peoples heart is like paper when it is oiled* that will
take no impression. Oh improve in grace: If you have a barren piece of ground,
you do all you can to improve it, and will you not improve a barren heart? It
is a great Encomium and honor to the Ministry, when people thrive under it;
Need we, as some others* Epistles of commendation 2 Cor. 3.1.
? Paul esteemed the Corinthians his glory and his crown; hence, says he,
though other Ministers have need of letters of commendation, yet he needed
none; for when men should hear of the faith of these Corinthians, which was
wrought in them by Paul's preaching, this was sufficient certificate for him
that God had blessed his labors, there should need no other Epistle, they
themselves were walking certificates, they were his letters testimonial. This
was an high Elogium; what an honor is it to a Minister, when it shall be said
of him as once of Octavius, when he came into Rome he found the walls of brick,
but he left them walls of marble; So when the Minister came among the people,
he found hearts of stone, but he left hearts of flesh. On the other side, it is
a dishonor to a Minister when his people are like Labans lambs, or Pharaoh's
kine. There are some diseases which they call, opprobria Medicorum, the
reproaches of Physicians; and there are some people who may becalled opprobria
Ministrorum, the reproaches of Ministers: what greater dishonor to a Minister,
then when it shall be said of him, he has lived so many years in a Parish, he
found them an ignorant people, and they are so still; he found them a dull,
slothful people, (as if they went to the Temple, as some use to go to the
Apothecaries shop, to take a Recipe to make them sleep) and they are so still;
he found them a profane people, and so they are still* Surely there is some
fault, or God does not go forth with his labors; such a people are not a
Ministers crown, but his heartbreaking Oh let your profiting appear to all. 1 Timothy 4*15.
God sends Paul and Apollo as blessings among a people, they are to be helpers
of your faith* if they toil all night, and take nothing Luke 5.5.
, it is to be feared that Satan caught the fish ere they came at their net.

. 2. Showing, That the world is a Believers.
2. (...).
2. The next thing is, the world is yours.

1. The lawful use of the world. is a Believers. 2. The special use of the
world, is a Believers.
1. The lawful use of the world is yours. The Gospel does somewhat enlarge our
Charter. We are not in all things, so tied up as the Jews were; there were
several sorts of meat that were prohibited them, they might eat of those beasts
only that did chew the cud, and part the hoof Lev. 1.3.
, they might not eat of the swine; because though it did divide the hoof, yet
it did not chew the cud; nor of the Hare, because though it did chew the cud;
yet it did not not divide the hoof, it was unclean; but to Christians that live
under the the Gospel, there is not this prohibition. The world is yours, the
lawful use of it is yours; every creature being sanctified by the Word and
Prayer, is good 1 Timothy 4.4.
, and we may eat, asking no question for conscience sake. The World is a
garden, God has given us leave to pick of any flower. It is a Paradise, we may
eat of any tree that grows in it, but the forbidden, that is sin; 1 Cor. 7.31.
And they that use this World, as not abusing it. We are apt to offend most in
lawful things. The World is yours to traffic in; only let them that buy, be
as if they bought not: take heed that you do not drive such a trade in the
world that you are like to break in your trading for heaven.

2. The special use of the world is yours.

1. The world was made for your sake.

2. All things that fall out in the world are for your good.

1. The world was made for your sake. God has raised this great fabric
chiefly for a Believer. The Saints are Gods jewels, Mal. 3.17. The world is the
shrine or Cabinet where God locks up these jewels for a time. The world is
yours (...). Oecumen.
, it was made for you. The creation is but a theater, to act the great work of
Redemption upon. The world is the field, the Saints are the corn, the
ordinances are the showers, the mercies of God are the Sunshine that ripens
this corn, death is the sickle that cuts it down, the Angels are the harvesters
that carry it into the barn. The world is yours, God would never have made this
field, were it not for the corn growing in it. What use then is there of the
wicked? They are as an hedge to keep the corn from foreign invasions, though
oft-times they are a thorn-hedge.

Quest. But, alas, Quest.
a child of God has often the least share in the world, how then is the world
his?

Answ. If thou art a believer, Answ.
that little thou have, though it be but an handful of the world, it is blessed
to thee; If there be any consecrated ground in the world, that is a believers.
The world is yours; Esau had the venison, but Jacob got the blessing: a little
blessed is sweet. A little of the world with a great deal of peace, is better
then the revenues of unrighteousness. Ps 37.16.
Every mercy a child of God has swims to him in Christ's blood, and this sauce
makes it relish the sweeter. Whatever he tastes, is seasoned with Gods love; he
has not only the mercy, but the blessing: So that the World is a Believers. An
Unbeliever, that has the World at will; yet the World is not his, he does not
taste the quintessence of it. Thorns and thistles does the ground bring forth
to him. He feeds upon the fruit of the curse, Mal. 2.2.
I will curse your blessings; he eats with bitter herbs: So that properly the
World is a Believers. He only has a Scripture-tenure, and that little he has
turns to cream. Every mercy is a present sent him from heaven.

2. All things that fall out in the World, are for your good.

1. The want of the World, all is for your good. 2. The hatred of the World,
all is for your good.
Mundi indigentia.
1. The want of the World is for your good. By wanting the honors and revenues
of the World, you want the temptations that others have. Physicians observe,
that men die sooner by the abundance of blood, then the scarcity; it is hard to
say, which kills most, the sword or surfeit: A glutton with his teeth digs his
own grave. The world is a silken net, Prove. 3.32.
the prosperity of fools shall destroy them. Him whom I shall kiss, (says
Judas) take him: so, whom the world kisseth, it often betrays. The want of the
world is a mercy.

2. The Hatred of the world is for your good. Mundi inimicit^a.
Wicked men are instruments in Gods hand for good, ( albeit they mean not so;)
they are flails to thresh off our husks, files to brighten our graces, leeches
to suck out the noxious blood. Dant preciosa balsama. Hier.
Out of the most poisonful drug, God distills his glory and our salvation. A
child of God is beholding even to his enemies, The ploughers ploughed upon my
back Ps. 129.3
, if they did not plough and harrow us, we should bear but a very thin crop.
After a man has planted a tree, he prunes and dresseth it. Persecutors are
Gods pruning-hook, to cut off the excrescencies of sin; and evermore the
bleeding vine is most fruitful: the envy and malice of the wicked shall do us
good: God stirred up the people of Egypt to hate the Israelites, and that was a
means to usher in their deliverance. The frowns of the wicked make us the
more ambitious of Gods smile; their incensed rage, as it shall carry on Gods
decree (for while they sit backward to his command, they shall row forward to
his decree) so it shall have a subserviency to our good. Every cross wind of
providence shall blow a believer nearer to the port of glory. What a blessed
condition is a child of God in! kill him, or save him alive, it is all one. The
opposition of the world is for his good. The world is yours.

. 3. Showing, That life is a believers.
3. The next thing is, Life is yours. Hierome understands it of the life of
Christ. 3. (...)
It is true, Christ's life is ours, the life which he lived on earth, and the
life which he now lives in heaven; his satisfaction and his intercession both
are ours, and they are of unspeakable comfort to us. But I conceive by life in
the text, is meant Natural life, that which is contradistinguished to death: So
Ambrose. Ambrose.
But how is life a Believers? Two ways.

1. The privilege of life is his. 2, The comfort of life is his.
1. The privilege of life is a believers: that is, life to a child of God, is
an advantage for heaven: this life is given him to make provision for a better
life. Life is the porch of Eternity; here the Believer dresseth himself, that
he may be fit to enter in with the Bridegroom. We cannot say of a wicked man,
(unless catachrestically) that life is his. Though he lives, yet life is not
his, he is dead while he lives. He does not improve the life of nature to get
the life of grace; he is like a man that takes the lease of a farm, and makes
no benefit of it. Diu fuit in mundo, non vixit; he has been so long in the
world, as Seneca speaks, but he has not lived. He was borne in the Reign of
such a King, his father left him such an estate, he was of such an age, and
then he died; there is an end of him, his life was not worth a prayer, nor his
death worth a tear. But life is yours; it is a privilege to a Believer, while
he has natural life, he lays hold upon 1 Timothy 6.12.
eternal life, how does he work out his salvation? what a do is there to get
his evidences sealed? what weeping, what wrestling? how does he even take
heaven by storm? So that life is yours: It is to a child of God a season of
grace, the seed-time for eternity; the longer he lives, the riper he grows for
heaven. The life of a believer spends as a lamp, he does good to himself and
others; the life of a sinner runs out as the sand, it does little good. The
life of the one is as a figure engraven in marble; the life of the other as
letters written in dust.

2. The ^^^fort of life is a believers 2 Cor. 6.10.
. As sorrowful, yet always rejoicing ^ake a child of God at the (...)
disadvantage, let his life be ^ver-cast with clouds, yet if there be any
comfort in life, the believer has it. Our life is often imbecill and weak, but
the spiritual life does administer comfort to the natural. Homo componitur ex
mortali and rationali, Man (says Augustine) is compounded of the mortal part
and the rational part; Aug.
the rational serves to comfort the mortal. So, I may say, a Christian consists
of a natural life, and a spiritual, the spiritual revives the natural. Observe
how the spiritual life distills sweetness into the natural, in three cases.

Poverty. This often eclipses the comfort of life (...). Menand.
. But what though poverty has clipped the wings? Poor in the world, yet rich
in faith, Jam. 2.5. The one humbles, the other revives

Reproach. This is an heartbreaking, Psalm. 69.20. Reproach has broken my
heart. Yet a Christianhath his Cordial by him, 2 Cor. 1.12. (...): For this is
our rejoicing, the testimony of our conscience. Who would desire a better Jury
to acquit him then God, and his own conscience?

3. In case of losses. It Is in it Judge 8.2.
vintage. Ye took joyfully the spoiling of your goods, (...), knowing in your
selves that you have in heaven a better and an enduring substance, Heb. 10.34.
They had lost their estate, but not their God. Here is, you see, the dry rod
blossoming. The spiritual life distills comfort into the natural. Take the
sourest part of a Christians life, and there is comfort in it. When you hear
him sighing bitterly, it is for sin; and such a sigh, though it may break the
heart, yet it revives it Isa 57.15
. The tears of the godly are sweeter then the triumph of the wicked. The
comfort that a wicked man has is only imaginary, it is but a pleasant fancy;
as rejoicing, yet always sorrowing: He has that within spoils his music.
But life is yours. When a believers life is at the lowest ebb, yet he has
aspringtide of comfort.

CHAP. IV. The Augmentation of the Charter.
AMong these (...), Things present, There are yet three other privileges which
are in the believers Charter.

1. Remission of his sin. 2. Regeneration of his nature. 3. Adoption of his
person.
. 1. Showing, That remission of sin is a jewel of the Believers Crown.
1. The Remission of his sin. This is, 1. A costly mercy. (...).
2. A choice mercy.


1. It is a costly mercy. That Without shedding of blood is no remission Heb.
9.22.
; Christ did bleed out our pardon: he was not only a Lamb without spot, but a
Lamb slain. Every pardon a sinner has, is written in Christ's blood.

2. It is a choice mercy. This I will forgive their iniquity; and I will
remember their sin no more Jer. 31.34.
. This is an enriching mercy, it entitles us to blessedness, Psalm. 32.1.
Blessed is the man to whom the Lord imputes not his sin. Of all the debts
we owe, our sins are the worst; now to have the book cancelled, and God
appeased; to hear God whisper by his Spirit, Son, be of good cheer, thy
sins are forgiven; I will not blot thy name out of my book, but I will blot
thy sins out of my book: This is a mercy of the first magnitude. Biessed is
that man; in the Original it is in the plural, (...)
Blessednesses. Have thou but one blessing, my father, says Genesis 27.38.
Esau? lo, here a plurality, a whole chain of blessings. Pardon of sin is a
voluminous mercy, there are many mercies bound up with it. You may name it Gad,
for behold a troop comes Genesis 30.11
. When God pardons a sinner^, now he puts on (if I may so speak) his brightest
robe: Therefore when he would proclaim himself in his glory to Moses, it was
after this manner, The Lord, the Lord, merciful Ex. 34.1.
. His mercy is his glory: and if you read a little further, you shall see it
was no other then pardoning mercy Ver. 7.
, Forgiving iniquity, and transgression, and sin, etc. It Is an high act of
indulgence. God seals the sinners pardon with a kiss. This made David put on
his best clothes, and anoint himself 1 Samuel 1.20.
. It was strange, his child newly dead, and God had told him, that the sword
should not depart from his house, yet now he falls anointing himself: the
reason was, David had heard good news, God sent him his pardon by Nathan the
Prophet 1 Samuel 12.13.
, The Lord has put away thy sin. This oil of gladness which God had now
poured into his heart, made way for the anointing oil.

Quest. Quest.
How shall I know that this privilege is mine?

Answ.
Answ. He whose sins are pardoned has something to show for it. There are two
Scripture-evidences. She stood behind Christ weeping Luke 7.38.
. Her heart was a sacred limbeck, out of which those tears were distilled.

Quest.
Quest. But to what purpose is all this cost? what needs weeping after pardon?

Answ.
Answ. Because now sin and mercy are drawn forth in more lively colors then
ever. The Spirit comes thus to a sinner; Thou have sinned against God, who
never intended thee evil, thou have abused that mercy that saves thee; all
this thou have done, yet behold, here is thy pardon; I will set up my mercy
above thy sin, nay, in spite of it. The sinner being sensible of this, falls a
weeping, and wishes himself even dissolved into tears. He Zach. 12.10.
looks upon a bleeding Christ, with a bleeding heart. Nothing can so melt the
heart of a sinner, as the love of God, and the blood of Christ. 2. He whose
sins are pardoned, his heart burns in love to God: thus Mary Magdalene, as her
eyes were broached with tears, so her heart was fired with love to Christ; For
she loved much Luke 7.47.
. Gods love in pardoning a sinner is attractive. The Law has a driving power,
but love has a drawing power.

. 2. Showing, That Regeneration goes along with Remission, and is a branch of
the Charter.
2d. Privilege. 2. (...).
The Regeneration of his nature, which is nothing else but the transforming the
heart, and casting it into a new mould: you have a pregnant place for this,
Romans 12.2.
Be ye transformed by the renewing of your mind. In the Incarnation, Christ
did assume our humane nature, and in Regeneration, we partake of his divine
nature.

This blessed work of Regeneration, is in Scripture called sometimes the new
birth Joh. 3.3.
, because it is begotten of a new seed, the Word, Iam. 1.18. And sometimes the
new creature Gal. 6.15
; new, not in substance, but in quality. This is the great promise, Ezekiel.
36.26. A new heart also will I give you. Observe, Remission and Regeneration
are two twins. When God pardons, he takes away the Rebels heart. Where this
work of Regeneration is wrought, the heart has a new Byas, and the life a new
Edition. How great a privilege this is, will appear two ways. Till this
blessed work of Regeneration, we are in a spiritual sense, 1. Stil-born. 2.
Illegitimate.


1. Stil-born; Dead in trespasses Ephesians. 2.1. A man in his pure naturals is
dead, 1. In respect of working. 2. In respect of honor.


1. In respect of working. 1. Respectu operis.
A dead man cannot work. The works of a sinner in Scripture are called dead
works Heb. 9.14
: bid a natural man do any thing, you had as good set a dead man about your
work: bring him to a Sermon, you do but bring a dead corpse to Church; bring
him to the Sacrament, he poisons the Sacramental cup; he may receive the
Elements, but nothing concocts Christus fide dege^^^dus. Tertul.
. It is as if you should put bread and wine into a dead man's mouth. Reprove him
sharply for his sin Tit. 1.1^
; To what purpose do you strike a dead man?

2. Respectu honoris.
2. He is dead in respect of Honor. He is dead to all privileges. He is not
fit to inherit mercy. Who sets the Crown upon a dead man? The Apostle calls it
the Crown of life, Revel. 2.10. it is only the living Christian shall wear the
Crown of life.

2. A man unregenerate is spirituallly illegetimate: The Devil is his father.
Ye are of your father the devil Joh. 8.44
. And sin is his mother. Sin is the womb that bare him, and the paps that gave
him suck. Thus it is till Christ be formed in the heart of a sinner, then his
reproach is rolled away from him. Regeneration does ennoble a person, therefore
such an one is said to be borne of God, 1 John 3.9. O how beautiful is that
soul! I may say with Bernard, O anima, Dei insignita imagine, desponsata fide,
donata Spiritu, etc. O divine soul, invested with the image of God, espoused to
him by faith! A person regenerate is imbroydered with all the graces of the
Spirit; he has the glistering spangles of holiness; the Angels glory shining
in him; he has upon him the reflex of Christ's beauty. The new creature is a
new Paradise set full of the heavenly plants. An heart ennobled with grace (to
speak with reverence) is Gods lesser heaven.

. 3. Showing, The nature of Adoption, and that this is a part of the Believers
Charter.
3. The third privilege is the Adoption of his person: 3. (...).
Having predestined us to the Adoption of children by Jesus Christ Ephesians. 1.5.
. A believer is made of the blood royal of heaven. This adoption, or sonship
consists in three things: 1. A transition, or translation from one family to
another. As a plant must be taken out of one soil and put into another, else
it cannot properly be said to be transplanted. He that is adopted, is taken out
of the old family of the devil, Ephesians. 2.2. and Hell, ver. 3. to which he was
heir apparent, and is made of the family of heaven, ver. 19. of a noble family,
(...). God is his Father, Christ his elder Brother, the Saints Coheirs, the
Angels Fellow Servants in that Family. Psalm. 45.10. Forget also thy Fathers
house. He that is spiritually adopted, has now no more to do with sin. Ephraim
shall say, What have I to do any more with Idols Hos. 14.8.
? A child of God has indeed to do with sin as with an enemy, to which he
gives battle; but not as with a Lord, to which he yields obedience. He is free
from sin Romans 6.18.
, I do not say he is free from duty. Was it ever heard that a child should be
freed from duty to his Parents? This is such a freedom as Rebels take. 3.
Adoption consists in a legal investiture into all the

1. He that is divinely adopted, There is now therefore no condemnation to them
which are in Christ Jesus. A believer is out of the power of damnation. Will a
father pass the sentence upon his own son? He may, as in some cases Judges
have done in their circuit: but God will not. God does so love his eldest Son,
that for his sake he will not destroy any of his adopted sons. Indeed, every
believer is like to Christ the eldest Son; He has the same spirit, the same
judgment, the same will: so that there being something of Christ the eldest
Son in every adopted son, God will not destroy him; for then he should throw
something of Christ into hell.

2. The second royalty is, a new name. In two cases the name is changed; in
marriage the wife loses her own name; and in adoption, he that is adopted,
assumes a new name; before a Slave, now a Son; of a sinner, a Saint; To him
that overcomes, I will give a white stone, and in the stone a new name written
Rev. 2.17
. The white stone, that is remission, and the new name, that is adoption; and
the new name is put in the white stone, to show, that our adoption is grounded
upon our justification; and this new name is written, to show, that God has
all the names of his children enrolled in the Book of life.

3. The third Royalty or privilege of adoption, is a new Scutchion. Lion, in
regard of their courage, Prove. 28.1. Indeed, they are nearly allied to him, who
is the Lion of the tribe of Judah. Sometimes they give the Eagle, in regard of
their sublimenesse: They are ever flying up to heaven upon the two wings of
faith and love, Isa. 40.31. They shall mount up with wings as Eagles. Sometimes
they give the Dove, in regard of their meekness and innocence, Cant. 2.14. O my
Dove, that art in the clefts of the rock. This is the dignity of a a believer,
he has a new Scutchion.

4. He that is adopted, is heir apparent to all the promises. There is never a
promise in the Bible, but a child of God may say, this is mine: therefore they
are called the heirs of the promise Heb. 6.17.
. The promises are called great and precious, 1 Pet. 1.4. Great, for their
extent: Precious, for their excellency. The promises are a Cabinet of jewels,
they are breasts full of the wine of consolation; there is Christ and heaven in
a promise; now he that is adopted is made an heir of the promise, and he may
lay a legal claim to it. An unbeliever has nothing to do with these
privileges. Ishmael was the son of the bondwoman, he had no right to the
family: Cast out the bondwoman and her son, as Sarah once said to Abraham,
Genesis 21.10. So the unbeliever is not adopted, he is none of the family; and God
will say at the day of Judgment, Cast out this son of the bondwoman into
outer darkness, where is weeping and gnashing of teeth.

. 4. The Corrolaries, or necessary inferences from adoption.
This blessed state of adoption does strongly infer two things.

1. Gods love. 2. Gods care.
1. Adoption sets forth Gods complacency, Ioh. 3.1. Behold, what manner of love
has the Father bestowed upon us, that we should be called the sons of God? It
is mercy that feeds a sinner, but it is rich mercy that adopts him. If the
Saints are children, all Gods transactions toward them are love. Let him do
what he will with them, yet he loves them, they are adopted.

Object. 1.
Object. But God is angry with them.

Answ.
Answ. Gods love and his anger toward his children are not opposita, but
diversa, they may stand together, he is angry in love; Rev 3.19
As many as I love, I rebuke and chasten. A bitter pill may be as needful for
preserving health, as a julip or cordial: God afflicts with the same love he
adopts: Bern.
Deus irascitur cum non irascitur: God is most angry, when he is not angry.
Affliction is an argument of sonship. If you endure chastnings, God deals
with you as with sons Heb. 12.7.
. God had one Son without sin, but no son without stripes: Afflictions
are refining, Prove. 17.3. The fining pot is for silver; and the furnace for
Gold. Fiery trials make golden Christians. Afflictions are purifying, Dan.
12.10. Many shall be tried, and made white. We think, God is going to destroy
us, but he only lays us a whitening. God will make us at last bless him for
our sufferings. Oculos quos peccatum claudit, poena aperit: Greg.
The eyes that sin shuts, affliction opens. When Manasseh was in chains, then
he knew the Lord was God. Every Christian must go to heaven upon the cross.
First, the stones in Solomon's Temple were hewn and polished, and then set up
into a building: first, the Saints (who are called ^ Pet. 2.5
lively stones) must be hewn and carved by sufferings, as the cornerstone
was, and so made meet for the celestial building. Col. 1.12.


Object. 2. But sometimes those that are adopted are under the black clouds of
desertion: Object. 2.
How does this consist with love?

Answ. 1. Yet God leaves a seed of comfort: He that believes, Answ. 1.
has the seed of God in him 1 John 3.9
. Gods children when they want the Sun, yet they have a day-s^ar in their
heart. They have the work of sanctification, when they want the wine of
consolation: Grace is better then comfort.

vision, but not in regard of union. Thus it was with Jesus Christ, when he
cried out, My God, my God. There was not a separation of the union between him
and his Father, only a suspension of the vision No^ fuit divulsio unionis, sed
tantum suspensio visionis.
. When the Moon does intervene between us and the Sun, there follows an
eclipse. Gods love, through the interposition of our sins, may be darkened and
eclipsed, but still he is a Father. The Sun may be hid in a cloud, but it is
not out of the Firmament. The promises in time of desertion may be as it were
sequestered; we have not that comfort from them as formerly; but still the
believers title holds good in law.

toward him. God may change his countenance, but not his heart. It is one
thing for God to desert, another thing to dis-inherit. Hos. 8.11
How shall I give thee up, O Ephraim? Hos. 8.11. This is a Metaphor taken from
a father going to dis-inherit his son, and while he is going to set his hand to
the deed, his bowels begin to melt, and to yearn over him: though he be a
prodigal child, yet he is a child, I will not cut off the entail: So says
God, How shall I give thee up? though Ephraim has been a rebellious son, yet
he is a son, I will not dis-inherit him. Gods heart may be full of love, when
there is a veil upon his face. The Lord may change his dispensation toward
his children, but not his disposition. The believer may say, I am adopted, and
let God do what he will with me, let him take the rod, or the staff, it is all
one, he loves me.

2. Adoption sets forth Gods tender care. Will not a father take care for his
child? This care of God shines forth in two things.

1. Prevention. 2. Provision.
Prevention: God ever lies sentinel to keep off evil from us. 1. Temporal
evil. There are many casualties and contingencies, to which we are incident;
God shields them off, he keeps watch and ward for his people, Psalm. 121.4. He
that keeps Israel, shall neither slumber nor sleep. The eye of providence is
ever awake, and God gives his Angels charge over us, Psalm. 91.11. A believer
has a guard of Angels for his lifeguard. There is an elegant expression to
set this out, He bare you as upon Eagles wings Ex. 19.4.
, an emblem of Gods providendentiall care to his adopted. The Eagle fears no
bird from above to hurt her young, only the arrow from beneath; therefore she
carries them upon her wings, that the Arrow must first hit her, before it can
come at her young ones: Thus God carries his children upon the wings of
providence; and they are such, that there is no clipping these wings, not can
any Arrow hurt them.

2. Spiritual evils, Psalm 91.10. There shall no evil befall thee: God does
not say, No afflictions shall befall us, but no evil.

Question. Quest.
But sometimes evil in this sense befalls the godly; viz. sin, they spot their
garments.

Answer 1. But that evil shall not be mortal. Answ. 1.
As quicksilver is in it self dangerous, but by ointments it is so tempered,
that it is killed; so sin is in it self deadly, but being tempered with
repentance, and mixed with the sacred ointment of Christ's blood, the venomous
damning nature of it is taken away.

2. Though sin in it self be evil, yet to believers God will bring good out
of that evil; he will humble them, and every trip shall make them the more
watchful. Poison is in it self evil, but the wise Physician can turn it to a
sovereign medicine.

Provision. Has God adopted us for children, and will he not provide for us?
Behold the fowls of the air, etc Mat. 6.26.
. Does a man feed his bird, and will he not feed his child? Consider the
lilies of the field ver. 28.
. Does God cloth the lilies, and will he not cloth his lambs? The Lord cares
for us, 1 Peter 5.7. As long as his heart is full of love, so long his head
will be full of care.

. 5. Showing, The signs of adoption.
Quest. But how shall I know that I am adopted? Quest.


Answ. If thou have in thee a child-like heart, which is, Answ.


1. A tender heart, 2 Chr. 34.27. Because thy heart was tender. The heart that
was before a flinty, is now become a fleshy heart. The heart is fearful of sin;
the least hair makes the eye weep, so the least sin makes the heart smite.
David's heart smote him when he cut off the lap of King Readiness garment; what
would it have done if he had cut off his head? A tender heart is like melting
wax to God, he may set what seal he will upon it. A tender heart is like
adamant to the threatenings of men; in this sense, the more tender the heart is,
the more hard.

praying heart. The Spirit of adoption is a Spirit of supplication: Ye have
received the Spirit of adoption, whereby ye cry, Abba, Father Romans 8.15.
. Before the child is out of the womb, it cannot cry. While men lie in the
womb of their natural estate, they cannot pray, so as to be heard; but when
they are born again of the seed of the Word, then they cry, Abba, Father.
Prayer is nothing else but the souls breathing it self into the bosom of its
Father. Prayer is a sweet and familiar intercourse with God; He comes down to
us upon the wings of his Spirit, and we go up to him upon the wings of prayer.
It is reported in the life of Luther, that when he prayed, it was, Theodor? in
vit. Luth. page 142.
tanta reverentia, ut si Deo; and tanta fiducia, ut si amico: it was with so
much reverence, as if he were praying to God; and with so much boldness, as if
he had been speaking to his friend. This prayer must have constancy and
instancy, (...), Romans 12.12. continuing constant: The heart must boil over.
Prayer is compared to groans unutterable Romans 8.26.
, it alludes to a woman that is in pangs: we should be in pangs when we are
traveling for mercy: such prayer commands God himself Is. 45.11
.

3. A childe-like heart is a loyal heart; it is molded into obedience, I
delight to do thy will, O my God.

4. A childe-like heart is a zealous heart. It Is impatient of Gods dishonor.
was cool in his own cause; but hot in Gods. When the people of Israel had
wrought folly in the golden calfe, he breaks the Tables. As we shall answer for
idle words, so for sinful silence. It is dangerous in this sense to be
possessed with a dumb devil. David says, the zeal of Gods house had Ps. 69.9.
eaten him up. Many Christians, whose zeal once had almost eaten them up, now
they have eaten up their zeal. Let men talk of bitterness, for my part, I can
never believe that he has the heart of a child in him, that can be patient
when Gods glory suffers. Can an ingenuous child endure to hear his father
reproached? Though we should be silent under Gods displeasure, yet not under
his dishonor. When there is a fire of zeal kindled at the heart, it will
break forth at the lips. Zeal tempered with holiness, Psalm. 39.3.
this white and sanguine is the best complexion of the soul. Of all others,
let Ministers be impatient when Gods glory is eclipsed and impeached. Let not
them be either shaken with fear, or seduced with flattery; they are Gods
ensign-bearers, his warriors 2 Timothy 2.3.
, and therefore must discharge against sin. God never made Ministers to be as
false glasses, to make bad faces look fair. ^or want of this fire of zeal,
they are in danger of another fire, even the burning lake, Rev. 21.8. into
which the fearful shall be cast.

CHAP. V. Showing that things to come are a Believers.
AND so I slide into the second part of the Text, (...), Things to come are
yours: here is portion enough! It is a great comfort that when things present
are taken away, yet things to come are ours. Me thinks, the very naming this
word, Things to come, should make the spirits of a Christian revive. It is a
sweet word; our happiness is in reversion, the best is behind, all is not yet
come that is promised. Truly, if we had nothing but what we have here, we were
miserable 1 Cor. 15.9.
; here are disgraces, martyrdomes; we must taste some of that Gall and Vinegar
which Jesus Christ drank upon the Cross: but O Christian, be of good cheer,
there is something to come: The best part of your portion is yet unpaid. All
things to come are yours. God deals with us, as a Merchant, that shows the
worst piece of cloth first. We meet sometimes with course usage in the world,
that piece which is of the finest spinning, is kept till we come at heaven. It
is true, God does chequer his work in this life, a white spot with a black; he
gives us something to sweeten our pilgrimage here, the Praelibations and tastes
of his love; these are the earnest and first fruits, but what is this to that
which is to come? Now we are the sons of God, 1 John 3.2. But it does not yet
appear what we shall be: expect that God should keep his best wine till last;
Things to come are yours.

CHAP. VI. The first Prerogative; To Come.
BUt what are those things that are to come? Quest.


Answ. Answ.
There are twelve things yet to come, the which I call twelve Prerogatives
Royal, wherewith the Believer shall be invested. The first is set down in the
Text which I will begin with. (...).
1. Death is yours. Death in Scripture is called an Enemy, Cor. 15.26. Yet here
it is put in a Christians Inventory, Death is yours. It Is an enemy to the
mortal part, but a friend to the spiritual. It is one of our best friends next
to Christ; Death is a part of the joincture. When Moses saw his rod turned into
a serpent, it did at the first affright him, and he fled from it; but when God
bade him take hold of it, he found by the miraculous effects which it wrought,
it did him and the people of Israel much good; so death at the first sight is
like the rod turned into a serpent, it affrights; but when by Faith we take
hold of it, then we find much benefit and comfort in it. As Moses rod divided
the waters, and made a passage for Israel into Canaan Ex. 19.16.
; So death divides the Waters of Tribulation, and makes a passage for us into
the land of promise. Death is called the King of Terrors Job 18.14.
, but it can do a child of God no hurt; the sting is pulled out 1 Cor. 15 55.
; The Be by stinging loses its sting: While death did sting Christ upon the
Cross, it has quite lost its sting to a Believer: It can hurt the soul no
more then David did King Saul, when he cut off the lap of his garment. Death to
a Believer, is but like the Arresting of a man for a Debt, after the Debt is
paid; Death, as Gods Sergeant at Arms, may Arrest us, and carry us before Gods
Justice, but Christ will show our discharge; the Debt-book is crossed in his
blood.

Quest. How is Death ours?

Answ. Two ways.

1. It is the Outlet to Sin. 2. It is the Inlet to happiness.
1. Death to a Believer, is an under a sinful necessity; even the best Saint;
There is not a just man upon earth, that does good and sins not. Eccles.
7.20.
Evil thoughts are continually arising out of our hearts, as sparks out of a
Furnace. Sin keeps house with us whether we will or no; the best Saint alive is
troubled with In-mates; though he forsakes his sins, yet his sins will not
forsake him. 1. Sin does indispose to good; How to perform that which is good
I find not, Romans 7. ver. 18. When we would pray, the heart is as a Voyal out
of tune: When we would weep, we are as irritate to evil; The Flesh lusts
against the Spirit Gal. 5.17
: There needs no wind of Tentation, we have Tide strong enough in our hearts,
to carry us to Hell. Consider sin under this threefold notion.

body of death (...). Ro^. 7.24.
, and that not impertinently. First, It is a body, for its weight. The body is
an heavy and weighty substance: so is Sin a body, it weighs us down. When we
should pray, the weights of Sin are tied to our feet that we cannot ascend.
Anselm seeing a little Boy playing with a Bird, he let her fly up, and
presently pulls the Bird down again by a string: So, says he, it is with me,
as with this Bird; when I would fly up to heaven upon the wings of meditation,
I find a string tied to my leg; I am overpowered with corruption: but Death
pulls off these weights of sin and lets the Soul free. Secondly, Sin is a body
of death for its annoyance. It was a cruel torment that one Meze^ti^us
used, he tied a dead man to a living, that the dead man might annoy and infest
the living. Thus it is with a child of God, he has two men within him, Flesh
and Spirit, Grace and Corruption* here is the dead man tied to the living; a
proud sinful heart is worse to a child of God, then the smell of a dead Corpse.
Indeed, to a natural man sin is not offensive, for being dead in sin, he is
not sensible of the body of death: but where there is a vital principle, there
is no greater annoyance then the body of Death: Insomuch that the pious soul
often cries out, as David, Woe is me, that I dwell in Mesek, and sojourn in the
tents of Kedar Ps. 120.5
. So says he, Woe is me, that I am constrained to abide with sin. How long
shall I be troubled with inmates? How long shall I offend that God whom I love?
When shall I leave these Tents of Kedar?

Tyrant, it carries in it the nature of a Law; the Apostle calls it the law in
his members Romans 7.24.
. There is the law of Pride; the law of Unbelief; it has a kind of
jurisdiction, as Caesar over the Senate, perpetuam dictaturam Verse. 15.
. What I hate that do I: The Apostle was like a man carried down the stream,
and was not able to bear up against it. Sin takes us prisoners; whence are
our carnal fears? whence our passions? whence is it that a child of God does
that which he allows not; yea, against knowledge? only this, he is for a time
Sins Prisoner: The Flesh often prevails (though in cool blood, the elder
shall serve the younger;) whence is it, that he who is borne of God, should be
so earthly? The reason is, he is captived under sin: but be of good cheer,
where grace makes a Combat, death shall make a Conquest.

3. Sin is a leprous spot. It makes every thing we touch unclean: Priests
commanded them to take away the stones in the wall, in which the Plague was,
and take other stones, and put in the place of those stones, and take other
mortar, Levit. 14.42. Lev. 14.42.
But when the Plague spread again in the wall, then he must break down the
house with the stones and timber thereof, Verse. 45. Ver. 45.
Thus in every man naturally, there is a fretting leprosy of sin, pride,
impenitency, etc. These are leprous spots: now in conversion, here God does, as
it were, take away the old stones and timber, and put new in the room; he
makes a change in the heart of a sinner Ezekiel. 36.26.
, but still the leprousie of sin spreads; then at last, death comes and pulls
down the stones and timber of the house, and the soul is quite freed from the
leprousie. Sin is a defiling thing, it makes us red with guilt, and black
with filth Quanta foeditas vitiosae mentis. Tull.
; It Is compared to a menstruous cloth Is. 30.22
; we need carry it no higher. Pliny tells us that the Trees with touching of
it, would become barren Ejus tactu sterilescunt f^uges, ejus gustu in rabiem
adiguntur canes. Plin.
; and Hierom says, Nihil in lege menstruato immundius; there was nothing in
the Law more unclean, then the menstruous cloth; this is sin. Sin draws
the Devils picture in a man; malice, is the Devils eye; oppression, is his
hand; hypocrisy, is his cloven foot; but behold, death will give us our
discharge, death is the last and best Physician Ultimus morborum medicus mors.
; which cures all diseases; the aching head, and the unbelieving heart. Peccatum
erat obstetrix mortis, and mors erit sepulchrum peccati. Sin was the Midwife
that brought Death into the World, and Death shall be the Grave to bury Sin;
O the Privilege of a Believer! he is not taken away in his sins; but he is
taken away from his sins. The Persians had a certain day in the year, which
they called vitiorum interitum, wherein they used to kill all Serpents and
venomous creatures: Brisson. de reg. persi. lib. 2.
Such a day as that will the day of death be to a man in Christ. This day the
old Serpent dies in a Believer, that has so often stung him with his
temptations: this day the sins of the godly, these venomous creatures shall
all be destroyed; they shall never be proud more, they shall never grieve the
Spirit of God more; the Death of the body shall quite destroy the Body of death.

Sampson found an honey-combe in the Lions carcass; so may a child of God suck
much sweetness from death. Death is the gate of life; death pulls off our
rags, and gives us change of raiment: Nemo ante funera foel^x. Solon.
all the hurt it does us, is to put us into a better condition. Death is called
in Scripture a sleep, 1 These. 4.14. Those that sleep in Jesus: as after sleep
the spirits are exhilarated and refreshed: so after Death, the times of
refreshing come from the presence of the Lord. Death is yours. Death opens the
portal into Heaven, as Tertullian speaks: The day of a Christian's death, is
the birthday of his heavenly life; it is his Ascension-day to glory; it is his
Marriage-day with Jesus Christ. After our Funeral begins our Marriage; Well
then might Solomon say, Better is the day of a man's death, then the day of his
birth Eccles. 7.1.
. Death is the spiritual man's preferment, why then should he fear it? Death, I
confess has a grimme visage to an impenitent sinner, so it is ghastly to look
upon; it is a pursuivant to carry him to hell: but to such as are in Christ,
Death is yours: It is a part of the Joincture. Death is like the Pillar of
cloud Ex. 14.19
, it has a dark-side to a sinner; but it has a light-side to a believer:
Deaths pale face looks ruddy, when the blood of sprinkling is upon it; in
short, Faith gives us a propriety in Heaven, Death gives us a possession; Fear
not your privilege; the thoughts of death should be delightful. Jacob, when
he saw the Chariots, his spirits revived: Death is a Wagon or Chariot, to
carry us to our Fathers house. What were the Martyrs flames but a fiery Chariot
to carry them up to Heaven? How should we long for Death? This world is but a
Desert we live in: Shall we not be willing to leave it for Paradise? We say, It
is good to be here; we affect an earthly eternity: but grace must curb nature.
Think of the privileges of Death. The Planets have a proper motion, and a
violent; by their proper motion they are carried from the West to the East; but
by a violent motion they are overruled by the Primum Mobile, and are carried
from the East to the West: So though naturally we desire to live here, as we
are made up of flesh; yet grace should be as the primum mobile, or
master-wheele, that swayes our will, and carries us in a violent motion, making
us long for death. Saint Paul desired to be dissolved: and 2 Corinthians. 5.2. 2
Cor. 5.2.
In this we groan earnestly, desiring to be clothed upon with our house which
is from heaven: we would put off the earthly clothes of our body, and put on
the bright robe of immortality; we groan, (...). It Is a Metaphor taken from a
mother, who being pregnant, groans and cries out for delivery. Austine longed
to die, that he might see that head which was once crowned with thorns. We
pray, Thy Kingdom come: and when God is leading us into his Kingdom, shall we
be afraid to go? The times we live in should, me thinks, make us long for
death: we live in dying times, we may hear as it were Gods passing Bell,
ringing over these Nations. Foelix Nepotianus, qui haec non videt, as Hierome
said in his time; Nepotian is an happy man, that does not see the evils which
befall us: they are well that are out of the storm and are gotten already to the
haven: To me to die is gain Phil. 1.21.
.

Quest. But who shall have this privilege? Answ. death is certain: but there
are only two sorts of Persons, to whom we may say, Death is yours. It Is your
preferment.

die daily: We are not borne Angels, die we must; Therefore we had need carry
always a deaths-head about us. The Basilisk if it see a man first, it kills
him; but if he see it first, it does him no hurt: The Basilisk death, if it
sees us first, before we see it, it is dangerous: but if we see it first by
meditating upon it, it does us no hurt: study death, often walk among the
Tombs. It is the thoughts of death beforehand, that must do us good. In a dark
night, one Torch carried before a man, is worth many Torches carried after him:
one serious thought of death beforehand, one tear shed for sin before
death, is worth a thousand shed after, when it is too late. It Is good to make
Death our familiar, and in this sense to be in Deaths often: 2 Cor. 11.23.
that if God should presently seal a lease of ejectment, if he should send us a
Letter of Summons this night to surrender, we might have nothing to do but to
die.

Alas, how do we adjourne the thoughts of death* It Is almost death to think of
it. There are some that are in the very threshold of the grave, who have one
leg in the earth and another leg in hell: yet put far from them the evil
day Am. 6.3.
. I have read of our Lysicrates, who in his old age dyed his gray hairs black,
that he might seem young again. When we should be building our Tombs, we are
building our Tabernacles: die daily, lest you die eternally. The holy
Patriarchs in purchasing for themselves a burying place, showed us what
thoughts they still had of Death. Joseph of Arimathea erected his Sepulcher in
his Garden: we have many that set up the Trophies of their victories; others
that set up their Scutchions, that they may blaze their honor: but how few
that set up their Sepulchers? who erect in their hearts, the serious thoughts
of death? Oh, remember when you are in your gardens, in places most delicious
and fragrant, to keep a place for your Tombstone: die daily. There is no
better way to bring sin into a Consumption, then by often looking on the pale
horse, and him that sits thereon Rev. 6.8.
. By thinking on death, we begin to repent of an evil life; and so we disarme
death before it comes, and cut the lock where its strength lies.

2. Such as are in Heaven before they die: death is yours. If we will When I
awake, I am still with thee, Psalm. 139.17. David awaked in Heaven, his
conversation is there, Philip. 3.20. For our conversation is in Heaven. The
Believer often ascends Mount Tabor, and takes a prospect of glory. O that we
had this celestial frame of heart! When Zacheus was in the crowd, he was too
low to see Christ; therefore he climbed up into the Sycomore-Tree Luke 19.4
: When we are in a crowd of worldly business, we cannot see Christ: Climb up
into the tree by divine contemplation: If thou would get Christ into thy
heart, let Heaven be in thy eye: Set your affections upon things above Col. 3.2.
, Colos. 3.2. There needs no exhortation to set our hearts upon things below.
How is the curse of the Serpent upon most men? Upon thy belly shall thou go,
and dust shall thou eat all the days of thy life Genesis 3.14
. Those that feed only upon dust, Golden dust, will be unwilling to return to
dust: Death will be terrible.

The tribes of Reuben and Gad desired Moses that they might stay on this side
Jordan, and have their portion there; it being a place convenient for their
Cattle Number. 32.41.
: It seems they minded their Cattle more then their passage into the holy Land:
so many Christians, if they may have but a little grazing here in the world, in
their Shops, and in their Farms, they art content to live on this side the
River, and mind not their passage into the Land of Promise: you that are in
heaven before you die, Death is yours.

An earthly Saint, is a contradiction. (...) signifies a man refined and
separated from the earth: if an Astronomer, in stead of observing the Planets,
and the motions of the Heavens, should take a reed in his hand, and fall a
measuring of the earth, would not this be counted a solecisme? and is it not as
great a solecisme in Religion, when men that pretend to have Christ and heaven
in their eye, yet mind earthly things? Phil. 3.19. Our souls, me thinks,
should be like to a ship, which is made little and narrow downwards, but more
wide and broad upwards: So our affections should be very narrow downwards to
the earth, but wide and large upwards toward heavenly things. Thus we see
death is a privilege to believers; death is yours: the heir, while he is
under age, is capable of the land he is borne to: but he has not the use or
the benefit of it, till he comes of age; be as old as you will, you are never
of age till you die: Death brings us of age, and then the possession comes into
our hands.

CHAP. VII. The second Prerogative Royal of a Believer.
NOw I proceed to the second Prerogative, which is yet to come: what holy David
says of Sion, Glorious things are spoken of thee, O thou City of God, Psalm.
87.3. I may apply to these blessed things in reversion.

2. The second Prerogative royal carried up by the Angels: In this life, a
believer is carried by the Saints; they lift him upon the wings of their
prayers, and when they can carry him no longer, after death the Angels take
him, and carry him up: thus shall it be done to the man whom God will honor.
Wicked men who are of the Devils lifeguard, when they die, they shall have a
black-guard of Angels to carry them: Thou who art an old sinner (that have an
hoary head, but thy heart is as young in sin as ever*) I may say to thee, as
Christ said in another sense, to Peter: When thou art old, thou shall stretch
forth thy hands, and another shall gird thee, and carry thee whither thou
would not Joh. 21.18.
. So I say, Thou old sinner, the time is shortly coming, when thou shall
stretch forth thy hands on thy deathbed, and another shall bind thee, and
carry thee whither thou would not; thou shall be carried by a black-guard:
but a believer shall be carried by the Angels into Heaven: The beggar died, and
was carried by the Angels into Abraham 's bosom Luke 16.22.
. Abraham's bosom is a figurative speech, representing the seat of the
Blessed: thither was he carried by the Angels: Poor Lazarus, when he was upon
earth, he had no friends, but dogs to come at him; when he was dead, he had ^
convoy of Angels. After our fall* the Angels (as well as God) fell out with us,
and became our enemies; hence, we read that the Angels (set out by the
Cherubims) stood with a flaming sword, to keep our first Parents out of
Paradise, Genesis 3.24. but being at peace with God, we are at peace with the
Angels: Therefore the Angel comes with an Olive Branch of Peace in his mouth,
and proclaims with triumph, the news of Christ's incarnation, Luke 2.11. For
unto you is borne, in the City of David, a Savior, which is Christ the Lord:
the Angels bless God for man's Redemption, Ver. 13. And suddenly there was with
the Angel a multitude of the heavenly host praising God, and saying, Glory be
to God in the highest. The Angels love mankind (especially where there is the
new-man) and are ready to do all friendly offices for us: as in our lifetime,
they are our supporters Psalm. 91.11. He shall give his Angels charge to keep
thee: So after death they are our Porters: Lazarus was carried up by the
Angels. The Angels are called (...), ministering Spirits Heb. 1.14
; they are willing to minister for the good of the Saints: Hence some observe,
it is said, Lazarus was carried, (...), by the Angels, in the plural, not by
one Angel: as if the Angels had been ambitious to carry Lazarus, and every one
strived which should have a part: wicked men do not strive more, who shall have
a part in the death of the godly, then the Angels do, who shall bear a part in
their ascension. O in what pomp and triumph did Lazarus's soul now ride! never
was Dives so honored in his life, as Lazarus was at his death. For a King to
help to carry the Hearse of one of his Subjects, were an high honor; but a
believer shall have a guard of Angels to conduct him. Amasis King of Egypt,
that he might set forth his magnificence, would have his Chariot drawn with
four Princes, which he had conquered in the War: but what was all this to the
Chariot in which Lazarus, and the soul of every believer shall be drawn at
their death? they shall be carried by the Angels of God.

CHAP. VIII. The third Prerogative Royal of a Believer.
THe next great Prerogative is, The Believer shall be with Christ in glory,
Phil. 1.23. I desire (...), to be dissolved, or loosen anchor, and to be with
Christ Phil. 1.23
. This is a privilege of the first magnitude: surely, we can be no losers by
being with Christ. A graft or scion, though it be taken out of the tree, it
does not perish, but is set into a better stock: thus it is with a Christian;
while he is here, (even after Conversion) there is much of the wild Olive
still in him; now when this scion, by death is cut off, he does not perish, but
is set into a more noble and generous stock, he is with Christ, which is far
better: a state of perfection, is better then a state of imperfection. Our
graces are our best jewels, but they are imperfect and do not give out their
full luster: they are like the Moon, which when it shines brightest, has a
dark spot. Our faith is mingled with unbelief, our humility is stained with
pride; the flame of our graces is not so pure, but it has some smoke; grace
is but in its infancy and minority, it will never be of full growth till we are
with Christ. This is the highest link in the chain of glory, we shall be with
Christ. What is it the pious soul desires in this life? is it not to have the
sweet presence of Christ? he cares for nothing, but what has aliquid Christi
Bucer.
, something of Christ in it* he loves duties, only as they are manuductions to
Christ* why is prayer so sweet, but because the soul has private conference
with Christ? Why is the Word precious, but because it is a means to convey
Christ? he comes down to us upon the wings of the Spirit; and we go up to him
upon the wings of Faith: An ordinance without Christ, is but feeding upon the
dish in stead of the meat. Why does the wife love the Letter, but because it
brings news of her husband? Here we enjoy Christ by letters, and that is sweet;
but what will it be to enjoy his presence in glory? Here is that which may
amaze us, we shall be with Christ, Christ is all that is desirable; nay, he is
more then we can desire. A man that is thirsty, he desires only a little water
to quench his thirst; but bring him to the Sea, and here is more then he can
desire. In Christ, there is not only a fullness of sufficiency, but a fullness
of redundancy; it overflows all the banks: a Christian that is most sublimated
by Faith, has neither an head to devise, nor an heart to desire all that which
is in Christ; only when we come to Heaven, God will enlarge the vessel of our
desire, and will fill us as Christ did the Waterpots with Wine, Joh. 2.7.
up to the brim. Now this privilege of being with Christ, has six privileges
growing out of it.

SECT. I. The first Privilege of being with Christ.
1. VIsion, Job 19. ver. 26. In my flesh shall I see God Job 19.26
; the sight of Jesus Christ will be the most sublime and ravishing object to a
glorified Saint. When Christ was upon earth, his beauty was hid. He has no
form or comeliness Is. 53.2.
: the light of the divine nature was hid in the dark lantern of the humane:
it was hid under reproaches, sufferings; yet even at that time, there was
enough beauty in Christ to delight the heart of God. My Elect in whom my soul
delights Isa. 42.1.
: then his veil was upon his face, but what will it be when the veil shall be
taken off, and he shall appear all in his embroydery? In him dwells the
fullness of the Godhead bodily, Col. 2.9. Such glittering beams shall sparkle
forth from Christ at that day as will infinitely amaze and ravish the eyes of
the beholders. Imagine what a blessed sight it will be to see Christ wearing
the robe of our humane nature, and to see that nature sitting in glory above
the Angels; Ipse Deus sufficit ad praemium: Bern.
It Is Heaven enough to see Christ. Whom have I in heaven but thee Ps. 73.25
? Ibi sunt Angeli and Arch-angeli.
There are, says Musculus, Angels and Archangels; I but they do not make
Heaven: Christ is the most sparkling Diamond in the ring of glory. Therefore
the Apostle does not say, I desire to be dissolved, and to be (...), in heaven,
but to be (...), with Christ: because his presence is the heaven of heaven.

If Jesus Christ be so beautiful here in his ordinances, viz. Word, Prayer,
Sacraments, (they are the beauties of holiness) If there be so much excellency
in Christ, when we see him by the eye of faith, through the prospective glass
of the promise: O what will it be, when we shall see him face to face! When
Christ was transfigured on the Mount, he was full of glory, Mat. 17.2. His
raiment was white as the light. If his transfiguration was so glorious, what
will his inauguration be? What a glorious time will it be, when, as it was said
of Mordec^i Est. 8.15
, we shall see him in the presence of his Father, arrayed in royal apparel,
and with a great crown of gold upon his head. Oh look often upon him with a
believing eye, whom you shall shortly see with a glorified eye.

That which will add to the Saints vision, and make it truly beatificall, is,
that (through Christ) the dread, and terror of the divine Essence shall be
taken away; Majesty shall appear in God, to preserve reverence, but withal,
Majesty clothed with beauty, and tempered with sweetness to excite love and
joy in the Saints. Through the face of Christ as through a bright Mirror, or
Crystal the glory of God, his wisdom, holiness, mercy shall be sweetly
transparent. We shall see God as a friend; not as guilty Adam did, who was
afraid and hid himself Genesis 3.10
; but as Queen Esther looked upon King Ahashuerus holding forth the Golden
scepter Est. 5.2.
. We shall have the smiles of Gods face, and the kisses of his lips. O what a
blessed sight of God will this be! surely it will not be formidable, but
comfortable; and to set off this vision the more, the Saints shall always be
beholding the Kings face; while they live here in the world Gods eye is never
off from them, and in heaven their eye shall be never off from God; they shall
be ever looking on that blessed object, and the more they behold the shining
luster of his glory, the more they shall be ravished both with desire, and
delight. God must make us able to bear the sight of all this. We are no more
able to bear a sight of glory, then a sight of wrath, but we shall be
qualified, and made fit to receive these penetrating beams.

SECT. II. The second Privilege of being with Christ.
THe next Privilege is Union; our being with Christ is not only local, but
conjugall: We shall so behold him as to be made one with him. What nearer then
union? what sweeter? Union is the spring of joy, the ground of privilege; by
virtue of this blessed union with Christ, all those rare beauties wherewith the
humane nature of the Lord Jesus is bespangled, shall be ours. Let us compare
two Scriptures, Ioh. 17.24. Father, I will that they also whom thou have given
me, be with me, where I am, that they may behold my glory. That is, the glory
of the humane nature; but that is not all, Ver. 22. The glory that thou have
given me, I have given them. Christ has not his glory only for himself, but
for us: we shall shine by his beams: Non tantum aderit gloria sed ine^it.
Bernard.
Here Christ puts his graces upon his Spouse, and in heaven he will put his
glory upon her. No wonder then the Queens daughter is all glorious within,
Psalm. 45.14. and her clothing of wrought gold. How glorious will the Spouse
be, when she has Christ's jewels upon her? Judge not of the Saints by what
they are, but by what they shall be: It does not yet appear what we shall be,
1 John 3.1. Why, what shall we be? We shall be like him. The Spouse of Christ
shall not only be made one with Christ, but she shall be made like Christ: in
other marriages, the Spouse changes her condition, but here she changes her
complexion: not that the Saints in glory shall receive of Christ's Essence (a
Socinian error,) They shall have as much glory, as the humane nature is
capable of: but though Christ conveys his Image, yet not his Essence. The Sun
shining upon a glass, leaves a print of its beauty there; and it is hard to
distinguish between the glass and the sunbeam: but the glass is not the beam,
the sun conveys only it is likeness, not it is essence.

SECT. III. The third Privilege of being with Christ.
THe next privilege, is, Nobility: which consists in Three Things. 1. Every
Saint shall be a King: There are some that aspire after earthly Scepters, as if
here were the place of the Saints reign: then surely, the Church of God should
not be militant upon earth, but triumphant. But, behold the honor of the
Saints, they shall be all Kings! (though I say not in this life) all Christ's
Subjects are Kings: therefore you read of, 1. Their Royal ^obe, Revel. 6. v.
11. 2. Their Throne, Revel. 3, v. 21. To him that overcomes, I will give him to
sit upon my Fathers throne. Perhaps here he had but a poor thatched house, but
there a Throne. 3. Their Crown. In this world, the Saints wear a crown of
Thorns, but there a crown of Glory: and this crown has two Properties.

Incorruptible, 1 Pet. 5.4. it fades not away; it does not wither: but after
millions of years is as bright and flourishing, as at the first days wearing;
eternity is a flower of the Saints crown.

2. It is unmixed, it has no cares Non ita ^^rona circundat ca^ut S^cut a^^m^m
solli^citudo.
that often they make their head ache. Cyrus the Persian King was wont to say,
Did men but know the cares which he sustained under an Imperial crown, he
thought no man would stoop to take it up. The Crown Royal, though it may be
made of pure gold, yet it is mixed metal: but the Saints Crown in glory, is
without mixture: it is not mingled with care of keeping, or fear of losing: oh
then, let us be willing to suffer for Christ; if we bear the Cross, we shall
wear the Crown.

A second Part of the Saints honor is, they shall sit with Jesus Know ye not
that the Saints shall judge the world 1 Cor. 6.3
? The Saints shall sit with Christ in Judicature, as the Justice of Peace with
the Judge: the Saints are Christ's Assessors; they shall be with him upon the
Bench, applauding his righteous sentence. O, what a glorious Tribunal will that
be! here the world judges the Saints, but there the Saints shall judge the
world.

is not ashamed to call them brethren Heb. 2.11.
: and surely, Christ will see them of the blood royal advanced. To what Angels
has Christ said, Ye are my brethren? This honor have all his Saints. As the
Saints robes in glory shall be brighter then the Angels, (theirs being only the
righteousness of creatures, but these having upon them the Righteousness of
God Jer. 23.6.
*) So their dignity shall be greater. O infinite! here we are prisoners at bar,
but there Favorites at Court: the Saints shall sit down in glory above the
Angels.

SECT. IV. The fourth Privilege of being with Christ.
THe next privilege is Joy: This joy of the Saints, proceeds from Union; when
our union with Christ is perfect, then our joy shall be full, Rev. 21.4. And
God shall wipe away all tears, and there shall be no more sorrow.

1. There shall be no weeping. a Sponge to wipe off the tears of the Saints.
Here the Spouse is in Sable, it being a time of absence from her Husband Mat.
9.15
: But in heaven Christ will take away the Spouses mourning; he will pull off
all her black, and bloody robes, and will cloth her in white robes, Revel.
7.13. White, as it is an Emblem of the Saints purity, so it is a type of their
joy; heaven should not be heaven, if there were weeping there: hell indeed is
called a place of weeping; they that would not shed a tear for their sins,
while they lived, shall have weeping enough; but we never read of weeping in
heaven. Christ will take down our harps from the Willows; there he will call
for his Heralds and trumpeters: the Angels, those blessed Quiristers, shall
sing the divine anthems of praise* an^ the Saints shall join in that heavenly
Consort. If it were possible, that any tears could be shed, when we are with
Christ, they should be the tears of joy, as sometimes we have seen a man
weep for exessive joy; Christ will turn all our water there into wine.

2. There shall be no sorrow; one no sin to humble; heaven is such a pure
soil, that the Viper of sin will not breed there; there shall be no Devil to
tempt; the old Serpent is cast out of the heavenly Paradise. There shall be no
Enemy to molest: When Israel had conquered Canaan, yet they could not get rid
of all the Canaanites, they would live among them; But the Canaanites would
dwell in that land Judge. 1.27.
: But when we are with Christ, we shall never be troubled with Canaanites more.
In that day (I may allude to that of the Prophet) there shall be no more the
Canaanite dwell in the house of the Lord Zac. 14.2 Nullus ibi hostium metus,
nullae infidiae Daemonum. Bern.
. God will keep the heavenly Paradise with a flaming Sword, that none shall
come near to hurt: Upon all that glory shall be a defense Isa. 4.5.
. There shall be nothing to breed sorrow in heaven. There are two things that
usually raise the clouds of sorrow, and both shall be removed when we are with
Christ.

1. The frowns of great men: how ambitious are men of the Princes smile? but
alas, that quickly sets in a cloud, and then their comforts are in the wain,
they are sad! but when we are with Christ, we shall have a perpetual smile from
God: the Saints shall never be out of favor, Jesus Christ is the great
favorite at Court; and as long as God smiles upon Christ, so long he will smile
upon the Saints, they having on Christ's beauty, and being part of Christ.

2. The loss of dear friends: a friend imparts secrets; friendship is the
marriage of affections, it makes two become one spirit. David and Jonathan
took sweet counsel together, their heart was knit in one: now here is the
grief, when this precious knot must be untyed: but be of good cheer, if thy
friend belong to the election, after thou have parted with thy sins, thou
shall meet with him and never part. If thy friend be wicked, though he were thy
friend on earth, thou will cease to be his friend in heaven. The pious wife
shall not complain she has lost her husband, nor the religious Parent, that
he has lost his child; all relations are infinitely made up in Christ, as the
whole constellation in the Sun, that great Lamp of Heaven. When a man comes
to the sea, he does not complain that he wants his Cisterne of water: Though
thou did suck some comfort from thy relations; yet when thou come to the
Ocean, and art with Christ, thou shall never complain, that thou have left thy
cistern behind: There will be nothing to breed sorrow in heaven; there shall
be joy, and nothing but joy: Heaven is set out by that phrase, Enter thou into
the joy of thy Lord Mat. 25.21.
. Here joy enters into us, there we enter into joy: the joys we have here, are
(...)* those are (...). These are from heaven, those are in heaven: the joys
that we shall have with Christ, are without measure, and without mixture: Ps.
16.11
In thy presence is fullness of joy.

1. The heart shall be filled. Nothing triangle, that none can fill but the
Trinity. As Christ's beauty shall amaze the eye, so his love shall ravish the
heart of a glorified Saint; must it not needs be joy to be with Christ? what
joy when a Christian shall see the great gulf shot between heaven and hell?
What joy when Christ shall take us into the Wine-celler? and kiss us with the
kisses of his lips? What joy when the match shall be at once made up, and
solemnized between Christ and a believer? these are the more noble and generous
delights.

2. All the senses shall be filled; and, at once; The eye shall be filled; What
joy to see that Orient brightness in the face of Christ? there you may see the
Lily and the Rose mixed, white and ruddy, Cant. 5.10. The Ear shall be filled;
What joy to the Spouse to hear Christ's voice? The voice of God was dreadful to
Adam, after he had listened to the Serpents voice: I heard thy voice in the
garden, and was afraid, Genesis 3.10. But how sweet will the Bridegrooms voice be?
What joy to hear him say, My Love, my Dove, my undefiled? What joy to hear the
music of Angels, even the heavenly host praising God? If the eloquence of
Origin, the golden mouth of Chrysostom did so affect and charm the ears of
their auditors, Oh then what will it be to hear the glorious tongues of
Saints and Angels, as so many divine Trumpets sounding forth the excellencies
of God, and singing Hallelujahs to the Lamb? The smell shall be filled; What
joy to smell that fragrancy and perfume that comes from Christ? All his
garments smell of myrrh, aloes, and Cassia. The sweet breath of his Spirit
blowing upon the soul, shall give forth its sent, as the wine of Lebanon. The
taste shall be filled; Christ will bring his Spouse into the banqueting house,
and she shall be inebriated with his love; O what joy to be drinking in this
heavenly nectar? This is the water of life: This is the wine on the lees well
refined. The touch shall be filled; the Saints shall be ever in the embraces of
Christ; Behold my hands and my feet; handle me* and see me, Luke 24.39. That
will be our work in heaven; we shall be ever handling the Lord of life: Thus
all the senses shall be filled. Yet though there be a fullness of joy, there
shall be no surfeit; Ibi nec fames, nec fastidium. Bern.
the soul shall not be so full, but it shall desire: nor shall it so desire,
but it shall be full: That which prevents a surfeit in heaven, is that there
shall be every moment new and fresh delights springing forth from God into the
glorified soul: Well might the Apostle say, to be with Christ is far better.
Great is the joy that faith breeds. Whom not seeing, yet believing, ye rejoice
with joy unspeakable and full of glory 1 Pet. 1.8.
. If the joy of Faith be such, what will the joy of fruition be? There is joy
when we fall into temptations, Jam. 1.2. If Christ's sufferings are full of joy,
what then are his embraces? If the dew of Hermon hill be so sweet, the first
fruits of Christ's love; what will the full crop be? In short, there will be
nothing in heaven but what shall add infinitely to the joy of the Saints. The
very torments of the damned shall create matter of joy and triumph. I may
allude to that of the Psalmist, The righteous shall rejoice when he sees the
vengeance Ps, 58.9.
; the elect shall rejoice upon a double account to see Gods justice
magnificently exalted, and to see themselves miraculously delivered. There
shall be no unpleasant object represented; nothing but joy. Such will that joy
be, when we are with Christ, that as it is not possible, so neither is it fit
for a man to speak, 2 Cor. 12.4. We read that Joseph gave his brethren money
and provision for the way; But the full sacks were kept till they came at their
fathers house; God gives us something by the way; some of the hidden-manna:
some taste of his heavenly joy in this life, but the full sacks of corn are
kept for heaven. O what joy to be with Christ? surely if there were such joy
and triumph at Solomon's coronation, That all the earth rang with the sound of
it 1 King 1.40.
; What joy will be on the Saints coronation-day, when they shall be eternally
united to Jesus Christ? This shall inhance the joy of heaven; It is for ever: 1
These. 4.17. Then shall we ever be with the Lord. If this joy should after many
years have a period, it would much abate the sweetness. But certainly, if we
could by our Arithmetic reckon up more millions of ages then there have been
minutes since the Creation; after all this time (which were a short eternity)
the joy of the Saints shall be as far from ending, as it was at the beginning.

SECT. V. The fifth Privilege of being with Christ.
I Proceed to the next privilege, which is Rest Felix transitus a labor ad
requiem, a pe^^g^i^atione ad patr^am. Bern.
. A Christian in this life is like Quicksilver, which has a principle of
motion in it self, but not of rest: We are never quiet, but as the Ball upon
the Racket, or the ship upon the waves^ As long as we have sin this is like
the quicksilver: A child of God is full of motion and disquiet; I have no
rest in my bones by reason of my sin, Psalm. 38.3. While there are wicked men
in the world, never look for rest. If a man be poor, he is thrust away by the
rich: if he be rich, he is envied by the poor; sometimes losses disquiet,
sometimes lawsuits vex: It Is only the prisoner lives in such a Tenement as he
may be sure none will go about to take from him: one trouble does succeed
another, Velut unda supervenit undae: sometimes the floodgates of persecution
are opened; Rev. 12.4, 5.
sometimes the Tombstone of disgrace is laid upon the Saints: either the body
is in trouble, or the mind, or both; The Saints in this life are in a
pilgrim-condition: the Apostles had no certain dwelling place, 1 Cor. 4.11. We
are here in a perpetual hurry, in a constant fluctuation: our life is like the
Tide, sometimes ebbing, sometimes flowing: here is no rest: And the reason is,
because we are out of our center; every thing is in motion till it comes at the
center; Christ is the center of the soul: the Needle of the compass trembles,
till it turns to the North Pole. Noah's Dove found no rest for the sole of her
feet, till she came at the Ark: This Ark was a Type of Christ; when we come to
heaven, the Kingdom that cannot be shaken Heb. 12.28.
, we shall have rest, Heb. 4.9. There remains therefore a rest for the people
of God. Heaven in Scripture is compared to a granary, Mat. 3.12. Mat. 3.12
an emblem of rest. Wheat while it stands on the ground is shaken to and fro
with the wind, but when it is laid up in the granary, it is at rest: the Elect
are spiritual wheat, who while they are in the field of this world are never
quiet, the wind of persecution shakes this wheat, and every one that passes
by will be plucking these sacred ears of corn, but when the wheat is in the
heavenly Garner it is at rest. There remains a rest, etc. Not but that there
shall be motion in heaven (for Spirits cannot be idle) but it shall be a motion
without lassitude and weariness. They that die in the Lord rest from their
labors Rev. 14.13.
. The work which the Saints shall do in heaven shall be delightsome and
pleasant, it shall be a labor full of ease, a motion full of rest. When a
Believer is in heaven, he has his Quietus est. The lower Region is windy and
tempestuous; when we are once gotten into the upper Region of glory, there are
no winds or noxious vapors, but a serene calmnesse; this it is to be (...),
with Christ.

SECT. VI. The sixth Privilege of being with Christ.
THe last is Security. It Is possible a man may have a few minutes of rest; but
he is not secure, he knows not how soon Eclipses and changes may come: he is
still in fear, (...), etc. Antis^hen.
and fear makes a man a servant, (says the Philosopher) though he know it
not. There is torment in fear, 1 John 4.18. He that has great possessions,
thinks thus; But how soon may I fall from this Pinnacle of honor? how soon
may the plunderer come? Nay, a believer, that has durable riches, yet is still
pendulous and doubting concerning his condition.

1. He sometimes questions whether he be in the state of grace or no: and thus
he thinks with himself; perhaps I believe; perhaps I do not believe: I have
something that glisters, perhaps it is but a counterfeit chain of Pearl? my
Faith is Presumption, my Love to Christ is but self-love; and when the Spirit
of God has wrought the heart to some sound persuasion, he is soon shaken
again; as a ship that lies at anchor, though it be safe, yet it is shaken and
tossed upon the water: and these fears leave impressions of sadness upon the
heart.

2. But secondly, he fears, that though he be in the state of Grace, yet he
may fall into some scandalous sin, and so grieve the Spirit of God, sadden
the hearts of the righteous, wound his own conscience, harden sinners,
discourage new beginners, put a song into the mouth of the profane; and at
last God hide his face in a cloud. A child of God after a sad declension,
having by his sin put black spots in the face of Religion, though I deny not,
but he has a title to the Promise; yet he may be in such a condition that he
cannot for the present apply any Promise, he may go weeping to his grave.

These sad fears like black vapors, are still arising out of a gracious
heart; but when once a believer is with Christ^, there is full security of
heart: he is not only out of danger, but out of fea^e. Take it thus, a man
that is upon the top of a Mast, he may sit safe for the present, but not
secure. Perhaps the Pirates may shoot at the ship, and take it; perhaps the
winds may arise suddenly, and the ship map be cast away in the storm; but a
man that is upon a rock, he stands impregnable: his heart is secure. A
Christian in this life is like a man upon the top of a Mast, sometimes the
Pirates come abroad, viz. cruel persecutors, and they shoot at his ship, and
often, though the passenger ( the precious soul) escapes, yet they sink the
ship; sometimes the winds of tentation blow, those northern winds; and now
the Christian questions whether God love him, or whether his name be enrolled
in the book of life; and though being in Christ, there is no danger, yet his
heart does hesitate and tremble: but when he is with Christ, off from the top
of the Mast; and is planted upon the rock, his heart is fully secure; and you
shall hear him say thus, Now I am sure, I have shot the gulf, I am now passed
from death to life, and none shall pluck me out of my Saviors arms.

CHAP. IX. The fourth Prerogative Royal.
LEt the Lucianists and Epicures place their happiness in this life; a
believers is in reversion; the golden world is yet to come. I pass to the next
Prerogative, which is:

4. The blessed inheritance, Col. 1.12. Giving thanks unto the Father, which
has made us meet to be partakers of the inheritance of the Saints in light.
This world is but a Tenement, which we may be soon turned out of; heaven is an
inheritance, and a glorious one. Heaven has no Hyperbole Coelo non datur
Hyperbole.
: if the skirts and Suburbs of the Palace, viz. the Stars and Planets be so
glorious, that our eyes cannot behold the dazzling luster of them. What glory
then is there in the Chamber of presence? What is the Sanctum Sanctorum? Of
this blessed place, we have a figurative description, Revel. 21. John was
carried away in the Spirit, Rev. 21.
and had a Vision of heaven, Ver. 2. That it was the Jerusalem above, is
clear, if we consult with Ver. 22. Verse. 22.
And I saw no Temple therein: while we dwell upon earth, there is need of a
temple; we shall not be above Ordinances till we are above sin: but in
heav^n, God will be in stead of a temple, He shall be all in all 1 Cor. 15.28.
Rev. 21.25
. And Ver. 25. There shall be no night there: No City is to be found, not the
most glorious Metropolis under heaven, where it is always day: for though some
Regions which lie immediately under the Pole, have light for several months
together; yet when the Sun with-drawes from the Horizon, they have as long a
night as before they had a day: but says the Text, There shall be no night
there: In hell it is all night; but in heaven, the day will be ever
lengthening. Now this blessed Inheritance, or Kingdom which the Saints shall
possess, has six Properties, or rather Privileges, worth our serious
thoughts.

1. Sublimenesse, It is set out by a great and high mountain, Revel. 21. ver.
10. It is placed above the Aerie and Starry Heaven, says Musculus; it is the
Empyraean Heaven, which Saint Paul calls the third Heaven ^ Cor. 12.2.
. For the situation of it, it is far above all heavens, where Christ himself
is Ephesians. 4.10
. This is Seeds beatorum, the Royal Palace, where the Saints shall dwell. The
men of this world are high in power, and in pride; but if they could build
their Nests among the Stars, the elect shall shortly be above them; they shall
take their flight as high as Christ: here is a preferment worth looking after.

2. Magnificence, It is set out by pearls and precious stones, the richest
jewels Rev. 21.19.
, If the streets are of gold, what is the furniture and hangings; what is the
Cabinet of Jewels? I wonder not, that the violent take it by force, Mat. 11.12.
I rather wonder others are no more violent: What are all the rarities of the
world to this? the Coasts of Pearl, the Islands of Spices, the Rocks of
Diamonds? What a rich place must that needs be, where God will lay out all his
cost; where Wisdom does contrive, and Bounty does disburse?

Fulgentius beholding the pomp and splendour of the Roman Senate House cried
out, O how beautiful is the celestial Jerusalem, if the terrestrial
Senate House be so glorious! In this blessed inheritance there is nothing but
glory; there is the King of glory; Ps. 24.7.
there are the Vessels of glory; Romans 9.23.
there are the Thrones of glory; Mat. 19.28.
there is the Weight of glory; 2 Cor. 4.17.
there are the Crowns of glory; Rev. 4.4.
there is the Kingdom of glory; 1 These. 2.12.
there is the Brightness of glory; Heb. 1.3.
This is a purchase worth getting. What will men adventure for a Kingdom? The
worst come to the worst; it is but venturing our blood, we need not venture our
conscience.

3. Purity, Heaven is set forth under the Metaphor of pure gold, and
transparent glass* Revel. 21.21. The Apostle calls it an inheritance undefiled
1 Pet. 1.4
. Heaven is a pure place. It is compared to the Saphyr, Rev. 21.19. The Saphyr
is a precious stone, of a bright skie-colour Caeruleo color. Plin
, and it has a virtue in it, says Pliny, to preserve chastnesse and purity.
Thus Heaven is represented by the Saphyr; it is a place, where only the
refined sublimated spirits do enter. And Heaven is compared to the Emerald,
ver. 19. which (as Writers say of it) has a precious virtue to expel poison.
Heaven is such a pure soil, that as no fever of lust, so no venom of malice,
shall be there, with the Emerald; it will expel poison. There shall not enter
into it any thing that defiles, Revel. 21. verse. 27. It is a Kingdom wherein
dwells righteousness, 2 Pet. 3.13. In this lower Region of the world, there is
little righteousness, They set up wickedness by a law, Psalm. 94.20. and the
wicked devours his neighbor, which is more righteous then he, Hab. 1.13. Homo
homini lupus. The just man is oppressed because he is just. One says, There is
more justice to be found in hell, then here among men: for in hell no innocent
person is oppressed; but here righteousness is the thing that is persecuted
Mat. 5.10
. A man can hardly tread two steps, but either into sin or into suffering. In
this world the law is made 1 Timothy 1.9
only for the righteous man. The sinner need not fear any punitive vindictive
act of justice, rather he that reproves sin may fear. Holiness is the white
that the devil shoots at. But heaven is a kingdom, wherein dwells
righteousness: there is the Judge of the world; who puts on righteousness, as
a Breast Plate Isa. 59.17
: who loves righteousness Ps. 11.7.
. There is the sun of righteousness Mal. 4.2.
. There is the robe of righteousness Isa 61.10
. There is the crown of righteousness 2 Timothy 4.8.
.

4. Amplitude, The inheritance is sufficiently spacious for all the Saints. The
garner wide enough to receive all those infinite grains of wheat that shall be
laid in it: and he that talked with me had a golden reed to measure the City,
etc. The City lies foure-square, and the length is as large as the breadth,
and he measured the City with the reed twelve thousand furlongs Rev. 21.15, 16.
. Or, as I find it in some Greek Copies, (...). Twelve times twelve thousand
furlongs. Here is a finite put for an infinite; impossible it is that any
Arithmetician should number; or Rhetorician express these furlongs. It is a
phrase only that darkly shadows out the amplitude and largeness of this
celestial City, though there be innumerable company of Saints and Angels in
heaven, yet there is infinitely enough room to receive them, In my fathers
house are many Mansions Joh. 14.2
. Some are of opinion that every believer shall have a particular Mansion in
glory. Every Saint shall have his Kingdom, says Iansenius. We know our
Savior told his Apostles that they should sit upon twelve thrones Mat. 19.28.
. Certainly the Saints shall not be straitened for room. The continent of
glory is wide enough for the most vast sublime spirits to expatiate in.

5. Light, It is called an inheritance in light ^ol. 1.12
; (...). If every star were a Sun it could never shadow out the bright luster
of this celestial Paradise. Light is a glorious creature; what were all the
world without light but a dark prison? What beauty is there in the Sun when
it is masqued with a cloud? Lumen actuat colores, says the Logician: Light
does actuate the colors, and make every flower appear in its fresh beauty.
Heaven is a diaphanum or bright body all over embroydered with light, not like
the Coelum stellatum, or starry heaven, here and there bespangled with stars,
but other parts of it like checquor-work interwoven with darkness. Here Christ
as a continual Sun shall give light to the whole heaven. The lamb shall be
the light thereof Rev. 21.23.
; indeed all other light in comparison of this, is but like the twilight, or
rather the midnight. Here alone are the shining rays of beauty, which every
glorified eye shall be enabled both to behold and to possess; and this light
shall have no night to Eclipse it, no snuffers of death to extinguish it; when
once the Sun of righteousness has risen upon the soul it shall never set
any more. This is an high Gradation of the glory of heaven, it is an
inheritance in light. When the Scripture would set forth the blessedness of
God himself, it makes it consist in this, He dwells in light 1 Timothy 6.16.
.

6. Permanency, It is an inheritance incorruptible 1 Pet. 1.4
. It runs parallel with eternity: Eternity is a circle, that has neither
beginning nor end; a Sea that has neither bottom nor b^nks. This is the glory
of the celestial Paradise; it abides for ever. The world passes away 1 John
2.17.
, 1 John 2.17. Every thing is passing: It Is good to look upon the world, as the
Heathens did upon pleasure; they looked upon the back-parts of pleasure, and
saw it going away from them, and leaving a sting. The world is passing away,
but Heaven never passes; therefore surpasses evil things (as pain and
misery) length of time makes them worse, but good things (as joy and pleasure)
length of time makes them better. Heavens Eminency is its Permanency. Things
are prized and valued by the time we have in them, lands, or houses in
fee-simple which are to a man, and his heirs for ever, are esteemed far better
then leases which soon expire: The Saints do not lease heaven, it is not their
Landlords house, but their Fathers house: And this house never falls to decay,
it is a mansion house, John 14.2. There is nothing excellent, (says one of the
Fathers) that is not perpetual; Greg. Nazian.
The comforts of the world are fluid and uncertain like a fading garland;
therefore they are shadowed out by the Tabernacle, which was transient, but
Heaven is set out by the Temple, which was fixed and permanent: It was made of
strong materials, built with stone, covered with Cedar, over-laid with gold.
This is the Heaven of Heaven, We shall be ever with the Lord, 1 These. 4. ver.
17. Eternity is the highest link of the Saints happiness; the soul of the
believer shall be ever bathing it self in the pure and pleasant fountain of
glory. As there is no intermission in the joys of heaven, so no expiration.
When once God has set his Plants in the celestial Paradise, he will never
pluck them up any more; he will never transplant them: never will Christ lose
any member of his body: you may sooner separate light from the Sun, then a
glorified Saint from Jesus Christ. O eternity, eternity! what a Spring will
that be, that shall have no Autumn? what a day that shall have no Night? Me
thinks, I see the Morning Star appear, it is break of day already.

And this inheritance of glory fades not away, 1 Pet. 1.4. Had it not been
enough for the Apostle to have said, 1 Pet. 1.4.
It is an inheritance incorruptible? Nay, but he adds, It fades not away.
There is a sacred climax in this* the meaning is heaven does not lose its
gloss or vernancy. A Rose may continue in its being when it does not retain
its beauty. The substance of it may be preserved when the color and savor is
lost: but such is the glory of this inheritance, that it cannot be made so much
as to wither but like the flower we call Semper-vivens, it keeps fresh to
eternity. Concerning the glory of this blessed inheritance, let me super-adde
these four things:

1. The glory of heaven is ponderous and weighty; It is called, A weight of
Glory, 2 Cor. 4.17. Immensum gloria calcar habet. God must make us able to
bear it. This weight of glory should make sufferings light: This weight should
make us throw away the weights of sin out of our hands, though they be golden
weights: who would for the indulging of a lust, forfeit so glorious an
inheritance? Lay the whole World in scales with it, it is lighter then vanity.

2. It is infinitely satisfying; there is no vacuity, or indigency, This
Encomium can be given properly of nothing but heaven. You that Court the world
for honor, and preferment, remember, the creature says concerning
satisfaction It is not in me. The world is made in manner of a circle, the
heart in manner of a Triangle; a circle can never fill a triangle; heaven only
is commensurate to the vast desires of the soul. Here the Christian cries out
in a divine ecstasy, I have enough, my Savior, I have enough. Thou shall make
them drink of the Rivers of thy pleasures Ps. 36.8.
, not drops, but rivers; and these only can quench the thirst. It shall be
every day festival in Heaven; there is no want at a feast. There shall be
excellency shining in its perfection Id perfectum cui nihil addi potest. Lac.
lib. 1. cap 3
. The world is but a Jaile, the body is the Fetter with which the soul is
bound; if there be any thing in a Jaile to delight, what is the Palace and the
Throne, what is Heaven? If we meet with any comfort in Mount Horeb, what is in
Mount Sion? All the world is like a Landscape, you may see Orchards and Gardens
curiously drawn in the Landscape, but you cannot enter into them; you may enter
into this heavenly Paradise, 2 Pet. 1. ver. 11. For so an entrance shall be
made abundantly into the everlasting Kingdom, etc. Here is soul-satisfaction.

3. Though an innumerable company of Saints and Angels have a part in this
inheritance, there is never the less for thee: Here is a propriety in a
community; another man's beholding the Sun, does not make me to have the
lesser light: Thus will it be in glory. Usually here, all the land goes to the
Heir, the younger are put off with small portions: In Heaven, all the Saints
are Heirs; the youngest Believer is an heir* and God has land enough to give
to all his heirs: All the Angels and Archangels have their portion paid out;
yet a Believer shall have never the less. [ Hereditas illa non minuitur copia
possessorum, non fit angustior numero cohaeredum: Aug. in Psalm. 49.] Is not
Christ the heir of all things? Augustine.
Heb. 1. verse. 2. and the Saints co-heires? Romans 8. verse. 17. They share with
Christ in the same glory. It Is true, one vessel may hold more then another, but
every vessel shall be full.

4. The souls of the Elect shall enter upon possession immediately after
death, 2 Corinthians. 5. verse. 8. We are willing rather to be absent from the body,
and to be present with the Lord. There are some that say, the souls of the
Elect sleep in their bodies; but the Apostle here confutes it; for if the soul
be absent from the body, how can it sleep in the body? There is an immediate
transition and passage from death to glory, The soul returns to God that gave
it Eccl. 12.7.
: Christ's Resurrection was before his Ascension; but the Saints Ascension is
before their Resurrection. The body may be compared to the bubble in the water,
the soul to the wind that fills it: you see the bubble rises higher and
higher, at last it breaks into the open air: so the body is but like a bubble
Jam. 4.14
, which rises from infancy to youth, from youth to age, higher and higher; at
last this bubble breaks, and dissolves into dust, and the spirit ascends into
the open air: it returns unto GOD that gave it.

Be of good comfort, we shall not stay long for our inherirance; it is but
winking, and we shall see God. O the glory of this Paradise! when we are turned
out of all, let us think of this inheritance which is to come, Aug.
Praemium, quod fide non attingitur; faith it self is not able to reach it; it
is more then we can hope for: There can be no want, where Christ is, who is all
in all, Ephesians. 3.11. Ephesians. 3.11
In Heaven, there is health without sickness, plenty without famine, riches
without poverty, life without death. There, is unspotted chastity, unstained
honor, unparalled beauty: there, is the Tree of Life, in the midst of
Paradise; there, is the river that waters the garden; there, is the Vine
flourishing, and the Pomegranates budding, Cant. 6.11.
there, is the banqueting house, where are all those delicacies and rarities,
wherewith God himself is delighted: while we are sitting at that Table,
Christ's Spiknard will send forth its smell Cant. 1.12.
. There, is the bed of love, there are the curtains of Solomon, there are the
Mountains of Spices, and the streams from Lebanon; there are the Cherubims,
not to keep us out, but to welcome us into Paradise; there, shall the Saints be
adorned, as a Bride with Pearls of glory; There, will God give us abundantly,
above all that we are able to ask or think Ephesians. 3.20.
. Is not here enough? what cannot an ambitious spirit ask? Hamans aspiring
heart could have asked not only the Kings royal Robe and the ring from his
hand, but the Crown from his head too; a man can ask a century of Kingdoms, a
million of worlds. But in heaven God will give us more then we can ask. Nay,
more then we can think. An high expression! what cannot we think? we can think,
what if all the dust of the earth were turned to silver, what if every stone
were a wedge of gold, what if every flower were a ruby, every pile of grass a
pearl, every sand in the Sea a diamond; yet, what were all this to the New
Jerusalem which is above. It is as impossible for any man in his deepest
thoughts to comprehend glory, as it is to mete the heaven with a span Isa 40.12
, or draine the great Ocean. O incomparable place! Surely, were we carried away
in the spirit, I mean, elevated by the power of Faith, to the contemplation of
this royal and stately Palace, I know not whether we should more wonder at the
luster of heaven, or at the dullness of such as mind earthly things. How is
the world adored, which is but a Pageant or apparition! It is reported of
Caesar, that traveling on a time through a certain City, as he passed along,
he saw the women for the most part, playing with Monkies and Parrets: at which
sight, he said, What? have they no children to play with? So I say, when I see
men toying with these earthly and beggarly delights, What? are there not more
glorious and sublime things to look after? That which our Savior says to the
woman of Samaria, If thou knew the gift of God and who it is that says to
thee, Give me to drink, thou would have asked of him, and he would have
given thee living water Joh. 4.10
; the same may I say, Did men know these eternal Mansions, and what it were to
be digging in these rich Mines of glory: would God give them a Vision of heaven
a while, as he did Peter, who saw heaven opened, Act. 10.11. how would they
fall into a Trance, (being amazed and filled with joy!) and being a little
recovered out of it, how importunately would they beg of God, that they might
be adopted into this stately inheritance! But what do I expatiate? these things
are unspeakable and full of glory. Had I as many tongues as hairs on my head I
could never sufficiently set forth the beauty and resplendency of this
inheritance. Such was the curious art of Apelles in drawing of Pictures, that
if another had taken up the Pensil to draw, he had spoiled all Apelles work.
Such is the excellency of this celestial Paradise, that if the Angels should
take up their Pensill, to delineate it in its colors, they would but stain
and eclipse the glory of it. I have given you only the dark shadow in the
Picture, and that but rudely and imperfectly. Such is the beauty and bliss of
this inheritance, that as Chrysostom says, if it were possible that all the
sufferings of the Saints could be laid upon one man, it were not worth one
hours being in Heaven.

Augustine is of opinion, we shall know our friends in heaven. Nor to me does
it seem improbable, for sure our knowledge there shall not be eclipsed, or
diminished, but increased. And that which Anselme does assert, that we shall
have a knowledge of the Patriarchs, and Prophets, and Apostles, all that were
before us and shall be after us, our predecessors and successors, to me seems
very rational; for society without acquaintance is not comfortable, and my
thinks the Scripture does hint thus much; if Peter and James, having but a
glimpse of glory (when our Lord was transfigured on the Mount) were able to
know Moses and Elias whom they had never seen before: how much more shall we,
being infinitely irradiated, and enlightened with the Sun of righteousness,
know all the Saints, though we were never acquainted with them before? And this
will be very comfortable. Certainly there shall be nothing wanting that may
complete the Saints happiness.

Now that this glorious inheritance is the Saints Prerogative, I shall evince
by two Arguments.

It is so, 1. In respect of the many obligations that lie upon God for
performing this. 1. Argum^n^.
As, 1. In regard promise, Tit. 1.2. In hope of eternal life which God that
cannot lie has promised. Gods promise is oath. He who is truth Heb. 6.17. 3.
In regard of the price that is paid for it, Christ's blood. Heaven is not only a
promised possession, but a purchased possession, Ephesians. 1.14. 4. In prayer for
it: Father I will that they also whom thou have given me, be with me where I
am. Joh. 17.24.
Now God can deny Christ nothing being the only favorite. I know thou always
hear me, Joh. 11.42. 5. In regard of Christ's ascension. preparations against
our coming, Joh. 14.2. I go before to prepare a place for you. We read that
our Lord sent two of his disciples before to make ready a large upper room for
the Passover, Mar. 14.15. So Jesus Christ is gone before to make ready a large
upper room in heaven for the Saints. 6. In regard of the anticipation of the
Spirit in the hearts of the godly, giving them an assurance of, and stirring up
in them passionate desires after this glorious inheritance; hence it is, we
read of the earnest of the Spirit, 2 Cor. 1.22. and the first fruits of the
Spirit, Romans 8.23. and the seal of the Spirit, Ephesians. 1.13. God does not still
his children with rattles. Heaven is already begun in a believer, so that the
inheritance is certain. You see how many obligations lie upon God; and to
speak with reverence, i^ stands not only upon Gods mercy, but upon his
faithfulness to make all this good to us.

2. Argument.
The second argument is in respect of the Union which the Saints have with Jesus
Christ. They are members of Christ, therefore they must have a part in this
blessed inheritance; the members must be where the head is. Indeed, the
Arminians tell us, that a justified person may fall finally from grace, and so
his union with Christ may be dissolved, and the inheritance lost. But how
absurd is this doctrine? Is Christ divided? can he lose a member of his body?
then his body is not perfect; for how can that body be perfect which wants a
limb? and if Christ may lose one member from his body, why not as well all by
the same reason? and so he shall be an head without a body; but be assured, the
union with Christ cannot be broken Joh. 17.12.
, Ioh. 17.12. and so long the inheritance cannot be lost. What was said of
Christ's natural body, is as true of his mystical: A bone of it shall not be
broken. Look how every bone and limb of Christ's natural body was raised up out
of the grave, and carried into heaven: so shall every member of his mystical
body, joined to him by the eternal Spirit, be carried up into glory. Fear not,
O ye Saints, neither sin nor Satan can dissolve your union with Christ, nor
by consequence hinder you of that blessed place where your Head is.

Quest. Here it will be asked, Quest.
Who shall ascend into the hill of the Lord? Psalm. 24.3. who shall be a Citizen
of this new Jerusalem, which is above?

Answ. The new creature: Answ.
this you read of, 2 Cor. 5. verse. 17. This new creature does disponere ad
coelum, prepare for the new Jerusalem. This is the Divine and curious Artifice
of the Holy Ghost in our hearts, forming Christ in us: the same Holy Ghost that
overshadowed the Virgin Mary, and formed the Humane Nature of Christ in her
womb, does work and produce this new creature. O thou blessed man and woman,
in whom this new creature is formed! I may say to thee as the Angel to Mary:
That which is conceived in thee is of the Holy Ghost: Of all God's creatures,
the new creature is the best. Then let me ask, Art thou a new creature? Art
thou a scion, cut off from the wild Olive of nature, and ingrafted into a new
stock, the Tree of Life? Has God defaced, and dismantled the old man in thee?
does some limb drop off every day? Have thou a new heart? Ezekiel. 36. verse 26.
Till then, thou art not fit for the new heaven: Art thou new all over? Have
thou a new eye, to discern the things that differ? Have thou a new appetite?
Does the pulse of thy soul beat after Christ? It is only the new creature,
which shall be heir of the new Jerusalem. When thou were sailing to Hell,
(for we have both wind and tide to carry us thither) has the North and
South-winde awaked? Has the gale of the Spirit blown upon thee, and turned thy
course? Art thou now sailing to a new Port? Has the seal of the Word stamped
a new and heavenly print upon thee? Then I am speaking all this while to thee,
this blessed inheritance is entailed upon thee.

But if thou art an old sinner, expect that heaven should be kept as Paradise,
with a Flaming Sword, that thou may not enter: Be assured, God will never
put the new Wine of glory into an old musty bottle. Heaven is not like Noah's Ark that received clean beasts into it, and unclean Genesis 7.8.
: this inheritance does not receive all comers. It is only the wheat that goes
into Christ's garner, what has the chafe to do there? this inheritance is only
for them that are sanctified, Act. 20.32. Is thy heart consecrated ground? We
read that in the time of Ezra after the return of the people from the
captivity, some who were ambitious of the Priesthood, sought the writings of
the Genealogies, but they were not found among the numbers of the Priests,
therefore they were put by as polluted from the Priesthood Ezr. 2.62
: So whosoever they be that think to have a part in this blessed place, if
their names be not found; that is, if they are not new creatures, they shall be
put away as polluted from this inheritance.

CHAP. X. The fifth Prerogative Royal.
I Pass on to the next thing to come, which is.

5. Our Knowledge shall be clear. Knowledge is a beautiful thing; such was
Adam's ambition to know more, that by tasting the Tree of Knowledge, he lost
the Tree of Life: In Heaven our knowledge shall be clear. Religion is a
continued riddle; many things we have now but in the notion, which then we
shall see perfectly; now we know but in part 1 Cor. 13.9.
. The best Christian has a veil upon his eye, as the Jews have upon their
heart; hereafter the veil shall be taken off. Here we see through a glass
darkly, (...), in a riddle, or mystery; then face to face: that is, clearly.

There are five Mysteries which God will clear up to us when we are in heaven.

Trinity: this we know but in part. Unity in Trinity, and Trinity in Unity,
where One makes Three, and Three make but One: this is bad Arithmetic, but
good Divinity; we have but dark conceptions of it: it is a Mystery so deep,
that we may soon wade beyond our depth.

Augustine being to write his Books of the Trinity, was taught modesty by a
child, who was lading the Sea into a little Spoon; to whom Augustine said,
that he labored in vain, for his little Spoone would not contain the Sea; to
whom the child answered, My little Spoone will sooner hold this vast Ocean,
then your shallow brain can contain the depth of the Trinity. How little a
portion is known of God? If Job asked the question, Who can understand the
Thunder? we may much more ask, Job 26.14.
Woe can understand the Trinity? but in heaven we shall see God as he is 1 John
3.2.
, that is, perfectly.

Quest. But shall every Saint enjoy God so perfectly that he shall have the
same knowledge that God has.

Answ. the infinite essence of God shall app^ar to the Saints Tota, but not
totaliter Ioh. de combis comp^nd. Theol. lib. 7. cap. 26.
; we shall have a full knowledge of God, but not know him fully, yet we shall
take in so much of God as our humane nature is capable of; it will be a bright
and a glorious knowledge: here we know him but ab effectu, by his Power,
Wisdom, Mercy: we see but his back-parts, there we shall see him face to face.

2. The Mystery of the incarnation, Joh. 1.14
Christ assuming our humane nature, and marrying it to the divine. Therefore
called, (...). God-man. (...) God with us. A Mystery which the Angels in heaven
adore 1 Pet. 1.12
. God said, The man is become as one of us, Genesis 3.22. but now we may say, God
himself is become as one of us! it was not only mirandum, but miraculum. There
was nothing within the sphere of natural causes to produce it. The incarnation
of Christ is catena aurea, a golden chain made up of several links of
Miracles. For instance, that the Creator of heaven should become a creature;
Creator coeli creatus sub coelo.
that eternity should be born; that he whom the heaven of heavens cannot
contain, should be enclosed in the womb; that he who thunders in the clouds,
should cry in the cradle Qui to^itruat in coelis, clamat in cunabulis.
; that he who rules the stars, should suck the breasts; that he who upholds
all things by the Word of his Power, Heb. 1.7.
should himself be upheld; that a Virgin should conceive, that Christ should be
made of a woman and of that woman which himself made; that the creature should
give a being to the Creator; that the Star should give light to the Sun;
that the branch should bear the Vine; that the mother should be younger then
the child she bare, and the child in the womb bigger then the mother; that he
who is a Spirit should be made flesh; that Christ should be without father and
without mother, yet have both, without mother in the Godhead, without father
in the Manhood; that Christ being incarnate should have two natures (the
divine and humane) and yet but one Person; that the divine nature should not be
infused into the humane, nor the humane mixed with the divine, yet assumed into
the Person of the Son of God, the humane nature not God, yet one with God.
Here is, I say, a chain of Miracles.

I acknowledge the mercy of the incarnation was great, we having now both
affinity and consanguinity with Jesus Christ; Christ's incarnation is the Saints
inauguration.

The love of Christ in the incarnation was great; for herein he did set a
pattern without a parallel, in clothing himself with our flesh, which is but
walking ashes; he has sowed as it were sackcloth to cloth of Gold, the
humanity to the Deity. But though the incarnation be so rich a blessing, yet it
is hard to say which is greater, the Mercy or the Mystery 1 Timothy 3.16.
. It is a sacred depth, how does it transcend reason, and even puzzle faith, We
know but in part we see this only in a glass darkly, but in heaven our
knowledge shall be cleared up, we shall fully understand this divine riddle.

3. The Mystery of Scripture: The hard knots of Scripture shall abstruse and
profound; Divines may shoot their arrows, but it is hard to say how near they
come to the mark: it is dubious whether in such a particular age and century of
the Church, such a Prophecy was fulfilled. The Jews have a saying when they
meet with an hard Scripture they understand not, Elias veniet and solvet nodos:
Elias will come and interpret these things to us; we expect not Elias, but when
we are in Heaven we shall understand Prophecies, our knowledge shall be clear.

Providence shall be cleared up. Providence is Regina mundi, the Queen of the
world; it is the hand that turns all the wheels in the universe; Chrysostom
calls it the Pilot that steeres the ship of the Creation. Providence are often
dark; God writes sometimes in shorthand* the characters of Providence are so
various and strange, and our eyes are so dim, that we know not what to make
of Providence: hence we are ready to censure that which we do not understand:
we think that things are very excentrick and disorderly; Gods Providence is
sometimes secret* always wise. The dispensations of Providence are often sad,
judgment beginning at the house of God, and the just man perishing in his
righteousness, Eccles. 7.15. that is, while he is pursuing a righteous cause:
though his way be pious, it is not always prosperous: and on the other side,
those that work wickedness are set up, yea, they that tempt God are delivered,
Mal. 3.15. though now our candle be in a dark lanthorn, and the people of God
cannot tell what God is a doing, yet when they are in heaven they shall see the
reason of these transactions Joh. 13.7
: they shall see that every Providence served for the fulfilling of Gods
Promise, viz. that all things shall work together for good, Romans 8.28. In a
Watch the wheels seem to move cross one to another, but all carry on the
motion of the Watch, all serve to make the Alarm strike; so the wheels of
Providence seem to move cross, but all shall carry on the good of the elect;
all the lines shall meet at last in the center of the Promise; in heaven, as we
shall see Mercy and Justice, so we shall see Promises, and Providence kissing
each other: Our light shall be clear. When a man is at the bottom of an hill,
he cannot see very far: but when he is on the top, he may see many miles
distant. Here the Saints of God are in the valley of tears, they are at the
bottom of the hill, and cannot tell what God is a doing: but when they come to
Heaven, and shall be on the top of the mount, they shall see all the glorious
transactions of Gods Providence; never a Providence but they shall see either a
wonder or a mercy wrapped up in it. A Limner at the first makes but a rude
draught in the picture, here an eye, there an hand; but when he has limn'd it
out in all its parts and lineaments, and laid them in their colors, it is
beautiful to behold. We that live in this age of the Church, see but a rude
draught, as it were some dark pieces of Gods Providence represented, and it is
impossible that we should judge of Gods work by pieces; but when we come to
Heaven and see the full body and portraiture of Gods Providence drawn out in
its vive colors, it will be a most glorious sight to behold: Providence shall
be unridled.

5. The Mystery of hearts. We shall see an heart- anatomy, Eccles. 12.14.
Eccles. 12.14. For God shall bring every work into judgment with every secret
thing. We shall see the designs and cabinet-counsels of men's hearts
discovered; then the hypocrites mask shall fall off. O the black conclave that
is in the heart of man Ps. 64.6.
; The heart is deep: it may be compared to a River, which has fair streams
running on the top, but when this river comes to be drained, there lies
abundance of vermin at the bottom: thus it is with man's heart, there are fair
streams running on the top, a civil life, a religious profession; but at the
day of judgment, when God shall draine this river* and make a discovery of
hearts, then all the vermin of ambition, covetousness, shall appear, all
shall come out: then we shall see whether Iehu's design was zeal for God, or
the Kingdom: we shall see clearly whether Iezabel had more mind to keep a
fast, or to get Naboths Vineyard: then we shall see whether Herod had more
mind to worship Christ, or to worry him; all the secrets of men's hearts shall
be laid open: Me thinks, it would be worth dying to see this sight. We shall
then see who is the Achan, who the Judas; the women's paint falls off from their
faces, when they come near the fire; before the scorching heat of Gods
justice, the hypocrites paint will drop off* and the Treason hid in the heart
will be visible: These mysteries will God reveal to us: our knowledge shall be
clear.

CHAP. XI. The sixth Prerogative Royal.
THE next privilege, is, Our Love shall be perfect: Nulla vrtus sine
charita^e. Aquin. 22 ae. qu. 23. a. 7.
Love is the Jewel with which Christ's Bride is adorned: in one sense it is
more excellent then Faith; for Love never cease, 1 Cor. 13.8. The Spouse
shall put off her Jewel of Faith, when she goes to heaven; but she shall never
put off her Jewel of Love: Love shall be perfect.

God shall be perfect: The Saints love shall be joined with Reverence, for a
filial disposition shall remain, but there shall be no servile fear in
Heaven: Horror and trembling is proper to the damned in hell; though in Heaven
there shall be a reverencing fear, yet a rejoicing fear: we shall see that in
God which will work such a delight that we cannot but love him. And this love
to God shall be, 1. A fervent love: we love him secundum studium, there
secundum actum, as the Schoolmen speak: Our love to God in this life is rather
a desire, but in Heaven the smoke of desire shall be blown up into a flame of
love, we shall love God with an intensenesse of love: here our love is
lukewarm, and sometimes frozen: a child of God weeps that he can love God no
more; but there is a time shortly coming when our love to God shall be fervent,
it shall burn as hot as it can; the damned shall be in a flame of fire, the
elect in a flame of love. 2. A fixed-love: Alas, how soon is Your goodness is
like a morning cloud, and as the early dew it goes away Hos. 6.4.
: In the morning you shall see the grass covered with drops of dew, as so many
pearls, but before noon all is vanished: so is it with our love to God: perhaps
at a Sermon, when our affections are stirred, the heart melts in love: and at a
Sacrament, when we see Christ's blood as it were trickling down upon the
cross, some love-drops fall from the heart; but, within a few days all is
vanished, and we have lost our first love, this is matter of humiliation while
we live. But O ye Saints, comfort your selves, in Heaven your love shall be
fixed, as well as fervent; it shall never be taken off from God any more: such
beauty and excellency shall shine in God, that as a divine loadstone it will be
always drawing our eyes and hearts after him.

2. Our love to the Saints shall Non erit invidia disparis claritatis, quia
erit in omnibus unitas charitatis. Aug. in Io^. Hom. 3.
It is our duty to love the Saints, 1. Though they are of bad dispositions;
sometimes their nature is so rugged and unhewn, that grace does not cast forth
such a luster; it is like a gold ring on a leprous hand, or a Diamond set in
iron: yet if there be any thing of Christ, it is our duty to love it. 2. Though
they in some things differ from us, yet if we see Christ's image and
portraiture drawn upon their hearts, we are to separate the precious from the
vile. But alas, how defective is this grace? how little love is there among
Gods people? Herod and Pilate can agree: wicked men unite, when Saints divide.
For the divisions of England there are great thoughts of heart. Contentions
were never more hot, love never more cold. Many there are whose music consists
all in discords, whose harp is the Cross; that pretend to love truth, but hate
peace, Ps. 120.7
Divisions are Satan's Powder Plot, to blow up Religion. Sin brought forth
separation, and this daughter of separation has brought forth the grandchilde
of division. For these things there are great searchings of heart. It were not
strange to hear the harlot say, Let the child be divided; but to hear the
mother of the child say so, this is sad. If Pope, Cardinal, Jesuit, all
conspire against the Church of God, it were not strange; but for one Saint to
persecute another, this is strange. For a Wolf to worry a Lamb is usual; but
for a Lamb to worry a Lamb is unnatural. For Christ's Lily to be among the
thorns, is ordinary; but for this Lily to become a thorn, to tear and fetch
blood of it self, this is strange! How will Christ take this at our hands?
Would he not have his Coat rent, and will he have his Body rent? Oh that I
could speak here weeping: Well, this will be a foyl to set off heaven the more;
there is a time shortly coming, when our love shall be perfect, there shall be
no difference of judgment in heaven; there the Saints shall be all of a piece.
Though we fall out by the way, and about the way, we shall all agree in the
journies end. When once the blessed Harp of Christ's voice has sounded in the
ears of the Saints, the evil spirit shall be quite driven away. When our
strings shall be wound up to the highest peg of glory, you shall never hear any
more discord in the Saints Music. In Heaven there shall be a perfect Harmony.

CHAP. XII. The seventh Prerogative Royal.
THe next glorious privilege to come, is the Resurrection

Sublata fide resurrectionis, totum Religionis aedificium corruit, etc.
of the body. There are some of the Sadduces opinion, that there is no
resurrection, then let us eat and drink, for to morrow we die, 1 Cor. 15.32. To
what purpose are all our prayers and tears? and indeed it were well for them
who are in their lifetime as bruit beasts, if it might be with them as beasts
after death; but there is a resurrection of the body Joh. 11.24.
, as well as an ascension of the soul 1 Cor. 15.12.52.1.
; which I shall prove by two Arguments.

These. 4.14.

Ex AEquo, in regard of justice* and equity; the bodies of the wicked have been
weapons of unrighteousness, and have joined with the soul in sin; their eyes
have been a casement to let in vanity, their hands have been full of bribes,
their feet have been swift to shed blood; therefore justice and equity require
that they should rise again, and their bodies be punished with their souls.
Again, The bodies of the Saints have been members of holiness: their eyes
have dropped down tears for sin, their hands have relieved the poor, their
tongues have been trumpets of Gods praise, therefore justice and equity require
that they should rise again, that their bodies as well as their souls may be
crowned: There must be a resurrection, else how should there be a remuneration?
We are more sure to arise out of our graves then out of our beds: the bodies of
the wicked are locked up in the grave as in a prison, that they may not infest
the Church of God; and at the day of judgment they shall be brought out of the
prison to trial: and the bodies of the Saints are laid in the grave as in a
bed of perfume, where they mellow and ripen against the resurrection. Noah's
olive tree springing after the flood, the blossoming of Aaron's dry rod, the
flesh and sinews coming to Ezekiel's dry bones, what were these but lively
emblems of the resurrection?

2. That this resurrection is not Resurrection to be nothing else but
Regeneration, which is called a rising from sin, and a being risen with
Christ Col. 3.1.
; and do affirm, that there is no other resurrection but this; and that only
the soul is with God in happiness, not the body. Of this opinion were Hymeneus
and Philetus, 2 Timothy 2.18. But the rising from sin is called the first
resurection, Rev. 1.6. which implies that there is a second resurrection; and
that second I shall prove out of Dan. 12.2. And many of them that sleep in the
dust of the earth shall awake; he does not say, they are already awake, but
they shall awake. And John 5.28. Joh. 5.28.
The hour is coming in which all that are in the graves shall hear his voice,
and shall come forth, they that have done good, unto the resurrection of life;
and they that have done evil, unto the resurrection of damnation. Observe,
Christ does not say, they are come forth of the grave already, but they shall
come forth.

Here a question may be moved, Whether the bodies of some of the Saints are not
in Heaven already, Quest.
then it will seem that their resurrection is not yet to come? as we read that
Elias was taken up to heaven in a fiery chariot: and Enoch, Heb. 11.5. was
translated, that he might not see death.

Answ. I know the Question is controverted among Divines: Answ.
But there are some reasons do persuade me that Enoch and Elias are not yet
bodily in Heaven, nor shall be till the resurrection of all flesh, when the
rest of the Elect, like a precious crop, being fully ripe, shall be translated
into glory. The first is Heb. 11.13. where it is said, These all died in faith,
where Enoch was included. Now why we should restrain this word (...), these,
only to Abel, Noah, Abraham, and not also to Enoch, I see no rational ground.

Quest.
Quest. But is it not said, he was translated, that he might not see death? How
can these two stand together, that Enoch died, yet he did not see death?

Answ.
Answ. This word, (...), that he might not see death, I conceive, ( with some
Divines) the meaning is, that he might not see it in that painful and horrid
manner as others: his soul had an easy and joyful passage out of his body; he
died not after the common manner of men; so says Peter Martyr. Seeing and
feeling, are in Scripture often exegetical, the one is put for the other, as Romans
7.23. I see a law in my members, that is, I feel a law. 2. My second John 3.2.
It does not yet appear what we shall be, but we know, (...), when he shall
appear, we shall be like him. We read in Scripture but of two Appearings of
Christ, his appearing in the flesh, and his appearing at the day of judgment.
Now his appearing in this text, must needs be meant of his last appearing; And
what then? then says the Apostle, we shall be like him, that is, in our
bodies, Phil. 3.21. The spirits of just men being already made perfect, Heb.
12.23. Whence I infer, Enoch is not yet ascended bodily into heaven, because
none of the bodies of the Saints shall be fully made like Christ till his
second Enoch and Elias should be taken up in their bodies into heaven, says
Peter Martyr, and he urges that saying of our Lord, Joh. 3.13
No man has ascended into heaven, (that is, says he, corporeally) but the Son
of man that descended from heaven. Of this opinion also is Oecolampadius,
Martinus Borrhaeus, and learned Doctor Fulk, Dr. Fulk.
who in his marginal notes upon the 11th. to the Hebrews, has this descant. It
appears not, says he, that Enoch now lives in body, no more then Moses, but
that he was translated by God out of the world, and died not after the common
manner of men. And concerning Eliah, the same reverend Author has this
passage, It is evident, that he was taken up alive, but not that he continues
alive. And again, because we read expressly, that he was taken up into heaven, 2
King. 2.11. It is certain, ( says he) that his body was not carried into
heaven. Christ being the first that in perfect humanity ascended thither: 1
Cor. 15.20. Christ is become the first fruits of them that sleep: He is called
the First Fruits, not only because he was the most excellent, and sanctified
the rest, but because he was the first Cluster which was gathered, the First
that went up in a corporeal manner into the Seat of the Blessed. For my part, I
see not how Christ could properly be called the First Fruits; if Enoch, and
Eliah were bodily in heaven before him. Hence we see that the Resurrection is
yet to come.

3. The third thing is, That at the resurrection every soul shall have its own
body: the same body that dies shall arise. Some hold that the soul shall be
clothed with a new body, but then it were improper to call it a Resurrection
of the body, it should be rather a Creation. It was a custom in the African
Churches Cyprian.
, to say, I believe the resurrection hujus carnis, of this body. I confess,
the doctrine of the resurrection is such, that it is too deep for reason to
wade here, you must let faith swim. For instance, Suppose a man dying, is cast
into the Sea, several Fishes come and devour him, the substance of his body
goes into these fishes, afterward the fishes are taken and eaten, and the
substance of these fishes goes into several men; now how this body, thus
devoured, and as it were crumbled into a thousand fractions should be raised
idem numero, the same numerical body, is infinitely above reason to imagine, we
have scarce faith enough to believe it.

Quest.
Quest. How can this be?

Answ. To such I say as our blessed Savior, Matthew. 22.29. Answ.
Ye do err, not knowing the Scriptures, nor the power of God. 1. Not knowing
The Scripture tells us expressly, that the same body that dies shall rise again,
Job 19.26. In my flesh shall I see God, not in another flesh. And verse. 27. My
eyes shall behold him, not other eyes. So 1 Cor. 15.53. This mortal shall put
on immortality (...).
: not another mortal, but this mortal. And 2 Cor. 5.10. That every one may
receive the things done in his body, etc. not in another body. Death in
Scripture is called a sleep; it is far easier with God to raise the body,
then it is for us to awake a man when he is asleep. 2. Ye err not knowing the
power nothing created all things, cannot he reduce many things to one thing?
when the body is gone into a thousand substances, cannot he make an
abstraction, and bring that body together again? Do we not see the Chemist can
out of several metals mingled together, as gold, silver, alcumy, extract the
one from the other, the silver from the gold, the alcumy from the silver, and
can reduce every metal to its own species or kind: and shall we not much more
believe, that when our bodies are mingled and confounded with other substances,
the wise God is able to make a divine extraction, and re-invest every soul with
its own body?

Use 1.
Use 1. This is comfort to a child of God: As Christ said to Martha, John
11.23. Thy brother shall rise again: so I say to thee, thy body shall rise
again. The body is sensible of joy as well as the soul; and indeed, we shall
not be perfect in glory till our bodies be reunited to our souls. Therefore in
Scripture, the doctrine of the resurrection is made matter of joy and triumph,
Isa. 26.19. The dead men shall live, Isa. 26.19
together with my dead body shall they arise: Awake and sing ye that dwell in
the dust. Death is as it were the fall of the leaf, but our bones shall
flourish as an herb, in the spring of the resurrection. That body which is
mouldred to dust shall revive. Sometimes the Saints do sow the Land with their
bodies, Ps. 142.7 Psalm 79.3.
Psalm. 142.7. and water it with their blood, Psalm. 79.3. But these bodies,
whether imprisoned, beheaded, sawn asunder, shall arise and sit down with
Christ upon the Throne. O consider what joy will there be at the re-uniting of
the body and soul at the resurrection. As there will be a sad meeting of the
body and soul of the wicked, they shall be joined together as briars to
scratch, and tear one another: So what unspeakable joy will there be at the
meeting together of the soul and body of the Saints? how will they greet one
another (they two being the nearest acquaintance that ever were?) what a
welcome will the soul give to the body? O blessed body, thou did suffer thy
self to be martyrd, and crucified, thou were kept under by watchings, fastings,
etc. when I prayed thou did attend my prayers with hands lifted up and knees
bowed down. Thou were willing to suffer with me, and now thou shall reign with
me; cheer up thy self my dear friend; thou were sown as seed in the dust of
the earth with ignominy, but now art raised in glory; thou were sown a natural
body, but now art raised a spiritual body. 1 Cor. 15 43.
O my dear body, I will enter into thee again as an heavenly sparckle, and thou
shall cloth me again as a glorious vestment; I will (I say) enter into thee
again, and both of us will enter into our Masters joy.

Use 2. Use 2.
It shows the great love and respect God bears to the weakest believer* God will
not glorify the bodies of his dearest and most eminent Saints, not the
Patriarchs or Prophets, not the body of Moses, Elias, till thou risest out of
thy grave. God is like a Master of a Feast, that stays till all his guests are
come. Abraham the father of the faithful, must not sit down bodily in Heaven,
till all his children are born; and the body of every Saint perfectly mellow
and ripe for the resurrection.

3. If the bodies of the Saints must arise, 3.
then consecrate your bodies to the service of God: these bodies must be made
one with Christ's body. The Apostle makes this Use of the Doctrine of the
resurrection, 1 Cor. 6.14. And God has both raised up the Lord, and will also
raise up us by his own power: there is the Doctrine. Know ye not that your
bodies are the members of Christ? shall I then take the members of Christ, and
make them the members of an harlot? ver. 15. there is the Use. It is enough for
wicked men, to adulterate and defile their bodies. The drunkard makes his body
a tunnel for the wine and strong drink to run through. The Epicure makes his
body a living tomb to bury the good creatures of God. The adulterer makes his
body a stews. The body is called a vessel in Scripture 1 These. 4.4
; these vessels will be found musty at the resurrection, fit only to hold that
wine which you read of* Psalm. 75.8. In the hand of the Lord there is a cup, and
the wine is red; this is the wine of Gods wrath. It is enough for those bodies
to be defiled which shall be joined to the devil: but you that are believers,
that expect your bodies shall be joined with Christ's body; oh cleanse these
vessels; take heed of putting your bodies to any impure services. Present your
bodies a living sacrifice, Romans 12.1. Have a care to keep all the passages and
cinque ports; sometimes the devil comes in at the eye; therefore Job made a
covenant with his eyes: and goes out at the tongue; therefore David set a watch
before his lips: Surely those that have their hearts sprinkled from an evil
conscience, that is, the guilt of known sin, will have a care to have their
bodies washed with clean water Heb. 10.22.
.

CHAP. XIII. The Eighth Prerogative Royal.
I Proceed now to the next Privilege which is to come, viz. The bodies of the
Saints shall be enameled with glory. In this life the body is infirm,
Physicians have much ado to piece it up; it is like a Picture out of frame, or
an house out of repair, every storm of sickness it raines through. O anima,
(...).
quam deforme hospitium nacta es! How does the excellent soul often lodge in a
deformed body? The body is like a piece of rotten wood, diseases like worms
breed there, fevers, plurisies, aches, etc. But this body shall be made
glorious at the resurrection, it shall neither have diseases nor defects; Leah
shall no more complain of her blear eyes, nor Barzillai of his lamenesse. There
are five Properties of the glorified bodies.

agil and nimble: the bodies of the Saints on earth are heavy in their motion,
and subject to weariness, but in Heaven there shall be no elementary gravity
hindering, but our bodies being refined, shall be swift and facile in their
motion, and made fit to ascend, as the body of Elias. In this life the body is
a great hindrance to the soul in its operation, The spirit is willing, but the
flesh is weak. The soul may bring its action against the body, when the soul
would fly up to Christ, the body as a leaden lump keeps it down; it is vivum
sepulchrum: but there is a time coming when it shall be otherwise; the bodies
of the Saints shall be agil and lively, they shall be made fully subject to the
soul, and so no way impede or hinder the soul in its motion.

2. The bodies of the Saints shall transparent, full of clarity and
brightness; as Christ's body when it was transfigured, Matthew. 17.2. our bodies
shall have a divine luster put upon them: here they are as iron when it is
rusty, there they shall be as iron when it is filed and made bright: they shall
shine, tanquam Sol in fulgore, says Augustine, as the Sun in its splendor;
nay, seven times brighter, says Chrysostom: here our bodies are as the gold
in the oar, drossy and impure; in heaven they shall be as gold when it spangles
and glisters: so clear shall they be, that the soul may sally out at every
part, and sparkle through the body as the wine through the glass.

amiable; beauty consists in two things. 1. Symmetry and proportion, when all
the parts are drawn out in their exact lineaments. 2. Complexion when there is
a mixture and variety in the colors, white and sanguine: thus the bodies of
the Saints shall have a transcendency of beauty, put upon them. Here the body
is called a vile body: Vile ortu, in its birth and production: Phil. 3.21
de limo terrae, of the dust of the earth: The earth is the most ignoble
element Job 30.8.
. And vile officio, in the use that it is put to, the soul often uses the body
as a weapon to fight against God (...). Romans 6.13
; but this vile body shall be ennobled and beautified with glory, it shall be
made like Christ's body Phil. 3.21.
.

How beautiful was Christ's body upon earth, in it there was the Purple and the
Lily, it was a mirror beauty: Rivet. Genebrard
For all deformities of body issue immediately from sin, but Christ being
conceived by the holy Ghost, and so refined and clarified from all lees and
dregs of sin he must needs have a beautiful body, and in this sense he was
fairer then the children of men Ps. 45*^
. Christ's body, as some Writers aver, was so fair by reason of the beauty and
grace which did shine in it, that no limner could ever draw it exactly; and if
it was so glorious a body on earth, how great is the luster of it now in
heaven? That light which shone upon Saint Paul surpassing the glory of the
sun Act. 26.13.
; was no other then the beauty of Christ's body in heaven; O then what beauty,
and replendency will be put upon the bodies of the Saints! they shall be made
like Christ's glorious body.

impassible, free from suffering. We read that Job's body was smitten with
biles, and Paul did bear in his body the marks of the Lord Jesus, but ere long
our bodies shall be impassible: not but that the body when it is glorified,
shall have such a passion as is delightful (for the body is capable of joy) but
no passion that is hurtful, as cold, or famine, it shall not be capable of any
noxious impression.

immortal: here our bodies are still dying, quotidie en im dempta est aliqua
pars vitae, and cum crescit vita, tum decrescit Sen.
. It is improper to ask when we shall die, but rather when we shall make an end
of dying: first the infancy dies, then the childhood, then youth, then old age,
and then we make an end of dying: it is not only the running out of the last
sand in the glass that spends it, but all the sands that run out before. Death
is a worm that is ever feeding at the root of our gourds: but in Heaven our
mortal shall put on immortality. As it was with Adam in innocence, if he had
not sinned, such was the excellent temperature and harmony in all the qualities
of his body, that it is probable he had not died, but had been translated from
Paradise to Heaven. Indeed, Bellarmine says, that Adam had died though he had
not sinned; but I know no ground for that assertion, for sin is made the
formal cause of death Romans 5.12.
: however there is no such thing disputable in Heaven, the bodies there are
immortal, Luke 20.36. Neither can they die any more. Luke 20.36.
If God made Manna (which is in it self corruptible) to last many hundred
years in the golden pot, much more is he able by a divine power, so to
consolidate the bodies of the Saints, that they shall be preserved to eternity.
Rev. 21.4. And there shall be no more death: our bodies shall run parallel with
eternity.

CHAP. XIV. The Ninth Prerogative Royal.
Matthew. 22.30. Christ does not say, we shall be Angels, but (...) as the
Angels. Qu. How is that? R. Not only that we shall not die; but, in regard of
our manner of worship. The Angels fulfill the will of God.

1. Swiftly. 2. Perfectly. 3. Cheerfully.
1. Swiftly: When God sends the Angels upon a Commission, they do not hesitate
or dispute the case with God, but presently obey* The Angels are set out by the
Cherubims, which had wings: this was not to represent their Persons (for
spirits have no wings) but their Office* to show how swift they are in their
obedience; it is as if they had wings, Dan. 9.21. The man Gabriel (this was an
Angel) was caused to fly swiftly: as soon as ever God speaks the word, the
Angels are ambitious to obey; now in Heaven we shall be as the Angels.

This is a singular comfort to a weak Christian: alas, we are not as the Angels
in this life; when God commands us upon service, to mourn for sin, to take
up the Cross, O what a dispute is there? how long is it sometimes ere we can
get leave of our hearts to go to prayer? Jesus Christ went more willingly to
suffer, then we do often to pray: how hardly do we come off in duty? God had as
good almost be without it. Oh, but (if this be our grief) be of good comfort,
in Heaven we shall serve God swiftly, we shall be winged in our obedience, we
shall be even as the Angels.

2. The Angels serve God perfectly: they fulfill God's whole will: they leave
nothing undone; when God commands them upon duty, they can shoot to an hairs
breadth. Alas, our services how lame and bedrid are they? we do things by
halves; in stead of using the world as if we used it not, we pray as if we
prayed not, we weep for sin as if we wept not: how many blemishes are there
in our holy things? as the Moon when it shines brightest has a dark spot in
it: how many grains should we want, if Christ did not put his merits into the
scales? our duties, like good wine, do relish of a bad cask: the Angels pouring
sweet odours into the prayers of the Saints, Rev. 8.3. shows, that in
themselves they yield no sweet savor, u^^esse perfumed with Christ's incense;
but in Heaven we shall be (...) even as the Angels, we shall serve God
perfectly: how should we long for that time!

3. The Angels serve God Cheerfully: it is their heaven to serve God: when they
are singing hallelujahs, they are ravished with holy delight: though being
spirits they need no food, yet it is their meat and drink to serve God. As Adam
in innocence, if he had stood though he was set to dress the garden, and
should have been employed in manufacture, yet this labor would have been
without pain and travel, it would have been delightful to him. Thus the Angels
serve God without lassitude and weariness The joy of the Lord is their
strength. When we shall arive at Heaven, we shall in this sense be as the
Angels, we shall serve God cheerfully, we shall (...) and not be weary: what a
blessed privilege is this, we that now are accounted (...) 1 Cor. 4.13.
, as the offscouring of men, shall be (...), as the Angels!

CHAP. XV. The Tenth Prerogative Royal.
THE next Privilege to come is the Vi^dication a good Conscience, have not
always a good Name. The old Serpent spits his venom at the godly through the
mouths of wicked men: if Satan cannot strike his dart into our Consciences, he
will put a dead fly into our Name. The people of God are represented to the
world in a very sad manner; how strangely does a Saint look when he is put in
the devils dress! as those Primitive Christians that were clothed with Bears
skins, and painted with red devils, Job was represented to the world as an
hypocrite, and by his friends too, which went near to him. Paul was called a
seditious man; and he suffered in the opinion of some as an evil doer, 2 Timothy 2
9. Wherein I suffer trouble as an evil doer, even unto bonds: he did not only
bear Christ's marks in his body, but in his Name. Our blessed Savior was called
a deceiver of the people. It has ever been the manner of the wicked world, to
paint Gods children in very strange colors. It is a great sin to defame a
Saint, it is murder; better take away his life then his Name; it is a sin
which we can never make him reparation for; a flaw in a man's credit being like
a blot in a white paper, which will never out: The defaming of a Saint is no
less then the defaming of God himself; the Saints have Gods picture drawn in
their hearts; a man cannot abuse the picture of Caesar, without some reflection
upon Caesar's person. Well, either God will clear his peoples innocence here,
which he has promised, Psalm. 37.6. And he shall bring forth thy righteousness
as the light: thy good Name may be in a cloud, but it shall not set in a cloud;
or else at the day of judgment, then there shall be a Vindication of Names.

In this life the godly are called the troublers of Israel, they are seditious,
rebellious, what not? but a day is shortly coming when God himself will
proclaim their innocence. Believe it, as God will make inquisition for blood,
so for Names; The Name of a Saint is precious in Go^s esteem, it is like a
statue of gold which the polluted breath of men cannot stain; and though the
wicked may throw dust upon it, yet as God will wipe away tears from the eyes of
his people, so he will wipe off the dust from their Name. The time is shortly
coming when God will say to us, as once to Joshua Josh. 5.9.
, I have rolled away the reproach of Egypt from off you: Even as it was with
Christ, the Jews rolled a great stone upon him, and as they thought, it was
impossible he should rise again; but an Angel came and rolled away the stone,
and he arose in a glorious triumphant manner: So it shall be with the godly,
their good Name often lies buried, a stone of obloquy and reproach is rolled upon
them; but at the day of judgment, not an Angel, but God himself will roll away
the stone, and they shall come forth from among the pots, where they have been
blacked and sullied, Ps. 68.13
as the wings of a dove covered with silver, and her feathers with yellow gold.
O what a blessed day will that be, when God himself shall be the Saints
compurgator!

CHAP. XVI. The Eleventh Prerogative Royal.
THE next blessed Privilege,

1. The Process in Law, Rev. 20.12. The books were opened: It is a the books
are opened, the book of Gods Account, the book of Conscience: now observe
another book was opened, which is the book of life; that is, the book of God's
Decree, the book of Free Grace, the book that has our Names written in it, and
our Pardon; and the elect shall be judged out of this book: surely the sentence
cannot be dismal, when our Husband is Judge, and will judge us by the book of
life.

The Sentence it self, Matthew. 25.34. Come ye blessed of my Father: Saints
Acquittance: the Curse is taken off, they have their discharge in the Court of
Justice and shall have the broad Seal of Heaven, Father, Son and holy Ghost,
all setting their hands to the Pardon, and this Christ shalll proclaim. 2. It
implies Saints Instalment. Come ye blessed. As if Christ should say; Ye are the
heirs apparent to the Crown of Heaven, Heaven is your freehold; come in ye
blessed of the Lord, enter upon possession. And this sentence can never be
reversed to eternity; but as Isaac said, I have blessed him, and he shall be
blessed. At the hearing of this comfortable sentence, O with what ineffable joy
will the Saints be filled! it will be Melodia in aure, Iubilum in cord. Bern.
like music in the ear, and a Jubily in the heart. Even as Elizabeth once said
to the Virgin Mary, as soon as the voice of thy salutation sounded in my ears,
the babe leaped in my womb for joy: so the heart of a believer will leap in him
at the hearing of this blessed sentence, and be ready to leap out of him for
joy. O what trembling now among the devils, what triumph among the Angels!

CHAP. XVII. The last Prerogative Royal.
THE last Privilege to come is, God will make a public of all the good which
the Saints have done. This I ground upon three Scriptures, Matthew. 25.21. Euge,
bone serve, Well done, thou good and faithful servant. The world maligns and
censures; when we discharge our conscience they say, ill done; but God will
say, well done, thou good and faithful servant; he will set a trophy of honor
upon his people, Matthew. 25.35. I was an hungered, Mat. 25.35
and ye gave me meat; I was a thirsty, and ye gave me drink; I was a stranger,
and ye took me in; naked, and ye clothed me, etc. King Ahashuerus had his book
of Records, and when he did read in his book, he took notice of Mordecai's good
service, and caused him to have public honor Esth. 6. Ver. 1, 10.
. Be assured, God has his book of Records, and will openly take notice of all
the good service you have done, and he himself will be the Herald to proclaim
your praises, 2 Cor. 4.5. Then shall every man have praise of God.

I speak this the rather, to encourage you in Gods service. Perhaps thou have
laid out thy self for the Cause of God, and thou see Providence blows upon
it, and thou beginnest to think, it was a desperate venture, all is lost. No:
thy Faith and Zeal is recorded, thy Name is taken in Heaven, and God will
shortly give thee a public testimonial of honor, Well done, thou good and
faithful servant. What a whetstone is this to duty? how should it add oil to
the flame of our devotion? thou perhaps have prayed a great while, and watered
this seed with thy tears; be of good comfort, thy tears are not lost, God
bottles them as precious wine, and it is not long before he will open his
bottle, and this wine which came from the winepresse of thy eyes, shall sparkle
forth in the sight of men and Angels. Nay, God will not only take notice of
what we have done for him, but what we would have done. David had an intention
to build God an house, and the Lord did interpret it as if he had done it, 1
King. 8.18. Whereas it was in thy heart to build an house unto my Name, thou
did well that it was in thine heart 1 King. 8.18.
. Intentional goodness is recorded, and it shall add to our Crown.

What a good God do we serve! who would ever change such a Master! it were, one
would think, enough, that God should give us wages for our work (especially
seeing he gave us ability to work;) but that God should applaud us, Well done!
Think how sweet it will be to hear such a word from God, how amazing and
ravishing, when he shall say openly, These are the servants of the most high
God, these are they that have feared an Oath, that have wept in secret for that
which it was not in their power to reform; these are they that have kept their
garments pure, that have valued my favor above life, that did rather choose to
honor me then humor men: These are they that were willing to wash off the
stains from the face of Religion with their blood, and to make my Crown
flourish though it were in their ashes. Well done, good and faithful servants,
enter into the joy of your Lord. Thus shall it be done to them whom God
delights to honor.

These are those glorious things which are to come: I have led you up to the
top of the mount, and given you a prospect of Heaven, I have shown it you at
the little end of the Perspective; I shall say of this glory of heaven, as once
the Queen of Sheba of Solomon's pomp and magnificence 1 King. 10.7.
, The half of it has not been told; the Angels here must be silent.

CHAP. XVIII. The first Inference drawn from the Proposition.
Use 1.
IT shows us what an high valuation and esteem we should set upon the godly.
Informa. 1. Branch
They are, we see, men greatly in favor with God, as the Angel once proclaimed
to Daniel Dan. 9.23.
. and they are invested with glorious Privileges; they are of an heavenly
descent, borne of the Spirit; and they are very (...), for they are Heirs of
the Kingdom Jam. 2.5.
. God has not only laid out some parcels of land, or divided heaven to them,
as Canaan was divided to Israel by lot Josh. 15
. The Tribe of Judah to inhabit in one Country, the Tribe of Reuben, another,
etc. God, I say, does not parcel out heaven thus to the Saints, no; heaven is
theirs with all its Perquisites, with all its Royalties. There are no
enclosures or Landmarks in heaven: There can be no confinement, where every
thing is infinite: Oh what an high value and estimate then should be put upon
the Saints! they are heirs! How does the world respect great heirs? What honor
then should we give to the godly! (...). They are adopted into all the stately
privileges of heaven! It is true, an heir in his young age may be kept short,
but how rich is he when he is possessed of the inheritance? how rich shall the
Saints be, when God shall pour out of his love, and shall empty all the
treasures of glory into them! The Saints are jewels, but their worth and
riches, is not known; therefore they are trampled upon by the world. It does
not yet appear what they shall be: all things are theirs.

CHAP. XIX. The second Inference drawn from the Proposition.
IT shows us a maine difference between the godly and the wicked; Inform. 2.
Branch
the godly man has all his best things to come, the wicked man has all his
worst things to come: as their way is different, so their end; Thou in thy
lifetime receivedst thy good things Luke 16.25.
. The wicked have all their good things here; they have not only what heart can
wish, but They have more then heart can wish Ps. 73.7.
: their worst things are to come: Why, what is to come? the Apostle answers, 1
These. 1.10. wrath to come. And here I shall briefly show you the wicked man's
Charter: which consists in five things.

. I.
1. The awakening of Conscience: this having their conscience seared with an
hot iron, 1 Timothy 4.2. this conscience is quiet, but not good, Bernard.
for the dumbness of conscience proceeds from the numbnesse of it Ideo te
plango quia te ipsum non pla^gis. Hierom.
: It is with him as with a sick patient, who having a confluence of diseases
upon him, yet being asleep, is insensible of the pain. The conscience of many a
man, is like the body of Dionysius, so gross and corpulent, that though they
did thrust needles into his flesh, he felt no pain. Time was when conscience
was tender, but by often sinning he is like the Ostrich, that can digest iron;
or as it is said of Mithridates, that by often accustoming his body to poison,
it never hurt him, but he could live upon it as his food. That sin which was
before as the wounding of the eye, now is no more then the cutting of the
nail. Well, there is a time coming when this sleepy conscience shall be
awakened. Belshazzar was drinking wine in bowls, but there came out fingers on
the wall, and his countenance changed Dan. 5 5
, there conscience began to be awakened. Conscience is like a looking-glass,
if it be foul and dusty, you can see nothing in it, but wipe away the dust, and
you may see your face in it clearly: there is a time coming, when God will wipe
off the dust from the glass of a man's conscience, and he shall see his sins
clearly represented. Conscience is like a Lion asleep, when he awakes he roars
and tears his prey: when conscience awakes, then it roars upon a sinner, and
tears him, as the devil did the man into which he entered; Mark 9.22. he ^ent
him, and threw him into the fire. When Moses rod was turned into a Serpent, he
was afraid, and fled from it; oh what is it when conscience is turned into a
Serpent? Conscience is like the Be, if a man does well, then conscience gives
honey, it speaks comfort; if he do ill, it puts forth a sting: it is called a
worm, Mark 9.44. Where the worm never dies. It is like Prometheus's Vulture, it
lies ever gnawing: it is Gods blood-hound that pursues a man. When the Jaylour
Acts 16.
saw the prison-doors open, and as he thought the prisoners were missing, he
drew his sword and would have killed himself: when the eye of conscience is
opened, and the sinner begins to look about him for his evidences, Faith,
Repentance, etc. and sees they are missing, he will be ready to kill himself:
a troubled conscience is the first fruits of hell; and indeed it is a lesser
hell. That it is so, appears two ways.

1. By the suffrage of Scripture, Prove. 18.14. A wounded spirit who can bear? a
wound in the Name, in the estate, in the body, is sad; but a wound in the
conscience, who can bear? especially when the wound can never be healed: for I
speak of such as awake in the night of death.

good men: when the storm has risen in their conscience (though afterward it
has been allayed) yet for the present they have been in the suburbs of hell.
David complains of his broken bones Psalm. 51.8
, he was like a man that had all his bones out of joint. What is the matter?
you may see wherein his pain lay, Psalm. 51.3. My sin is ever before me; he was
in a spiritual agony: it was not the sword threatened, it was not the death of
the child, but it was the roarings of his conscience, some of Gods arrows
stuck fast there: though God will not damn his children, yet he may send them
to hell in this life.

2. By the experience of bad men, who have been in the perpetual convulsions of
conscience: I have sinned, says Judas: before he was nibling upon the silver
bait, the thirty pieces; but now the hook troubles him, conscience wounds him:
such was Judas his horror, being now like a man upon the rack, that he hangs
himself to quiet his conscience. This shows what the hell of conscience is,
that men account death easy to get rid of conscience, but in Nemo potest a
seipso recurrere. Isid.
vain: it is with them as with a sick man, he removes out of one room into
another, and changes the air, but still he carries his disease with him. Thou
may think, O sinner, to laugh thy sins out of countenance; but what will thou do when conscience shall begin to fly upon thee, and shall examine thee
with scourgings Act. 22.24.
? it is a mercy when conscience is awakened in time, but the misery is when the
wound is too late, there being then no balm in Gilead.

. II.
2 Cor. 5.10.
For we must all appear before the judgment seat of Christ: Hierome thought he
ever heard that sounding in his ears, Surgite mortui, Arise ye dead, and come
to judgment. What solemnity is there at an Assizes, when the Judge comes to
the Bench, and the Trumpets are sounded? Thus Christ the Judge shall be
accompanied with Angels and Archangels, and the Trumpets shall be blown, 1
These. 4.16. For the Lord himself shall descend from Heaven with a shout, with
the voice of the Archangel, and with the Trump of God. This is the great and
general Assizes. Then shall Christ sit down upon the Throne of Judicature,
holding his sword in his hand, and a flame coming out of his mouth 2 These. 1.7.
. Now the sinner being summoned before him as a prisoner at bar, he has his
guilt written in his forehead, he is (...), condemned before he comes, I mean
in his conscience, which is the consistory or petty Sessions: and appearing
before Christ, he begins to tremble and be amazed with horror; and not being
covered with Christ's righteousness, for want of a better covering, he cries to
the mountains to cover him: Rev. 6.26
And the Kings and the great men said to the mountains and rocks, fall on us,
and hide us from the face of him that sits on the throne, and from the wrath of
the Lamb. Nothing so dreadful as the sight of mercy abused. Now the Lamb will
be turned into a Lion; and he who was once a Savior, will be a Judge.

. III.
The third thing to come, is, His: I will reprove thee, and set thy sins in
order before thee, Psalm. 50.21. As God has a bottle for tears, so he has a
book to register men's sins, Rev. 20.12. Rev. 20.12.
The books were opened. Oh what a black charge will be read against a sinner;
not only the sins which have damnation written in their forehead, as
drunkenness, swearing, blasphemy, shall be brought into the charge, but those
sins which he slighted; As

1. Secret sins, such as the world never took notice of: many a man covered
then cured: Not unlike to him that shuts up his shop-windows, but follows his
trade within doors* he sits brooding upon sin; he does with his sins as
Rachel did with her fathers Idols, she put them under her that he might not
find them; so does he put his sins in a secret place Deuteronomy. 27.15.
: all these sins shall be set in order before him: Luke 12.2. For there is
nothing covered that shall not be revealed: God has a key for the heart Jer.
17.10.
.

Little sins, as the world calls them; Though I know no such thing as little
Treason; the Majesty against which it is committed, does accent and inhance the
sin. Besides, little sins (suppose them so) yet multiplied, become great.
What is lesser then a grain of sand, yet when multiplied, what is heavier then
the sands of the sea? a little sum multiplied is great; a little sin
unrepented of will damn; as one leak in the Ship, if it be not looked to, will
drown Navis si unam habuerit t^bulam pe^foratam, mergitur fluctibus. Aug.
. You would think it is no great matter to forget God, yet, Psalm. 50.22. it
has a heavy doom. The non-improvement of Talents, the world looks upon as a
small thing; yet we read of him that hid his Talent in the earth, Mat. 25.25.
he had not spent it, only not trading it, is sentenced.

Sins that in the eye of the world were looked upon as graces; sins that
were colored and masqued over with (...) for God and good intentions, etc. men
put fine glosses upon their sins, that they may obtain credit, and be the
more vendible. It is said of Alcibiades, that he embroidered a curtain with
Lions and Eagles, that he might hide the picture under, full of Owls and
Satyrs. Plutarch.
So does Satan embroider the curtain with the image of Virtue, that he may hide
the foul picture of sin under. The devil is like the Spider, first she weaves
her web and then hangs the fly in it: so he helps men to weave the web of
sin with religious pretenses, and then he hangs them in the snare; all these
sins shall be read in the sinners charge, and set in order before him.

. IV.
4. The next thing is, The passing of the Sentence, Matthew. 25.41. Ite
maledicti, Depart from me, ye cursed. At the hear^^^ of this sentence, the
heart of a sinner will be rent through with horror; that heart which before
would not break with sorrow for sin shall now break with despair. At the
pronouncing of this dreadful sentence, depart from me, the sinner would be glad
if he could depart from himself, and be annihilated; O it will be a sad
departing! We use to say, when a man is dead, he is departed; but this will be
a departing without a deceasing. As soon as Christ has pronounced the curse,
the sinner will begin to curse himself. Oh what have I been doing! I have layn
in wait for my own blood Prove. 1.18.
, I have twisted the cord of my own damnation. While he lived, he blessed
himself; oh how happy am I, how does providence smile upon me! Psalm. 49.18.
Though whiles he lived he blessed his soul, yet when this sentence is passed,
he is the first that will curse himself.

. V.
5. The pouring out of the Vial, Psalm. 75.8. For in the hand This is the sad
execution: hell is set out by Tophet, Isa. 30.33. which was a place situated
near Jerusalem Calvin.
, where they offered their children in the fire to Moloch. A Metaphor to figure
out the infinite torments of hell: the sinner shall lie in the furnace of Gods
wrath, and the breath of the Lord, as a pair of bellows, shall blow the fire.
Hell is said to be prepared, as if God had been sitting down to study and
devise some exquisite torment: Hell is set out in one place by fire Mat. 18.8
, and in another place by darkness Mat. 12.13.
; to show that hell is a fire without light: the hypocrite while he lived, was
all light, no fire, and in hell he shall be all fire, no light; nothing there
to give comfort, no music but the shriekes of the damned; no wine but what is
burnt with the flame of God's wrath: There shall be weeping, and wailing, and
gnashing of teeth. The weeping hypocrite shall go to the place of weeping:
while he lived, he lifted up his eyes in a false devotion, and now being in
hell he shall lift up his eyes Luke 16.
. He that gnashed his teeth at the godly, shall now have gnashing enough;
before he gnashed in envy, now in despair; and this for ever. He will burn up
the chaff with unquenchable fire, the word unquenchable scorcheth hotter then
the fire. Mat. 3.12
The fire of hell is like that stone in Arcadia I have read of, which being
once kindled, could not be extinguished. Eternity is the hell of hell; the
loss of the soul is irreparable; if all the Angels in Heaven should go to make
a Purse, they could not make up this loss. Si rursum corruerit anima, unde
reparabitur? number potest alter Christus, aut idem iterum crucifigi Bern.
? When a sinner is in hell, shall another Christ be found to die for him, or
will the same Christ be crucified again? oh no: they are everlasting burnings.
Isa. 33.14.
Thus the sinner has all his worst things to come: but a believer has all his
best things to come, the things which eye has not seen, nor ear heard, viz
the beatificall vision, the crystal streams of joy that run at Gods right
hand: his Heaven is to come.

CHAP. XX. A serious Scrutiny about the Believers Charter.
I Hear, me thinks, a Christian say* Use 2. Trial.
Great are the Privileges of a Believer, but I fear I have no title to this
glorious Charter: All depends upon an interest. Were there a dispute about our
Estate, whether such an Inheritance did belong to us, we would desire that
there should be a trial in Law to decide it. Here is a large Inheritance,
things present, and things to come; but the question is, whether we are the
true Heirs to whom it belongs? now for the deciding this, we must seriously
examine what right we have to Christ; for all this Estate is made over to us
through Christ: so we find it in the text; All things are yours, and ye are
Christ's: There comes in the Title. Jesus Christ is the great Magazine and
storehouse of a Christian, he has purchased Heaven in his blood; now if we
can say, we are Christ's, then we may say, All things are ours.

Quest. But how shall we know that we are Christ's? Quest.


Answ. Those that are Christ's, Answ.
Christ is in them, 2 Cor. 13.5. Know ye not that Christ is in you?

Quest. Quest.
But how shall we know that?

Answ. If we are in the faith; Answ.
It is observable, before the Apostle had said, Know you not that Christ is in
you, first he puts this query Examine whether ye are in the faith? Christ is in
you, if you are in the faith: Here lies the question, Have you faith? Now for
the deciding this, I shall do two things: show you first the essentials of
faith, then the consequentials. 1. The essentials Faith ere it be wrought must
have some preparatories: there must be some legal bruisings in the soul, some
sense of unworthiness. Now to this blessed Grace of Faith, there are three
things especially requisite.

. I. Showing that Knowledge is requisite to faith.
The first is Knowledge. Faith is an They that know thy Name will put their
trust in thee, Psalm. 9.10. Philo calls it, fides oculata, quick-sighted faith.
Knowledge must carry the Torch before faith: 2 Timothy 1.12. For I know whom I
have believed. As faith without works is dead, so faith without knowledge is
blind. Devout ignorance damnes: which condemns the Church of Rome, that think
it a piece of their religion to be kept in ignorance; these set up an Altar to
an unknown God: they say, Ignorance is the mother of devotion; but sure, where
the Sun is set in the understanding, there must needs be night in the
affections. So necessary is knowledge to the being of faith, that the Scripture
does sometimes baptize faith with the Name of knowledge; Isa. 53.11. By his
knowledge shall my righteous servant justify many; knowledge is put there for
faith. Now this knowledge of Christ which goes before faith, or rather is the
embrio and first matter of which faith is formed, consists in four things: The
soul through this optic glass of knowledge, sees

1. A preciousnesse in Christ, he is the pearl of price. Christ was never poor
but when he had on our rags: there is nothing in Christ but what is precious;
he is precious in his Name, in his Nature, in his Influences; he is called a
precious stone Isa. 28.16
; he must needs be a precious stone, who has made us living stones.

2. A fullness in Christ; the fullness Col. 2.9. all fullness, Col. 1.19. a
fullness of merit; his blood able to satisfy his Fathers wrath: a fulness of
Spirit; his grace able to supply our wants; by the one he does absolve us, by
the other he does adorn us.

suitableness in Christ; that which is good, if it be not adaequatum,
suitable, it is not satisfactory: If a man be hungry, bring him fine flowers,
this is not suitable, he desires food: if he be sick, bring him music, this is
not suitable, he desires Physic: in this sense there is a suitableness in
Christ to the soul; he is quicquid appetibile, as Origin speaks, whatever we
can desire. If we hunger and thirst, he is pabulum animae, the food of the
soul; therefore he is called the bread of life. If we are sick unto death, his
blood is a sacred balm: he may be compared to the trees of the Sanctuary Ezekiel.
47 12.
, which were both for meat, and for medicine.

4. A Propensenesse and readiness in Isa. 55.1. Ho, every one that thirsts,
come ye to the waters; and he that has no money, buy and not, etc. Behold here,
at what a low price does God set his heavenly blessings! it is but thirsting,
bring but desires. Behold the Propensenesse in Christ to ^^spense and give out
his fullness: buy without money; a strange kind of buying! there is bounty in
Christ as well as beauty. As he is all fullness, so he is all sweetness, of a
noble and generous disposition; he does not only invite us, but charge us upon
pain of death to come in and believe: he threatens us if we will not lay hold
of mercy: he waits to be gracious Isa. 30.18
: This is the lenocinium, and enticer of the affections: this draws the eyes
and heart of a sinner after him: what are the blessed Promises but Christ's
golden Scepter held forth? what are the motions of the Spirit, but Jesus Christ
coming a wooing? and such a knowledge and sight of Christ is necessary to usher
in faith: now the soul begins to move toward him; he sees all this variety of
excellency in Christ, and withal sees a possibility, nay, a probability of
mercy: there is nothing that hinders him, God does not exclude him unless he
exclude himself: Then he thinks thus, What is it keeps me off from Christ? is
it my unworthiness? behold, there is merit in Christ: is it my wants? there is
enough in the fountain, and Jesus Christ does not expect that I should carry
any thing to him, but rather that I should bring something from him: he does
not expect that I should carry water to the well, only an empty vessel: why
then should not this fullness in Christ be for me as well as others? While he
is thus parlying with himself, the Spirit works a kind of persuasion, that
Christ is willing that he in particular should taste of this mercy; then
follows the second act which faith puts forth, and that is consent; Well, I
will have Christ whatever it cost me.

. II. That Consent is requisite to faith.
Though Knowledge be a necessary antecedent to Faith, yet it is not Consent:
Faith is seated as well in the heart and will, as in the understanding: as well
in the affection, as in the apprehension. With the heart man believes Romans 10
10.
. Scepticks in religion, may have a faith in the head, but not in the heart;
they are more Notion, then Motion: the soul consents to have Christ, and to
have him upon his own terms.

1. As an Head; the head has a fountain of spirits, and the seat of
government: the head is as it were the Pilot of the body, it rules and steers
it in its motion. The believer consents to have Christ not only as an Head to
send forth spirits, that is comfort; but as an head to rule: A sinner would
take Christ's Promises, but not his Laws: he would be under Christ's benediction,
but not under his jurisdiction. A believer consents to have whole Christ; non
eligit objectum, he does not pick and choose; but as he expects to sit down
with Christ upon the throne, so he makes his heart Christ's Throne.

1 Pet. 4.14.
, and will have Christ not only in purple but when with John Baptist he is
clothed in Camels hair. Faith can embrace the fire, if Christ be in it. Faith
looks upon the Cross as Jacobs ladder, to carry him up to Heaven: Faith says,
Blessed be that affliction, welcome that Cross which carries Christ upon it.

3. The Believer consents to have Christ purely for love; if the Seneca.
non est amicitia, sed mercatura; it were not properly to make a marriage with
him, but rather to make a merchandise of him: the believer consents for love,
August.
amat Christum propter Christum, he loves Christ for Christ: Heaven without
Christ is not a sufficient dowry for a believer: there is nothing adulterate in
his consent, it is not sinister; there is nothing forced, it is not for fear;
that were rather constraint then consent: a consent forced will not hold in
Law, it is voluntary. The beauty of Christ's person, and the sweetness of his
disposition, draws the will, which as the Primum mobile or master-wheel,
carries the whole soul with it.

pro termino interminabili, never to part more; he desires an uninterrupted
communion with him, he will part with life, but not with Christ: indeed, death
when it slips the knot between the soul and the body, it ties it faster between
the soul and Christ.

Amor non nisi donum amantis. Guil. Paris.
, resigning up all the interest in himself to Christ; he is willing to lose his
own Name, and surname himself by the Name of Christ: to lose his own will, and
be wholly at Christ's dispose: Ye are not your own 1 Cor. 6.19.
; he resigns up his love to Christ. In this sense the Spouse is said to be a
spring Cant. 4.12.
shut up. She has love for Relations, but the best of her love is kept for
Christ: The world has the Milk of her love, but Christ has the Cream of it:
the choicest and purest of her love is a Spring shut up, it is broached only
for Christ to drink. This is the second Act of faith.

. III. Opening the nature of Recumbency.
The third thing is Recumbency. The soul having given its consent that the
match should be made up, and done it out of choice, now it casts it self upon
Christ as a man that casts himself upon the stream to swim, it makes an holy
adventure, it clasps about Christ, and says, My Lord, my Jesus, which is as it
were the joining of hands. This Act of Recumbency is sometimes in Scripture
called a coming to Christ Joh. 6, 37
, sometimes a leaning upon Christ Cant. 8.5
. This is that faith which justifies.

Now concerning this faith, I shall lay down two Rules. 1. That faith justifies
not as a formal cause, but purely as an instrument, viz. as it lays hold on
Christ the blessed object, and fetches in his fullness: and in this sense it
is called a precious faith 2 Pet. 1.1
: the worth lies not in faith, but in Christ, on which it does center and
terminate; Faith in it self considered, is not more excellent than other
graces. Take a piece of Wax, and a piece of Gold, of the same Magnitude, the
Wax is not valuable with the Gold; but as this Wax hangs at the lavell of some
Will, by virtue of which a great Estate is confirmed, and conveyed, so it may
be worth many hundred pounds. So faith considered purely in it self, does
challenge nothing more than other graces, nay, in some sense, it is inferior,
it being an empty hand: But as this hand receives the precious Alms of Christ's
Merits, and is an instrument or channel through which the blessed streams of
life flow to us from him; so it does challenge a superiority above other graces.

Indeed, some affirm, that the (...), the very Act of believing, without
reference to the Merits of Christ, justifies. To which I shall say but this; 1.
Faith cannot justify as it is an Act, for it must have Act and the Object.
What is faith, if it do not fix upon Christ, but fancy? It was not the people
of Isreal's looking up that cured them, but the fixing their eye upon the Brazen
Serpent. 2. Faith does not justify as it is a Grace. This were to Work: which
must needs be, if (as some affirm) it be in lieu of obedience to the Moral
Law. Then we should be justified by Works, contrary to that, Ephesians. 2.9. where
the Apostle speaks expressly, Not of works. So that it is clear, faith's
excellency lies in the apprehending and applying the object Christ: therefore
in Scripture we are said to be justified, (...), through faith as an Instrument
deputed Ephesians. 2.8.
; not (...), for faith as a formal cause.

The second Rule is, that Faith exercise grace. It cannot be denied but faith
has an influence upon the graces; it is like a silver thread that runs through
a Chain of Pearl: it puts strength and vivacity into all the virtues; but it
does not justify under this Notion. Faith begets obedience: By faith Heb. 11.
Abraham obeyed: But Abraham was not justified as he obeyed, but as he believed
Romans 4.3
. Faith works by love, but it does not justify as it works by love. For as the
Sun shines by its brightness, not by its heat; though both are inseparably
joined: so faith and love are tied together by an indissoluble knot, yet faith
does not justify as it works by love, but as it lays hold on Christ. Though
faith be accompanied with all the graces, yet in point of justification, it is
alone and has nothing to do with any of the graces. Hence that speech of
Luther; in the justification of a sinner, Christ and faith are alone, Tanquam
sponsus and spomsa in thalamo; As the Bridegroom and Bride in the Bedchamber.
Faith is never separated from the graces, yet sometimes it is alone. And thus I
have shown you the Essentials of faith.

. IV. Showing what are the fruits and products of faith.


1. Faith is an heart-quickning The just shall live by his faith, Hab. 2.4.
When we begin to believe we begin to live. Faith grafts the soul into Christ,
as the cion into the stock, and fetches all its sap and juice from that
blessed Vine. Faith is the great quickner; it quickens our graces, and our
duties.

1. Faith quickens our graces; stirs till faith set it a work. How does love
work? By faith! When I apprehend Christ's love, this does pullize and draw up my
love to him again. How does humility work? By faith! Faith humbles the soul; it
has a double aspect, it looks upon sin, and a sight of sin humbles: it looks
upon Free Grace, and a sight of mercy humbles. How does patience work? By faith
Jam. 1.3.
! If I believe God is a wise God, who knows what is best for me, and can
deliver not only from affliction, but by affliction: This spins out patience.
Thus faith is not only viva, but vivifica: it puts forth a divine Energy and
operation into all the graces.

2. Faith animates and quickens duties. What was the blood of Bulls and Goats
to take away sin Heb. 10.4
? It was their faith in the Messiah, that made their dead Sacrifices become
living Services. What are Ordinances, but a dumb show, without the breathings
of faith in them? therefore in Scripture it is called, the prayer of faith Jam.
5.7.
, the hearing of faith Heb. 4.2.
, and the obedience of faith Romans 16.26.
, dead things have no beauty in them, it is faith that quickens and beautifies.

Having purified their hearts by faith, Acts 15.9. Faith is a Virgin-grace, of
a pure and heavenly nature. Faith is in the soul as lightning in the Air,
which purges; as fire in the Metals, which refines; as Physic in the Body,
which works out the disease. Faith works out pride, self-love, hypocrisy: it
consecrates the heart: That which was before the Devils Thorow-fare, is now
made Gods Enclosure, 1 Timothy 3.9. Holding the mystery of faith in a pure
conscience. Faith is an heavenly plant, which will not grow in an impure soil.
Faith does not only justify, but sanctify: as it has one work in heaven, so
it has another work in the heart: He that before was under the power of some
hereditary corruption, as soon as faith is wrought there is a sacred virtue
coming from Christ for the enervating, and weakening that sin: the waters are
abated. The woman that did but touch the hemme of Christ's Garment felt virtue
coming out of him Mark. 5.27.
. The touch of faith has an healing power: Faith casts the Devil out of the
Castle of the heart, though still he keeps the Outworks. Satan has a party in
a Believer, but there is a Duel fought every day: and faith will never give
over, till, as a Prince, it prevails. This is the faith of Gods Elect Tit. 1.1.
. Thou that say thou believe, has thy faith removed the Mountain of sin,
and cast it into the Sea? What, a believer, and a drunkard! a believer, and a
swearer! a believer, and an Apostate! for shame, either leave thy sins, or
leave thy profession: Faith and the love of sin can no more stand together,
then two contraries in the same part of the Subject gradu intensivo; as light
and darkness;

Faith is an heart-pacifying grace; Romans 5.1. Being justified by faith, we have
peace with God, Faith is the Dove that brings an Olive Branch of peace in its
mouth; Faith presents God reconciled, and that gives peace. What is it makes
Heaven, but the smile of God? Faith puts the soul into Christ, and there is
peace; John 16. ult. That in me ye may have peace. When the Conscience is in a
Fever, and burns as hell, faith opens the Orifice in Christ's sides, and sucks
in his blood, which has a cooling and pacifying virtue in it. Faith gives us
peace in Trouble, nay, out of Trouble. 1. It gives Peace in Trouble: Faith is
an heart-pacifying, because an heart-securing grace. When Noah was in the Ark,
he did not fear the Deluge: he could sing in the Ark. Faith shuts a believer
into the Ark Christ: Lead me to the Rock which is higher than I, was David's
prayer Ps. 61.1.
. Faith plants the soul upon this Rock. The West-Indians built their Palaces
upon the tops of hills: in the Flood the waters covered the hills; but a
believer is built higher: Isa. 33.16. His place of defense shall be the
munition of Rocks: but a man may starve upon a Rock; therefore it follows,
Bread shall be given him, etc. Faith builds a Christian upon the power,
wisdom, faithfulness of God: This is the munition of Rocks: and it feeds him
with the hidden Manna of Gods love: here is bread given him. The way to be safe
in evil times, is to get faith; this ushers in peace, and it is such a peace as
does garrison the heart, Phil. 4.7. The peace of God shall keep your heart,
(...): It shall keep it as in a Tower or Garrison. 2. Faith peace out of
trouble: joy out of sorrow Joh. 16.20
, glory out of reproach 1 Pet. 4.14.
. This is the key to Samsons Riddle, Out of the eater came meat; this explaines
that Paradox, Mat. 7.16
Can a man gather Grapes of Thorns, or Figs of Thistles? Yes, of Trials and
Persecutions faith gathers joy and peace: here are Figs of Thistles. How were
the Martyrs ravished in the Flames? The Apostles were whipped in prison, but it
was with Sweet Briar. O how sweet is that peace which faith Breeds? it is a
Plant of the Heavenly Paradise; it is a Christians Festival; it is his Music:
it is (...), as Chrysostom speaks, the anticipation of Heaven.

oak, he is strong to resist tentations, to bear afflictions, to foil
Corruptions; he gives check to them, though not full mate. An unbeliever is
like Reuben, unstable as water, he shall not excel. A state of infidelity, is
a state of impotency. A Believer is as Joseph, who though the Archers shot at
him, his bow abode in strength. If a Christian be to do any thing, he consults
with faith; this is the sinew, which if it be cut, all his strength goes from
him. When he is called out to suffering, he harnesseth himself with Faith, he
puts on this coat of maile; Faith lays in suffering strength, furnishes the
soul with suffering Promises, musters together suffering graces, propounds
suffering rewards.

But how comes Faith to be so strong? Answ. 1. Because it is a Ephesians. 6.16. Above
all, taking the shield of Faith: a shield will serve for a breast plate, a
sword, if need be, an helmet; it defends the head, it guards the vitals; Phil.
4.13. I can do all things, (...), through Christ that strengthens me. The
strength of faith lies out of it self, it grafts upon another stock. When it
would have wisdom, it consults with Christ, whose Name is wonderful,
Counselor; when it would have strength, it goes to Christ, who is called the
Lion of the Tribe of Judah. Christ is a Christians Armory, Faith is the key
that unlocks it. Faith hangs upon the lock of Christ, all its strength lies
here; cut it off from this lock, and it is weaker then any other grace. Christ
may be compared to that tower of David Cant. 4.4
, on which there hang a thousand bucklers, all shields of mighty men. The faith
of all the Elect, these shields hang upon Christ. Faith is an Heroical grace;
the Crown of Martyrdom is set upon the head of faith. By faith they quenched
the violence of the fire Heb. 11.34.
; the fire overcame their bodies, but their faith overcamr the flame.

5. Faith is a life-fructifying Julian upbraiding the Christians, said, that
their Motto was Only believe; and the Papists call us solifidians: Indeed, when
faith is alone, and views all the rare beauties in Christ, then faith sets a
low value and esteem upon works: but when faith goes abroad in the world, good
works are the handmaids that wait on this Queen. Though we place faith in the
highest Orb in matter of Justification, yet good works are in conjunction with
it in matter of Sanctification. It Is no wrong to good works to give faith the
upper hand, which goes hand in hand with Christ. Good works are not separated
from faith, only faith challenges its seniority. Faith believes as if it did
not work, and it works as if it did not believe. Faith has Rachels eye, and
Leahs womb: Romans 7.4.
Romans 7.4. That ye should be married to another, even to him who is raised from
the dead, that ye should bring forth fruit unto God. Faith is that Spouse-like
grace which marries Christ, and good works are the children which faith bears.

Thus having briefly shown you the Nature of Faith, I now come to the reflexive
Act: Have you faith or no? And here let me turn of summons to surrender, what
would become of you? you want that grace which should entitle you to Christ and
Heaven: oh, I say, mourn: yet mourn not as them without hope, for in the use of
means you may recover a Title. I know it is otherwise in our Law-Courts; if a
Title to an Estate be once lost, it can never be recovered: but it is otherwise
here; though thou have no Title to Christ to day, yet thou may recover a
Title: thou have not sinned away the hope of a Title, unless thou have sinned
away the sense of sinning. To such as are resolved to go on in sin, I have
not a word to say, they are upon the spur to go to hell: but to you that have
been prodigal sons, but are now taking up serious resolutions to give a bill
of divorce to your sins; let me encourage you to come to Christ, and to throw
your selves upon his blood; for yet a Title to Heaven is recoverable.

Object. 1.
Object. 1. But says the sinner, Is there hope of mercy for me? sure this is
too good news to be true: I would believe, and repent, but I am a great sinner.
Ans. And who else does Christ come to save 1 Timothy 1.15.
? whom does God justify but the ungodly Romans 4.5
? did Christ take our flesh on him, and not our sins?



Answ. And is not Christ's blood of a deeper purple then thy sins? is there not
more virtue in the one, then there can be venom in the other? what if the devil
does magnify thy sins, can not thou magnify thy Physician? cannot God drown
one sea in another, thy sins in the Ocean of his mercy?

3. But my sins are of a long

Answ. As if Christ's blood were only for new and fresh wounds? We read that
Christ raised not only the daughter of Iairus, which was newly* dead, and the
widows son which was carried forth to burying; but Lazarus, that had layn
four days in the grave, and began to putrefie: and has Christ less virtue
now in Heaven then he had upon earth? if thine be an old wound, yet the
medicine of Christ's blood applied by faith, is able to heal it: therefote sink
not in these quicksands of despair. Judas his despair, was worse in some sense
then his Treason. I would not encourage any to go on in sin, (God forbid,)
it is sad to have old age and old sins. It is hard to pull up an old tree that
is rooted, it is easier to cut it down for the fire; but let not such despair:
God can give an old sinner a new heart, he can make springs in the desert Isa.
30.19
: Have not others been set forth as paterns of mercy, who have come in at the
twelfth hour? Therefore break off the league with sin, throw thy self into
Christ's arms say, Lord Jesus, thou have said, Joh. 6.37
Those which come to thee, thou will in no case cast out

All things are yours: things present, and to come: You are the heirs on which
God has settled all these glorious privileges Give wine, says Solomon, to
them that are of heavy hearts Prove. 31.6.
. But while I am going to pour in this wine of consolation, me thinks, I hear
the Christian sadly disputing against himself, that he has no right to this
Charter.

CHAP. XXI. The Believers Objections answered.
THere are three great Objections which he makes: Object. 1. Alas, says he,
Object. 1.
I cannot tell whether I have faith or no?

Answ. Have thou no faith? Answ.
how did thou come to see it? a blind man cannot see: thou can not see the
want of grace, but by the light of grace. Quest. But sure, Quest.
if I had faith I should discern it? Ans. 1. Answ. 1.
Thou may have faith, and not know it: a man may seek for that sometimes
which he has in his hand. Mary was with Christ, she saw him, she spoke with
him, yet her eyes were held that she did not know it was Christ: the child
lives in the womb, yet does not know that it lives. 2. Faith often lies hid in
the heart, and we see it not for want of search; the fire lies hid in the
embers, but blow aside the ashes, and it is discernable: Faith may be hid under
fears, temptations; but blow away the ashes. Thou prizest faith; had thou a
thousand Jewels lying by, thou would part with all for this Jewel: no man
can prize grace but he that has it. Thou desire faith, the true desire of
faith is faith. Thou mournest for want of faith; dispute not, but believe; what
are these tears but the seeds of faith?

Object. 2.
Object. 2. But my faith is weak, the hand of it so trembles, that I fear it
will hardly lay hold upon Christ?

Answ.
Answ. There are seven things which I shall say in reply to this. grace is the
seed of God 1 John 3.9
, and it shall never die, but live as a sparkle in the main sea. 2 A weak faith
To them that have obtained like precious faith, 2 Pet. 1.1 not but that there
are degrees of faith; as faith purifies, so all faith is not alike one is more
then another; but as faith justifies, says is alike precious; the weakest
faith justifies as well as the faith of the most eminent Saint; a weak hand
will receive the alms: for a man to doubt of his grace because it is weak, is
rather to rely upon grace, then upon Christ. 3. The Promise is not made to
strong faith, whoever believes, be his faith never so small, the Promise is
made to true faith, and for the most part to weak. What is a grain of
mustard seed, what is a bruised reed, but the emblem of a weak faith? yet the
Promise is made to these: A bruised reed he will not break Mat. 12.20.
. The words are a miosis, where the lesser is put for the greater: He will not
break. that is, he will bind up: Though Christ chides a weak faith, yet that
it may not be discouraged, he makes a Promise to it. Hierom observes upon the
Beatitudes, there are many of the Promises made to weak grace: Matthew. 5.3
Blessed are the poor in spirit; Blessed are they that mourn, ver. 4. Blessed
are they that hunger, ver. 5.

Psalm. 128.
. The Thief on the Cross, when he was newly converted, he had but a weak
faith; but how many precious clusters grew upon that vine! Luke 23.40. he
chides his fellow-thief; Do thou not fear God? Luke 23.40. Verse 41.
he falls to self-judging, we indeed suffer justly: he believes in Christ when
he said, Lord: he makes an heavenly prayer, remember me when thou come into
thy kingdom: here was a young plant, but very fruitful. Weak Christians often
are more fruitful in affections; how strong is the first love, which is after
the first planting of faith!

5. A Christian may mistake, and think he is weak in faith because he is Canaan
was weak in assurance, but was strong in Faith. Christ gives her three
repulses, but her faith stands the shot; she pursues Christ with an holy
obstinacy of faith, insomuch that Christ sets a trophy of honor upon her
faith, Mat. 15.28.
O woman, great is thy faith: it may be a strong faith, though it does not see
the print of the nails: it is an heroical faith that can swim against wind
and tide, believe against hope Romans 4.18
. Christ sets the crown upon the head of faith, not of assurance. Ioh. 20.29.
Blessed are they that have not seen, and yet have believed.

God will gather the lambs with his arms, and carry them in his bosom Isa.
40.11
. The Lord had a great care of his weak Tribes: when Israel marched toward
Canaan, the Tribes were divided into several companies or Brigades: now it is
observable, all the weak Tribes were not put together, lest happily they should
discourage one another, and so have fainted in their march; but God puts a
strong Tribe to two weak Tribes; as Issachar, Zebulon, two weak Tribes, and
Judah a victorious Tribe; therefore he gives the Lion in his standard: surely
this was not without a mystery; to show what care God has of his weak
children, CHRIST the Lion of the Tribe of Judah shall be joined to them.

7. Weak faith is a growing greatest among herbs, and becomes a Tree, so that
the birds of the air come and lodge in the Branches thereof Mat. 13.32*
. Faith must have a growing time; The seed springs up by degrees; First the
Blade, and then the Ear, and then the full Corn in the Ear: the strongest
faith has sometimes been weak. The faith that has been renowned in the world,
was once in its infancy and minority: Grace is like the waters of the
Sanctuary, which did rise higher and higher. Wait on the Ordinances, these are
the breasts to nourish faith: be not discouraged at thy weak faith, though it be
now in the blossom, and bud, it will come to the full flower.

Object. 3. But, says a child of God, Object. 3.
I fear I am not elected?

Answ.
Answ. What, a Believer and not elected? Who told thee thou were not elected?
Have thou any skill in the black Book of Reprobation? The Angels cannot unclasp
this Book, and will thou meddle with it? Which is our duty to study, Gods
Secret will, or his Revealed? It Is a sin for any man to say he is a Reprobate.
That which keeps him in sin, must needs be a sin; but this Opinion keeps
him in sin, it cuts the sinews of endeavor. Who will take pains for heaven
that gives up himself for lost? O Believer! be of good comfort; thou need
not look into the Book of Gods Decree, but look into the Book of thy heart, see
what is written there: he that finds the Bible copied out into his heart, his
nature transformed, the byasse of his will changed, the signature and
engravings of the Holy Ghost upon him, he does not look like a Reprobate.

When you see the fruits of the earth spring up, you conclude the Sun has been
there; It Is hard to climb up into Election: but if we find the fruits of
holiness springing up in our hearts, we may conclude, the Sun of
Righteousness has risen there, 2 These. 2.13. God has from the beginning
chosen you to salvation by the Sanctification of the Spirit. By our
Sanctification we must calculate our Election. Indeed, God in saving us, begins
at the highest Link in the Chain, Election; but we must begin at the lowest
Link of the Chain, Sanctification, and so ascend higher.

Therefore laying aside all disputes, let me pour in of the Wine of
consolation. Thou who art a Believer, (and though thou will not affirm it, yet
thou dare not deny it without sin) let me do two things, show you your
happiness, then your duty.

1. Behold your happiness: all the sublime spirit would here be too low and
jejune. How happy art thou, O Believer! if God himself can make thee blessed,
thou shall be so: If being invested with Christ's Robes, enameled with his
beauty, replenished with his love: If all the dimensions of glory will make
thee blessed, thou shall be so. O the infinite superlative happiness of a
Believer! All things to come are his. What? To have the same Jointure with the
Angels, those blessed Spirits! Nay, to speak with reverence, to have a
partnership with God himself! to share in the same love, to be enriched with
the same glory which did sparkle forth in the humane nature of Christ Joh.
17.22.
! How amazing is this! the thoughts of it are enough to swallow us up. O what
an inheritance is he born to, who is newborn? Suppose he is poor in the
world, and despised, (The King of the Moors was offended at Religion, because
the Professors of it were poor,) I say to him as our Savior, Luke 6.20.
Blessed are ye poor, for yours is the Kingdom of God. All things to come are
yours. Who would not be a Believer! O that I might tempt such to Christ as yet
stand out.

Learn your duty. Mercy calls for Duty.

CHAP. XXII. Showing the Duties of a Believer by way of Retaliation.
THere are several Duties which I would press upon Believers; and they branch
themselves into nine particulars.

1. Branch.
1. Admire, and thankfully adore the love of God in settling this rich Charter
upon you. How was David affected with Gods goodness? 2 Samuel 7.19. Thou have
spoken of thy servants House for a great while to come. So should we say, Lord,
thou have not only given us things present, but thou have spoken of thy
servants for a great while to come, nay, for ever. It will be a great part of
our work in heaven to admire God: let us begin to do that work now which we
shall be for ever doing. Adore free grace; free grace is the hinge on which all
this turns; Every link in this golden chain is richly enameled with
free grace; Free Grace has provided us a plank after shipwreck. When things
pas^ were forfeited, God has given us things to come. When we had lost
Paradise, he has provided heaven. Thus are we raised a step higher by our
fall. Set the Crown upon the head of free grace. O to what a Seraphicall frame
of spirit should our hearts be raised! How should we join with Angels and
Archangels in blessing God for this! It Is well there is an eternity coming;
and truly that will be little enough to praise God. Say as that sweet Singer of
Israel, Ps. 103.1,
Psalm. 103.1. Bless the Lord, O my soul; Or as the Original will bear, (...).
Bow the Knee, O my soul, before the Lord. Thus should a Christian say, All
things in heaven and earth are mine; God has settled this great portion upon
me, Bow the Knee, O my soul, praise God with the best instrument, the heart;
and let the instrument be screwed up to the highest, do it with the whole
heart. When God is tuning upon the string of mercy, a Christian should be
tuning upon the string of Praise, I have given you but a taste of this new
Wine: yet so full of Spirits it is, that a little of it should inflame the
heart in thankfulness. Let me call upon you, who are the heirs apparent to
this rich inheritance, Things present and to come; that you would get your
hearts elevated, and wound up into a thankful frame. It Is not an handsome
posture, to see a Christian ever complaining when things go cross. O do not so
look upon your troubles, as to forget your mercies. Bless God for what is to
come: and to heighten your praises, consider God gives you not one^^ ^hese
things, but he gives y^^ ^^mself. Da mihi te Domine.
It was Austins praye^. Lord, says he, What ever thou have given me, take all
away, only give me thy self: You have not only the gift, but the Giver. O take
the Harp and Violl; if you do not bless God, who shall? where will God have
his praise? he has but a little in the World. Praise is in it self an high
Angelical work, and requires the highest spirited Christians to perform it.
Wicked men cannot praise God: they can say, God be thanked; but as it is with
the Hand-Diall, the finger of the Dial is at twelve, when the Dial has not
moved one minute. So, though the tongues of wicked men are forward in praise,
yet their hearts stand still. Indeed, who can praise God for these glorious
privileges to come, but he that has the Seal of the Spirit to assure him
that all is his? O that I might persuade the people of God to be thank^^ll,
Make Gods Praise glorious Psa. 62.1
. Let me tell you, God is much taken with this frame; Repentance is the joy of
Heaven, and Thankfulness is the music of Heaven: let not God want his music;
let it not be said, God has more Murmurers than Musicians; Who so offers
praise, glorifies me Ps. 50. ult
.

2. If all things to come are yours, live suitable to those glorious hopes: you
that look for things to come, let me tell you, God looks for something present
from you; namely, that your lives be answerable to your hopes What manner of
persons ought you to be? 2 Pet. 3.11. You have heard what manner of privileges
you shall have; I, but what manner of persons ought you to be? Those that look
to differ from others in their Condition, must differ from them also in their
Conversation. Wherefore beloved, seeing you look for such things, be diligent
that you may be found of him in peace without spot 2 Pet. 3.14
. We would all be glad to be found of God in peace, then labor to be found
without spot. Spot not your faces, spot not your consciences; live as those who
are the Citizens and Burgesses of this new Jerusalem above. Walk as Christ did
upon earth. There are three steps in which we should follow Christ.

1. In sanctity: his was an holy life; Joh. 8.46.
Which of you convinces me of sin? Though he was made sin, yet he knew no
sin. The very devils acknowledged his holiness: we know thee who thou art,
The holy One of God. Oh be like Christ; tread in his steps. In the Sacrament,
we show forth the Lords death 1 Cor. 11 26.
: And in an holy conversation we show forth his life. The holy oil, wherewith
the Vessels of the Sanctuary were to be consecrated, was compounded of the
purest ingredients Exodus 30 32.
, which was a Type and Emblem of that Sanctity which should rest upon the
godly; their hearts and lives should be consecrated with the holy oil of the
Spirit. How does it discredit and as it were intomb the honor of religion when
men profess they look for heaven, yet there is nothing of heaven in them; if
there be light in the lanthorn, it will shine out: and if grace be in the
heart, it will shine forth in the conversation. It is a great sin in these
times to be bewailed, the looseness of Professors: even those that we hope (by
the rule of charity) have the sap of grace in their heart, yet do not give
forth such a sweet savor in their lives: How many under the Notion of
Christian Liberty, degenerate into Libertinisme. The carrage of some that go
for Saints is such, that it would make men afraid to embrace Religion. What
Chrysostom says of the Contentions of the Church in his time; (If, says he,
a Gentile should come and say, I would be made a Christian; yet when he sees
such a spirit of Dissension among them; one of Paul, and another of Apollo,
such are the diversity of opinions, that he knows not which to choose, but
must return to his Gentilism again:) The same may I say of the looseness, if
not scandals of some Professors; If a stranger should come from beyond Sea, and
see the miscarriages of many, their Covetousness, their Licentiousness; had
he no other Bible to read in, but the lives of some Professors, he would
turn back again, and resolve never to be made a Christian. Pudet haec
opprobria nobis --. What a shame is this? Did Christ walk thus when he was
upon earth? His life was a pattern of Sanctity! You that are Professors, your
sins are sins of unkindnesse, they go nearest to Christ's heart. Do you live
as those who have hope of things to come? is Christ preparing Heaven for you,
and are you preparing War against him? Is this your kindness to your friend?
O consider how you wound Religion; Your sins are worse then others. A stain
in a black cloth is not so easily seen or taken notice of; but a spot in a
piece of Scarlet, every ones eye is upon it. The sins of wicked men are not
so much wondered at, they can do no other, theirs is a spot in black; but a
sin in a Professor, this is like a spot in a bright Scarlet, every ones eye
is upon it* this wounds the honor of Religion: The deviation of the godly is
as odious as the devotion of the profane. Oh that there were such a luster and
majesty of holiness in the lives of Professors, that others might say, These
look as if they had been with Jesus, they live as if they were in Heaven
already. Aaron must not only have Bells* but Pomegranates, which were for
savor, as the other were for sound. It is not enough to discourse of
godliness, or to make a noise by a Profession: What are these Bells without the
Pomegranates, viz. a life that casts a savor in the Church of God?

2. Walk as Christ did, in Humility. His life was a pattern of Humility. He was
the Heir of Heaven, the Godhead was in him, yet he washes his Disciples feet
John 13.6. He poured water into a Basin, and began to wash his Disciples feet,
and to wipe them with the Towel. No wonder it is said, that he came in the form
of a servant; he stands here with his Basin of water and a Towel; nay he did
not only humble himself to the Disciples feet, but he humbled himself to the
death, even the death of the cross, Phil. 2.8. Tread in this step of Christ* be
humble; the humble Saint looks like a Citizen of heaven. Humility is the vail
of a Christian: Christ's Bride never looks more beautiful in his eye, than when
she has on this vail* Be ye clothed with humility 1 Pet. 5.5
. Humility, as it hides another error, so it hides its own graces; grace
shines brightest through the Mask of humility. Moses face shined, Exodus 34.29.
but he wist not that it shined. What are all our duties without humility?
Incense smells sweetest when it is beaten small Species aromaticae cum in
pulverem rediguntur, suavissime redolent.
; when the Incense of our duties is beaten small, then it sends forth its most
fragrant perfume. Humility studies its own unworthiness, it looks with one eye
upon grace, to keep the heart cheerful, and with the other eye upon sin, to
keep it humble. Better is that sin which humbles me, then that duty which
makes me proud! Humility gives all to Christ; as Ioab when he had gotten a
victory, sends for King David, that he might carry away the Crown of it: So
does the humble Christian, when he has gotten the victory over a corruption,
he sets the Crown upon the head of Christ: if he has strength to go through
duties, he writes Christ and free grace upon all. I labored more abundantly
then they all; yet not I, but the grace of God which was with me, 1 Cor. 15.10.
You that look for things above, let me tell you, the way to ascend is to
descend; the lower the tree roots, the higher it shoots up: would you shoot up
in glory, would you be tall Cedars in the Kingdom of God? be deeply rooted in
Humility. Humility is compared by some of the Fathers to a Valley; we must walk
to heaven through this valley of Humility. Humility is such a precious Herb, as
grows not in the garden of Philosophy; that is rather Humanity, then Humility.
Humility distinguishes Christ's Spouse from harlots. Hypocrites grow in
knowledge; but not in humility. (...).
Knowledge puffs up, 1 Cor. 8.1. It Is a Metaphor taken from a pair of Bellows,
that are blown up and filled with wind. He that is proud of his knowledge, the
Devil cares not how much he knows. It is observable in the old law that God
hated the very resemblance of the sin of pride, he would have no honey
mingled in their offering; Ye shall burn no leaven, nor any honey in any
offering of the Lord made by fire Lev. 2.1^
. Indeed, leaven is sour, but what is there in honey that should offend? why
no honey? because honey when it is mingled with meal or flower, makes it to
rise, and swell, therefore the people of Israel must mingle no honey in their
offering. This was to let us see how God hated the resemblance of this sin of
pride. Be humble.

3. Be like Christ in Charity; Person was lovely Cant. 5.16.
, so was his Disposition, he was composed all of love: his lips dropped honey,
his side dropped blood, his heart dropped love. You that expect these glorious
things to come, live as Christ did, live in love: Oh that this spice might send
out its fragrant smell among Christians! We know we are passed from death to
life, because we love the brethren 1 John 3.14.
. Do thou love the Person of Christ, and hate the picture? He that loves him
who does beget, loves him also that is begotten 1 John 5.1
. There are two Devils which are not fully cast out of Gods own people, The
devil of vain glory, and the devil of uncharitableness. Are we not
Fellow-Citizens? Do we not all expect the same Heaven? Nay, are we not
Brethren? which should be a sufficient bond to knit us together in amity. We
have all the same Father, God; We are borne of the same Mother, the Church; we
are begotten of the same seed, the Word; We suck the same breasts, the Promises;
We feed at the same Board, the Table of the Lord; We wear the same clothing,
the Robe of Christ's Righteousness; We are partners in the same glory, the
inheritance of the Saints in light. And shall we not love? There is indeed a
blessed strife, when the Saints strive for the faith: but this is a strife that
consists of unity; Striving together for the faith of the Gospel, Phil. 1.27
(...).
. You that look for things to come, live suitably to your hopes: Walk as
Christ did, that some of his beams may shine in you, and his life may be as it
were copied out in yours.

3. The third duty is, 3. Branch.
If things to come are a Believers, be content though you have the less of
things present: Having food and raiment, let us be therewith content 1 Timothy 6.8.
. Oh what a rich estate has a Believer! he is to be valued according to that
which is in reversion. Things to come are his. If you were to take an estimate
of a man's Estate, would you value it by that which he has in his House, or
by his Land? Perhaps he has little in his house, little money, or plate; but
he is a landed man, There lies his Estate. While we are in this House of Clay,
we have but little. Many a Christian can hardly keep life and soul together;
but, he is a landed man, things to come are his; then be content with the
less of things present: If we have but a small fore-crop, we shall have a
great after-crop; it is sufficient if we have but enough to bear our charges
till we come to Heaven. An Heir that has a great Estate beyond Sea, though
he has but a little money for his voyage thither, he will be content. If a
Christian has but enough to pay for his passage, till he comes at Heaven, it
is sufficient; as Seneca said to his friend Polibius Fas tibi non est de
fortuna conqueri, salvo Caesare. Sen.
, Never complain of thy hard fortune, as long as Caesar is thy friend. So I
say to a Believer, Never complain as long as Christ is thy friend; he is
preparing the Heavenly Mansions for thee. If thou complainest of any thing, let
it be of thy complaining. Should not Hagar have been content, though the water
were spent in her Bottle, when there was a Well so near? God has made a Deed
of gift, he has given Christ to a Believer, and in him all things, things
present and to come, Grace and Glory Psalm. 84.11.
; is not here enough to make him content? But, says the Christian, I want
present comforts. Consider, the Angels in Heaven are rich, yet they have no
money; thou have things to come, Angels riches, such as cannot stand with
reprobation; be content then with the less of things present. The
Philosophers, who never understood one syllable of this Charter, did contemn
riches, and preferred a contemplative life; what poor contemplations were
those? certainly a man that lives by faith, may have more sweet content in his
soul by the meditation of things to come, then a worldly man by the enjoying
things present.

4. Labor for such an high degree of faith, 4. Branch.
as to make these things to come, present. Faith and Hope are two Sisters, and
are very like, they differ thus; Hope looks at the excellency of the Promise,
faith at the certainty of it: now faith looking at the infallible truth of him
that promises, thus it makes things to come present. Faith does antedate
glory, it does substantiate things not seen Heb. 11.1.
: Faith alters the Tenses, it puts the Future into the Present Tense, Psalm.
60.6. Gilead is mine, Manasseh is mine, Ephraim is the strength of my head,
etc. Those places were not yet subdued, but God had spoken in his holiness, he
had made David a promise, and he believed it, therefore he looked upon them as
already subdued: Gilead is mine, etc. So says faith, God has spoken in his
holiness, he has made me a promise of things to come, therefore Heaven is
mine already. When one has the reversion of an house, says he, This house is
mine, Oh that we had this Art of Faith, thus to anticipate Heaven, and make
things to come present. Thou who art a Believer, Heaven is thine now; thy head
is already glorified; nay, heaven is begun in thee, thou have some of those
joys which are the primitiae, the first fruits of it. A Christian by the eye
of faith, through the Perspective-glass of the promise, may see into Heaven.
Faith sees the Promise fulfilled before it be fulfilled. Faith sets to its
hand: Item, Received so much, before it be paid. Had we a vigorous faith, we
might be in Heaven before our time: That which a weak believer hopes for, a
strong believer does in some kind possess. Oh that we could often take a
prospect of the Heavenly Paradise: Walk about Sihon, and go round about her,
tell the towers thereof, mark ye well her bulwarks, consider her Palaces Psalm.
48.12, 13
: So, Walk into the Heavenly Mount, see what a glorious situation it is, go
tell her Towers, see what an inheritance you have; see your beauty and
Nobility, behold your Scutchion: Oh that we could thus breath our faith up
this Mount of Heaven every day. Do not say, All this shall be mine; but, It is
mine already: my Head is there, my faith is there, my heart is there: could we
thus living up to the height of our faith, reallize and antedate things to
come, how would all present thing vanish! if a man could live in the Sun, the
earth would not appear: when Saint Paul had been wrapped up into the third
Heaven, the earth did hardly appear ever after: see how he scorns it, I am
crucified to the world: it was a dead thing to him, he had begun Heaven
already; thus it is with a man that is Heavenlized. You Saints that are
earthly, the eye of your faith is blood-shot: it is the character of a sinner,
he cannot see afar off (...).
, 2 Pet. 1.9. like a man who has bad eyes, that can see but just before him.
Faith carries the heart up to Heaven, and brings Heaven down into the heart.

5. Branch.
5. If all things to come are yours, then walk cheerfully with God, put on your
white robes: has a Believer a title to Heaven? what, and sad? We rejoice in
hope of the glory of God, Romans 5.2. It is but a while, it is but putting off the
earthly clothes of our body, and we shall be clothed with the bright robes of
glory, and can a Believer be sad? See how Christ does secretly check his
Disciples for this, Luke 24.17. What manner of communications are these, while
you walk and are sad? What, sad and Christ risen? So I say to believers;
Things to come are yours: why walk ye and are sad? let them be out of heart,
who are out of hope. Oh rejoice in God: when the lead of the flesh begins to
sink, let the cork of faith swim above! How does the heir rejoice in hope of
the Inheritance! How does the Apprentice rejoice to think of coming out of his
time! Here we are kept under by sin, and a child of God is forced sometimes
to do the devils work, but shortly death will make us free; there is an
eternal Jubilee coming, therefore rejoice in the hope of the glory of God. Can
wicked men rejoice that have their portion in this life, and cannot he rejoice
that has a reversion of Heaven? Are the waters of Abanah and Pharpar like to
the waters of Jordan? O ye Saints, think into what a blessed condition you are
now brought! is it not a sweet thing to have God appeased? is it not a matter
of joy to be an heir of the promise? Adam in Paradise had choice of all the
trees, one only excepted. The Promises are the trees of life, thou may walk
in the garden of the Bible, and pluck from all these trees. Who should rejoice
if not a Christian? he has never so much cause to be sad, as he has to be
cheerful.

Object. 1.
Object. 1. But my sins trouble me.

Answ.
Answ. It Is true: That sin will not forsake thee, is matter of sadness; but
that thou have forsaken sin, is matter of joy: Sin is a talent of lead.
That thou can not run so fast as thou would in the ways of God, is
matter of sadness: but that thou go without halting, (in regard of
uprightness,) this is matter of joy; and for your comfort remember, shortly
you shall sin no more, all things shall be yours but sin.

Object. 2.
Object. 2. But we are bid to mourn.

Answ.
Answ. I would not speak against holy mourning; while we carry fire about us,
we must carry water; as long as the fire of sin burns in our breasts, we must
carry tears to quench it. But consider, 1. Spiritual joy and mourning may
stand together; sometimes it rains and shines at once: when there is a shower
in the eyes, there may be sunshine in the heart: in religion, mourning and
music are not inconsistent. 2. The end why God makes us sad, is to make us
rejoice; he does not require sorrow for sorrow, but it is ordained to be sal
and condimentum, as sauce to make our joy relish the better: we sow in tears,
that we may reap in joy: 3. The swetest joy is from the sourest tears: Christ
made the best wine of water Joh. 2.
: the purest and most excellent joy is made of the waters of true repentance:
the Be gathers the best honey off the bitterest herbs: Tears are the breeders
of spiritual joy. When Hannah had wept, she went away, and was no more sad.
Those clouds are very uncomfortable that never have any sunshine: That mourning
which dies the soul all in sable, viz. that has no place for rejoicing, I
shall rather think it despair, then true remorse; The same God who has bid us
mourn, has also bid us rejoice, Phil 4.4. It Is an excellent temper to be
serious, yet cheerful. Jesus Christ loves the sanguine complexion: joy puts
liveliness and activity into a Christian, it oils the wheels of the affections;
an heavy mind makes a dull action: the joy of the Lord is your strength Neh.
8.10.
. The pensive melancholy Christian does disparage the glory of Heaven: What
will others say? Here is one that speaks of things to come, and of a Crown laid
up, but sure he does not believe it: see how sad he is! what ado is here to
make a child of God cheerful! shall we need bid an Heir rejoice in the Estate
befallen him? let me tell you You who refuse consolation, are not fit persons
to praise God: It Is a kind of Solecisme, to praise God with a sad heart: I will
sing praises, Psalm 108. v. 1. It Is more proper to sing praises, then to weep
them. Rejoice, O Christian, lift up thy crest, triumph in the hope of these
(...), things to come: it is not enough that there be joy within the firmament
of a Christians heart but it must shine out in his countenance.

Sixth Duty. If all things to come are a believers, 6. Branch.
let him not envy them who have only things present. God often wrings out the
waters of a full cup to wicked men, but there are dregs at the bottom. Indeed,
the prosperity of sinners is a great temptation: David stumbled at it, and had
almost fallen; Psalm. 73. My feet had well nigh slipped: It is not matter of envy
but pity, to see men thrive in a way of sin; a fool is in gay clothes, but do
you envy him? a man under a sentence, going up the ladder, do you envy him?
They that will be rich fall into temptations and a snare, Quis aerario, qui^
ple^is loculis invide^? Sen.
1 Timothy 6.9. Do you envy a man who is fallen into a snare? wicked men have that
guilt which imbitters their comforts, so that they may be said to want what
they have (...).
: as a man who has great possessions, yet having a fit of the Stone or Gout,
while he is in that torment he may be said not to have them, because the
comfort of them is taken away. A believer has better things then these; things
to come: Wicked men have a Crown of unrighteousness, he has a Crown of
righteousness; they have robes (and perhaps stained with the blood of
innocents) Jer. 19.3.
, he has the bright robe of glory. Envy not the oppressor, and choose none of
his ways: Prove. 3.31.
better is sanctified adversity, then successful impiety.

Seventh Duty. Be supported in want of spiritual comfort: 7. Branch.
spiri^uall joy is a sweet thing (...) is the spiced wine that (...) lips of
them who are asleep to speak: Cant. 7.9
this is the hidden Mannah, the bunch of grapes that grows upon the true vine;
this is the Saints banqueting stuff; how sweet is it to have Word* and Spirit,
and Conscience speaking peace! in the mouth of these three witnesses faith is
confirmed. But, says the poor soul that goes mourning, It is not so with me, I
have not the Privy Seal of Heaven, I want assurance. Well, do not give over
waiting. We read, John 6.19. the Disciples were in the ship, and there arose a
great storm, And when they had rowed about twenty five, or thirty furlongs,
they see Jesus. This, O Christian, may be thy case, there is a tempest of
sorrow risen in thy heart; and thou have rowed from one Ordinance to another,
and have no comfort: Well, be not discouraged, do not give over rowing; thou
have rowed but three or four furlongs, perhaps when thou have rowed twenty
five or thirty furlongs, thou may see Jesus, and have a comfortable evidence
of his love; but suppose thou should row all thy life long, and not have
assurance, there are tw^ things should support the heart in want of spiritual
joy.

1. Supporter.
1. God denies comfort to exercise grace. We are impatient if we have not
comfort presently; and truly, did we carve for our selves, we should often cut
the worst piece; a Christian would ever be upon Mount Tabor, looking into
Canaan, he is loath to come down into the valley, and be in trials, agonies,
temptations, as if God could not love us except he had us in his arms: God
will have us without comfort sometimes; to make us row against tide, believe
against hope. Of what use were the Stars, if the Sun did always shine? how
could patience have it is perfect work, how could repentance' if we were always
upon the Mount of joy? Rachel is more fair, but Leah is more fruitful; comfort
is fair to look upon, but grace is better then comfort. A Christian should
rather pray for a fruitful heart then fair weather; oftentimes when God lets
down comfort into the heart, we begin to let down care. As it is with
Musicians, before they have money, they will play you many a sweet lesson; but
as soon as you throw them down money, they are gone, you hear no more of
them: Before joy and assurance, oh the sweet music of Prayer and Repentance!
but when God throws down the comforts of his Spirit, we either begin to leave
off duty; or at least slacken the strings of our Vial, and grow remiss in it:
thou art taken with the money, but God is taken with the music; thou art taken
with comfort, but God is more taken with thy faith: when there is too much
sunshine, oftentimes there follows a drought in our graces.

2. Supporter.
2. The second thing to support the heart, is, Things to come are yours: it is
but staying a while, and you shall be brim-full of comfort: now a believer is
an heir of this joy, let him stay but while he is of age, and he shall be
fully possessed of the joys of Heaven. For the present, God leaves a seed of
comfort in the heart, 1 John 3.9
the seed of God; there is a time shortly coming when we shall have the full
flower; We shall drink of the fruit of the vine in the Kingdom of Heaven Mat.
26.29.
. As Paul said of Onesimus, Philem. v. 15. For perhaps he therefore departed
for a season, that thou might receive him for ever: so I say of the comforts
of Gods Spirit, they may be withdrawn for a season, that we may have them for
ever: there is a time coming when we shall bathe our selves in the rivers of
divine pleasure.

8. The next duty is, 8. Branch*
If all Christ's things are ours, then all our things must be Christ's; this is
Lex Talionis, justice and equity require it. There Is a joint interest between
Christ and a believer: Christ says, All mine are thine, things present, and
things to come; then the heart of a believer must echo back to Christ, Lord,
whatsoever I have is for thee; my parts, my estate; it was the saying of a
reverend Father* Lord, thou art my all, and my all is thine Anselm.
. Oh be willing to spend, and be spent; do, and suffer for Christ.

per annum, with this proviso, that in lieu of his acknowledgement he should
pay a Peppercorn every year to the King, what proportion were there between
this man's rent and his revenue? Alas, we are but unprofitable servants Luke
17.10.
, all that we can do for Christ is not so much as this peppercorn; yet up and
be doing: Christ hates complements: we must not only bow the knee to him, but
with the Wise men Mat. 2.11
, present him with gifts, gold, frankincense, and myrrh. Be not like the
sons of Belial, who brought their King no presents 1 Samuel 10. ult.
. But, says the Christian, I am poor, and can do little for Christ. Can thou
not make a Deed of gift, and bestow thy love upon Christ? In the Law, he that
could not bring a Lamb for an offering, if he brought but two Turtle-doves, it
was sufficient. The woman in the Gospel that threw in but her two mites, yet it
was accepted Mar. 12.42.
. God is not angry with any man because he has but one Talent, but because he
does not trade it.

2. Suffer for Christ, be willing Luthers saying, That in the cause of God he
was cont^nt, totius mundi odium and impetum sustinere; to endure the odium and
fury of the whole world. Basil affirms of the Primitive Saints, they had so
much courage in their sufferings, that many of the Heathens seeing their
Heroic zeal, turned Christians; they snatched up torments as so many Crowns.
Oh think nothing too dear for Christ. We that look for things to come, should
be wiling to part with things present for Christ.

9.
9. Lastly, If all things to come are ours, be content to wait for these Great
Privileges: it is not incongruous to long for Christ's appearing, and yet to
wait for it: you see the glory a believer shall be invested with; but though
the Lord gives a great portion, he may set a long day for the payment. David
had the promise of a Crown, but it was long before he came to wear it. God
will not deny, yet he may delay his promise, to teach us to wait: it is but a
short-spirited faith that cannot wait. The husbandman waits for the seed:
there is a seed of Glory sown in a believers heart, wait till it spring up
into a harvest. Truly, it is an hard thing to wait for these things to come;
so many discouragements from without, so many distempers from within, that the
Christian is willing to be at home: therefore we need patience, Heb. 10 36. For
ye have need of patience. But how shall we get it? nourish faith; ver. 35.
Cast not away your confidence. Patience is nothing else but faith spun out; if
you would lengthen patience, be sure to strengthen faith.

There Is a great deal of reason why a believer should be content to wait for
Heaven. 1. God is faithful Heb. 10.23.
: Gods Word is security enough to venture upon, his Bond is as good as ready
money: all the world hangs upon the word of his power* and cannot our faith
hang upon the word of his promise? we have his hand and seal, nay, his Oath. 2.
While we Giving thanks to the Father* who has made us meet for the
inheritance, Col. 1.12. we must be made meet. Perhaps our hearts are not humble
enough, not patient enough; our faith is but in its swaddling bands, we should
be content to wait a while, till we have gotten such a vigorous faith as will
carry us full-sail to Heaven. As there is a fitting of vessels for hell, Romans
9.22. so there is a ripening and a preparing of the vessels of mercy, ver. 23.
A Christian should be willing to wait for glory till he be fit to take his Tim.
4.8, If we suffer for God, the heavier our Cross, the heavier shall be our
Crown. Would a Christian be in the Meridian of glory, would he have his robes
shine bright, let him stay here and do service; God will reward us, though not
for our works, yet according to our works Mar. 16.27.
: the longer We stay for the principal, the greater will the interest be. 4.
receiving, this of doing. Hence the Apostle being enflamed with divine love,
though he could with all his heart be with Christ, yet he was content to live
a while longer, that he might build up souls, and make the Crown flourish upon
the head of Christ Phil. 1.24.
: It Is self-love says, Who will show us any good? divine love says, How may I
do good? The prodigal son could say, Father, give me my portion; he thought
more of his portion, then his duty. A gracious spirit is content to stay out of
Heaven a while, that he may be a means to bring others thither. He whose heart
has been divinely touched with the love of God, his care is not so much for
receiving the talents of gold, as for improving the talents of grace. Oh wait a
while, learn of the Saints of old, they waited: if we cannot wait now, what
would we have done in the times of the long-lived Patriarchs? look upon worldly
men, they wait for preferment; shall they wait for earth, and cannot we wait
for Heaven? If a man has the reversion of a Lordship or Manor when such a
Lease is out will he not wait for it? We have the reversion of Heaven when the
lease of life is run out, and shall we not wait? Look upon wicked men, they
wait for an opportunity to sin; the adulterer waits for the twilight Job 24.15.
; sinners lie in wait for their own blood, Prove. 1.18. Shall men wait for their
damnation and shall not we be content to wait for our salvation? Wait without
murmuring, wait without fainting; the things we expect are infinitely more then
we can hope for. And let me add one caution; wait on the Lord, and keep his
ways, Psalm. 37.34. while we are waiting, let us take heed of wavering. Go not
a step out of Gods way, though a Lion be in the way, avoid not duty to meet
with safety: keep Gods highway, the good old way, Jer. 6.16. the way which is
paved with holiness, Isa. 35.8. and an highway shall be there, and it shall be
called the way of holiness: avoid Ps. 125.5
crooked paths, take heed of turning to the left hand, lest you be set on the
left hand. Sin does cross our hopes, it barracadoes up our way; a man may as
well expect to find Heaven in hell, as in a sinful way

My last Use is to such as have only things present, Use ult.
that they would labor for things to come. You have seen the blessed condition
of a man in Christ, never rest till this be yours: Alas, what are the great
possessions of the earth? the world has vanity written upon the frontispiece;
there is a transiency and a deficiency in these things. What is Honour' but a
rattle to still men's ambition? it is like the Meteor which lives in the air, so
does this in the breath of other men Hon^r est in honora^te.
: it is like a gale of wind which carries the ship; sometimes this wind is down,
a man has lost his Honor, and lives to see himself intombed: som^^mes this
wind is too high: how many have been blown to hell while they have been sailing
with the wind of popular applause! Honor is but magnum nihil Sen.
, a glorious fancy, Acts 25.23 (...).
. It does not make a man really the better, but often the worse: a man swelled
with honor (wanting grace) is like a dropsyman whose bigness is his disease.

And for riches (the silver goddess which men a door,) what are they? 1. They
are vain: I gathered me silver and gold and the peculiar treasure of Kings and
of the Provinces, Eccl. 2.8. and behold, all was vanity, verse. 11. That must
needs be vain which cannot fill the heart. Covetousness is a dry drunkenness;
the more men have, the more they thirst; Eo majora cupimus, quo majora habemus.
like the fire, the more fuel is thrown into it, the more it is inflamed.

2. They are uncertain, 1 Timothy Plato.
, are Dei ludibria, quae sursum ac deorsum suo coelo feruntur, like
Tennis-bals, which are bandied up and down from one to another. 3. They
vexing: It was a fruit of the curse, Genesis. 3.18. Thorns and thistles shall
the earth brin^ forth: The comforts of this life have more or less of the
Thorn in them: They are sweet-briar: Riches may well be called Thorns, they
pierce both head and heart, the one with care of getting, the other with grief
dangerous, they often turn to the hurt of the owner, Ecclesiastes 5.13. they are
Bern.
dulce venenum; a sweet poison; how many have pulled down their souls to build
up an estate! A ship may be so loaded with gold and silver that it sinks; A
gift blindes the eye Deuteronomy. 6.19.
, the same may be said of riches, the golden dust of the world puts out the
eye of the soul, that men neither know God nor themselves: Judas (as
Tertullian thinks) was pretty honest till he carried the bag Usque ad (...)
^ssici^m.
. It Is hard to be in office, and not put conscience out of office; oh what are
these present things in comparison of things to come! Christ who had all
riches, scorned these earthly riches* he was borne poor, the Manger was his
cradle, the Cobwebs his curtains: he lived poor, He had not where to lay
his head Mat 8.20*
; he died poor; for as Austin observes, when Christ died, he made no Will,
he had no Crown Lands, only his coat was left, and that the Soldiers parted
among them; and his Funeral was suitable, for as he was borne in another man's
house, so he was buried in another man's Tomb. To show how he did contemn
earthly dignities and possessions. His Kingdom was not of this world: Suppose
an hour of adversity come, can these present things quiet the mind in
trouble? riches are called thick clay Hab. 2.6
, which will sooner break the back, then lighten the heart: When pangs of
Conscience and pangs of Death come, and no hope of things to come, what peace
can the world give at such a time? surely it can yield no more comfort then a
silken stockin to a man whose leg is out of joint; a fresh color delights
the eye, but if the eye be sore, this color will not heal it; Riches avail
not in the day of wrath Prove. 11.4.
. Thou can not hold thy wedge of gold as a Screene to keep off the fire of
Gods justice: Let this sound a retreat to call us off from the immoderate
pursuit of present things, to labor for things to come; what are these
nether springs to the upper springs? As Abraham said, Lord, what will thou
give me, seeing I go childless Genesis 15.12.
? So say, Lord, what will thou give me, seeing I go Christlesse? Luther did
solemnly protest, God should not put him off with these things: Valde
protestatus sum me nolle sic satiari ab eo Luther.
: Oh labor for those blessings in heavenly places Ephesians. 1.3.
. Things present are pleasing, but not permanent; be not content with a few
gifts: Abraham gave unto the sons of the Concubines gifts, and sent them away;
but unto Isaac, Abraham gave all that he had Genesis 25.5
. Reprobates may have a few jewels and earrings which God scatters with an
indifferent hand, these with the sons of the Concubines are put off with gifts,
but labout you for the portion Ps. 119.57
, that portion which the Saints and Angels are spending upon, and can never
spend: get by faith into Christ, and then all is yours; so says the Apostle,
All things are yours, and ye are Christ's.

FINIS.

