THE Fight of Faith CROWNED: OR, A SERMON PREACHED At the FUNERAL of that
Eminently Holy Man Mr. HENRY STUBS.

By THO. WATSON Minister of the Gospel.

LONDON, Printed and are to be sold by Joseph Collier at the Bi^^^ on
London-Bridg, under the Gate, 1678.

THE EPISTLE.
Christian Reader,
IT was not my intendment to have appeared thus publicly, but being requested
by the near Relations of this worthy Minister deceased to print my Sermon,
(which by their appointment was preached) I knew not well how to withstand
their importunity. Indeed I was the more willing to let these lines be
published, that I might raise a Pillar of Remembrance to the precious name of
Mr. Stubs. The Subject Matter treated on is the Christian Combat and Crown. O
blessed Crown which cannot be fully pencilled out in its orient colors, though
an archangel should take the pencill. The Roman Emperors had three several
Crowns set upon their head; the first was of Iron, the second of Silver, the
third of Gold. God sets three Crowns upon the Elect, Grace, Joy, Glory. What
should we thirst after but this incomprehensible bliss! Did our thoughts dwell
above, we should live sweeter lives. The higher the Lark flys, the sweeter it
sings. Cyprus was anciently called Macaria, the blessed Island; but it is more
true of Heaven, it is the blessed Island. It Is a place where sorrow cannot
live, and joy cannot die. It may be compared to the fields of Sicily, where
there is continual Spring, and flowers all the year long. Could our Meditations
mount up to the Empyraean delights, how would the World disappear and shrink
into nothing! (...) Chryfost.
(...). -- To those who stand upon the top of the Alps, the great Cities of
Campania seem as little Villages. After St. Paul was wrapped up into third
Heaven, the world was crucified to him, Gal. 6. 14. Worldly things when they
are in their highest meridian of glory hasten to a Sunsetting, (...). let us
live more in the altitudes, and take a prospect of the eternal recompenses;
what can be more delicious or sacred than to have Christ in our heart, and the
Crown in our eye.

I have inserted something more into this Sermon, than straits of time would
permit in the delivery. If it may inkindle holy ardours in the breasts of any,
and quicken their pace in the way to Heaven, I have my option. That this may be
effected is the prayer of him who is

Thy Friend and Servant in the Gospel, THO. WATSON.

2 TIMOTHY IV. 7, 8. I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have
kept the faith, henceforth is laid up for me a Crown of Righteousness.
THese words were spoken by Paul the aged not long before his death, ver. 6. I
am now ready to be offered, or (as the word (...) signifies) to have my blood
poured out in sacrifice. And what a comfort was it to make this noble
profession before his departure, I have fought a good fight, etc. The Text
falls into three Parts:

1. St. Paul's Courage, I have fought a good fight.

2. His Constancy, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith.

3. His Crown, Henceforth is laid up for me a Crown of Righteousness.

Here is a large field, and I can but pluck a few Ears of Corn, I begin with
the first part of the Text.

1. Paul's Courage, I have fought a good fight, (...), I have fought to an agony.

Observe first, A Christians life is military, 1 Timothy 1. 18. That thou may
war a good warfare; (...), Chrysostom.
a Saints life is not effeminate and slothful, but like the Soldiers life.

1. In respect of hardship: A Soldier has not his soft bed or daily fair, but
undergoes tedious marches; such is the Christian life, 2 Timothy 2. 3. Thou
therefore endure hardness as a good soldier of Jesus Christ. We must not be
delicatuli (as Tertullian speaks) silken Christians, but expect to wrestle with
difficulties: The naked neck is too soft and tender to bear the Cross of Christ.

2. In respect of Watchfulness: A Soldier gets up to his Watchtower, and sends
abroad his scouts for fear the Enemy surprise him; a Christian must excubias
agere, stand sentinel, be ever upon his guard. It was Christ's Watchword, Mark
13. 37. I say to you all watch. When you have prayed against sin, watch against
temptation.

3. In respect of Combat, 1 Timothy 6. 12. Fight the good fight of faith. In order
to which fight, a Christian must get his Armor and Weapons ready.

1. He must get his Armor ready, the care of most is to get riches, not
armor; there are two things absolutely needful, food and armor; it is
necessary to get Christ for our food and grace for our armor without this
there is no abiding the day of Trial: A Soldier that wears his Princes Colors,
but has no armor, will soon fly the field; such as by a profession wear
Christ's Colors, but have not the Armor of God upon them, will turn their
backs in the day of battle.

There are two chief pieces of the spiritual armor. 1. The Helmet, that is,
Divine Hope, 1 These. 5. 8. For an helmet the hope of salvation: An Helmet is to
defend the head that it be not hurt Galta caput tuetur.
; so the hope of salvation as an Helmet defends a person, and makes him lift up
his head in the greatest dangers. But Christians, be sure ye get the right
helmet, the helmet of hope may be counterfeited.

1. The first deceit of the Helmet, or a false hope, is a dead hope; Hypocrites
have a faint velleity, they hope for Heaven, but exert no activity in working
out salvation; but true hope is a lively hope, 1 Pet. 1, 3. Hope of Glory sets
an edg upon the affections, and adds wings to the endeavor.

2. A false hope is an unclean hope, a man hopes, but sins; it is vain to speak
of hopes of salvation, yet have the marks of damnation: True hope is an Helmet
made of pure metal, 1 John 3. 3. He who has this hope, purifieth himself.

3. A false hope is vanishing, it is not an Helmet, but a spiders Web Job 8. 14.
; the least terror of Conscience shakes it, but a true hope is permanent, Prove.
14. 32. The righteous has hope in his death, in a dying hour his hope is in a
living God. When Quintian the Persecutor commanded to cut off the breasts of
Agatha a Martyr, Do thy worst Tyrant (said he), yet I have two breasts which
you cannot touch; the one of Faith, the other of Hope. Duae tamen supersunt
mamillae, una fidei, altera spes.
O get the right Helmet, the Devil laughs at Hypocrites to see how they are
cousened with false armor: A fool is contented with a Paper-helmet.

2. The second piece of the Spiritual Armor is the breast plate, which is Love,
1 These. 5. 8. Putting on the breast plate of Love. This breast plate is
inseparable, it may be shot at, but it cannot be shot through, Cant. 8. 7. A
soul armed with love, will go through a Sea, and a Wilderness, he will dye in
Gods service.

(...), Ignatius.
2. A Christian must get his weapons ready. 1. The shield, Ephesians. 6. 16. (...),
Above all things taking the shield of faith.

Epaminondas was not so careful of his life, as of his shield: A shield is of
great use, it defends the head, it guards the vitals, it keeps the arrow from
entering into the body; the shield of faith defends the heart, and beats back
the fiery darts of temptation. Scena a Roman Soldier did so long resist
Ponipy's Army, till he had above an hundred darts sticking in his shield --
Densam portans in pectore sylvam -- Lucan.
Hold forth the shield of faith, and nothing can hurt you.

2. The sword, Ephesians. 6. 17. The sword of the spirit, which is the word of God:
It Is good for a Soldier to be well skilled in his weapon, the word of God is a
weapon to stab lust at the heart; it is observable when the Devil tempted our
Savior, he ran to Scripture; it is written Mat. 4. 10.
three times Christ wounded the old Serpent with this spiritual weapon.

And having gotten into this warlike posture, a Christian must in arenam
descendere, enter the lists, and fight the good fight of faith. In the future
life the Saints shall be out of the noise of the Drum and Canon, and not one
stroke shall be struck more; then they shall not appear in their armor, but
their white robes, and with palm-branches in their hands in token of victory
Rev. 7. 9.
but here they must fight the Lords battles Certent singuli ut accipiant
coronas, Cypr.
, and no cessation of arms till death; and there is a threefold Regiment they
must encounter with.

1. The lusts of the flesh which war against their souls, 1 Pet. 1. 11. The
flesh is a sly intestine enemy, and least suspected Si soris host^m non habes,
domi invenies, Livy.
; an enemy got within the walls of the Castle is most dangerous. Luther said he
feared his own heart more than Pope or Cardinal, the heart is the somenter of
sin Fomes peccati, Aug.
; it mints evil thoughts, and blows up the coals of fiery passions; it is the
Trojan horse, out of which comes a whole army of lusts. And shall not we fight
the good fight, and discharge with the fire of zeal against this bosom-traytor
the flesh? The Primitive Christians cried, Ad leonem potius quam lenonem; they
chose rather to be destroyed by Lions without, than lusts within.

2. The second Regiment to be resisted, is Satan and the infernal Powers Ephesians
6. 12.
, 1 Pet. 5. 8. Your adversary the Devil as a roaring Lion walks about (...)
: He walks about not as a Pilgrim, but a spy that narrowly observes; there
were liars in wait for Sampson, Judge. 16. 12. Satan like a muskiteer lies in
ambush, and his design carries death in the front, seeking whom he may devour:
He tempts one man to be drunk, another to be unclean; he sets Kingdoms
a-quarrelling, that at last he may devour them, like him who sets two cocks of
the game to fight, that having killed each other, he may sup with their
carcasses. Does this hellish Goliath come into the field, and defy the living
God? and shall not some spear be lift up against him? 1 Pet. 5. 9. Whom resist
steadfast in faith.

3. The third Regiment Christians must fight against, is the enchantments of
the world; the world is a flattering enemy, it kills with embracing; worldly
things are retinacula spei Tertul.
, they hinder our passage to the holy Land; they choke good affections, as the
earth puts out the fire; whom the world kisseth it betrayeth. Heliogabalus made
ponds of sweet water to drown himself, and gilded poisons to poison himself;
the world destroys millions with her sweet waters of pleasure, and her gilded
poisons of preferment; let us then gird on our Armor, and fight valorously

Good reason we should fight the fight of Faith, because we carry rich treasure
about us: he who carries a charge of money about him, had need be in a fighting
posture. We carry a precious soul about us; if the Cabinet of the body be so
curiously wrought and embellished, Psalm. 139. 15. Then what is the jewel in it?
The soul is a spark and beam of celestial brightness Damascen.
, a blossom of eternity, and shall not we by our martial prowess and chivalry
defend this treasure? to be robbed of the soul is an irreparable loss. God
(says Chrysostom) has given thee two eyes, if thou losest one, thou have
another; but thou have but one soul, and if thou art robbed of that, thou art
undone for ever.

Use 1. Is the Christian life military? To blame then are they who have no
spiritual Artillery, nor do they make one sally out against the Enemy. It Is
death to go abroad unarmed; People spend time in dressing themselves by the
glass, and putting on their jewels, but do not put on their sacred Armor, Job
21. 12. They take the Timbrel and Harp, and rejoice at the sound of the Organ;
as if they were rather in music, than battle. Lycurgus would have no man's name
written upon his Tomb, but his who dyed manfully in War: God writes no man's
name in the Book of Life, but his who dies fighting the good fight of faith.

Use 2. Give battle to Sin and Satan, and pursue them with an holy malice Qnis
sanctorum sine certamine coronatus est, Hierom.
: and to encourage in the fight, let these things be weighed.

1. It is certamen praeclarum, a good fight: It Is a lawful War; Princes may
commence a War to invade other men's rights and properties; but God has
proclaimed this War against sin Genesis 3. 15.
, Col. 3. 5. Mortify therefore your members, fornication, inordinate affection.

2. We have a good Captain: Jesus Christ is the Captain of our salvation Forti
anim^ pugnare dece^, sub Christi auspiciis and vexillo, Calv.
, Hebr. 2. 10. If a flock of sheep have a Lion for their Captain, they need not
fear the Wolf: Christ is the Lion of the tribe of Judah, Revel. 5. 5. He not
only leads us on in our march, but helps us in the fight: A Captain may give
his Soldier armor, but he cannot give him strength: Christ animates and
strengthens us Ephesians. 6. 10.
, Isa. 41. 10. He puts his spirit within us Erek. 36. 2^.
, and so we are more than conquerors, Romans 8. 37.

3. Our Enemy Satan is beaten in part already; Christ has given him his
deaths-wound upon the Cross, Col. 2. 15. The Devil may roar against a Child of
God, but shall not hurt him: he could not touch Job's life, much less his soul;
therefore fear not, resist the devil and he will fly from you, Jam. 4. 7. Satan
is a conquered Enemy, he knows no march but running away.

4. Fighting is the best way to have Peace, by sitting still, we tempt the
Enemy to fall upon us, and wound us; our peace is preserved by War with Satan
Pax nostra bellum contra daemonem,
: he who has been skirmishing all day, may take David's pillow at night, and
say, in pace enbabo, I will lay me down in peace.

Quest. How may we so fight the good fight as to overcome?

Answ. 1. Let us fight in the strength of Christ, Phil. 4. 13. I can do all
things through Christ's strengthening me. Grace it self, if it has not a good
second, will be beaten out of the field; some fight against sin in the strength
of their vows and resolutions, and so are foiled. We must go out against our
spiritual Antagonists in the strength of Christ; as David went out against
Goliath in the Name of the Lord, 1 Samuel 17. 45. The Saints overcame the accuser
of the brethren by the blood of the Lamb, Rev. 12. 11.

2. We must fight upon our knees by Prayer: Prayer is flagellum diaboli, it
whips the Devil Tertul.
; the arrow of Prayer put into the bow of the promise, and shot with the hand
of Faith, pierces the old serpent. Prayer brings God over to our side, and
then we are on the strongest side; let us pray that God will enable us to
overcome all our ghostly Enemies. While Joshua was fighting, Moses was praying
on the Mount, Exodus 17. 11. so while we are fighting, let us be praying, Ephesians.
6. 13, 18. The way to overcome is upon our knees.

2. The second part of the Text, is, St. Paul's Constancy, I have finished my
course, I have kept the faith.

I have finished my course], cursum peregi -- I have run out natures lease, I
am come to the period of life prefixed, and am stepping into eternity: I have
kept the faith, that is, I have kept the Doctrine of Faith, I have lived the
life of Faith.

2. Observe, Christians should hold on till they come to the finishing of their
Faith, a carceribus ad metam; it is not enough to begin well, to put forth fair
blossoms of Religion at first, but we must (...), continue firm to the end. Non
pugnanti sed vincenti dabitur corona, Aug.
This is the glory of a Christian not only to hold forth the truth, but to hold
fast the truth, Act. 21. 16. Mnason of Cyprus an old Disciple; it is a beautiful
sight to see silver hairs crowned with golden virtues. It was the honor of the
Church of Thyatira, her last works were better than her first, Rev. 2. 19. The
excellency of a medicine is when it keeps its virtue. To finish the course and
keep the faith, is like generous Wine that keeps its spirits to the last
drawing.

Use 1. Here is a bill of indictment against such as before the finishing of
their course, have departed from the faith; they are fallen to worldliness or
wantonness, the very mantle of their profession is fallen off. Desinit in
Piscem mulier formosa superne. Such were Lucian, Porphiry, Peter Castellon,
Judas. Judas has many successors. Demas forsook God, 2 Timothy 4, 10.
and afterward became a Priest in an Idol-Temple, says Dorotheus. Julian
bathed himself in the blood of beasts offered in sacrifice to Heathen gods, and
so as much as in him lay, washed off his Baptism. Things which move from an
artificial spring quickly cease; unfound hearts having only external artifices
of Piety, but wanting a vital principle of Grace, soon make a stop in Religion.
How can they adhere to God who never loved him? The Soldier who has no true
love to his commander, will throw off his Colors., Hos. 8. 3. Israel has cast
off the thing that is good. We have had more shipwracks at Land than at Sea,
men have made shipwreck of their conscience, 1 Timothy 1. 19. Apostates unravel
the work they have been doing for Heaven, they pick out all their golden
stitches, Ezekiel. 18. 14. As if a Limner should with a pencil draw a curious
piece, and then come with his sponge and wipe it out again. Apostates drop as
windfalls into the Devils mouth, they having disparaged the ways of God, and
put Christ to open shame, Heb. 6. 6. God will make them do penance in Hell Heb.
10. 38.
.

Use 2. Persevere in the Faith. What is a man the better to run some part of
the race and then tire? so to go within an inch of Heaven, and then fall short
Non quaruntur in Christianis initia, sed finis. Hierom.
. Who makes reckoning of corn that sheds before harvest? or fruit that falls
from the tree before it be ripe? O Christians, remember your Salvation is now
nearer, Romans 13. 11. You are within prospect of the Holy land, and will you now
tire in your march? this is as if a Ship laden with Jewels and Spices, and
within sight of the shore should be cast away; or as if a Jew had been running
to the city of refuge, and had gotten within half a furlong of the city, and
then had fainted, and been slain by the avenger of blood. 'T was Beza's Prayer,
Lord, perfect that which thou have begun in me, that I may not Domine quod
capisti perfice, ne in portu naufragium accidas.
suffer shipwreck when I am almost in the haven.

Mot. Consider, persevering in the Faith is a note of discrimination between a
true Saint and an Hycrite; the hypocrite he sets up in the trade of Religion,
but will soon break; he advances his mast and topsail, and sets out fair for
Heaven, but in time of temptation falls away, Mat. 13. 21. but a true Christian
is fixed in holiness; he is not as a wave of the Sea, but as a Rock in the Sea.
His zeal like the fire of the Vestal Virgins in Rome is always kept burning.

That we may spin out this fine thread of Religion to its full length, and hold
out to the end,

1. Let us be well grounded in the Fundamentals of Religion, the Doctrine of
Justification, Regeneration, the Resurrection, and the eternal recompenses,
Col. 1. 23. Grounded and settled; such as are unprincipled will be led into any
error, the Mass or the Alchoran, you may lead a blind man any whither; he will
hardly ever suffer for the truth that does not know it.

2. If we would hold on in the Faith let us preserve a jealous fear of our
selves; fear is the souls lifeguard, it causes vigilance, it banisheth
presumption, Romans 11. 20. Be not high-minded but fear. If God lets go his
manu-tenancy we fall. How many have been over-turned with self-confidence as
the vessel with the sail. Pendleton's proud brag was soon confuted, instead of
his fat melting in the fire, his heart melted; the fear of falling keeps us
from falling. Fear begets prayer, and prayer begets strength, and strength
begets constancy.

3. If we would keep the Faith to the end, let us labor to taste the sweetness
of Religion in our own souls, Psalm. 34. 8. O taste and see that the Lord is
good. The light of Truth is one thing, the relish is another, Psalm. 119. 103.
How sweet are thy words unto my taste, yea sweeter than honey. Many fall away
because they never tasted what Religion was; they could taste some sweetness in
corn and oil, but Promises were dry breasts. If the wine of the Word have ever
cheered our heart, we will never part with it.

4. If we would continue our progress in the ways of God, let us be inlaid with
sincerity; this silverthread must run through the whole chain of our duties. A
Christian may have a double principle, but he has not a double heart; he is
perfect with the Lord, Deuteronomy. 18. 13. Nothing will hold out but sincerity, Psalm.
25. 21. Let integrity preserve me. When Job could not hold fast his Estate, yet
he held fast his Religion; whence was this? from his sincerity, Job 27. 6. My
righteousness I hold fast, and will not let it go, my heart shall not reproach
me so long as I live. The garment of Job's profession did not tear, because it
was lined with sincerity.

3. The third part of the Text is St. Paul's Crown, Henceforth is laid up for
me a Crown of Righteousness; it is Corona recondita, a Crown laid up. A
Christians best things are to come (...).
. Well might the Apostle say, It does not yet appear what we shall be, 1 John
3. 2. We are here as Princes in disguise, the world knows us not; but there
is a Crown laid up. While we are laying out for God, he is laying up for us.

And what Crown is this? a Crown of Righteousness. The felicity of Heaven is
described sometimes by a city for riches, Heb. 11. 10. sometimes by a country
for pleasure, Heb. 11. 16. sometimes by a Crown for honor. And this Crown has
various Appellations:

1. It is called a Crown of Glory, 1 Pet. 5. 4. it is full of splendour,
therefore said to be bespangled with Stars, Rev. 12. 1. We can no more bear a
sight of this Crown till God enlarge our capacities, than a weak eye can bear
the dazzling beams of the Sun.

2. It is called a Crown of life, Jam. 1. 12. whoever heard before of a living
Crown? It is a Crown of life, not only (as Grotius says) because it is
bestowed in the life to come, but because it enlivens with joy; it not only
Crowns the head, but chears the heart. It Is a living Crown.

3. It is called a Crown of Righteousness in the Text; not that it is of right
due to us, or comes of merit, as the Papists corruptly gloss; we cannot deserve
a crum at Gods hands, much less a Crown. That which merits must be a gift, not
a debt, whatever service we do for God is a due debt; nay, we cannot pay all;
nay, that which we pay is not in current money, our duties are stained with
sin, where then is merit? but it is called a Crown of Righteousness, because it
is purchased by Christ's righteousness, and because God having promised this
Crown, it is righteous in him to bestow it.

Hence observe thirdly, for the persevering Saint there is laid up a Crown of
righteousness in Heaven; (...). Ignat.
a Crown is the highest ensign of worldly happiness. It Is only for Kings and
Persons of renown to wear; there is a Crown of righteousness laid up for the
Elect. It Is a massy Crown. The Hebrew word for glory signifies a weight (...).
; things that are precious, the more weighty they are the more they are worth.
The weightier a chain of Pearl is the more it is worth. The Heavenly Crown is
expressed by a weight of glory, 2 Cor. 4. 17. This Crown of righteousness does
out-vye, and exceed all earthly Crowns.

1. It is more refined; earthly Crowns are interwoven with troubles; they are
not made without crosses. It was King Henry the Sevenths motto, a Crown of Gold
hung in a bush of Thorns. But the Saints Crown is not mixed with care, it adds
no sorrow with it.

2. The Crown of righteousness is given to every individual Saint. Here the
Crown goes but to one person, a Crown of gold will fit but one head; but in
Heaven every Saint is a King Rev. 1. 6.
, and has his Crown.

3. The Crown of righteousness does not draw envy to it. David's Crown was an
eyesore to Absalom, and he would have plucked it from his Fathers head, but in
the life to come different degrees of glory, shall neither stir up pride, nor
cause envy; for though one Crown may be bigger than another, yet every ones
Crown shall be as big as he can carry.

4. The Crown of righteousness is everlasting; that which disparageth earthly
Crowns is, they are corruptible, Prove. 27. 24. Does the Crown endure to every
generation? Terrestrial Crowns soon moulder into the dust, but the Crown of
righteousness is a Crown of Immortality, it neither spends nor fades (...).
Chrysostom.
, 1 Pet. 5. 4. Ye shall receive a Crown of righteousness which fades not away.
Corona virens, non (quales illae ex hedera and lauro) marcescens Menochius.
Eternity is a Jewel of the Saints Crown.

Quest. What is the quiddity or matter of which the Celestial Crown is made?

Answ. The Crown it self consists in the Beatifical sight and fruition of the
all-glorious God. In visione Dei ut primi very, and amore Dei ut summi boni
consistit Corona.
What else is the Angels Crown but (...), the beholding of Gods face, Mat. 18.
10. Deus and Coronator, and Corona August.
; to have intellectual transforming sights of God, will ravish the Elect with
infinite delight. Chrysostom says, The souls of the blessed shall be
bespangled, (...), with some of those illustrious beams of Gods glory which
shall be transparent through the bright mirror of Christ's Humane nature. If
there were such gladness when Solomon was Crowned, 1 King. 1. 40. They rejoiced
with great joy, so that the earth rent with the sound; what mighty acclamations
and triumphs will be on the Saints Coronation day? such will be the ecstasies
and divine raptures of joy, as exceed our very faith Premium quod side non
attingitur. Aug.
. The delights of Heaven may be better felt than expressed. Whatever can be
said of the Celestial Crown is but gutta de mari, as a drop to the Ocean, nay,
scarce so much.

Quest. When shall the Saints receive this Crown of righteousness?

Answ. They shall receive it in part immediately after death, before their
bodies are buried, their souls are crowned, 2 Cor. 5. 8. Absent from the body,
present with the Lord; if the Crown were not instantly bestowed after death, it
were better for believers to stay here, for they are here daily cucreasing
their Grace; here they have some bunches of Grapes by the way, sweet foretasts
of Gods love, so that they had better stay here, if they had not a speedy
transition and passage to glory. But this is the consolation of believers, that
they shall not stay long for their preferment; no sooner did Lazarus die, but
he had a convoy of Angels to carry him to Abraham's bosom. Christians you may be
happy before you are aware, it is but winking and you shall see God.

The full Coronation will be at the Resurrection when the bodies and souls of
Believers shall be reunited; their Bodies shall be Crowned with immense
felicity, and clarified like Christ's glorious body.

Quest. But why is the Crown at all deferred, why is it not set on a Christians
head presently?

Answ. It is not yet the proper season.

1. We are heirs under age; we receive but Primitias spiritus, the first fruits
of the spirit, Romans 8. 23. Grace is in its minority; now, though some Princes
have been crowned in their Cradle, God crowns none till they are of perfect
stature. Sin incorporates with grace, would we partake of glory while we
partake of sin?

2. Our work is not yet done, we have not finished the faith; the labourer does
not receive his pay till his work be done. Christ's reward was deferred till he
had perfected his work, Joh. 17. 4, 5. I have finished the work which thou
gave me to do, and now O father glorify me. The Lord does not think it meet
that we should have our pay before hand; when we have arrived at the end of our
faith, then comes salvation, 1 Pet. 1. 9.

Br. 1. See then there is nothing lost by solid piety; Use 1.
after fighting the good fight of faith, comes the Crown of righteousness. When
we hear of the severe part of Religion, steeping our souls in the brinish tears
of repentance, mortifying our complexion-sin, we are ready to grumble and
mutiny, but do we serve God for naught? will he not compensate our labors with
a Crown? yea, such a Crown which as far exceeds our thoughts as it does our
deserts. No man can say without wrong done to God that he is an hard master.
The Lord gives double pay, he gives great vailes in his service here, inward
joy and peace, and afterward he refreshes us with the delights of Paradise
which are without intermission and expiration: O what a vast difference is
there between duty enjoined, and glory prepared! What is the shedding of a tear
to a Crown?

2. Branch. See what contrary ways the godly and the wicked go at death; the
godly are advanced to Crowns of Glory, the wicked are bound with chains of
darkness, Jude 6. But what are these chains? Surely such as no aquafortis can
eat a-sunder. By these chains I understand God's Sovereign Omnipotency,
fastening sinners under wrath (as the chain does the Prisoners) that they
cannot stir: Sinners may break the chain of Gods Precepts, but they cannot
break the chain of his Power: This is the unparalled misery of impenitent
souls, they do not go to a Crown when they dye, but to a Prison; O think what
horror and despair will possess the wicked when they see themselves ingulphed
in tremendous flames, and their condition hopeless, helpless, endless ubi nec
qui: torquetur moritur, nec qui torquet fatigatur, Bern. Flor.
. A servant under the old Law, who had an hard master; yet every seventh year
being a year of Jubilee, or release he might go free; but in Hell there is no
year of release when the damned shall go free, Mark 9. 44. What is become of
men's intellectuals? Have they lost their reason as well as their conscience?
Why do they not bethink themselves in time what sin will bring them to, though
now it shows its color in the glass, yet in the end it will bite as a serpent,
Prove. 23. 32. If a man had but a sight of Hell (says Bellarmine) it were
enough to make him sober, yea turn Hermit and Anchorite, and live a most
mortified life.

3. Branch. See the grand folly of such as for vain pleasures and profits will
lose this celestial Crown: It may be said of them, as Eccles. 9. 3. Madness is
in their heart. Tiberias for a draught of water lost his Empire; men swallow
temptations like pills, which gripe their consciences, and afterward make them
forfeit blessedness. This will accent and inhance a sinners torment, and will
cause gnashing of teeth, to think how sillily he lost paradise; for a flash of
impure joy, he parted with the quintessence of happiness. Would it not vex one
to think he should be so inveigled as to part with his land of Inheritance for
a fit of music; such are they who let Heaven go for a song. If Satan could
make good his brag, in giving all the glory and kingdoms of the world, they
could not countervail the loss of Heavens Crown; whenever a sinner dies, the
Devil will beg him for a fool.

4. Branch. If the Saints are installed, and have the Crown-royal set upon them
at death, then what little cause have we to mourn immoderately at the death of
godly friends? God allows us tears; Jacob wept over his dead Father Genesis 50. 1.
; tears give vent to grief -- strangulat inclusus dolor -- but there is no
reason we should grieve excessively for our pious friends, they receive a
Crown, and shall we mourn when they have preferment? Suppose you had a dear
relation beyond the Sea, and you should hear he were Crowned King, would you
grieve to hear of his advancement? Thy friend who dies in the Lord, receives
immediately a Crown of Righteousness, and will you be cast down with sorrow?
Why should you shed tears immoderately for them who have all tears wiped from
their eyes? Why should you be swallowed up of grief for them who are swallowed
up of joy? They are removed hence for their advantage, as if one should be
removed out of a smoky Cottage to a Palace? The Prophet Elijah was removed in
a fiery chariot to Heaven; Shall Elishah weep inordinately, because he enjoys
not the company of Elijah? Is it not better to have sparkling Crowns and white
Robes, than to sojourn in the tents of Kedar? Is it not better to live among
Angels than fiery serpents? Is it not best to have Christ's banner of love
displaid over us? Are there any sweeter smiles or softer embraces than his? Why
then should any macerate, and even intomb themselves in sorrow for their
relations? Theocritus says, it was a custom among the Ancients to have their
(...), or funeral banquet, because of the felicity they supposed the parties
deceased did enter into; O thou who hangest thy harp upon the willows, and with
Rachel refusest to be comforted; remember there is no wiping away tears from
the eye, but with the winding sheet; thy friend could not be in the Region of
the blessed, till he dyed; his dying-day was his ascension-day: O then keep thy
tears for thy sins, but do not torment thy self with grief for him, whose soul
is as holy as it would be, and as happy as it can be.

Use 2. Trial. Are we heirs to this glorious Crown? Such only as are righteous
persons shall wear the Crown of Righteousness: The work of righteousness goes
before the Crown of Righteousness, Isa. 32. 17. Are we not only Morally, but
Theologically righteous? Have we a righteousness of imputation procured for us
by Christ's merit, and a righteousness of implantation produced in us by his
spirit? Are we consecrated with the anointing Oil of grace? God gilds the elect
with the beams of his own Holiness, and makes them shine like himself. Have we
both circumcision of heart, and circumspection of life? If we are righteous
persons, we are sure to wear the Crown of Righteousness.

Let not the profane presume of happiness; let not them think to go to Heaven
per saltum, to leap out of Delilah's lap into Abraham's bosom, 1 Cor. 6. 9. Know
ye not that the unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of God? God will not
lay a Viper in his bosom, or set a Crown upon the head of a swinish sinner.

Use 3. Exhort. It has a double aspect: 1. To all in General.

1. Believe that there is a Crown of Righteousness laid up for all that fight
the good fight. Some of the Rabbis say, that the great dispute between Cain
and Abel was about the world to come: Abel affirmed a Crown of recompense for
the godly, Cain denied it. This truth concerning the real Elyzian delights in
reversion, should be graven upon our hearts as with the point of a diamond.
Carnal persons look upon the felicities of the other world, but as a Platonical
idaea, or fancy; they do not see the Crown with bodily eyes, therefore they
question it: The verity of the soul may as well be questioned, because being a
spirit it cannot be seen: Doubting of Principles, is the next way to denying
them. Let us set our seal to this, there is a Crown of Righteousness laid up.
Where should our Faith rest but upon a Divine Testimony? The whole earth hangs
upon the word of Gods Power, and shall not our Faith hang upon the word of his
promise? Tit. 1. 2. In hope of eternal life, which God who cannot lie has
promised. The Saints Crown is purchased by Christ's blood, Ephesians. 1. 14. and
Christ will not lose his purchase. What was the end of Christ's ascension? He
went up to Heaven, not only to invest himself, but all believers with Glory; as
an Husband takes up Land in another Country in the behalf of his Wife. What did
Christ pray for, but that all the Saints might be with him? John 17. 24. And
what Christ prayed for as he was man, he has power to give as he is God:
Besides, the Lord has given us the unction of his spirit to prepare us, and
the earnest of his spirit to assure us of happiness, 2 Cor. 1. 21. and he will
not lose his earnest; so that the Crown of Righteousness shall indubitably be
bestowed. To question this, is to destroy the main Article of our Creed, life
everlasting. Such Atheists as judge the eternal recompenses fictions, put God to
swear against them, that they shall never see life. Heb. 3. 18.


2. Branch. Strive for this Crown Sen. Herc. Fur. Non est ad astra mollis e
terris via.
. I have read of those who travel in long Pilgrimages to the holy Land, they
have hard lodgings, and pass through a number of dangers; and at the end of
their journey pay a large tribute at the Pisan Castle to the Turks; and when
they come thither, they see only a bare sepulcher, where it is supposed their
Savior lay. Did they take such pains to gratify their superstitious devotion?
What Herculean labor then should a Christian undertake in his journey to the
true land of promise, whereby he shall both see and enjoy his Savior, and not
enter into his Sepulcher, but Palace, and be eternally crowned with the
delights of the Jerusalem abo(...)

(...) we but take as much pains for Heaven, as others do for the world,
undoubtedly we might obtain it, Phil. 3. 15. Reaching forth unto those things
which are before (...).
. A metaphor taken from Racers, that reach their necks forward, and strain
every limb to lay hold upon the prize; let us contend, tanquam pro aris and
focis. There are two things requisite for a Christian, a watchful eye, and a
working hand; to purpose, let us add pursuit. What scuffling is there for
outward honors? Men will wade through blood to a Crown. Was there such strife
for a corruptible Crown in the Olympian and Isthmean races? Sometimes the Crown
bestowed upon the Victor was made of Olive, sometimes of Myrtle, sometimes of
Cynamon enclosed in Gold; but still it was corruptible: O then how strenuously
should we labor for the Garland made of the flowers of Paradise, which never
fade! With what vigor and resolution did Hannibal march over the Alps for the
obtaining terrestrial Kingdoms? How should we act then ad extremum virium, for
that Orient Crown which shines ten thousand times brighter than the Sun in its
meridian splendor. Luther spent three hours a day in Prayer: Anna the
Prophetess departed not from the Temple, but served God with fastings and
prayers night and day, Luke 2. 37. The learned Calvin, Jewel, Perkins were
indefatigable in their pursuit after Glory.

Let us look to this Cloud of Witnesses, and bestir our selves, ply our Oar,
double our Files; Who would not toil all day, to catch salvation at night? when
the flesh cries out, What a weariness is it? Who can endure all this labor?
say, it is worse enduring Hell: The labor for Heaven, though it seem pungent,
it is transient; the fight is quickly over, and then comes the immarcescible
Crown.

2. It has a particular aspect to believers.

1. Be full of anhelations and longings for this Crown of Righteousness. Does
not the banished Prince desire his native Country? The unwillingness of
Christians to go hence shows,

1. The weakness of their Faith: They question their interest in this excellent
glory; were their title to Heaven more cleared, they would need patience to be
content to stay here any longer.

2. The weakness of their love. Love (as Aristotle says) desires Union. Did
men love Christ as they should, they would desire to be united to him in glory.
St. Paul desired to be dissolved and be with Christ, Phil. 1. 23. It was the
speech of an holy man on his deathbed, My heart is in heaven, Lord lead me to
that glory which I have seen already as through a glass Mr. Rollock.
. We are encompassed with a body of sin; should not we long to shake off this
viper? We are combating with Satan; should not we be willing to be called out
of the bloody field, where the bullets of temptation fly so fast, that we may
receive a victorious Garland? We now live far from Court, we do rather desire
God than enjoy him; should not we long to be crowned with the blissful sight of
Gods face? Though we should be content to stay here to do God service, yet we
should ambitiously desire to be always sunning our selves in the light ofGods
countenance; think what it will be to be led into Christ's wine-celler, to have
the kisses of his mouth, to smell the Savor of his ointments, to lie in his
bosom, that bed of love; think what it will be to have unstained honor,
unparalled beauty, unmixed joy; what it will be to tread upon stars, to dwell
among Cherubims, and to feast on those dulcia fercula, heavenly delicacies and
rarities wherewith God himself is delighted. Methinks our souls should be big
with longing for these things, and we should be put into such a blessed Pathos
of desire, as Monica, who hearing of the joys of Heaven, cried out, Quid hic
facio? What should I do here? why is my soul held any longer with this earthen
fetter of the flesh? would but God give us some Idaea, or imperfect glimps of
Heavens Glory; how should we be ready to fall into a Trance with Peter? And
being a little recovered out of it, what earnest suitors Act. 10. 11.
would we be to be caught up for ever into the Heavenly Paradise.

2. You who are the heirs of Glory, be exhorted to work with all your might for
God: Love and serve God more intensly than others, who has laid up such things
for you, as eye has not seen, nor can it enter into man's heart to conceive, 1
Cor. 15. 58. Always abounding in the work of the Lord, knowing your labor is
not in vain in the Lord -- immensum gloria calcar habet -- St. Paul had a
spirit of activity for God, 1 Cor. 15. 10. I labored (...) more abundantly
than they all. St. Paul's obedience did not move slowly, as the Sun upon the
dial, but swiftly as the Sun in the firmament; whence was this, his eye was
upon the Crown, Henceforth is laid up for me a Crown of Righteousness: The
recompense of reward may add wings to duty, and oil to the flame of zeal. What
are we that God should incircle us with happiness, and not others? that he
should (as Jacob) cross his hands, lay his right hand upon us, and his left
hand upon others; O discriminating grace for ever to be adored, how can we
serve God enough? If there could be tears shed in Heaven, it would be for this
that we have been so lame in our duty, and have brought no more revenues into
the Heavenly Exchequer.

3. Let this be as Bezoar-stone to revive and bear up your hearts under all
your present sufferings, Act. 20. 23. Bonds and afflictions abide me.
Affliction is the Saints diet-drink; instead of Roses they are crowned with
thorns. You may as well separate weight from lead, as sufferings from a Saints
life, 2 Cor. 9. 8. We are troubled on every side. Believers are as a ship that
has the waves beating on both sides, but this Text may buoy them up from
sinking, there is glory which does succed and exceed all their sufferings. The
Saints now drink in a wormwood-cup, but shortly they shall drink in a spiced
cup, and taste the same heavenly Nectar as the Angels. One days wearing the
Celestial Crown, will abundantly pay for all their sufferings, Romans 8. 18. I
reckon that the sufferings of this present time, are not worthy to be compared
with the glory which shall be revealed in us. The weight of glory makes
affliction light. O ye Saints who are the true birds of paradise sing in
winter, there is glory behind, and every suffering will be like a grain put in
the scale to make your glory weigh heavier. Suffering Saints shall have more
Jewels hung upon their Crown.

4. Let this be an antidote against the fear of death. The day of death is (as
Seneca calls it) aeterni natalis, the birthday of eternity; believers are not
fully happy till death Sicut testa ovorum quamvis pulchre formata, necesse est
tamen eam frangi ut inde pullus procedat; ita hujus corporis necesse est
testam, ut status ille sublimior regni coelestis effulgeat. Clem Al.
. Death therefore is made a part of the inventory, 1 Cor. 3. 22. Death is
yours. When the mantle of the flesh drops off, the soul ascends in a triumphant
chariot; God has promised his people a portion, but it is not paid them till
the day of death. It Is their fathers good pleasure to give them a Kingdom, Luke
12. 32. but they cannot see it till death has closed their eyes. Why then
should the Saints be troubled at death? indeed I wonder not that the wicked are
appal'd, and scared at the approach of the King of terror; they are in debt to
Gods justice, and death as Gods Sergeant arrests them, and drags them before
the Divine Tribunal. But why should any of Gods children be under such
consternation, and have the trembling at the heart? What hurt does death do to
them? it pulls off their fetters and puts jewels upon them; it leads them to
gates of Pearl, rivers of pleasures. Faith gives a title to Heaven, death a
possession.

Go forth my soul, said Hilarion on his deathbed, what fear thou? why
should the godly dread their privilege? is a Prince afraid to cross the narrow
Seas who is sure to be Crowned as soon as he comes at shore? This puts Roses
into the pale face of death, and makes it look more ruddy and amiable; it is
aditus ad gloriam, it crowns the Saints with all the delights of the Empyraean
Heaven.

I Have done with the Text, it remains that I should speak something to the
occasion.

It has pleased the all-wise God to take to himself lately, that reverend and
faithful Minister Mr. Henry Stubs, whose death we now commemorate. The memory
of the just is blessed. Fulgentius calls a good name the godly man's heir, it
lives when he is dead. This man of God has left a sweet favor and perfume
behind in Gods Church, besides his achievement of humane learning, he was
enriched with the knowledge of Christ crucified. The Graces excel the Muses.

He was very humble; humility is the best garment a Minister can preach in 1.
Pet. 5. 5.
. He was one of a thousand for integrity. The plainer the Diamond is, the
richer.

He was a grave Preacher, and did choose rather to speak solid than floride. He
spoke as became the Oracles of God. Levity is below the majesty of Preaching.

He was a painful labourer in Gods Vineyard; he preached in season and out of
season. The souls of people were dearer to him than his life Nec propter vitam
vivendi perdere causam. D. Reyn.
. Praying and Preaching was rather his delight than task. He was a burning lamp
consuming himself to give light to others.

He preached feelingly; he felt those truths in his own soul which he
recommended to his Auditors; an unconverted Minister is like a Lute, making
sweet Music to others, but it self is not sensible; this elect vessel retained
a scent and relish of those sacred Truths which he poured out to others.

He lived much by faith, and had sweet converse with God; all the Saints have
Gods heart, but some have more of his company.

He was Exemplary in his deportment; he did (...), Ministers by virtue of their
calling, approach nearer to God, Exodus 19. 22. The Elements the higher they
are, the purer; the fire is purer than the air. The higher we are by office,
the holier we should be. Quo sublimiores, eo sanctiores. This blessed person
deceased, did live as an incarnate Angel. I may say of him as Basil of Gregory
Nazianzen, he thundered in his Doctrine, and lightened in his Conversation.

He was charitable-minded. I have been credibly informed, that out of that
little he had gathered together while he was in his Living, he appointed two
hundred pounds (which he entrusted in the hands of Feoffees) to be improved
annually for the good of the poor to buy them Bibles.

He was of a sweet temper, never fierce but against sin. He was devout toward
God, affable to his Friends, loving to his Relations.

The Lord honored his Ministry very much, he had a double Crown; the souls he
converted were his Crown of rejoicing 1 These. 2. 19.
, and now he wears a Crown of Righteousness. How great a loss has
Glocestershire and London of this eminent Minister. It has been told me, that
he set apart some time every day to pray for the Church of God; he (like Moses)
lay in the breach to turn away wrath; we shall soon grow poor if we lose such
praying friends. During the time of this good man's sickness, he was
asthmatical, and labored much for breath, so that he could not utter himself
so freely, but what was heard to drop from him was very savoury. He said he had
fled to the city of refuge, and recited that Scripture, 2 Timothy 1. 12. I know
whom I have believed, and I am persuaded he is able to keep that which I have
committed to him against that day. I pray God give all who are concerned in
this loss, wisdom to improve this present stroke, and make a living Sermon of
their dead Minister. He is now voti compos, he enjoys the sight of that God
whom he so pathetically longed for upon his deathbed. He is got into the upper
region above all storms. His body is returned to dust, and his soul to rest. He
is enclosed in happiness, as the word for Crowning imports (...).
. He is as rich as the Angels, though he has lost his life, yet not his Crown.

FINIS.

