THE DOCTRINE OF Repentance, Useful for these Times.

By Tho. Watson, Minister of the Gospel.

I will come unto thee quickly, and will remove thy Golden Candlestick out of
his place except thou repent,

Revel. 2. 5. Nemo potest been agere poenitentiam, nisi qui speraverit
indulgentiam.

Ambrose de Poenit. lib. 1. LONDON, Printed, by R. W. for Thomas Parkhurst, at
the Sign of the Golden Bible on London Bridge. 1668.

THE Epistle to the READER.
Christian Reader,
THE two great Graces essential to a Saint in this life, are Faith and
Repentance. These are the two wings by which he flies to Heaven. Faith and
Repentance preserve the spiritual life, as heat and radical moisture do the
natural. The Grace which I am now to discuss, is Repentance.

Chrysostom thought it the fittest subject for him to Preach upon before the
Emperor Arcadius. And Austin caused the Penitential Psalms to be written
before him as he lay upon his Bed, and he did often peruse them with tears
Possidon. in vit. Aug.
. Repentance is never out of season; it is of as frequent use, as the
Artificers Tool, or the Soldiers weapon. If I am not mistaken, practical
Points are more needful in this Age, than Controversal and Polemical. I had
thought to have smothered these Meditation* in (...) De^k, but (...) (...) to
be of great concern in thi^ (...) of time, I have rescinded my first
resolution, (...) have exposed them to a critical view. Repentance is
Purgative; fear not the working of this Pill. Smite thy ^oul (says
Chrysostom) smite it, it will escape death by that stroke. How happy were it
if we were more deeply affected with sin, and our eyes did swim in their Orb.
The waters of R^pentance though they are troubled, yet Pure, where we may
clearly see the Spirit of God moving. Moist tears dry up the rheumes of sin,
and quench the wrath of God Fletus imbre exstinxit Petrus fulmen irae divinae.
Brugensis.
. Repentance is the Cherisher of Piety, the Procurer of Mercy (...). Chrysostom
de Poenit.
. The more r^gret and trouble of Spirit we have at our first Conversion, the
less we shall feel afterward. The greater Fine is paid, the less Rent.
Christians have you a sad resentment of other things, and not of sin? Worldly
Tears fall to the earth, but godly tears are kept in a bottle, P^alm 56. 8.
Judge not holy weeping superfluous. Tertullian thought he was born for no other
end but to repent Peccato^ omnium ^otarum cum sim* nec ulli rei nisi
poenitentiae natus. Ter^. de (...).
. Either sin must drown* or the scul burn. Let it not be said, Repentance is
difficult. Things that are excellent deserve (...) Superas^evadere ad auras hoc
opus, etc. Virgil.
. Will not a man digg for Gold in the (...), though it makes him swea^ (...)
Plu^arch.
. It is better to go with difficulty to Heaven, than with ^ase to Hell. What
would the (...) give might they have an H^rauld sent to them from God to
proclaim mercy upon their repentance? What Vollies of sighs and groans would
they send up to Heaven, what floods of tears would their eyes pour forth, but
it is now too late Post mortem non d^tur poenitentiae locus. Tertul. con^.
Deme^r.
. They may keep their tears to lament their folly, sooner than to procure
pity. O that therefore while we are on this side the Grave, we would make our
peace with God. To morrow may be our dying day, let this be our repenting day.
How should we imitate the Saints of old who have imbittered their souls Cum
pervenissem ad poe^itentes vidi (...) res and verba quae Deo vim infe^e
possent* Quosdam ex eis vidi noctibus totis sta^e Pervigiles; alios humi
^uridas facies inclinantes, indignos s^ qui coelum aspicerent vociferantes;
nonnullos lugentes, fron* te^que in Terram collidentes ^ alios pectora jugiter
Tundentes, animamque suam suspi^i* inge^i amaricantes. Cl^mach.
, and sacrificed their lusts, and put on sackcloth (...) hope of white robes.
Peter baptized himself with tears; And that devout Lady Paula, (of whom Hierom
writes) like a Bird of Paradise bemoaned her self and humbled her self to the
dust for sin. Besides our own personal miscarriages, the deplorable condition
of the Land calls for a contribution of Tears. Have not we lost much of our
Pristine fame and renown Fama Pari Passu ambulat cum vita.
? Time was when we did sit as Princess among the Provinces Lam. 1. 1.
. God made the sheaves of other Nations to do obeisance to our Sheaf Genesis
37. 7.
, but is not our Glory fled away as a Bird? Hos. 9. 11. We are become the shame
of our friends, and the scorn of our enemies. And what severe dispensations are
yet behind, we cannot tell. Our black and Hideous Vapors having ascended, we
may fear loud Thunderclaps should follow; and will not all this bring us to
our wits, and excite in us a Spirit of humiliation? Shall we sleep on the top
of the Mast when the winds are blowing from all the quarters of Heaven? O let
not the Apple of our eye cease Lam. 2. 18.
. I will not launch forth any further in a Prefatory Discourse, but that God
would add a blessing to this work, and so direct this arrow, that though shot
at rovers, it may hit the mark, and some sin may be shot to death, shall be the
ardent prayer of him, who is

May 25. 1668. The Well-wisher of thy Souls Happiness, Thomas Watson.

Reader, Be pleased to correct these mistakes of the Press.
Page 21. Marg. for Christi primogenito, r. Christo primogenito; p. 64. l. 11.
for fleshly, r. fleshy; p. 72. l. 6. for canker, r. cancer. p. 82. Marg. r.
aquila senscente tam curuum habet rostrum. p. 110. l. 23. for Good, r. God. p.
131. l. 10. for 1 Samuel 30. 22. r. Isaiah 30. 22.

THE DOCTRINE OF REPENTANCE.
Acts 26. 20. That they should repent and turn to God, and do works meet for
Repentance.
CHAP. I. A Praeliminary Discourse, together with the Proposition.
SAint Paul being falsely accused by Tertullus to be seditious, chap. 24. 5. We
have found this man a pestilent fellow, (...) Pestem.
and a mover of Sedition: in this chapter he makes an apology for himself,
before Festus and King Agrippa.

Paul proves himself to be an Orator. He courts the King, 1. By his Gesture;
He stretched forth his hands, verse. 1. as the custom of Orators was. 2. By his
manner of speech, ver. 2. I think my self happy King Agrippa, because I shall
answer for my self before thee, touching all the things whereof I am accused.

Paul treats of three things, and that in so deep a strain of Rhetoric, as he
had almost converted King Agrippa.

1. He discourses of the manner of his life before his conversion, ver. 5.
after the most strait Sect of our Religion, I lived a Pharisee. During the time
of his unregeneracy, he was zealous for Traditions; and his false fire of zeal
was so hot, that it scorched all that stood in his way, ver. 10. Many of the
Saints I shut up in prison.

2. Paul discourses of the manner of his conversion, ver. 13. I saw in the way
a light from Heaven, above the brightness of the Sun. This light was no other
but what shined from Christ's glorified body: And I heard a voice speaking unto
me, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? The body being hurt, the head in
Heaven cried out. At this light and voice Paul was amazed, and fell to the
earth, ver. 14. And I said, who art thou Lord? and he said, I am Jesus whom
thou persecutest, ver. 15. Paul was now taken off from himself; all opinion of
self-righteousness vanished, and he did graft his hope of Heaven upon the stock
of Christ's Righteousness.

3. Paul discourses of the manner of his life after his conversion: He who
before was a persecutor, now became a Preacher, ver. 16. Arise, for I have
appeared unto thee, to make thee a Minister, and a Witness, of those things
which thou have seen. When Paul (this vessel of election (...)
) was savingly wrought upon, he labored to do as much good as before he had
done hurt. Before, he persecuted Saints to death, now he preaches sinners to
life. God first sent him to the Jews at Damascus, and afterward enlarged
his-commission to preach to the Gentiles. And the subject he preached upon was
this in the text, That they should repent and turn to God Gentes falsos
coluerunt Grotius.
. A weighty and excellent Subject. deos, Judaei Verum Deum, sed non sicut
oportebat.

I shall not dispute the Priority, whether Faith or Repentance goes first;
doubtless Repentance shows it self first in a Christians life; yet I am apt to
think the seeds of Faith are first wrought in the heart Non potest homo serio
poenitere* n si se Dei esse noverit. Zanchy.
. As when a burning Taper is brought into a room, the light shows it self
first, but the Taper was before the light: So we see the fruits of Repentance
first, but the initials of Faith were there before.

That which inclines me to think that Faith is seminally in the heart before
Repentance, is this, because Repentance being a grace, must be acted by one
that is living. Now, how does the soul live but by Faith? Heb. 10. 38. The just
shall live by his Faith. So that there must be first some seeds of Faith in the
heart of a penitent, Resipiscentia ex fide gignitur. M^sculus.
else it is a dead Repentance, and so of no value.

But whether Faith or Repentance go first, sure I am, Repentance is of such
importance, as there is no being saved without it. After Paul's shipwreck, he
did swim to shore on planks, and broken pieces of the ship, Act. 27. 44. So in
Adam we all suffered shipwreck, and Repentance is the only plank left us after
shipwreck to swim to Heaven Tab^la post nau^agium. Doct.
.

It is a great duty incumbent upon Christians, solemnly to repent and turn unto
God, Mat. 3. 2. Repent ye, for the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand, Act. 3. 19.
Repent therefore, and be converted, that your sins may be blotted out, Act. 8.
22. Repent of this thy wickedness. In the mouth of these three witnesses this
truth is confirmed. Repentance is a foundation-grace, Heb. 6. 1. Not laying
again the foundation of Repentance. That Religion must needs fall to the ground
which is not built upon this foundation.

Repentance is a grace required under the Gospel. Some think it legal; but the
first Sermon that ever Christ preached; nay, the first word of his Sermon was
(...), Repent, Mat. 4. 17. And his last farewell that he left when he was going
to ascend, was, that Repentance should be preached in his Name, Luke 24. 37.
And the Apostles did all beat upon this string, Mark 6. 3. They went out and
preached that men should repent.

Repentance is a pure Gospel Grace. The covenant of works admitted no
Repentance. There it was, sin and die: Repentance comes in by the Gospel.
Christ has purchased in his blood that repenting sinners shall be saved. The
Law required personal, perfect, and perpetual obedience; it cursed all that
could not come up to this, Gal. 3. 10. Cursed is every one that continues not
in all things which are written in the Book of the Law to do them.

It does not say, he that obeys not all things, let him repent, but, let him be
cursed. So that Repentance is a Doctrine brought to light only by the Gospel.

CHAP. II. Showing how Repentance is wrought.
THE manner how Repentance is wrought, is,

1. Partly by the Word, Act. 2. 37. 1.
When they heard this, they were pricked in their heart, etc. The Word preached
is Gods Engine he uses to effect Repentance. It Is compared to an Hammer, and
to a Fire, Ier. 23. 29. The one is to break, the other to melt the heart. How
great a blessing is it to have the Word dispensed, which is of such noble
virtue? And how hard will they find it to escape Hell, who put out the lights
of Heaven?

2. Repentance is wrought by the Spirit. 2.
Ministers are but the Pipes and Organs; it is the Holy Ghost breathing in
them, makes their words effectual Omne instrumentum operatur in virtute
princip^lis agentis.
. Act. 10. 44. While Peter spoke these words, the Holy Ghost fell on all them
which heard the Word. The Spirit in the Word illuminates and converts Spiritus
Dei est omnipotens artifex, formans affectionem, spirans Gratiam, juvans
operationem, agens omnia for^iter, and disponens suaviter. Bernard.
. When the Spirit touches an heart, it dissolves into tears, Zach. 12. 10. I
will pour on the Inhabitants of Jerusalem a spirit of Grace, and they shall
look on me whom they have pierced, and mourn. It Is wonderful to consider, what
different effects the Word has upon men. Some at a Sermon are like Josiah,
their heart is tender, and they let fall tears 2 King. 22. 19.
; others are no more affected with it, than a deaf man with mufick. Some grow
better by the Word, others worse. The same earth which causes sweetness in the
Grape, causes bitterness in the Wormwood. What is the reason the Word works so
differently? it is because the Spirit of God does carry the Word to the
conscience of one, and not another. One has received the divine Unction, and
not the other, 1 Ioh. 2. 20. Oh pray that the dew may fall with Manna. That the
Spirit may go along with the Word. The Chariot of Ordinances will not carry us
to Heaven, unless the Spirit of God join himself to this Chariot Act. 8. 29.
.

CHAP. III. Discovering the Deceits of Repentance.
IT will next be enquired, what Repentance is. I shall first show you what it
is not. There are several Deceits of Repentance, which might occasion that
saying of Austin, That Repentance damns many. He means a false Repentance. A
person may delude himself with a counterfeit Repentance.

1. The first Deceit of Repentance is 1. Deceit.
legal Terror. A man has gone on long in sin, at last God arrests him, shows
him what desperate hazard he has run, and he is filled with anguish; within a
while the tempest of conscience is blown over, and he is quiet; then he
concludes he is a true penitent, because he has felt some bitterness in sin:
Be not deceived, this is not Repentance. Ahab and Judas had some trouble of
mind. It is one thing to be a terrified sinner, and another thing to be a
repenting sinner. Sense of guilt is enough to breed terror; infusion of grace
breeds Repentance. If pain and trouble were sufficient to Repentance, then the
damned in Hell should be most penitent, for they are most in anguish.
Repentance depends upon a change of heart. There may be terror, yet no change
of heart.

2. Another Deceit about Repentance, 2 Deceit.
is, resolution against sin. A person may purpose and make vows, yet be no
penitent, Ier. 2. 20. Thou said, I will not transgress. Here was a
resolution; but see what follows; under every green tree, thou playedst the
Harlot. Notwithstanding her solemn engagements, she played fast and loose with
God, and ran after her Idols. We see by experience when a person is on his
sickbed, what protestations will he make if God recover him again, yet he is
as bad as ever: He shows his old heart in a new temptation. Resolution against
sin may arise,

1. From present extremity; not because sin is sinful, but because it is
painful. This Resolution will vanish.

2. Resolution against sin may arise from fear of future evil; an apprehension
of death and Hell, Rev. 6. 8. I looked, and behold a pale horse, (...) Ses^ore
morte, Pedissequo inferno.
and his name that sat on him was death, and Hell followed after him? What
will not a sinner do? what vows will he not make, when he knows he must die and
stand before the Judgment seat? Self-love raises a sickbed vow, and love of
sin will prevail against it. Trust not to a passionate resolution, it is raised
in a storm, and will die in a calm.

3. The third Deceit about Repentance, 3 Deceit.
is, the leaving many sinful courses. It Is a great matter I confess to leave
sin: So dear is sin to a man, that he will rather part with a child than a
lust, Micah 6. 7. Shall I give the fruit of my body, for the sin of my soul
Nunquid Deus a me poscit piaculum, sicut Saturnus, Moloch, aliique dei gentium
quos coluimus, victimas humanas e^flagitant?
? But sin may be parted with, yet no Repentance.

1. A man may part with some sins, and keep other. As Herod reformed many
things amiss, but could not leave his incest.

2. An old sin may be left to entertain a new Serpens quotannis exuvias
deponit. Causin. Hierogl.
. As you put off an old servant to take another. This is to exchange a sin. Sin
may be exchanged, and the heart not changed. He who was a Prodigal in his
youth, turns an Usurer in his old age. A slave is sold to a Jew, the Jew sells
him to a Turk; here is the Master changed, but he is a slave still. So a man
removes from one vice to another, but he is a sinner still.

3. A sin may be left not so much from strength of grace, as from moral
grounds. A man sees that though such a sin be for his Tooth, yet it is not for
his interest: It will eclipse his credit, prejudice his health, impair his
estate; therefore upon prudential reasons he gives it a dismiss.

The true leaving of sin, is, when the acts of sin cease from the infusion of a
principle of grace: As the air cease to be dark from the infusion of light.

CHAP. IV. Opening the Nature of True Repentance.
I Shall next come to show, what Gospel-Repentance is: Repentance is a grace of
Gods Spirit, whereby a sinner is inwardly humbled, and visibly reformed. For a
further amplification of Repentance, know, that Repentance is a spiritual
medicine, made up of six special Ingredients; if any one be left out, it loses
its virtue.

1. Sight of Sin. 2. Sorrow for Sin. 3. Confession of Sin. 4. Shame for Sin. 5.
Hatred for Sin. 6. Turning from Sin.
SECTION I.
1. THE first Ingredient in Repentance, 1 Ingredient.
is, Sight of Sin Visus peccati.
. The first part of Christ's Physic is Eye Salve, Act. 26. 18. It Is the great
thing noted in the Prodigals Repentance, Luke 15. 17. He came to himself (...),
opponitur (...), sign f. post factum sapere. Chemnitius.
: He saw himself a sinner, and nothing but a sinner. Before a man can come to
Christ, he must come to himself. Solomon in his description of Repentance, puts
this in as the first Ingredient, 1 King. 8. 47. If they shall bethink
themselves (...) est qua peccator ad se redit, ac Pristinam animi sensentiam in
melius mutat. Muscul.
. A man must first recognize and consider what his sin is, and know the plague
of his heart, ere he can be duly humbled for it. The first creature God made
was Light: So the first thing in a penitent is illumination, Ephesians. 5. 8. Now
ye are light in the Lord. The eye is made both for seeing and weeping. Sin must
first be seen, before it can be wept for.

Hence I infer, where there is no sight Use.
of sin, there can be no Repentance. Many who can spy faults in others, see
none in themselves: They cry, they have good hearts. Were it not strange that
two should live together, and eat and drink together, yet not know one another?
Such is the case of a sinner, his body and soul live together, walk together,
yet he is unacquainted with himself: He knows not his own heart, nor what an
Hell he carries about him. Under a vail a deformed face is hid. Persons are
veiled over with ignorance, and self-love, therefore see not what deformed
souls they have. The Devil does with them as the Faulkner with the Hawk, blinds
them, and carries them hooded to Hell, Zach. 11. 17. The sword shall be upon
his right eye. Men have insight enough into worldly matters, but the eye of
their mind is smitten; they see not any evil in sin Inter peccandum c^i sumus.
Muscul.
. The sword is upon their right eye.

SECT. II.
2. THE second Ingredient into Repentance, 2 Ingredient.
is, Sorrow for Sin Contritio cordis.
. Psalm. 38. 18. I will be sorry for my sin. Ambrose calls sorrow the
imbittering of the soul. The Hebrew word to be sorrowful, signifies to have the
soul as it were crucified*. This must be in true Repentance, (...)
Zach. 12. 10. They shall look upon me whom they have pierced, and ^ourn. As if
they did feel the nails of the Cross sticking in their sides. A woman may as
well expect to have a child without pangs, as one can have Repentance without
sorrow. He that can believe without doubting, suspect his faith; and he that
can repent without sorrowing, suspect his Repentance.

Martyrs shed blood for Christ Martyrs effundunt sanguinem poenitentes
lachrymas.
, and penitents shed tears for sin, Luke 7. 38. She stood at Jesus feet weeping
Quasi tota (...) lach^ymas resoluta.
. See how this limbeck dropped; the sorrow of her heart ran out at her eye
Tristitia ex cognitione peccati orta, salutaris est admodum, and genuina
poenitentiae comes Brugens.
. The brazen lavor for the Priests to wash in, Exodus 30. 18. did tipifie a
double lavor: The lavor of Christ's blood we must wash in by Faith; and the
lavor of tears we must wash in by Repentance. A true Penitentiary labors to
work his heart into a sorrowing frame; he blesses God when he can weep; he is
glad of a rainy-day: He knows it is a Repentance he shall have no cause to
repent of 2 Cor. 7. 10.
. Though the bread of sorrow be bitter to the taste, yet, it strengthens the
heart Psalm 104. 15.
.

This sorrow for sin is not facil: It is an holy Agony: It Is called in
Scripture a breaking of the heart, Psalm. 51. 17. The Sacrifices of God, are a
broken heart: And a (...) Vox scindite, duplex significatum gerere non absonum
est; prius proprium, respectu vestimentorum, poste^ius metaphoricum, respectu
cordis, quod scindi dicitur quando sensu peccatorum and irae Dei est anxium and
contritum. Glassii Philolog. Sacra.
rending of the heart, Joel 2. 13. Rend your hearts*. The expressions of
smiting of the thigh, Ier. 31. 19. knocking on the breast, L^k. 18. 13. putting
on of sackcloth, Isa. 22. 12. plucking off the hair, Ezra 9. 3. What are all
these, but outward signs of inward sorrow. This sorrow must be,

1. To make Christ precious. O how 1.
desirable is a Savior to a troubled soul! Now Christ is Christ indeed, and
mercy is mercy indeed. Till the heart be full of compunction, it is not fit for
Christ Non in. fundit Deus Oleum misericordiae nisi in vas contritum.
. How welcome is a Chyrurgion to a man that is bleeding of his wounds.

2. This sorrow is to drive out sin: 2.
Sin breeds sorrow, and sorrow kills sin: Holy sorrow is the Ruberb to purge
out the ill humors of the soul. It is said, that the tears of Vine-branches
are good to cure the Leprosy. Sure it is, tears that drop from the penitent,
are good to cure the leprosy of sin. Salt water of tears kills the worm of
conscience.

3. This sorrow is to make way for solid 3.
comfort, Psalm. 126. 5. They that sow in tears, shall reap in joy. The penitent
has a wet seed-time, but a delicious harvest. Repentance breaks the imposthume
of sin, and then the soul is at ease. Hannah after weeping went away, and was
no more sad, 1 Samuel 1. 18. Gods troubling the soul for sin, is like the Angels
troubling the Pool, Ioh. 5. 4. which made way for healing.

But it is not all sorrow evidenceth true Repentance: There is as much
difference between true and false sorrow, as between water in the spring which
is sweet, and water in the Sea which is briny. The Apostle speaks of sorrowing
after a godly manner, 2 Cor. 7. 9. But what is this (...), this godly
sorrowing? Answer, There are six Qualifications of it.

1. True godly sorrow is intrinsecal, 1.
and that two ways: 1. It is a sorrow of the heart. Hypocrites sorrow lies in
their faces, Matthew. 6. 16. They dis-figure their faces (...) proprie valet, sic
delere quidpiam, and tollere e medio ut nusquam appareat: Isti quoque
hypocritae (histrionum instar) comtum and munditiem omnem substrahebant,
illuvie and squalore foedi prodeuntcs, quasi nativum vultum e medio tollerent.
Bez^.
: They make a sour face, but their sorrow goes no further: Like the dew that
wets the leaf, but does not soak to the root. Ahabs Repentance was in outward
show: His garments were rent, but not his spirit, 1 King. 21. 27. Godly sorrow
goes deep, like a Vein which bleeds inwardly Fletus interior. Altingst.
. The heart bleeds for sin, Act. 2. 37. (...), They were pricked at their
hearts (...) Punctim caedo. Scap.
. As the heart bears a chief part in sinning, so it must in sorrowing.

2. It is a sorrow for heart-sins. The first ebullitions and risings of sin
Motus primo primi.
. Paul grieved for the Law in his members, Romans 7. 23. The true mourner weeps
for the stirrings of pride and concupiscence; he grieves for the root of
bitterness, though it never blossoms into act. A wicked man may be troubled for
scandalous sins; a real convert laments heart-sins.

2. Godly sorrow is ingenuous; it is 2.
more for the offense than the punishment. Gods Law is infringed, his love
abused; this melts the soul in tears. A man may be sorry, yet not repent: As a
thief is sorry when he is taken, not because he stole, but because he comes
under the penalty. Hypocrites grieve only for the bitter consequence of sin. I
have read of a fountain that never sends forth streams but the evening before a
famine: So their eyes never pour out tears, but when Gods Judgments are
approaching. Pharaoh was more troubled for the froggs and River of blood, than
for his sin. But godly sorrow is chiefly for the trespass against God; so that
if there were no conscience to smite, no Devil to accuse, no Hell to punish,
yet the soul would be grieved because of the prejudice done to God, Psalm. 51.
4. My sin is ever before me. David does not say, the sword threatened is ever
before me, but, my sin. Oh that I should offend so good a God, that I should
grieve my Comforter; this breaks my heart!

Godly sorrow shows it self to be ingenuous, because when a Christian knows he
is out of the Gunshot of hell, and shall never be damned; yet still he grieves
for sinning against that free grace which has pardoned him.

3. Godly sorrow is fiducial; it is intermixed 3.
with faith, Mar. 9. 24. The Father of the child cried out, and said with
tears; Lord I believe. Here was sorrow for sin checkered with faith; as we have
seen a bright Rainbow appear in a watery cloud.

Flevit Petrus quia culpa ob repsit ei; commune quod labitur, fidei quod
flevit. Ambrose.
Spiritual sorrow will sink the heart, if the pully of faith does not raise it.
As our sin is ever before us; so Gods Promise must be ever before us. As we
must feel our sting; so we must look up to Christ our brazen Serpent Illi
Evangelice resipiscunt, qui peccati aculeo apud se exulcerati, fiduducia autem
misericordiae Dei erecti, ad Dominu^ confugiunt. Zanchy.
. Some have had their faces so swelled with worldly grief, that they could
hardly look out of their eyes. That weeping is not good which blinds the eye of
faith. If there be not some dawnings of faith in the soul, it is not
humiliation, but despair.

4. Godly sorrow is a great sorrow, Zach. 4.
12. 11. In that day there shall be a great mourning, as the mourning of
Hadadrimmon In crucifixione Christi maximus erat fidelium Planctus, qualis fuit
in caede Iosiae, qui fuit Proavus and Typus Christi. Hierom.
. Two Suns did set that day when Josiah died, and there was a great Funeral
mourning. To such an height must sorrow for sin be boiled up.

-- Pectore ab imo suspiria -- Quest. Whether have all the same degrees of
sorrow?

Answ. No; sorrow does recipere magis and minus. In the new birth all have
pangs, but some have sharper pangs than others. 1. Some are naturally of a more
rugged morose disposition, of higher spirits, and are not easily brought to
stoop; these must have greater humiliation: As a knotty piece of timber must
have greater wedges driven into it. 2. Some have been more heinous offenders,
and suitable to their sin must their sorrow be. Some Patients have their sores
let out with a needle, others with a lance. Flagitious sinners must be more
bruised with the hammer of the Law. 3. Some are designed and cut out for higher
service, to be eminently instrumental for God; and these must have a mightier
work of humiliation pass upon them. Such as God intends to be Pillars in his
Church, must be more hewn. Paul the Prince of the Apostles, who was to be Gods
Ensign-bearer, to carry his Name before the Gentiles and Kings Act. 9. 15.
, was to have his heart more deeply launced by Repentance.

2. But how great must sorrow for sin be Quest. 2.
in all?

It must be as great as for any worldly Answ. 1.
loss.

-- Turgescunt lumina fletu -- * Propert.
Zach. 12. 10. They shall look on me whom they have peirced, and mourn as for
an only Son Planctu quasi super unigenitum pro Christi primogenito* Lap.
. 2. Sorrow for sin must surpass worldly sorrow. We must grieve more for
offending God, than for the loss of dear relations, Isa. 22. 12. In that day
did the Lord call to weeping, and baldness, and girding with sackcloth. This
was for sin. But in case of the burial of the dead, we find God prohibiting
tears Jer. 22. 10.
and baldness Jer. 16. 6.
: To intimate that sorrow for sin must exceed sorrow at the grave; and good
reason, for in the burial of the dead, it is only a friend departs, but in sin
God departs.

3. Sorrow for sin should be so great as to swallow up all other sorrow. As
when the pain of the Stone and Gout meet, the pain of the Stone swallows up the
pain of the Gout.

4. We are to find as much bitterness in weeping for sin, as ever we found
sweetness in committing it. Sure David found more bitterness in Repentance,
than ever he found comfort in Bathsheba.

5. Our sorrow for sin must be such as makes us willing to let go those sins
which brought in the greatest income of profit or delight. Then the Physic
has been strong enough, when it has purged out the disease: And then a
Christian has arrived at a sufficient measure of sorrow, when the love of sin
is purged out.

Godly sorrow in some cases is joined with restitution. Debent contritio
cordis, and satisfactio operis coalescere.
Whosoever has wronged others in their estate, by unjust fraudulent dealing,
ought in conscience to make them recompense. There is an express Law for this,
Numb. 5. 7. He shall recompense his trespass (...)
, with the principal thereof, and give it unto him against whom he has
trespassed. Thus Zacheus, Luke 19. 8. If I have wronged any man by false
accusation (...), quae ex calumnia ac^uisivi. Euthymius.
, I restore him ^our-sold. When Selymus the great* Turk lay upon his deathbed,
being moved by Pyrrhus to bestow that wealth he had wronged the Persian
Merchants of, upon charitable uses, he commanded, it should rather be sent back
to the right owners Turkish History.
. Shall not a Christians Creed be better than a Turks Alcoran. It Is a bad sign
when a man on his deathbed bequeaths his soul to God, and his ill-gotten goods
to his friends. I can hardly think God will receive his soul. Austin says,
without restitution, no remission Non remittitur peccatum, nisi restituatur
ablatum.
. And it was a speech of old Latimer, if ye restore not goods unjustly gotten,
ye shall cough in Hell.

1. But suppose a person has wronged another Quest. 1.
in his estate, and the party wronged be dead, what shall he do in this case?

Let him restore his ill-gotten goods to Answ.
that man's heirs and successors. Qu. But what if none of them be living? Answ.
Let him restore to God; that is, let him put his unjust gain into Gods treasury
by relieving the poor.

2. But what if the party who did the wrong Quest. 2.
be dead?

Then they who are his heirs ought to Answ.
make restitution. Mark what I say, if there be any who have estates left them,
and they knew that the parties who left their estates did defraud others, and
died with that guilt upon them, then the Heirs or Executors who possess those
estates, are bound in conscience to make restitution, else they entail the
curse of God upon their family.

3. But if a man has wronged another, Quest. 3.
and he be not able to restore, what shall he do in this case?

Let him deeply humble himself before Answ.
God, promising to the party wronged (if the Lord make him able) full
satisfaction, and God will accept of the will for the deed.

6. Godly sorrow is abiding. It is not 6.
a few tears shed in a passion will serve the turn: Some at a Sermon will fall
a weeping, but it is like an April shower soon over: Or like a vein opened and
presently stopped again: But true sorrow must be habitual. Oh Christian, the
disease of thy soul is Chronical, and is frequently returning upon thee,
therefore thou must be continually physicking thy selfby Repentance: And this
is that sorrow which is (...), after a godly manner.

How far are they from Repentance Use.
who never had any of this godly sorrow! Such are 1. The Papists, who leave out
the very soul of Repentance; making all penitential work consist in fasting,
penance, pilgrimages; but there is nothing of spiritual sorrow in this; they
torture their bodies, but their hearts are not rent. What is this but the
carcass of Repentance?

2. Carnal Protestants, who are strangers to godly sorrow; they cannot endure a
serious thought, nor do they love to trouble their heads about sin. Paracelsus
speaks of a Frenzy some have, which will make them die dancing. So sinners
spend their lives in mirth; they sing away sorrow, and go dancing to damnation.
Some have lived many years, yet never put a drop in Gods bottle, nor do they
know what a broken heart means: they weep and wring their hands, as if they
were undone, when their estates are gone, but have no agony of soul for sin.

There is a twofold sorrow; 1. A rational sorrow, which is an act of the soul,
whereby it has a displacency against sin, and chooses any torture rather than
to admit of sin. 2. There is a sensitive sorrow, which is expressed by plenty
of tears. The first of these is to be found in every child of God; but the
other, which is a sorrow running out at the eye, all have not: yet it is very
commendable to see a weeping penitent. Christ counts those the great beauties
which are tender-eyed; and well may sin make us weep. We usually weep for the
loss of some great good: By sin we have lost the favor of God. If Micah did so
weep for the loss of a false God, Judge. 18. 24. Ye have taken away my gods, and
what have I more? Then well may we weep for our sins, which have taken away the
true God from us.

SECTION III.
3. THE third Ingredient in Repentance, 3 Ingredient.
is confession of sin. Sorrow Confessio o^is.
is such a vehement passion as will have vent: it vents it self at the eyes by
weeping, and at the tongue by confession, Neh. 9. 2. The children of Israel
stood and confessed their sins, Hos. 5. 15. I will go and return to my place,
till they acknowledge their sins. It Is a metaphor alludes to a Mother, who when
she is angry, goes away from the child, and hides her face, till the child
acknowledges its fault, and begs pardon. Gregory Nazianzene calls confession,
a salve for a wounded soul.

Confession is a self accusing, 2 Samuel 24. 17. Lo, I have sinned. Indeed among
men it is otherwise: no man is bound to accuse himself, but desires to see his
accuser; but when we come before God we must accuse our selves:

-- me me adsum qui feci in me convertite Ferrum -- And the truth is, by this
self-accusing we prevent Satan's accusing. In our confessions we tax our selves
of pride, infidelity, passion; now when Satan (who is called The Accuser of the
Brethren) shall ^ay these things to our charge, God will say, They have accused
themselves already, therefore Satan, thou art nonsuited, thy accusations come
too late. Nay, the humble sinner does more than accuse himself; he does as it
were (...), sit in Judgment, and pass a sentence upon himself; he confesses
that he has deserved to be bound over to the wrath of God. And hear what the
Apostle says, 1 Cor. 11. 31. If we would judge our selves, we should not be
judged Neque judicio, quod poenitentiae humanae severitas protulit, aliquid
justitia coelestis apponit. Cyprion.
.

But have not wicked men confessed sin, as Judas and Saul? yes, but theirs was
not a true confession. That confession of sin may be right and genuine, these
eight qualifications are requisite.

1. It must be voluntary Est actus animi elicitus. ^ltingst.
; it must come 1.
as water out of a spring, freely. The confession of the wicked is extorted,
like the confession of a man upon a rack. When a spark of Gods wrath flies into
their conscience, or they are in fear of death, then they will fall to their
confessions. Balaam, when he saw the Angels naked sword, could say, I have
sinned, Numb. 22. 34. But true confession drops from the lips, as myrrh from
the tree, or honey from the comb, freely, Luke 15. 18. I have sinned against
Heaven and before thee. He charged himself with sin, before his Father charged
him with it.

2. Confession must be with compunction; 2.
the heart must deeply resent it Agnitio, conscientiae Angustias excitat,
pecca^orem prosternit, ut ^e misericordia ind^gnum judicet. Baldwin.
. A natural man's confessions run through him, as water through a pipe; they do
not at all affect him: but true confession leaves heart-wounding impressions on
a man. David's soul was burdened in the confession of his sins, Psalm. 38. 4. As
an heavy burden, they are too heavy for me. It is one thing to confess sin, and
another thing to feel sin.

3. Confession must be sincere: our 3.
hearts must go along with our confessions. The hypocrite confesses sin, but
loves it; like a thief that confesses stolen goods, yet loves stealing. How
many confess pride and covetousness with their lips, but ^oul them as honey
under their tongue. Austin says before his conversion he confessed sin, and
begged power against it, but his heart whispered within him, not yet Lord Non
adhuc Domine. Aug. Confess.
; he was afraid to leave his sin too soon. A good Christian is more honest; his
heart keeps pace with his tongue; he is convinced of the sins he confesses,
and abhors the sins he is convinced of.

4. In true confession a man does particularize 4.
sin. A wicked man acknowledges he is a sinner in general; he confesses sin
by wholesale; his confession of sin is much like Nebuchadnezzars dream, Dan.
2. 3. I have dreamed a dream; but he could not tell what it was, verse. 5. The
thing is gone from me. So says a wicked man, Lord, I have sinned, but he does
not know what the sin is, at least not remember: whereas a true convert
acknowledges his particular sins. As it is with a wounded man, he comes to the
Chyrurgion, and shows him all his wounds; here I was cut in the head, there I
was shot in the arm: So a mournful sinner confesses the several distempers of
his soul. Israel drew up a particular charge against themselves, Judge. 10. 10.
We have served Baalim. The Prophet Daniel recites the very sin which drew a
curse along with it, Dan. 9, 6. Neither have we hearkened unto thy servants the
Prophets which spoke in thy Name. By a diligent inspection into our hearts we
may find some particular sin indulged, point that sin with a tear.

5. A true penitent confesses sin in the 5.
fountain: he acknowledges the pollution of his nature. The sin of our nature
is not only a privation of good, but an infusion of evil: It is like Canker to
Iron, or a Stain to Scarlet Ut morbus non simpliciter privatio est sanitatis,
sed positio qualitatis contrariae. Chamier de hom. corrupt. Tom. 3.
. David acknowledges his birth-sin, Psa. 51.5. I was shapen in iniquity, and
in sin did my Mother conceive me -- Quantumvis legitimus sit Thorus, aliqua
tamen ratione cubile est inquinatum.
etiam embrioni haeserit peccatum -- We are ready to charge many of our sins
upon Satan's temptations; but this sin of our nature is wholly from our selves,
we cannot shift it off to Satan: we have a root within that bears gall and
wormwood, Deuteronomy. 29. 18. Our nature is (...), an abyss and seminary of all
evil; from hence come those scandals that infest the world. It Is this pravity
of nature which poisons our holy things; it is this which wings Gods judgments,
and makes our mercies stick in the birth. O confess sin in the fountain!

6. Sin is to be confessed with all its 6.
circumstances and aggravations: those sins doubtless are dyed in grain which
are committed under the Gospel horison. Confess sins against knowledge, against
grace, against vows, against experiences, against judgments, Psalm. 78. 31. The
wrath of God came upon them, and slew the fattest of them; for all this they
sinned yet still. These are killing aggravations which do accent and inhance
our sins.

7. In confession we must so charge 7.
our selves as to clear God; should the Lord be severe in his providence, and
unsheath his bloody sword, yet we must acquit him, and acknowledge he has done
us no wrong. Nehemiah in his confessing of sin, vindicates Gods righteousness,
Nehem. 9. 33. Howbeit thou art just in all that is brought upon us. Mauritius
the Emperor, when he saw his wife slain before his eyes by Phocas, cried out,
Righteous art thou O Lord in all thy ways.

8. We must confess our sins with a resolution 8.
not to act them over again. Some run from the confessing of sin, to the
committing of sin. Like the Persians, who have one day in the year wherein they
use to kill Serpents, and after that day suffer them to swarm again Brissonius.
. So many seem to kill their sins in their confessions, and afterward let them
grow as fast as ever, Isa. 1. 16. Cease to do evil. It Is vain to confess, we
have done those things which we ought not to have done, and continue still in
doing so. Pharaoh confessed he had sinned, Exodus 9. 27. But when the thunder
ceased, he fell to his sin again, verse. 33. He sinned yet more, and hardened his
heart. Origin calls confession, the vomit of the soul, whereby the conscience
is eased of that burden did lie upon it: Now when we have vomited up sin by
confession, we must not return to this vomit. What King will pardon that man,
who after he has confessed his treason, practices new treason? Thus we see
how confession must be qualified.

Is confession a necessary Ingredient in Use 1. Reproof.
Repentance? then here is a Bill of Indictment against four sorts of persons.

1. It reproves those that hide their 1 Branch.
sins: as Rachel hid her Fathers Images under her, Genesis 31. 34. Many had rather
have their sins covered, than cured: They do with their sins, as with their
pictures, draw a curtain over them; or as some do with their Bastards, smother
them. But though men will have no tongue to confess; God has an eye to see, he
will unmask their treason (...). Ignatius.
, Psalm. 50. 21. I will reprove thee, and set them in order before thee. Those
iniquities which men hide in their heart, shall be written one day on their
forehead as with the point of a Diamond. They who would not confess sin as
David, that they might be pardoned, shall confess sin as Achan, that they may
be stoned. It Is dangerous to keep the Devils counsel, Prove. 28. 13. He that
covers his sin shall not prosper.

2. It reproves them, who do indeed confess 2 Branch.
sin, but it is by halves; they do not confess all; they confess the pence, but
not the pounds; they confess vain thoughts, or badness of memory, but not the
sins they are most guilty of; as rash anger, extortion, uncleanness. Like him
in Plutarch, who complained his stomach was not very good, when his lungs were
bad, and his liver rotten. But if we do not confess all, how do we think God
will pardon all? It Is true, we cannot know the exact catalogue of our sins, but
the sins which come within our view and cognizance, and which our hearts accuse
us of, must be confessed as ever we hope for mercy.

It reproves them who do in their confessions 3 Branch.
mince and extenuate their sins. A gracious soul labors to make the worst of
his sins, hypocrites make the best of them; they do not deny they are sinners,
but yet do what they can to lessen their sins; they indeed offend sometimes,
but it is their nature, and it is long of such occasions. These are rather
excuses than confessions, 1 Samuel 15. 24. I have sinned, I have transgressed the
commandment of the Lord, because I feared the people. Saul lays his sin upon
the people. They would have him spare the Sheep and Oxen. 'Twas an Apology, not
a self-indictment. This runs in a blood. Adam acknowledges he did taste the
forbidden fruit, but instead of aggravating his sin, he translates it from
himself to God, Genesis 3. 12. The woman whom thou gave me, she gave me of the
Tree, and I did eat: If I had not had this woman to be a tempter, I had not
transgressed.

-- inscripsere deos sceleri Ovid.
--. That is a bad sin indeed that has no excuse: as it must needs be a very
course Wool which will take no dye. How apt are we to pare and curtail sin,
and look upon it through the small end of the perspective, that it appears but
as a little cloud, like the bigness of a man's hand, 1 King. 18. 44.

It reproves them who are so far from confessing sin, that they boldly plead
Non solum peccat^ non lugent, sed procaci front patrocinantur.
4 Branch.
for it: Instead of having tears to lament it, they use Arguments to defend it.
If their sin be passion, they will justify it, Jonah 9. 4. I do well to be
angry. If it be covetousness, they will vindicate it. When men commit sin, they
are the Devils Servants; when they plead for it, they are the Devils Attorneys,
and he will give them a fee.

2. Let us show our selves penitents by sincere confession of sin. The Thief on
Use 2. Exhortation.
the Cross made a confession of his sin, Luke 23. 41. We indeed suffer justly.
And Christ says to him, This day shall thou be with me in Paradise: Which
possibly might occasion that speech of Austin, that confession of sin shuts the
mouth of Hell, and opens the gate of Paradise. That we may make a free and
ingenuous confession of sin, let us consider,

Holy confession gives glory to God, Josh. 7. 19. My Son, give I pray thee
glory to God, I.
the God of Israel, and make confession unto him. An humble confession exalts
God: What a glory is it to him, that out of our own mouths he does not condemn
us? While we confess sin, Gods patience is magnified in sparing, and his
free grace in saving such sinners.

Confession is a means to humble the soul* He that subscribes himself an
Hell-deserving sinner, will have little heart to be proud: with the Violet he
will hang down his head in humility. A true penitent confesses he mingles sin
with all he does, therefore has nothing to boast of. Uzziah, though a King,
yet having a Leprosy in his forehead, he had enough to abase him, 2 Chronicles. 26.
19. So a child of a God, though he does any good, yet acknowledges much evil
to be in that good; this lays all his feathers of pride in the dust.

Confession gives vent to a troubled 3.
heart. When guilt lies boiling in the conscience, confession gives ease. It is
like the lancing of an Imposthume, which gives ease to the Patient.

Confession purges out sin. Austin 4.
calls it, the Expeller of vice. Sin is a bad blood; confession is like the
opening of a vein to let it out. Confession is like the dung-gate, by which all
the filth of the City was carried forth, Nehem. 3. 13. Confession is like
pumping at the leak, it lets out that sin which would else drown. Confession is
the sponge that wipes off* Solvit criminum nexus verecunda confessio. Ambros.
the spots of the soul.

Confession of sin endears Christ to the soul. If I say. I am a sinner, how
precious will Christ's blood be to me! When Paul had confessed a body of sin, he
presently breaks forth into a gratulatory triumph for Christ, Romans 7. 25.
Thanks be to God through Jesus Christ (...)* etc.
. If a debtor confess a Judgment, yet the creditor will not exact the debt,
but appoint his own Son to pay it, will not the debtor be very thankful? So
when we confess the de^ and that though we should for ever (...) in Hell we
cannot pay it; that God should appoint his own Son to lay down his blood for
the payment of our debt, how is free grace magnified, and Jesus Christ
eternally loved and admired!

Confession of sin makes way for 6.
pardon Dum agnoscit homo, ignoscit Deus. Austin.
. No sooner did the Prodigal come with a confession in his mouth, I have sinned
against Heaven, but his Fathers heart did melt toward him, and he kissed him,
Luke 15. 20. When David said, I have sinned, the Prophet brings him a box with
a pardon, The Lord has put away thy sin, 2 Samuel 12. 13. Tres tantum syllabae,
peccavi, sed in his syl^abis flamma sacrificii coram Deo ascendit in Coelum.
Aug. Tom. 10. Ho^. 41.
He who does sincerely confess sin, has Gods bond for a pardon, 1 Ioh. 1. 9.
If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins. Why
does not the Apostle say, if we confess, he is merciful to forgive our sins?
no, but he is just; because he has bound himself by promise to forgive such.
He who confesses sin, and comes with a penitent heart by faith in Christ, En
habes confi^entem reum, habeam igitur remittentem Deum.
Gods truth and justice is engaged for the pardoning of that man. D. Rivet.


How reasonable and easy is this command, 7.
that we should confess sin!

1. It is a reasonable command. For if one has wronged another, what more
rational than to confess he has wronged him? We having wronged God by sin, how
equal and consonant to reason is it that we should confess the offense.

2. It is an easy command. What a vast difference is there between the first
Covenant and the second. In the first Covenant it was, If thou committest sin
thou die; In the second Govenant it is, If thou confessest sin thou shall
have mercy. In the first Covenant no surety was allowed, under the Covenant of
Grace, if we do but confess the debt, Christ will be our Surety. What way could
be thought of more ready and facile for the salvation of man, than an humble
confession? Ier. 3. 13. Only acknowledge thy iniquity. I do not ask for
sacrifices of Ramms to expiate thy guilt; I do not bid thee part with the fruit
of thy body, for the sin of thy soul, Only acknowledge thy iniquity. Do but
draw up an Indictment against thy self, and plead guilty, and thou shall be
sure of mercy.

Methinks all this should render this duty amiable. Throw out the poison of sin
by confession, and this day is salvation come to thy house Exhomologesis
expultrix est vitiorum, pavor inferni, animarum salus. Aug. ad Fratr. in Eremo.
. Let this suffice to have spoken of our confession of sin to God. Only there
remains one case of conscience.

Whether we are bound to confess our sins to Quest.
men? The Papists insist much upon auricular confession Durandus. Tho. Aquinas.
. That one must confess his sins in the ear of the Priest, or he cannot be
absolved. They urge that, Iam. 5. 16. Confess your sins one to another. But
this Scripture makes little for their purpose Non dicit, confitemini suo
quisque Sacerdoti, and absolvemini ab illis, ^ed alter alteri. Musculus.
. It may as well be meant that the Priest should confess to the people, as the
people to the Priest. Auricular confession is one of the Popes Golden
Doctrines: Like the Fish in the Gospel, it has money in its mouth, Matthew. 17.
27. When thou have opened his mouth, thou shall find a piece of money. But
though I am not for confession to men in a Popish sense, yet I think in three
cases there ought to be confession to men.

1. In case a person has fallen into a 1.
scandalous sin, and by it has been an occasion of offense to some, and of
falling to others, Scandalum contristationis and lapsus.
he ought to make a solemn and open acknowledgement of his sin, that his
repentance may be as visible as his scandal, 2 Cor. 2. 6, 7.

2. In case a man has confessed his sin 2.
to God, yet still his conscience is burdened, and he can have no ease in his
mind, it is very requisite that he should confess his sins to some prudent
pious friend that may advise him, and speak a word in due season, Iam. 5. 17.
It is a sinful modesty in Christians, that they are no more free with their
Ministers, Ad hoc nobis a Deo Pa^re instituti sunt Ministri verbi, ut
quotiescunque conscientia nostra peccatis affligitur, consolationeque indiget,
ad ipsos tanquam ad praesentes Christi legatos recurramus. Zanchy de poenit.
and other spiritual friends, in disburdening themselves, and opening the sores
and troubles of their souls to them. If there be a thorn sticking in the
conscience, it is good to make use of those who may help to pluck it out.

3. In case any man has slandered another, 3.
Jer. 9. 4.
and by clipping his good name, has made it weigh lighter, he is bound to make
confession. The Scorpion carries his poison in his tail; the slanderer in his
tongue; his words pierce deep like the quills of the Porcupine. That person who
has murdered another in his good name, or by bearing false witness, has
damaged him in his estate, ought to confess his sin, and ask forgiveness,
Matthew. 5. 24. If thou bring thy gift to the Altar, and there remembrest that
thy Brother has ought against thee, Si nos eum in ^liquo laesi^us. Augustine.
de Se^rm. Dom. in mont. (...). 1.
go thy way, first be reconciled to thy Brother, and then come and offer thy
gift. How can this reconciliation be but by confessing the injury? Till this be
done, God will accept of none of thy services: Do not think the holiness of the
Altar will privilege thee; thy praying and hearing is in vain, till thou have
by confessing thy fault to thy Brother appeased his anger.

SECT. IV.
4. THE fourth Ingredient into Repentance, 4 Ingredient.
is, shame, Ezekiel. 43. 10. Pudor vultus.
That they may be ashamed of their iniquities. Blushing is the color of virtue
(...). (...).
. When the heart has been made black with sin, grace makes the face red with
blushing, Ezra 9. 6. I am ashamed and blush to lift up my face. The repenting
Prodigal was so ashamed of his excess, that he thought himself not worthy to be
called a Son any more, Luke 15. 21. Repentance causes an holy bashfulness. If
Christ's blood were not at the heart, there would not so much blood come in the
face. There are nine Considerations about sin may cause shame.

1. Every sin makes us guilty, and guilt 1.
usually breeds shame. Adam never blushed in the time of Innocence; while he
kept the whiteness of the Lilly, he had not the blushing of the Rose; but when
he had defloured his soul by sin, then he was ashamed: Sin has tainted our
blood, we are guilty of High Treason against the Crown of Heaven. This may
cause an holy modesty and blushing.

2* In every sin there is much unthankfulness, 2.
and that is matter of shame. He who is upbraided with ingratitude will blush;
we have sinned against God when he has given us no cause, Ier. 2. 5. What
iniquity have your Fathers found in me? Wherein has God wearied us, unless his
mercies have wearied us? O the silver drops that have fallen on us! we have had
the finest of the Wheat, we have been fed with Angels food: The golden Oil of
Divine Blessing has run down on us from the head of our heavenly Aaron. And to
abuse the kindness of so good a God, how may this make us ashamed! Caesar took
it unkindly at the hands of Brutus, on whom he had bestowed so many favors;
when he came to stab him; What thou my Son Brutus? O ungrateful to be worse for
mercy! Aelian reports of the Vulture, that it draws sickness from perfumes
Aelian. lib. 3. de animal.
So to contract the disease of pride and luxury from the perfume of Gods mercy,
how unworthy is it? What to requite evil for good? to kick against our feeder?
Aries cornibus ferit pascentem.
Deuteronomy. 32. 15. To make an Arrow of Gods mercies, and shoot at him, to wound him
with his own blessing, Aquila ex sagitta de suisme^ pennis concinnata periit.
Pier. Hyerogl.
O horrid ingratitude! Will not this dye our faces of a deep Scarlet?
Unthankfulness is a sin so great, that God himself stands amazed at it, Isa. 1.
2. Hear O Heavens, and give ear O Earth, I have nourished and brought up
children, and they have rebelled against me. And surely that sin which makes
God wonder, may make us blush.

3. Sin has made us naked, and that 3.
may breed shame. Sin has stripped us of our white Linen of Holiness; it has
made us naked and deformed in Gods eye, which may cause blushing. When Hanun
had abused David's servants, and cut off their garments, so that their nakedness
did appear, the text says, The men were greatly ashamed. 2 Samuel 10. 5.

4. Our sins have put Christ to shame (...). Heb. 12. 2.
, and shall not we be ashamed? The Jews 4.
arrayed him in Purple, they put a Reed in his hand, spat in his face, and in
his greatest Agonies reviled him: Here was the shame of the Cross, and that
which aggravated the shame, was to consider the eminency of his person, as he
was the Son of God, and the innocence of his life, as he was the Lamb of God.
Did our sins put Christ to shame, and shall they not put us to shame? Did he
wear the Purple, and shall not our cheeks wear Crimson? Who can behold the Sun
as it were blushing at Christ's passion, and hiding it self in an eclipse, and
his face not blush? 5.


5. Many sins which we commit, are by the special instigation of the Devil, and
will not this cause shame? The Devil put it into Judas his heart to betray
Christ, Ioh. 13. 2. He filled Ananias heart to lie, Act. 5. 3. He often stirs
up our passions, Iam. 3. 6. Now, as it is a shame to bring forth a child
illegitimate; so to bring forth such sins as may call the Devil Father. It Is
said, the Virgin Mary conceived by the power of the Holy Ghost, Luke 2. 35. But
we often conceive by the power of Satan. When the heart conceives pride, lust,
malice, it is very often by the power of the Devil. May not this make us
ashamed to think that many of our sins are committed (...) (...) with the old
Serpent.

6. Sin like Cyrcies enchanting cup, turns 6.
men into beasts, and is not that matter of shame? Psa. 49. 12. Sinners are
compared to Foxes, Luke 13. 32. Wolves, Mat. 7. 15. Asses, Job 11. 12. Swine, 2
Pet. 2. 22. A sinner is a Swine with a man's head. He who was once in dignity
little less than the Angels, is now become like the beasts. Grace in this life
does not wholly obliterate this brutish temper. Agur that good man cries out,
Sure I am more brutish than any, Prove. 30. 2. But common sinners are in a
manner wholly bruitified; they do not act rationally, but are transported by
the violence of their lusts and passions. How may this make us ashamed, who are
thus degenerated below our own species? Our sins have taken away that noble,
masculine spirit which once we had. The Crown is fallen from our head. Gods
Image is defaced, reason is ecclipsed, conscience stupefied. We have more in us
of the brute, than the Angel.

7. In every sin there is folly, Ier. 4. 22. 7.
A man will be ashamed of his folly. Is not he a fool that labors more for
the bread that perishes, than for the bread of life? Is not he a fool, that
for a lust or trifle will lose Heaven? Like Tiberius, who for a draught of
drink, forfeited his Kingdom? Is not he a fool, that will to safeguard his
body, injure his soul? As if one should let his arm or head be cut to save his
Vest.

-- naviget antyciras -- * ^orace.
Is not he a fool that will believe a temptation before a promise? Is not he a
fool that minds his recreation more than his salvation? How may this make men
ashamed to think, that they inherit not so much Land as folly, Prove. 14. 18.

8. That which may make us blush, is, 8.
that the sins we commit are far worse than the sins of the Heathen: we act
against more light: To us have been committed the Oracles of God. The same sin
committed by a Christian, is worse than by an Indian, because he sins against
clearer conviction; which is like the Dye to the Wool, or the weight put into
the scale, which makes it weigh heavier.

9. Our sins are worse than the sins of 9.
the Devils. 1. The lapsed Angels never sinned against Christ's blood; Christ
died not for them; the medicine of his merit was never intended to heal them;
but we have affronted and disparaged his blood by unbelief.

2. The Devils never sinned against Gods patience; as soon as they apostatized
they were damned: God never waited for the Angels Deus non expectavit Angelos.
B^rn.
: but we have spent upon the stock of Gods patience; he has pitied our
weakness, born with our frowardness; his Spirit has been repulsed, yet has
still importuned us, and would take no denial: Our carriage has been so
provoking, as would have tired not only the patience of a Moses, but of all the
Angels. We have put God to it, and made him weary of repenting, Ier. 15. 6.

3. The Devils never sinned against example; they were the first that sinned,
and were made the first example. We have seen the Angels, those morning Stars,
fall from their glorious Orb; we have seen the old world drowned, Sodom burnt,
yet have ventured upon sin. How desperate is that thief, who robs in the ^ery
place where his fellow hangs in chains; and surely if we have out-sinn'd the
Devils, it may well put us to the blush. Use 1.


1. Is shame an Ingredient into Repentance, then how far are they from being
penitents, who have no shame? many have sinned away shame, Zeph. 3. 5. The
unjust knows no shame (...). Chrysostom.
. It is a great shame not to be ashamed; the Lord sets it as a brand upon the
Jews, Ier. 6. 15. Were they ashamed when they committed abomination; nay, they
were not at all ashamed, neither could they blush *. The Devil has (...)
nescierunt erubescere.
stolen shame from men. When one of the Persecutors in Queen Mary's time Dr.
Story
was upbraided with his bloodiness to the Martyrs; I see nothing (says he) to
be ashamed of. Many are no more ashamed of their sin, than King Nebuchadnezzar
was of his being turned to grass. When men have hearts of Stone, and foreheads
of Brass, it is a sign the Devil has taken full possession of them Illum
periisse dico, cui periit pudor* Salust.
. There is no creature capable of shame but man: the bruit beasts are capable
of fear and pain, but not capable of shame: you cannot make a beast blush: such
do too much resemble the beasts who cannot blush for sin.

1. There are some so far from this holy blushing, that they are proud of their
sins; they are proud of their long hair: These are the Devils Nazarites, 1 Cor.
11. 14. Does not nature it self teach you, that if a man have long hair, it is
a shame to him? It confounds the distinction of sexes. Others are proud of
their black spots; and what if God should turn them into blew spots?

2. Others are so far from being ashamed of sin, that they glory in their sins,
Phil. 3. 19. Who glory in their shame (...). Pythagoras cum quendam audiret
dicentem, malle se inter mulieres quam Philosophos versari; sues inquit, malunt
in coeno, quam in lympidis aquis versari.
. Some are ashamed of that which is their glory; they are ashamed to be seen
with a good Book in their hand; others glory in that which ^s their shame: They
look on sin as a piece of gallantry: the sweare^ thinks his speech most
graceful, when it is interlarded with oaths: The drunkar^ counts it a glory,
that he is mighty t^ drink, Isa. 5. 22. But when men shall b^ cast into a fiery
furnace, heat seven times hotter by the breath of the Almighty, the^ let them
boast of sin as they see cause.

2. Let us show our penitency by Use 2.
modest blushing, Ezra 9. 6. O my God, Exhort.
blush to lift up my face. My God, there was faith; I blush, there was
repentance. Hypocrites will confidently avouch God to be their God, but they
know not how to blush. O let us take holy shame to our selves for sin Ille
demum sacrae Philosophiae primotdiis imbutus est, qui sibi serio displicet,
eumque sui pudeat, ac verecundia confundi didicit. Calvin.
. Be assured, the more we are ashamed of sin now, the less we shall be ashamed
at Christ's coming. If the sins of the godly be mentioned at the day of
Judgment, it will not be to shame them, but to magnify the riches of Gods
grace in pardoning them. Indeed the wicked shall be ashamed at the last day,
they shall sneak and hang down their heads, but the Saints shall then be as
without spot, Ephesians. 5. 27. so without shame; therefore they are bid to lift up
their heads, Luke 21. 28.

SECT. V.
5. THE fifth Ingredient unto Repentance, 5 Ingredient.
is hatred of sin. The Odium ^nimi.
Schoolmen distinguish of a twofold hatred.

The Doctrine of Repentance.

Odium Abominationis, and Odium Inimicitiae.

1. There is an hatred of Abomination, 1 Odium Abominationis.
or loathing, Ezekiel. 36. 31. Ye shall loath your selves for your iniquities. A
true penitent is a sin-loather. If a man loath that which makes his stomach
sick, much more that which makes his conscience sick: It Is more to loath sin,
than to leave it. One may leave sin for fear, as in a storm the Plate and
Jewels are cast overboard: but the nauseating and loathing of sin, argues a
detestation of it. Christ is never loved, till sin be loathed. Heaven is never
longed for, till sin be loathed. When the soul sees an issue of blood running,
he cries out, Lord, when shall I be freed from this body of death? When shall I
put off these filthy garments of sin, and have the fair mitre of glory set upon
my head Zach. 3. 4, 5
? Let all our self-love be turned into self-loathing. We are never more
precious in Gods eyes, than when we are lepers in our own.

2. There is an hatred of Enmity. There 2 Odium Inimicitiae.
is no better way to discover life than by motion: The eye moves, the pulse
beats. So to discover Repentance, there is no better sign, than by an holy
antipathy against sin. Hatred (says Cicero) is anger boiled up to an
inveteracy Odium est ira inveterata. Cicero l. 4. Tusc. qu.
. Sound Repentance begins in the love of God, and ends in the hatred of sin.

But how may true hatred of sin be known? Quest.


1. When a man's spirit is set against Answ. 1.
sin. The tongue does not only inveigh against sin, but the heart abhors it Ut
vitis refugit brassicam, quercus ab olea abhorret, ita poenitens a peccato.
Erasm.
. So that let sin be never so curiously painted, it is odious. As we abhor the
picture of one whom we mortally hate, though it be exactly drawn.

-- Non amo te Sabidi -- Suppose a dish be finely cooked, and the sauce good,
yet if a man has an antipathy against the meat, he will not taste it. So let
the Devil cook and dress sin with pleasure and profit, yet a true penitent
having a secret abhorrency of it, does disgust it, and will not meddle with it.

2. True hatred of sin is universal; and 2.
that two ways. In respect

1. Of the Faculties. 2. Of the Object.
1. Hatred is universal in respect of the Faculties: That is, there is a
dislike of sin, not only in the judgment, but in the will and affections: For
many an one is convinced that sin is a vile thing, and in his judgment has an
aversation from it, but yet he tastes sweetness, and has a secret complacency
in it. Here is a disliking sin in the judgment, and an embracing it in the
affections Vid^o meliora p^oboque, deterio^a sequor. Ovid.
: Whereas in true Repentance, the hatred of sin is in all the faculties; not
only in the intellectual part, but chiefly in the will, Romans 7. 15. What I
hate, that do I. Paul was not free from sin, yet his will was against it.

2. Hatred is universal in respect of the Object. He that hates one sin, hates
all. Aristotle says, hatred is against the whole kind (...). Arist. (...).
. He that hates a Serpent, hates all Serpents, Psalm. 119. 104. I hate every
false way. Hypocrites will hate some sins which do eclipse their credit, but a
true convert hates all sins; gainful sins, complexion-sins, the very stirrings
of corruption. Paul hated the motions of sin, Romans 7. 23.

3. True hatred is against sin quatenus sin. An holy heart detests sin for its
int^nsick pollution. Sin leaves a^ain upon the soul. A regenerate person abhors
sin, not only for the curse, but the contagion: He hates this Serpent not only
for its s^ing, but its poison: He hates sin not only for Hell, but as Hell.

4. True hatred is implacable, it will never be reconciled to sin any more.
Anger may be reconciled, hatred cannot. Sin is that Amalek, which is never to
be taken into favor again. The war between a child of God and sin, is like the
war between those two Princes, 1 King. 14. 30. There was war between Rehoboam
and Jeroboam all their days.

5. Where there is a real hatred, we do not only oppose sin in our selves, but
in others. The Church of Ephesus could not bear with them that were evil, Rev.
2. 2. Paul sharply censured Peter for his dissimulation, though he were an
Apostle. Christ in an holy displacency whipped the money changers out of the
Temple, Ioh. 2. 15. He would not suffer the Temple to be made an Exchange.
Nehemiah rebuked the Nobles for their Usury, Neh. 5. 7. And their
Sabbath-prophanation, Neh. 13. 7. A sin-hater will not endure wickedness in his
family, Psalm. 101. 7. He that works deceit shall not dwell in my house. What
a shame is it when Magistrates can show height of spirit in their passions, but
no heroic spirit in suppressing vice. Such as have no antipathy against sin,
are strangers to Repentance: Sin is in them, as poison in a Serpent, which
being natural, is delightful.

1. How far are they from Repentance, Use 1.
who instead of hating sin, love sin. To the godly sin is as a thorn in the
eye; to the wicked it is as a crown on the head, Ier. 11. 15. When thou do
evil, then thou rejoycest. Loving of sin is worse than committing it. A good
man may run into a sinful action unawares, but to love sin is desperate. What
is it makes a Swine, but loving to tumble in the mire? What is it makes a
Devil, but loving that which opposes God? To love sin shows that the will is
in sin; and the more of the will in a sin, the greater the sin Voluntas est
mensura actionis.
. Wilfulness makes it a sin not to be purged by sacrifice, Heb. 10. 26.

O how many are there that love the forbidden fruit! They love their oaths and
adulteries; they love the sin, and hate the reproof. Solomon speaks of a
generation of men, Eccles. 9. 3. Madness is in their heart while they live. So
for men to love sin, to hug that which will be their death, to sport with
damnation; Madness is in their heart.

It persuades us to show our Repentance Use 2.
by a bitter hatred of sin. There is Exhort.
(...) deadly antipathy between the Scorpion and the Crocodile, such should
there ^e between the heart and sin.

What is there in sin that may make a pe^itent Quest.
hate it?

Sin is the cursed thing*, the most misshapen Answ.
Monster. The Apostle uses a (...) Josh. 7. 13.
very emphatical word to express it, Romans 7. 13. That sin might become
exceeding sinful; or as it is in the Greek, hyperbolically sinful (...).
Perinde est, ac si scelestum scelus dicas. Beza. Peccatum peccaminosum. Erasm.
Eximium. Grotius.
. Now that sin is an hyperbolical mischief, and deserves hatred, will appear,
if we look upon sin in a fourfold notion.

1. Look upon sin in the original of it, whence it comes; it fetches its
pedigree from Hell, 1 Ioh. 3. 8. He that commiteth sin is of the Devil, for the
Devil sins from the beginning. Sin is the Devils proper work. It Is true, God
has a hand in ordering sin, but Satan has an hand in acting it. Now how
hateful is it to be doing that which is the peculiar work of the Devil? nay*
which makes men Devils (...). Ignatius.
. Ioh. 6. 7.

2. Look upon sin in its nature, and it will appear very hateful. See how the
Scripture has pensiled it out. 1. Sin is a dishonouring of God, Romans 2. 23. --
2. Sin is a despising of God, 1 Samuel 2. 30. -- 3. It is a fretting of God,
Ezekiel. 16. 43. -- 4. It is a wearying of God, Isa. 7. 13. -- 5. It is a breaking
the heart of God, Ezekiel. 6. 9. I am broken with your whorish heart; as a loving
husband is with the unchaste carriage of his wife. -- 6. Sin, when acted to the
height, is a crucifying Christ afresh, and putting him to open shame, Heb. 6.
6. That is, impudent sinners pierce Christ in his Saints, and were he now upon
earth, they would crucify him again in his person. Behold the odious nature of
sin.

3. Look upon sin in its comparison, and it appears ghastly. Compare sin either
with affliction, or Hell, and it is worse than both.

1. Compare sin with Affliction; sickness, poverty, death, and it is worse than
these. There Is more malignity in a drop of sin, than in a Sea of affliction. For

Sin is the cause of affliction; and the 1.
cause is more than the effect. The sword of Gods justice lies quiet in the
scabbard ^ill sin draws it out.

Affliction is good for us, Psalm. 119. 71. 2.
It is good for me that I was afflicted. Affliction causes Repentance, 2 Chronicles. 33. 12. The Viper being stricken, casts up its poison. So Gods Rod
striking us, we spit away the poison of sin. Affliction betters our grace. Gold
is purest, and Juniper sweetest in the fire. Affliction prevents damnation, 1
Cor. 11. 32. Therefore Maurice the Emperor prayed to God to punish him in this
life, that he might not be punished hereafter. So that affliction is many ways
for our good Utile est animae si in hac area mundi variis afflictionum
flagellis trituretur corpus. Aug.
; but sin has no good in it. Manasseh's affliction brought him to humiliation,
but Judas his sin brought him to desperation*

Affliction does only reach the body, 3.
but sin goes further, it poisons the fancy, disorders the affections.
Affliction is but corrective, sin is destructive. Affliction can but take away
the life Premi melius est quam perimi.
, sin takes away the soul, Luke 12. 20.

A man that is afflicted may have his 4.
conscience quiet Nihil sentit crus in nervo quando animus est in Coelo. Tertu^.
. When the Ark was tossed on the waves, Noah could sing in the Ark. When the
body is afflicted and tossed, a Christian can make melody in his heart to the
Lord, Ephesians. 5. 19. But when a man commits sin, conscience is terrified;
witness Spira, who upon his abjuring the Faith, said, he thought the damned
spirits did not feel those torments which he inwardly endured.

In affliction one may have the love of 5.
God (...). Chrysostom.
, Rev. 3. 19. If a man should throw a bag of money at another, and in throwing
it should hurt him a little, and raise the skin, he would not take it unkindly,
but look upon it as a fruit of love: So when the Lord bruiseth us with
affliction, it is to enrich us with the golden graces and comforts of his
Spirit; all is in love. But when we commit sin, God withdraws his love. When
David had sinned, he felt nothing but displeasure from God, Psalm. 97. 2. Clouds
and darkness are round about him. David found it so; he could see no Rainbow,
no Sunbeam, nothing but clouds and darkness about Gods face.

That sin is worse than affliction, is evident, 6.
because the greatest judgment God lays upon a man in this life, is to let
him sin without control. When the Lords displeasure is most severely kindled
against a person, he does not say, I will bring the Sword and Plague on this
man, but I will let him sin on, Psalm. 81. 11. So I gave them up to their own
hearts lusts Tradit Deus ut justus Judex. Beza.
. Now if the giving a man up to his sins (in the account of God himself) is the
most dreadful evil, then sin is far worse than affliction; and if it be so,
then how should it be hated by us!

2. Compare sin with Hell, and you shall see that sin is worse. Torment has
its emphasis in Hell, yet nothing there, is of so bad an aspect as sin. 1. Hell
is of Gods making; but sin is none of his making. Sin is the Devils creature.
2. The torments of Hell are a burden only to the sinner, but sin is a burden to
God. Amos 2. 13. I am pressed under you, as a Cart is pressed with sheaves. 3.
In the torments of Hell there is something that is good, namely, the execution
of divine justice. There is justice to be found in Hell: but sin is a piece of
the highest injustice; it would* rob God of his glory, Christ of his purchase,
the soul of its happiness: Judge then if sin be not a most hateful thing, that
is worse than affliction or Hell.

4. Look upon sin in the issue and consequence, and it will appear hateful. 1.


Sin reaches the body; it has exposed it to variety of miseries. We come into
the world with a ^ry, and go out with a groan; which made the Thracians weep
Herodot. lib. 5.
on their childrens birthday, to consider the calamities they were to undergo
in the world. Sin is the Trojan Horse, out of which come a whole Army of
troubles. I need not name them, because almost every one feels them. While we
suck the honey, we are pricked with the briar. Sin gives a dash in the wine of
our comforts; it digs our grave, Romans 5. 12.

Sin reaches the soul: By sin we have 2.
lost the Image of God, wherein did consist both our sanctity and majesty. Adam
in his pristine glory, was like an Herald that has his Coat of Arms upon him;
all reverence him because he carries the Kings Coat of Arms; but pull this Coat
off, and no man regards him. Sin has done this disgrace to us, it has plucked
off our Coat of Innocence; but that is not all; this bearded arrow of sin would
strike yet deeper; it would for ever separate us from the beatifical vision of
God, in whose presence is fullness of joy. If sin then be so hyperbolically
sinful, it may swell our spleen, and stir up our implacable indignation against
it. As Ammons hatred of Tamar was greater than the love wherewith he had loved
her, 2 Samuel 13. 15. So we should hate sin infinitely more than ever we loved it.

SECT. VI.
6. THE sixth Ingredient in Repentance, 6 Ingredient.
is turning from sin. Reformation is left last to bring up the Mutatio vitae.
rear of Repentance. What though one could with Niobe, weep himself into a
stone, if he did not weep out sin? True Repentance, like aqua fortis, eats
asunder the Iron chain of sin; therefore weeping and turning are put together,
Joel 2. 12. After the cloud of sorrow has dropped in tears, the firmament of
the soul is clearer, Ezekiel. 14. 6. Repent and turn your selves from your Idols,
and turn away your faces from all your abominations. This turning from sin is
called a forsaking of sin, Isa. 55. 7. As a man forsakes the company of a thief
or forcerer. It Is called a putting sin far away, Job 11. 14. As Paul* put away
the Viper, and shook it into the fire, Act. 28. 5. Dying to sin is the life of
Repentance Conversio ^it co^punctione mentis, mortificatione carnis, ut i^
mente sit puritas, in carne (...) sobrietas. Hugo de S. Vict.
. That very day a Christian turns from sin, he must enjoin himself a Perpetual
Fast. The eye must fast from impure glances; the ear must fast from hearing
slanders; the tongue must fast from oaths; the hands must fast from bribes; the
feet must fast from the path of the harlot; and the soul must fast from the
love of wickedness. This turning from sin implies a notable change.

There is a change wrought in the 1.
heart. The flinty heart is become fleshly. Satan would have Christ prove his
Deity, by making stones become bread. Christ has wrought a far greater
miracle, in making stones become flesh. In Repentance Christ turns an heart of
stone into flesh.

There is a change wrought in the life. 2.
Turning from sin is so visible, that others may discern it; therefore it is
called a change from darkness to light, Ephesians. 5. 8. Paul after he had seen the
heavenly vision, was so turned, that all men wondered at the change* Act. 9. 21.
Repentance turned the Jailer into a Nurse and Physician, Act. 16. 33. He took
the Apostles and washed their wounds, and set meat before them. A ship that is
going Eastward, there comes a wind and turns it Westward: So that a man before
was sailing Hell-ward, the contrary wind of the Spirit blows, and turns his
course, and causes him to sail Heavenward. Chrysostom speaking of the
Ninivites Repentance, says, that had a stranger who had seen Ninevehs excess,
gone after they repented into the City, it was so metamorphosed and reformed,
that he would scarce have believed it was the same City. Such a visible change
does Repentance make in a person, as if another so^l did lodge in the same body
Ego non sum ego.
. Now, that the turning from sin be rightly qualified, these few things are
requisite.

1. It must be a turning from sin with 1.
the heart: the heart is the primum vivens, the first thing that lives, and it
must be the primum vertens, the first thing that turns. The heart is that the
Devil does most strive for. Never did he so strive for the body of Moses, as he
does for the heart of man: in Religion the heart is all: if the heart be not
turned from sin, it is no better than a lie, Ier. 3. 10. Her treacherous Sister
Judah, has not turned to me with the whole heart, but feignedly: or as the
Hebrew, in a lie *. Judah did make (...) In mendacio.
a show of Reformation, she was not so grossly idolatrous as the ten Tribes;
yet, Judah was worse than Israel; she is called treacherous Judah; she
pretended to a reformation; but it was not in truth; her heart was not for God;
she turned not with the whole heart. It Is odious to make a show of turning from
sin, yet the heart is in league with it Totum cor vult Deus, non partem aliquam
ex ^o quae Veneri aut ventri datur, illi suffurari patitur. Cornel. Lap.
. I have read of one of our Saxon Kings who was baptized, that in the same
Church he had one Altar for the Christian Religion, another for the Heathen
Cam^den
. God will have the whole heart turned from sin. True Repentance must have no
reserves or inmates.

2. It must be a turning from all sin, ^*
Isa. 55. 7. Let the wicked forsake his way. A real penitent turns out of the
road of sin; every sin is abandoned: As Iehu would have all the Priests of Baal
slain, not one must escape, 2 King. 10. 24. So a true convert seeks the
destruction of every lust; he knows how dangerous it is to entertain any one
sin Ubi regn^ peccatum non potest regnare Dei Regnum. Bern.
. He that hides one rebel in his house, is a traitor to the Crown; and he that
indulgeth one sin, is a traitorous Hypocrite.

3. It must be a turning from sin upon 3.
a spiritual ground. A man may restrain the acts of sin, yet not turn from sin
in a right manner. Acts of sin may be restrained out of fear, or design; but a
right penitentiary turns from sin out of a religious principle, and that is,
love to God. If sin did not bear such bitter fruit, if death did not grow on
this tree, yet a gracious soul would forsake it out of love to God: This is the
most kindly turning from sin. When things are frozen and congealed, the best
way to separate them is by fire: When men and their sins are congealed
together, the best way to separate them, is the fire of love. Three asking one
another what made them leave sin; says one, I think of the joys of Heaven;
says another, I think of the torments of Hell; but says the third, I think of
the love of God, and that makes me forsake it? How shall I offend the God of
love?

4. It must be such a turning from sin, 4.
as turns unto God. This is in the text, That they should repent and turn unto
God (...). Chrysostom.
. Turning from sin, is like the pulling the Arrow out of the wound; turning to
God, is like the pouring in of the Balsom. We read in Scripture of a Repentance
from dead works, Heb. 6. 1. Terminus ^ q^uo.
and a Repentance toward God, Act. 20. 21. Terminus ad quem.
Unsound hearts pretend to leave old sins, but they do not turn to God, or
embrace his service. It Is not enough to forsake the Devils quarters, but we
must get under Christ's banner, and wear his colors. The repenting Prodigal did
not only leave his Harlots, but did arise and go to his Father. It was Gods
complaint, Hos. 7. 16. They return, but not to the most High. In true
Repentance the heart points directly to God, as the Needle to the Northpole.

5. The true turning from sin is such a 5.
turn, as has no return, Hos. 14. 8. Ephraim shall say, what have I to do any
more with Idols Vera est poenitentia quando aliquis convertitur, and non
revertitur. ^ Aug.
? The forsaking sin must be like the forsaking ones native soil, never to
return more to it. Some have seemed to be converts, and to have turned from
sin, but they have returned to their sins again Irrisor est non poenitens, qui
adhuc agit quod poenitet. Isidor.
. This is a returning ^o folly Psalm. 85 8.
. It is,

A fearful sin. For 1. It is against clear light: He who did once leave his
sin, it is to be supposed he felt it bitter in the pangs of conscience, yet he
returned to 1
it again; he must needs sin against the illuminations of the Spirit.

2. It reproacheth God, Ier. 2. 5. What iniquity have your Fathers found in me,
that they are gone from me? He that returns to sin, does interpretatively
charge God with some evil. If a man put away his wife, it implies he knows some
fault by her. To leave God, and return to sin* is tacitly to asperse the Deity.
God who hates putting away, Mal. 2. 16. hates that he himself should be put
away.

To return to sin, gives the Devil more 2.
power over a man than ever, Mat. 12. 43. When a man turns from sin, the Devil
seems to be cast out of him; but when he returns to sin, here is the Devil
entering into his house again, and taking possession, and the last state of that
man is worse than the first. When a prisoner has broken prison, and the
Jaylour gets him again, he will lay stronger Irons upon him He who leaves off a
course of sinning, does as it were break the Devils prison; but if Satan takes
him returning to sin, he will hold him faster, and take fuller possession of
him than ever. O take heed of this Ad Coe^ non ^ro (...).
! A true turning from sin, is a divorcing it, so as never to come near it any
more: and whoever is thus turned from sin is a blessed person, Act. 3. 26. God
having raised up his Son Jesus, sent him to bless you, in turning every one of
you from his iniquities.

Is turning from sin a necessary* Ingredient Use 1.
in Repentance, then there is Inform.
but little Repentance to be found. People are not turned from their sins, they
are still the same they were. Proud they were, and so they are still. Like the
beasts in Noah's Ark, they went into the Ark unclean, and came out unclean. Men
come to Ordinances impure, and go away impure. Though men have seen so many
changes without, yet there is no change wrought within, Isa. 9. 13. The people
turns not to him that smites. How can they say they repent who do not turn?
Are they washed in Jordan, who have still their Leprosy upon their forehead?
May not God say to the unreformed, as once to Ephraim (...). Septua.
, Hos. 4. 17. Ephraim is joined to Idols, let him alone. So, here is a man
joined to his drunkenness, and uncleanness, let him alone, let him go on in sin
Gravissima tradi sibi, suisque cupidinibus (...). Vaiabl.
; but if there be either justice in Heaven, or vengeance in Hell, he shall not
go unpunished.

Use 2. It reproves them 1. Who are Use 2.
but half-turned; and who are these? Reproof.
1 Branch.


Such as turn in their judgment, but 1.
not in their practice; they cannot but acknowledge that sin, like Saturn, has
a bad aspect and influence, and will weep for sin, yet are so bewitched with
it, that they have no power to leave it; their corruptions are stronger than
their convictions: These are half-turned, (...), almost Christians, Act. 26.
28. They are like Ephraim, who was a Panis subcineritius.
Cake baked on one side, and dough on the other, Hos. 7. 8. --

They are but half-turned, who turn 2.
only from gross sin, but have no intrinsic work of grace. They do not prize
Christ* or love holiness. It Is with civil persons, as with Jonah, he got a
gourd to defend him from the heat of the Sun, and he thought now he was safe,
but a worm presently arises and devours the gourd. So men, when they are
turned from gross sin, think their civility will be a gourd to defend them from
the wrath of God, but at death there arises the worm of conscience and smites
this gourd, and then their hearts fail, and they begin to despair.

They are but half-turned, who turn 3.
from many sins, but are unturned from some special sin. There is an harlot in
the bosom they will not let go. As if a man should be cured of several
diseases, but has a canker in his breast, and that kills him. 2 Branch.


It reproves such whose turning is as good as no turning; who have one Devil
goes out of them, and another enter^ they turn from swearing to slandering,
from profuseness to covetousness: Like a sick man that turns from a tertian
Ague to a quartan. Such turning will turn men to Hell.

Let us in this show our selves penitents, Use 3.
Exhort.
in turning from sin to God Ille ad Deum convertitur, qui quod semel prave
egera^ Plangit, quod rursum plangat ultro non repetit.
. There are some persons I have little hope to prevail with: Let the trumpet of
the word sound never so shrill, let threatenings be thundered out against them,
let some flashes of Hell fire be thrown in their faces, yet they will have the
other game at sin. These persons seem to be like the Swine in the Gospel,
carried down by the Devil violently into the Sea; they will rather damn than
turn, Ier. 8. 5. They hold fast deceit, they refuse to return: But if there be
any candor or sobriety in us, if conscience be not cast into a dead sleep, let
us listen to the voice of the charmer, and turn to God our supreme good.

How often does God call upon us to 1.
turn to him? He swears, Ezekiel. 33. 11. As I live, I desire not the death of the
sinner, turn ye, turn ye, etc. Vae nobis si nec juranti Deo credimu^. Tertul.
God had rather have our repenting tears, than our blood.

Turning to God makes for our profit: 2.
Our Repentance is no benefit to God, but to us. If a man drinks of a fountain,
he benefits himself, not the fountain: if he beholds the light of the Sun, he
himself is refreshed by it, not the Sun. If we turn from our sins to God, God
is not advantaged by it; it is only we our selves reap the benefit; therefore
selflove should prevail with us, Prove. 9. 12. If thou be wise, thou shall be
wise for thy self.

If we turn to God, he will turn to us; 3.
he will turn his anger from us, and his face to us. It was David's prayer,
Psalm. 86. 16. O turn unto me, and have mercy upon me. Our turning will make God
turn, Zach. 1. 3. Turn ye unto me, says the Lord, and I will turn unto you. He
who was an enemy will turn to be our friend: If God turn to us, the Angels are
turned to us; we shall have their tutelage and guardianship, Psalm. 91. 11. If
God turn to us, all things shall turn to our good; mercies and afflictions; we
shall taste honey at the end of the Rod. Thus we have seen the several
Ingredients of Repentance.

CHAP. V. Showing the reasons enforcing Repentance.
I Proceed next to the reasons which do enforce Repentance.

1. From Gods sovereign command, Reason 1.
Act. 17. 30. He commands men every where to repent. Repentance is not
arbitrary; it is not left to our choice whether we will repent or no, but it is
an indispensible command (...). Epictetus.
. God has enacted a Law in the High Court of Heaven, that no sinner shall be
saved but the repenting sinner; and he will not break his own Law. Though all
the Angels should stand before God, and beg the life of an irrepenting person,
God would not grant it, Exodus 34. 6. The Lord God, merciful and gracious,
keeping mercy for thousands, and that will by no means clear the guilty. Though
God is more full of mercy, than the Sun is of light, yet he will not forgive a
sinner while he goes on in his guilt: He will by no means clear the guilty.

2. The pure nature of God denies Reason 2.
communion with an impenitent creature. Till the sinner repent, God and he
cannot be friends, Isa. 1. 16. Wash ye, make ye clean. Go steep your selves in
the brinish waters of Repentance, Ver. 18. Come now and let us reason together.
Now, says God, I will parley with you, but else come not near me. What
communion has light with darkness? How can the righteous God indulge him that
goes on still in his trespasses? Exodus 23. 7. I will not justify the wicked.
If God should be at * Justitia Dei far non potest ut gratiae contemptoribus
ignoscatur. Musculus.
peace with a sinner before he repent, he should seem to like and approve all
that he has done; he should go against his own holiness. It Is inconsistent
with the sanctity of Gods nature to pard on a sinner while he is in the act of
rebellion.

3. Sinners continuing in impenitency, Reason 3.
are out of Christ's commission: See his commission, Isa. 61. 1. The Spirit of
the Lord God is upon me, he has sent me to bind up the brokenhearted. Christ
is a Prince and Savior, but not to save men in an absolute way, whether they
repent or no. If ever Christ bring men to Heaven, it shall be through Hell
gates, Act. 5. 31. Him has God exalted to be a Prince and Savior to give
Repentance. As a King pardons Rebels, not if they persist in open defiance, but
if they relent, and yield themselves to the mercy of their Prince.

4. There is a great deal of equity in Reason 4.
it, that we should repent. We have by sin wronged God; we have ecclipsed his
honor; we have infringed his Law, and good reason we should make him some
reparation. By Repentance we humble and judge our selves for sin; we set to our
seal that God is righteous if he should destroy us: and thus we give glory to
God, and do what in us lies to repair his honor.

5. If God should save men without Repentance, 5.
making no discrimination, then by this Rule he must save all; not only men,
but Devils, as Origin once held; and so consequently the decrees of Election
and Reprobation must fall to the ground; which how diametrically opposite it is
to sacred writ, let all judge.

CHAP. VI. Showing that it will be harder for some to repent, than others.
THere are two sorts of persons who will find it harder to repent than others.

1. Such as have sat a great while under the droppings of Gods Ordinances, but
grow no better. The earth which drinks in the Rain, yet bears thorns and
briars, is nigh unto cursing, Heb. 6. 8. The metal which has lain long in the
fire, but is not melted and refined, there is little hope of it. When God has
sent his Ministers one after another, exhorting and persuading men to leave
their sins, but they settle upon the lees of formality, and can sit and sleep
under a Sermon; it will be hard for these ever to be brought to Repentance;
they may fear lest Christ should say to them as once to the Fig Tree, Never
fruit grow on thee more.

2. They will find it harder to repent, who have sinned frequently against the
convictions of the Word, the checks of conscience Mala conscientia potest esse
secura nunquam tuta. Sen.
, and the motions of the Spirit. Conscience has stood as the Angel, with a
flaming sword in its hand; it has said, Do not this great evil; but sinners
regard not the voice of conscience, but march on resolvedly under the Devils
colors: these will not find it easy to repent, Job 24. 13. They are of those
that rebel against the Light. It is one thing to sin for want of light, and
another thing to sin against light. Here the unpardonable sin takes its rise;
first men sin against the light of conscience, and so proceed gradually to the
despighting the Spirit of grace.

CHAP. VII. Containing a reprehension to the Impenitent.
FIRST, then it serves sharply to reprove Use 1.
Reproof.
all unrepenting sinners, whose hearts seem to be hewn out of a Rock, and are
like the stony ground in the Parnble which wanted moisture. This disease

I fear is epidemical, Ier. 8. 6. No man repented him of his wickedness. Men's
hearts are marbled into hardness, Zach. 7. 12. They made their heart as an
Adamant Lapis hic durissimus est, qui respuit scalpra and malleos, quin and
ipsos disrumpit; ideoque (...) dicitur, scil. indomabilis. ^
. They are not at all dissolved into a penitential frame. It has been a
received opinion, that Witches never weep Bodin in his demon. lib. 4. cap. 1.
. Sure I am, such as have no grief for sin, are spiritually bewitched by Satan.
We read, that when Christ came to Jerusalem, he upbraided them because they
repented not, Matthew. 11. 20. And may he not upbraid many now for their
impenitency? Though Gods heart be broken with their sins, yet their hearts are
not broken: They say as Israel, Ier. 2. 25. I have loved strangers, and after
them will I go. The justice of God, like the Angel, stands with a drawn sword
in his hand ready to strike, but sinners have not so good eyes as Balaams Ass,
to see the sword. God smites on men's backs, but they smite not with Ephraim
upon their thigh Jer. 31. 19.
. It was a sad complaint the Prophet took up, Ier. 5. 3. Thou have stricken
them, but they have not grieved. That sure is reprobate silver which contracts
hardness in the furnace, 2 Chronicles. 28. 22. In the time of his distress, did he
trespass yet more against the Lord; this is that King Ahaz. An hard heart is a
receptacle for Satan. As God has two places he dwells in, Heaven and an humble
heart: so the Devil has two places he dwells in, Hell and an hard heart. It Is
not falling into the water drowns, but lying in it: It Is not falling into sin
damns, but lying in it without Repentance (...). Chrysostom. de poen.
. Hardness of heart brings at last to searedness of conscience, 1 Timothy 4. 2.
Having their conscience seared with an hot Iron Cauteriatam conscientiam vocat
Apostolus came quae sensum peccati amittit, instar partis cauterio i^stae. Fr.
^urrianus.
. Men have silenced their consciences, and God has seared them. And now he
lets them sin, and does not punish, Isa. 1. 5. Why should I smite you any more?
As a Father gives over correcting a child whom he intends to dis-inherit.

CHAP. VIII. Containing a serious Exhortation to Repentance.
LET me in the next place persuade Use* 2.
Exhort.
all to this great duty of Repentance. 1 Branch.
Sorrow is good for nothing but sin. If you shed tears for outward losses, it
will not advantage you. Water for the Garden, if poured in the sink, does no
good. Powder for the eye, if applied to the 1
arm, is of no benefit. Sorrow is medicinable for the soul, but if you apply it
to wordly things, it does no good. O that our tears may run in the right
chanel, and our hearts even burst with sorrow for sin. That I may the more
successfully press this Exhortation, I shall show you that Repentance

1. Is necessary. 2. It is necessary for all persons. 3. For all sins.
1. Repentance is necessary, Luke 13. 5. 1.
Except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish am currum habet vostrum ut
vesci non possit, nisi lapidem dein percutiendo aduncitatem frangat, quo facto
rursus edit, and rejuvenescit: ita qui peccatis est praegravatus, nil
spirituale illi sapiat, morietu^ ^ame nisi ad Petram Christum, per
poenitentiam, se diu percutiat, usque ad mentis mutationem, and duritiei
abjectionem Venantius Honor.
. There Is no rowing to Paradise, Aquila enescente
but upon the stream of repenting tears. Repentance is required as a
qualification. It is not so much to endear us to Christ, as to endear Christ to
us. Till sin be bitter, Christ will not be sweet.

2. Repentance is necessary for all persons. 2.
God commands all men, Act. * (...)
17.30.

1. It is necessary for great ones, Ier. 1.
13. 18. Say to the King and the Queen, humble your selves. The King of Niniveh
and his Nobles changed their robes for sackcloth, Jonah 3. 6. Great men's sins
do more hurt than others: the sins of leaders are leading sins; therefore they
of all others had need to repent. If such as hold the Scepter repent not, God
has appointed a day to judge them, and a fire to burn them, Isa. 30. 33.

2. Repentance is necessary for the flagitious 2.
sinners in the Nation. England had need put it self in mourning, and be
humbled by solemn Repentance. -- Anglica gens est optima flens -- What horrible
impieties are chargeable upon the Nation! We see persons daily listing
themselves under Satan. Not only the banks of Religion, but Civility are broken
down. Men seem to contend as the Jews of old, who should be most wicked Quis
^ejor ^it. Josephus.
. In their filthiness is leudness, Ezekiel. 24. 13. If oaths and drunkenness, if
perjury and luxury will make a people guilty, then it is to be feared England
is in Gods black Book. Sure men have cancelled their vow in Baptism, and made a
private contract with the Devil: Instead of crying to mercy to save them, they
cry, God damn them! Never was there such riding post to Hell, as if men did
despair of getting thither time enough. Has it not been known that some have
died with the guilt of fornication and blood upon them? Has it not been told
that others have boasted how many they have debauched and made drunk? Thus,
they declare their sin as Sodom, Isa. 3. 9. * Pudet haec opprobria nobis, etc.
Nay, men's sins are grown daring; as if they would hang out their flag of
defiance, and give Heaven a broadside Psa 73. 9.
. Like the Thraci^ns, who when it thunders, gather together in a body, and
shoot their Arrows against Heaven. The sinners in Britain do even send God a
challenge, Job 15. 25. They strengthen themselves against the Almighty; they
run upon him even on his neck, on the thick bosses of his bucklers. The bosses
in the buckler are for offense in war. Gods precepts and threatenings are as it
were the thick bosses of his buckler, whereby he would deter men from
wickedness; but they regard not, but are desperate in sin, and run furiously
against the bosses of Gods buckler. O to what an height is sin boiled up! Men
count it a shame not to be impudent. Pudet non esse impudentem. Aug. Conf.
. May it not be said of us as Josephus speaks of the Jews; such was the
excessive wickedness of those times, that if the Romans had not come and sacked
their City, Jerusalem had been swallowed up with some Earthquake Aut Hiatu, aut
diluvio, aut incendio, etc. Jos. lib. 6. de bell. jud.
, or drowned with a flood or fired from Heaven: And is it not high time then
for this * Toti in peccatis immersi, non levi tantum lachrymarum aspersione
indigent sed ablutione. D. Rivet.
Nation to enter into a course of Physic, and take this pill of Repentance,
who has so many bad humors spreading in her body politic? England is an
Island encompassed with two Oceans, an Ocean of water, and an Ocean of
wickedness; O that it might be encompassed with a third Ocean, namely,
repenting tears. If the Book of the Law chance to fall upon the ground, the
Jews have a custom presently to proclaim a Fast. England has let both Law and
Gospel fall to the ground, therefore had need fast and mourn before the Lord:
The Ephah of wickedness seems to be full, Good reason tears should empty apace,
when sin fills so fast: Why then do not all faces gather paleness? Why are the
Wells of Repentance stopped? Do not the sinners of the Land know they should
repent? Have they had no warning? Have not Gods faithful Messengers lifted up
their voice as a trumpet, and cried to them to repent? but many of these Tools
in the Ministry have been spent and worn out upon rocky hearts. Has not God
lighted strange Comets in the Heavens, as so many Preachers to call men to
Repentance, but still they are settled on their lees, Zeph. 1. 12. Do we think
God will always put up our affronts? Will he endure thus to have his name and
glory trampled upon? The Lord has usually been more swift in the process of
his justice against the sins of a professing people* God may a while reprieve
this Land by Frerogative, but if ever he* save it without Repentance, he must
go out of his ordinary Road: I say therefore with Mr. Bradford, REPENT O
ENGLAND. Thou have beleaper'd thy self with sin, and had need go and wash in
the spiritual Jordan. Thou have kindled Gods anger against thee, throw away thy
weapons, and bring thy holy Engines and Waterworks, that God may be appeased
in the blood of Christ. Let thy tears run, lest Gods roll of curses fly Zach.
5. 2.
. Either men must turn, or God will overturn: Either the fallow ground of their
hearts must be broken up, or the Land broken down. If no words will prevail
with sinners, it is because God has a purpose to slay them 1 Samuel 2. 25.
. Among the Romans, he who was for his capital offense forbidden the use of
water, was thereby concluded to be a condemned person. So they who by their
prodigious sins have so far incensed the God of Heaven, that he denies them the
water of Repentance, may look upon themselves as condemned persons.

3. Repentance is necessary for the 3
cheating crew, Psalm. 11. 9. 18. Their deceit is falsehood; who are wise to do
evil Jer. 4. 22.
; making use of their invention, only for circumvention: instead of living by
their faith, they live by their shifts. These are they who make themselves
poor, that by this artifice they may grow rich. I would not be misunderstood, I
mean not such as the providence of God has brought low, whose estates have
failed, not their honesty; but such as feign a break, that they may cheat their
Creditors. There are some who get more by breaking, than others can by trading:
these are like beggars that discolor and blister their arms, that they may
move charity; they live by their sores: So these live by their breaking. When
the Frost breaks, the streets are more full of water: So many tradesmen, when
they break, are fuller of money: These make as if they had nothing, but out of
this nothing, great estates are created. Remember, the Kingdom of Heaven is
taken by force Mat. 11. 12.
, not by fraud. Let men know, after this golden sop* the Devil enters: they
squeeze a curse into their estates: they had need repent quickly: Though the
bread of falsehood be sweet, Prove. 20. 17. yet many vomit up their sweet morsels
in Hell.

4. Repentance is necessary for civil 4.
persons: these have no visible spots on them; they are free from gross sin,
and one would think they were unconcerned in the business of Repentance Ille
morbus vix est sanabilis qui sanitatem imitatur.
. They are so good, that they scorn a Psalm of mercy. Indeed these are often in
the worst condition: these are they who Qui se meliores existimant a pietate
prorsus abalienantur. Brugens.
need no Repentance, Luke 15. 7. Their civility undoes them; they make a Christ
of it, and so on this shelf suffer shipwreck. Morality shoots short of Heaven;
it is only nature refined. A moral man is but old Adam dressed in fine cloths.
The Kings Image counterfeited and stamped upon Brass, will not go current. The
civil person seems to have the Image of God, but he is but brass metal, which
will never pass for current: Civility is insufficient to salvation: though the
life be moralized, the lust may be unmortified. The heart may be full of pride
and Atheism. Under the fair leaves of a tree there may be a worm. I say not,
repent that you are civil, but that you are no more than civil. The house that
was only swept and garnished, Satan entered into, Luke 11. 26. This was the
emblem of a moral man, who is swept by civility, and garnished with common
gifts, but is not washed by true Repentance; the unclean spirit enters into
such an one. If civility were sufficient to salvation, Christ needed not to
have died. The Civilian has a fair Lamp, but it wants the oil of grace.

5. Repentance is needful for Hypocrites: 5.
I mean, such as allow themselves in the sin. Hypocrisy is the counterfeiting
of sanctity. The Hypocrite or (stageplayer Scenici actores.
) is gotten a step beyond the moralist, and does dress himself in the g^rb Aug.
de Civitate Dei.
of Religion: he pretends to a form of godliness, but denies the power, 2 Timothy
3. 5. The Hypocrite is a Saint in jest; he makes a majestic show, like an Ape
clothed in Ermyn, or Purple. The Hypocrite is like an house with a beautiful
frontispiece, but every room within is dark: he is a rotten post fairly gilded
Foris candidus, intus sordidus.
: under his mask of profession he hides his plague-sores Aethiopes exsiccata
cadavera pingunt, and cippo vitreo operiunt, quid ornatius, imo quid turpius?
Herodot. lib. 3.
. The Hypocrite is against painting of faces, but he paints holiness: he is
seemingly good, that he may be really bad Aliud simulans, aliud agens. Hierom.
. In Samuels mantle he plays the Devil; therefore the same word in the
original signifies to use Hypocrisy, and to be profane *. The Hypocrite (...)
seems to have his eyes nailed to Heaven, but his heart is full of impure
lustings; he lives in secret sin against his conscience Latet interdiu
nycticorax, noctu vero prodit ad infausta. Pier.
; he can be as his company is, and act both the Dove and the Vulture; he hears
the word, but is all ear; he is for Templedevotion, where others may look upon
him, and admire him, but he neglects family and closet prayer. Indeed, if
prayer does not make a man leave sin, sin will make him leave prayer. The
Hypocrite feigns humility, but it is that he may rise in the world; he is a
pretender to faith, but he makes use of it rather for a cloak, than a shield;
he carries his Bible under his arm, but not in his heart; his whole Religion is
a demure lie, Hos. 11. 12.

But is there such a generation of men to be found? the Lord forgive them their
holiness. Hypocrites are in the gall of bitterness, Act. 8. 23. O how had they
need humble themselves in the dust! they are far gone with the rot, and if any
thing cure them, it must be feeding upon the salt Marshes of Repentance.

Let me speak my mind freely, none will find it more difficult to repent than
Hypocrites; they have so jugled in Religion, that their treacherous hearts know
not how to repent. Hypocrisy is harder to cure than Frenzy Difficilius
curatur quam insania.
. The Hypocrites Imposthume in his heart seldom breaks. If it be not too late,
seek yet to God for mercy.

Such as are guilty of prevailing Hypocrisy, let them fear and tremble, their
condition is sinful and sad. 1. Sinful, because they do not embrace Religion
out of choice, but design; they do not love it, only paint it. 2. Sad, and that
upon a double account. 1. Because this art of deceit cannot hold long Quae
simulata sunt, diuturna esse non possunt. Bern.
. He who hangs out a sign, but has not the commodity of grace in his heart,
must needs break at last. 2. Because Gods anger will fall heavier upon
Hypocrites, they dishonor God more, and take away the Gospels good name;
therefore the Lord reserves the most deadly Arrows in his quiver to shoot at
them. If Heathens be damned, Hypocrites shall be double-damned. Hell is called
the place of Hypocrites, Mat. 14. 5. 1. As if it were chiefly prepared for
them, and were to be settled upon them in fe^simple.

6. Repentance is necessary for Gods 6.
own people, who have a real work of grace, and are Israelites indeed; they
must offer up a daily sacrifice of tears. The Antinomians hold, that when any
come to be Believers, they have a Writ of Ease, and there remains nothing for
them now to do, but to rejoice. Yes, they have something else to do, and that
is, to repent. Repentance is a continued act. The issue of godly sorrow must
not be quite stopped till death. Hierom writing in an Epistle to Laeta, tells
her, that her life must be a life of Repentance. Repentance is called a
crucifying the old man Gal. ^. 24.
, which is not done on a sudden, but leisurely, it will be doing all our life.

And is there not a great deal of cause why Gods own people should go into the
weeping bath? 2 Chronicles. 28. 10. Are there not with you, even with you, sins
against the Lord? Have not you sins of daily incursion? Though you are
Diamonds, have you no flaws? Do we not read of the spots of Gods children
(...). Chrysostom.
? Search with the Candle of the Word into your hearts, and see if you can find
no matter of Repentance there.

1. Repent of your rash censuring: Deu. 32. 5.
1.
instead of praying for others, you are ready to pass a Verdict upon them
(...). Epictetus.
. It Is true, the Saints shall judge the world, 1 Cor. 6. 2. But stay your time;
remember the Apostles caution, 1 Cor. 4. 5. Judge nothing before the time, till
the Lord come.

2. Repent of your vain thoughts: These 2.
swarm in your minds as the Flies did in King Pharaohs Court Exodus 8. 24.
. What beweildrings are there in the imagination! If Satan does not possess
your bodies, he does your fancies, Ier. 4. 4. How long shall vain thoughts
lodge within thee? A man may think himself into Hell. O ye Saints, be humbled
for this lightness in your head.

3. Repent of your vain fashions. It Is 3.
strange that the garments which God has given to cover shame, should discover
pride. The godly are bid not to be conformed to this world, Romans 12. 2. People
of the world are garish and light in their dresses: It is in fashion now adays
to go to Hell; but whatever others do, yet let not Judah offend, Hos. 4. 15.
The Apostle has set down what upper garment Christians must wear, 1 Timothy 2. 9.
Modest apparel; and what under-garment, 1 Pet. 5. 5. Be ye clothed with
humility (...).
.

4. Repent of your decaies in grace, 4.
Rev. 2. 4. Thou have left thy first love Bon^s quandoque obrepit securitas,
refrigescit zelus, adeo ut stimulis indigeant. Pareus.
. Christians, how often is it Low Water in your souls! how often does your cold
fit come upon you! where are those flames of affection; those sweet meltings of
spirit as once you had? I fear they are melted away. O repent for leaving your
first love.

5. Repent of your non-improvement of 5.
Talents. Health is a talent, estate is a talent, wit and parts are talents;
and these God has entrusted you with to improve for his glory. He has sent
you into the world, as a Merchant sends his Factor beyond the Seas to trade for
his Masters advantage: But you have not done the good you might. Can you say,
Lord, thy pound has gained five pounds, Luke 19. 18. Oh mourn at the burial of
your talents! Let it grieve you that so much of your age has not been time
lived, but time lost; that you have filled up your golden hours, more with
froth than spirits Turpissima est jactura quae per negligentiam fit. Sen. Ep.
1. ad Lucill.
.

6. Repent of your forgetfulness of sacred 6.
vows. A vow is a binding ones soul to God, Numb. 30. 1. Christians, have not
you since you have been bound to God, forfeited your Indentures? Have not you
served for common uses after you have been the Lords by solemn dedication? Thus
by breach of vows, you have made a breach in your peace. Surely this calls for
a fresh lavor of tears.

7. Repent of your unanswerableness to 7.
blessings received. You have lived all your life upon free quarter; you have
spent upon free-graces stock; you have been bemiracled with mercy; but where
are your returns of love to God? * An gratiam retulimus, an largitorem nostrum
prout decuit coluimus.
The Athenians would have ungrateful persons to be sued at Law Valor. Maxim.
lib. 5. cap. 3.
. Christians, may not God sue you at Law for your unthankfulness, Hos. 2. 9. I
will recover my Wool and my Flax. I will recover them by Law.

8. Repent of your worldliness 8.
Quomodo Coelum petunt qui terrenis degravant^r? Possidere se c^edunt, potius
possidentur. Cyprian de Laps.
. By your profession, you seem to resemble the Birds of Paradise, that soar
aloft, and live upon the dew of Heaven Roranti b bunt ex aethere mella --
^ausin Hyerog^.
, yet as Serpents, you lick the dust. Baruc a good man, was taxed with this,
Ier. 45. 5. Seek thou great things for thy self (...)* Grandia Ar. Mont.
?

9. Repent of your divisions; these 9.
are a blot in your Coat Armor, and make others stand aloof off from Religion
(...). Ignat. Epist. ad Phil^delph.
. Indeed, to separate from the wicked resembles Christ, who was separate from
sinners, Heb. 7. 26. But for the godly to divide among themselves, and look
askew one upon another, had we* as many eyes as there are stars, they were few
enough to weep for this. Divisions eclipse the Churches beauty, and weaken her
strength Scyrus lapis mirum id habet, ut integer enatet, comminutus mergatur.
Plin. lib. 36. c. 17.
. Gods Spirit brought in cloven tongues among the Saints, Act. 2. 3. But the
Devil has brought in cloven hearts: Surely this deserves a shower of tears.

-- Quis talia fando Temperet a lachrymis? -- 10. Repent for the iniquity of
your holy 10.
things. How often have the services of Gods worship been frozen with
formality, and sowred with pride? There have been more of the Peacocks plumes,
than the groans of the Dove. It Is sad that ever duties of Religion should be
made a stage for vain glory to act upon. O Christians, there is such a thick
rhyne upon your duties, that it is to be feared there is but little meat left in
them for God to feed upon.

Behold here repenting work cut out for the best; and that which may make the
tide of grief swell higher, is, to think that the sins of Gods people do more
provoke God than others, Deuteronomy. 32. 19. The sins of the wicked pierce Christ's
side; the sins of the godly go to his heart. Peter's sin being against so much
love, was more unkind, which made his cheeks to be furrowed with tears, Mark
14. 72. When he thought thereon he wept.

3. Repentance is necessary for all sins.

Let us be deeply humbled and mourn 1.
before the Lord for original sin. We have lost that pure quintessential frame
of soul as once we had; our nature is vitiated with corruption. Original sin
has diffused it self as a poison into the whole man A planta pedis usque ad
verticem diffunditur hoc venenum. B^.
. Like the Hierusalem-Hartichoke, which, wherever it is planted, presently
over-runs the ground. There are not worse natures in Hell than we have. The
hearts of the best are like Peter's sheet, where were a number of unclean
creeping things, Act. 10. 12. This primitive corruption is bitterly to be
bewailed, because we are never free from it. It is like a spring under ground,
which though it be not seen, yet it still runs. We may as well stop the beating
of the pulse, as stop the motions to sin. This inbred pravity retards and
hinders us in that which is spiritual, Romans 7. 19. The good that I would, I do
not. Original sin may be compared to that fish Pliny speaks of, a Sea-Lamprey,
* (...). Plin.
which cleaves to the keel of the ship, and hinders it when it is under sail.
Sin hangs weights upon us (...), C^assa moles. Beza. Heb. 12. 1.
, that we move but slow to Heaven. O this adherency of sin! Paul shook the
Viper which was on his hand into the fire, Act. 28. 5. But we cannot shake off
original corruption in this life. Sin does not come as a lodger for a night,
but an indweller, Romans 7. 17. Sin that dwells in me. It Is with us as with one
who has an Hectic fever upon him, though he changes the air, yet still he
carries his disease with him. Original sin is inexhaustible. This Ocean cannot
be emptyed; though the stock of sin spends, yet it is not*at all diminished;
the more we sin, the fuller we are of sin. Original corruption is like the
Widows Oil, which increased by pouring out 2 King. 4. 6.
, and that which may be another wedge to break our hearts, is, that original
sin does mix with the very habits of grace. Hence it is, our actings toward
Heaven are so dull and languid. Why does faith act no stronger, but because it
is clogged with sense? Why does love to God burn no purer, but because it is
hindered with lust? Original sin incorporates with our graces. As bad lungs
cause an Asthma or shortness of breath: so original sin having infected the
heart, our graces breathe now very faintly. Thus we see what in original sin
may draw forth our tears. In particular let us lament the corruption

Of

1. Our Will. 2. Our Affections.
1. Let us mourn for the corruption of 1*
our Will: The will not following the dictamen of right reason, is biased to
evil: The will distasts God, not as he is good, but as he is holy: It
contumaciously affronts him, Ier. 44. 17. We will do whatsoever thing goes
forth out of our mouth, to burn incense to the Queen of Heaven. The greatest
wound is fallen upon our will.

2. Let us grieve for the corruption (...).
of our Affections, which consists in two things.

Their

1. Diversion. 2. Propension.
Let us grieve for the diversion of our 1.
affections; they are taken off from their proper object: The affections like
arrows shoot beside the mark. At first our Affections were wings to fly to God,
now they are weights to pull us from him.

Let us grieve for the propension of our 2.
Affections; our love is set on sin, our joy on the creature, our Affections
like the Lapwing feed on dung. How justly may the distemper of our Affections
bear a part in the scene of our grief? We of our selves are falling into Hell,
and our Affections would thrust us thither.

2. Let us lay to heart actual sins. Of these 2.
I may say, Who can understand his errors? Psalm. 19. 12. They are like Atoms
in the Sun, like sparks of a Furnace. We have sinned in our eyes, they have
been casements to let in vanity (...). Genesis 6. 2.
. We have sinned in our tongues, they have been fired with passion; what action
proceeds from us wherein we do not betray some sin? To reckon up these, were to
go to number the drops in the Ocean. Let actual ^ins be solemnly repented of
before the Lord.

CHAP. IX. Containing powerful Motives to Repentance.
THAT the exhortation to Repentance may be more quickened, I shall lay down some
powerful Motives to excite Repentance.

1. Sorrow and melting of heart, fits 1 Motive.
us for every holy duty. A piece of Lead while it is in the lump, can be put to
no use, but melt it, and then you may cast it into any mould, and it is made
useful: So an heart that is hardened into a lump of sin, is good for nothing,
but when it is dissolved by Repentance, now it is useful. A melting heart is
fit to pray. When Paul's heart was humbled and melted; then, Behold he prays,
Act. 9. 11. It is fit to hear the word: Now the word works kindly. When Iosiahs
heart was tender, he humbled himself, and rent his cloths at the hearing the
words of the Law, 2 Chronicles. 34. 19. His heart, like melting wax, was ready to
take any seal of the word. A melting heart is fit to obey. When the heart is
like metal in the Furnace, it is facil and malleable to any thing. Lord, what
will thou have me do Act. 9. 6.
? A repenting soul subscribes to Gods will, and answers to his call, as the
echo to the voice.

2. Repentance is highly acceptable. ^ Motive.
Then our hearts are a garden of Eden, delightful to God, when a spiritual
River runs to water this garden. I have read that Doves delight to be about the
waters; and surely Gods Spirit who descended in the likeness of a Dove, takes
great delight in the waters of Repentance. The Lord esteems no heart sound but
the broken heart, Psalm. 51. 17. The sacrifices of God are a broken spirit
Spiritus fractus est Dei holocaustum quo sum exhileratur. Fabritius.
. Mary stood at Jesus feet weeping, Luke 7. 38. She brought two things to
Christ (says Austin) unguentum and lachrymas, tears and ointment; her tears
were better than her ointment. Tears are powerful Orators for mercy; they are
silent, yet they have a voice, Psalm. 6. 8. Hear the voice of my ^eeping.

3. Repentance commends all our services 3 Motive.
to God. That is Gods savoury meat, which is seasoned with the bitter herbs of
godly sorrow. Hearing of the word ^s then good, when we are pricked at the
heart, Act. 2. 37. Prayer is delightful to God, when it ascends from the Altar
of a broken heart. The Publican smote upon his breast, saying, God be merciful
to me a sinner; this prayer pierced Heaven: He went away justified rather than
the other, Luke 18. 14. No prayer touches Gods ear, but what comes from an
heart touched with the sense of sin.

4. Without Repentance, nothing will 4.
avail us. Some bless themselves that they have a stock of knowledge, but what
is knowledge good for without Repentance? It is better to mortify one ^in,
than to understand all mysteries. Impure speculatists do but resemble Satan,
^ransformed into an Angel of light. Learning and a bad heart, is like a fair
face with a cancer in the breast. Knowledge without Repentance, will be but a
torch ^o light men to Hell.

5. Repenting tears are delitious; they 5.
may be compared to myrrh, which though it be bitter in taste, it has a sweet
smell, and refreshes the spirits: So Repentance, though it be bitter in it
self, yet it is sweet in the effects; it brings inward peace. The soul is never
more enlarged, and inwardly delighted, than when it can kindly melt. Alexander
upon the safe return of his Admiral Nearchus from a long voyage wept for joy
Camerari^s Hist. Med.
. How often do the Saints fall a weeping for joy! The Hebrew word to repent,
signifies (...) Consolari, in pyhel ^nitere. D^usius.
to take comfort *. None so joyful as the penitent. Tears (as the Philosopher
notes) have four qualities; they are moist, salt, hot, bitter. It Is true of
repenting tears; they are hot, to warm a frozen conscience; moist, to soften an
hard heart; salt, to season a soul putrefying in sin; bitter, to wean us from
the love of the world. And I will add a fifth they are sweet, in that they make
the heart inwardly rejoice, Ioh. 16. 22. Your sorrow shall be turned into joy.
Let a man (says Austin) grieve for his sin, and rejoice for his grief. Tears
are the bes^ sweetmeats Vis ergo O homo semper ^pulare, semper (...).
David who was the great weeper in Israel, was the sweet singer o^ Israel. The
sorrows of the penitent are like the sorrows of a traveling woman, Ioh. 16.
21. A woman in travel has sorrow, but as soon as she is delivered of the
child, she remembers no more the anguish, for joy that a man is born into the
world. So the sorrows of humbled sinners bring forth grace, and what joy is
there when this manchild is born! 6.


6. Great sins repented of, shall find mercy. Mary Magdalen, a great sinner,
when she washed Christ's feet with her tears, obtained pardon. Some of the Jews,
who had an hand in crucifying Christ, upon their Repentance, the very blood
they shed was a sovereign balm to heal them, Isa. 1. 18. Though your sins be as
scarlet, they shall be as white as snow. Scarlet in the Greek is called (...),
because it is twice dipped, and the art of man cannot wash out the dye again. But
though our sins are of a scarlet color, Gods mercy can wash them away. This
may comfort such whom the hainousness of sin discourageth, as if there were no
hope for them; yes, upon their serious turning to God, their sins shall be
expunged and done away.

Oh but my sins are out of measure sinful! do not make them greater by not
repenting. Repentance unravels sin, and makes it as if it had never been.

O but I have relapsed into sin after pardon, and sure there is no Novatiani
lap^is p^nitentibus veniam denegarunt.
mercy for me! I know the Novatians held, that after a relapse there was no
renewing by Repentance: But doubtless that was an error. The children of God
have relapsed into the same sin. Abraham did twice equivocate. Lot committed
incest twice. Asa, a good King, yet sinned twice by creature-confidence. Peter
twice by carnal fear, Matthew. 26. 70. Gal. 2. 12. But for the comfort of such as
have relapsed into sin more than once, if they solemnly repent, a white flag of
mercy shall be held forth to them. Christ commands us to forgive our
trespassing brother seventy times seven in one day, in case he repent, Mat. 18.
22. If the Lord bids us do it, will not he much more be ready to forgive upon
our Repentance? What is our forgiving mercy to his? this I speak not to
encourage any impenitent sinner, but to comfort a despondent sinner, that
thinks, it is in vain for him to repent, and that he is excluded from mercy.

7. Repentance is the inlet to spiritual 7.
^lessings; it helps to enrich us with ^ace; it causes the desert to blossom
as ^he Rose Isa. 35. 1.
; it makes the soul as the Egyp^an fields after the overflowing of Nilus,
^ourishing and fruitful. Never do the ^owers of grace grow more, than after a
^ower of repentant tears. Repentance ^auseth knowledge, 2 Cor. 3. 16. When ^eir
heart shall be turned to the Lord, the ^ail shall be taken away. The vail of
igno^nce which was drawn over the Jews ^yes, by Repentance should be taken
^way. Repentance inflames love. Weep^g Mary Magdalen loved much, Luke 7. 47.
^od preserves these springs of sorrow in ^e soul, to water the fruits of the
spirit Gal. 5 2^
.

8. Repentance ushers in temporal 8.
^lessings. The Prophet Joel persuading ^e people to Repentance, brings in the
^romise of secular good things, Joel 2. ^2, 19. Rent your heart, and not your
gar^ent, and turn unto the Lord, and the Lord ^ill answer and say to his
people, Behold I and you Corn, and Wine, and Oil. When ^e put water into the
Pump, it fetches ^p only water; but when we put the wa^er of tears into Gods
bottle, this fetches up wine. I will send you wine and oil. Sin blasts the
fruits of the earth, Hag. 1. 6. Ye have sown much, and bring in little Deus
punit fame neglectum sui. Lap.
. But Repentance makes the Pomgranate bud, and the Vine flourish with full
clusters. Fill Gods bottle, and he will fill your basket, Job 22. 23. If thou
return to the Almighty, thou shall lay up gold as dust. Repenting is a
returning to God, and this brings a golden harvest.

9. Repentance staves off judgments 9.
from a Land. When God is going to destroy a Nation, the penitent sinner stays
his hand, as the Angel did Abraham's, Genesis 22. 12. 'The Ninivites Repentance,
caused God to Sententiam revocavit excidii latam. Corn. L.
repent, Jonah 3. 10. God saw that they turned from their evil ways, and God
repented, etc. An outward Repentance has adjourned, and kept off wrath. Ahab,
who sold himself to work wickedness, yet upon his fasting and rending his
garments, says God to Eliah, I will not bring the evil in his days, 1 King.
21. 29. If the rending of the clothes did keep off judgment from the Nation
what will the rending of the heart do?

10. Repentance makes joy in Heaven. 10.
The Angels do as it were keep holy day, Luke 15. 10. There is joy in the
^resence of the Angels of God, over ^ne sinner that repents Exultare secimus
Angelos quando refipiscimus, currite fratres currite, non soli Angeli, sed and
ipse Angelorum vos creator expectat. Bern. Sermon. 2. in Vigil* Nativ.
. As ^raise is the music of Heaven, so Repentance is the joy of Heaven. When
men neglect the offer of salvation, and freeze in sin, this delights the
Devils; but when a soul is brought home to Christ by Repentance, this makes joy
among the Angels.

11. That which may cause tears to distill 11.
from our eyes, is to consider how dear our sins cost Christ. Christ is called
the Rock, 1 Cor. 10. 3. When his hands were pierced with nails, and the spear
was thrust in his side, then was this Rock smitten, and there came out water
and blood: And all this Christ endured for us Salutis nostrae avidus. Lemnius.
, Dan. 9. 26. The Messiah shall be cut off, but not for himself. We tasted the
Apple, and he the Vinegar and Gall Ego inique egi, and tu poena mulctaris. Aug.
. We sinned in every faculty, and he bled in every vein.

-- Cernis ut in toto corpore sculptus amor -- And can we look upon a suffering
Savior with dry eyes? Shall we not be sorry for those sins which made Christ a
man of sorrow? Shall not our enormities draw tears from us, which drew blood
from* Christ? Shall we sport any more with sin* and so rake in Christ's wounds?
Oh tha^ by Repentance we could crucify our sins afresh! The Jews said to
Pilate, Ioh. 19. 12. If thou let this man go, thou art not Cesars friend. If we
let* our sins go, and do not crucify them, we are not Christ's friends.

12. This is the end of all the afflictions 12.
God sends, whether it be sickness in our bodies, or losses in our estates,
that he may awaken us out of our sins, and make the waters of Repentance flow.
Why did God lead Israel that march in the wilderness among fiery Serpents, but
that he might humble them? Deuteronomy. 8. 2. Why did he bring Manasseh so low,
changing his Crown of Gold into fetters of Iron, but that he might learn
Repentance? 2 Chronicles. 33. 12, 13. He humbled himself greatly before the God of
his Fathers; then Manasseh knew that the Lord was good. One of the best ways
to cure a man of a Lethargy, is to cast him into a Fever. So when a person is
stupefied, and his conscience grown lethargical, God to cure him of this
distemper, puts him to extremity, and brings one burning calamity or other,
that he may startle him out of his security, and make him return to him by
Repentance. 13.


13. The days of our mourning will soon be ended De^eamus ad tempus ut
exultemus in ^ternum. A^.
. After a few showers that fall from our eyes, we shall have a perpetual
sunshine. Christ will provide an handkerchief to wipe off his peoples tears,
Rev. 7. 17. God will wipe away all tears. Christians, shortly you shall put on
your garments of praise: you shall exchange your Sackcloth, for white Robes:
instead of sighs, you shall have triumphs; instead of groans, Anthems; instead
of the water of tears, the water of life. The mourning of the Dove will be
past, and the time of singing of birds will come.

-- Volitant super aethera cantus -- This brings me to the next,

14. The happy and glorious reward ^4.
that follows upon Repentance, Romans 6. 22. Being made free from sin, ye have
your fruit unto holiness, and the end everlasting life. The leaves and root of
the Fig Tree are bitter, but the fruit is sweet. Repentance to the fleshy part
seems bitter, but behold sweet fruit, EVERLASTING LIFE. The Turks fancy after
this life an Elizi^m, or Paradise of Pleasure, where they have all dainty
dishes served in; they have gold in abundance, silken and purple apparel, and
Angels bringing them red wine in silver cups, and golden plates: Here is an
Epicures Heaven. But in the true Paradise of God, are those astonishing
delights, and rare viands served in, which eye has not seen, neither has it
entered into the heart of man to conceive (...) Origin. con^. Celsum.
. God will lead his penitents from the house of mourning, to the
banquettinghouse; no sight there but of glory; no noise but of music; no
sickness unless of love: There shall be holiness unspotted, and joy
unspeakable; then the Saints shall forget their solitary hours, and be sweetly
solacing themselves in God, and bathing in the Rivers of divine pleasure.

-- Flumina jam lactis, jam flumina nectaris* ibant, Planaque de viridi
stillabant ilice mella Ovid.
-- O Christian, what are thy duties compared with the recompense of reward?
what an infinite disproportion is there between Repentance enjoined, and glory
prepared? There was a feast day at Rome, wherein they used to crown their
fountains Varro. lib. 4.
. God will crown those heads which have been fountains of tears. Who would not
be willing to be a while in the house of mourning, that shall be possessed of
such glory, as put Peter and John into an ecstasy to see it but darkly,
shadowed and pourtrayed out in the transfiguration, Matthew. 17. O fruct^osa
poenitentia, O virgo amplectanda, O secunda nau^ragii tabula; miserorum
auxilium, spes exului^! vit^orum sera, virtutum apotheca: quae sola judicem
flectis; dum vulneras, sanas, dum (...) succumbis, gloriose triumphas; contra
tristitiam opponis gaudium, contra cinerem coronam. Hugo Vict.
This reward which free grace gives, is so transcendantly great, that could we
have but a glimpse of glory revealed to us here, we should need patience to be
content to live any longer. O blessed Repentance, that have such a light side
with thy dark, and have so much sugar at the bottom of thy bitter cup.

15. The next Motive to Repentance, 15.
is to consider the evil of impenitency: An hard heart is the worst heart; it
is called an heart of stone, Ezekiel. 36. 26. If it were Iron it might be
mollified in the furnace; but a Stone put in the fire will not melt, it will
sooner fly in your face. Impenitency is a sin grieves Christ, Mark 3. 5. Being
grieved for the hardness of their hearts. It is not so much the disease offends
the Physician, as the contempt of his Physic. Not the sins we have committed
do so much provoke and grieve Christ, as that we refuse the Physic of
Repentance which he prescribes. This aggravated Iezabels sin, Rev. 2. 21. I
gave her space to repent, yet she repented not. An hard heart receives no
impression Cor durum velut cera frigore iniquitatis obstricta signaculum
divinae imaginis non recipi^, Bernard.
; it is untuned for every duty. It was a sad speech Stephen Gardner uttered on
his deathbed, I have denied my Master with Peter, but I cannot repent with
Peter. O the plague of an obdurate heart! Pharaohs heart turned into stone, was
worse than his waters turned into blood. David had his choice of three
judgments, plague, sword and famine; but sure he would have chosen them all
rather than an hard heart. An impenitent sinner is neither allured by
entreaties Cor du^um nec compunctione scinditur, nec precibus flectitur, minis
non cedit, flagellis induratur; ad consilia infidum, ad turpia inverecundum ad
pericula impavidum. Bern. ad Eugen.
, nor affrighted by menaces. Such as will not weep with Peter, shall weep with
Judas. An hard heart is the Anvi^ on which the hammer of Gods justice will be
striking to all eternity.

16. The last Motive to Repentance is, 16.
the day of judgment is coming. This is the Apostles own Argument, Act. 17.
31. God commands men every where to repent, because he has appointed a day in
which he will judge the world. There is that in the day of judgment, which may
make a stony heart bleed. Will a man go on thieving when the Assizes are nigh?
Will the sinner go on sinning when the day of judgment is so nigh? Thou can
no more conceal thy sin, than thou can defend it; and what will thou do when
all thy sins shall be written in Gods Book, and engraven on thy forehead? O
direful day, when Jesus Christ clothed in his Judges Robe, shall say to the
sinner, stand forth, answer to the Indictment brought against thee. What can
thou say for all thy oaths, adulteries, and thy desperate impenitency? O how
amazed and stricken with consternation will the sinner be! and after his
conviction, he must hear the sad sentence, Depart from me. Then, he who would
not repent of his sins, shall repent of his ^olly: If then there be such a time
a coming, wherein God will judge men for their impieties, what a spur should
this be to Repentance! The penitent soul shall at the last day lift up his head
with comfort, and have a discharge to show under the Judges own hand.

CHAP. IX. Exhorting to speedy Repentance.
THE second branch of the Exhortation Use Exhort.
is, to press persons to speedy 2 Branch.
Repentance, Act. 17. 30. Now God commands men every where to repent (...)
. The Lord would not have any of the late Autumn fruits offered to him. God
loves early penitents that consecrate the spring and flower of their age to
him. Early tears, like Pearls b^ed of the morning dew, are more orient and
beautiful. Oh do not reserve the dregs of your age for God, lest he reserve the
dregs of his cup for you! Be as speedy in your Repentance, as you would have
God speedy in his mercies, 1 Samuel 21. 8. The Kings business required haste: So
Repentance requires haste.

It Is natural to us to procrastinate and put off Repentance. We say as Hag. 1.
2. The time is not yet come. No man almost is so bad, but purposes he will
amend, but he adjourns and prorogues so long, till at last all his purposes
prove abortive Modo and modo and hoc erat sine modo. Aug.
. Many are now in Hell that purposed to repent. Satan does what he can to keep
men from Repentance: when he sees they begin to take up serious thoughts of
reformation, he bids them stay a while longer. If this traitor sin must die
(says Satan) let it not die yet: So the Devil gets a reprieve for sin, it
shall not die this Sessions: at last men put off so long, that death seizes on
them, and their work is not done.

Let me therefore lay down some cogent Arguments to persuade to speedy
Repentance.

1. Now is the season of Repentance; Arg. 1.
and every thing is best done in its season, 2 Cor. 6. 2. Now is the accepted
time (...). Tempus dignum ^uod ad omnibus plausu and mira exultatione
suscipiatur; (...) salutem adferen^ mundo. L^p.
. Now God has a mind to show mercy to the penitent, he is on the giving hand.
Kings set apart days for healing. Now is the healing day for our souls; now
God hangs forth the white flag, and is willing to parley with sinners. A Prince
at his coronation as an Act of Royalty, gives money, proclaims pardons, fills
the conduits with wine: Now God proclaims pardons to penitent sinners; now the
conduit of the Gospel runs wine; now is the accepted time; therefore now come
in and make your peace with God; now break off your iniquities by Repentance:
it is wisdom to take the season The Husbandman takes the season for sowing his
seed: now is the seed-time for our souls.

2. The sooner you repent, the fewer Arg. 2.
sins you will have to answer for. Were you at the deathbed of an old sinner,
when conscience begins to be awakened, and should hear him crying out, here are
all my old sins come about me, haunting my deathbed as so many evil spirits,
and I have no discharge; here is Satan who was once my tempter, is now become
my accuser, and I have no Advocate; I am now going to be dragged before Gods
judgment seat, where I must receive my final doom. Oh how dismal is the case
of this man, he is in Hell before his time! but you who repent betimes of your
sinful courses, this is your privilege, you will have the less to answer for;
nay, let me tell you, you will have nothing to answer for, Christ will answer
for you; your Judge will be your Advocate, 1 Ioh. 2. 1. Father, will Christ
say, here is one that has been a great sinner, yet a brokenhearted sinner, if
he owes any thing to thy justice, set it on my score.

3. The sooner we repent, the more Arg. 3.
glory we may bring to God. It Is the end of our living, to be useful in our
generation: better lose our lives, than the end of our living. Late converts
who have for many years taken pay on the Devils side, are not in a capacity of
doing so much work in the Vineyard. The thief on the Cross could not do that
service for God as St. Paul did. But when we do betimes turn from sin, then we
give God the first fruits of our lives; we spend and are spent for Christ. The
more work we do for God, the more willing we shall be to die, and the sweeter
death will be. He that has wrought hard at his day-labour, is willing to go to
rest at night. Such as have been honoring God all their lives, how sweetly
will they sleep in the grave! The more work we do for God, the greater will our
reward be. He whose pound had gained ten pounds, Christ did not only commend
him, but advance him, Luke 19. 17. Have thou authority over ten Cities Es^o ex
primis proceribus Regnimei. Brugens. Tanquam stella sublimior fulge. Bed^.
By late Repentance, though we do not lose our Crown, yet we make it lighter.

4. It is of dangerous consequence to Arg. 4.
put off Repentance longer.

-- Mora trahit periculum -- It is dangerous, If we consider what sin is. Sin
is a poison 1.
Dulce venenum. Ber^.
; it is dangerous to let poison lie long in the body. Sin is a bruise Isa. 1. 6.
; if a bruise be not soon cured, it gangrenes and kills: If sin be not soon
cured by Repentance, it festers the conscience, and damns. Why should any love
to dwell in the tents of wickedness? They are under the power of Satan, Act.
26. 18. And it is dangerous to stay long in the enemies quarters.

It is dangerous to procrastinate Repentance; 2.
because, the longer any go on in sin, the harder they will find the work of
Repentance. Delay strengthens sin, and hardens the heart, and gives the Devil
fuller possession. A plant at first may be easily plucked up (...), etc.
Chrys^st.
, but when it has spread its roots deep in the earth, a whole team cannot
remove it: It Is hard to remove sin when once it comes to be rooted. The longer
the Ice freezeth, the harder it is to be broken: the longer a man freezeth in
security, the harder it will be to have his heart broken: the longer any travel
with iniquity, the sharper pangs they must expect in the new birth. When sin
has got an haunt, it is not easily shaken off. Sin comes to a sinner, as the
elder Brother came to his Father, Luke 15. 29. Lo these many years have I
served thee, neither at any time transgressed I thy Commandment, and will thou
cast me off now? what in mine old age, after thou have had so much pleasure by
me? See how sin pleads custom, and that is a Leopards spot Lanarum conchylia
quis in pristinum candorem revocet? Hierom.
, Ier. 13. 23.

It is dangerous to prorogue and delay 3.
Repentance, because there are three days may soon expire.

1. The day of the Gospel may expire; this is a sun-shiny-day; it is sweet, but
swift. Jerusalem had a day, but lost it, Luke 19. 42. But now they are hid from
thine eyes Est vero hic aposiopesis non ^ine maxima ene^gia. (...).
. The Asian Churches had a day, but at last the Golden Candlestick was removed:
It would be a sad time in England see to the glory departed. With what hearts
could we follow the Gospel to the grave? To lose the Gospel, were far worse
than to have our City Charter taken from us. Gray hairs are here and there,
Hos. 7. 9. I will not say the Sun of the Gospel is set in England, but I am
sure it is under a cloud. That was a sad speech, Matthew. 21. 43. The Kingdom of
God shall be taken from you: therefore it is dangerous to delay Repentance,
lest the market of the Gospel should remove, and the vision cease (...).
D^maseen.
.

A man's personal day of grace may expire. 2.
What if that time should come, wherein God should say, the Means of Grace
shall do no good; Ordinances shall have a miscarrying womb, and dry breasts.
Were it not sad to adjourn Repentance till such a decree came forth Currat
poen^tentia, ne praecurrat sententia. Chrysologus.
? It Is true, no man can justly tell that his day of grace is past; but there
are two shrewd signs by which he may fear it.

1. When conscience has done preaching. Conscience is a bosom-Preacher;
sometimes it convinces, sometimes it reproves: It says as Nathan to David,
Thou art the man. But men imprison this Preacher, and God says to conscience,
preach no more: He that is filthy, let him be filthy still. This is a fatal
sign a man's day of grace is past.

2. When a person is in such a spiritual ^ethargy, that nothing will work upon
him, or make him sensible. There is (...), the spirit of a deep sleep poured on
him, Isa. 29. 10. This is a sad presage his day of grace is past. How dangerous
then is it to delay Repentance when the day of grace may so soon expire!

3. The day of life may expire; what security have we that we shall live
another * (...). Philo. Jud.
day? We are marching apace out of the world; we are going off the stage; our
life is a taper soon blown out. Man's life is compared to the flower of the
field, Psalm. 103. 15. which withers sooner than the grass Viret gloria hominis
quasi flos soeni, hodie aliquem videas pubescentis aetatis virtute florentem,
grata specie, suavi color, cras, instar herbae foeni occasum patitur. Ambr.
Hexam. lib. 3.
. Our age is (...) as nothing, Psalm. 39. 5. Life is but a flying shadow. The
body is like a ves^el tunned with a little breath; sickness broacheth this
vessel, death draws it out. O how soon may the scene alter Mortalium vita quid
aliud quam scena? in qua alii aliis obtecti personis procedunt, agunto; suas
quisque parts, donec Choragus statim educat e prosce^io. Erasm.
! Many a Virgin has been dressed the same day in her bride-apparel and her
windingsheet! How dangerous then is it to adjourn repenting, when death may so
suddenly make a thrust at us. Say not, you will repent to morrow Sera nimis
vita est crastina. Mart.
: Remember that speech of Aquinas; God who pardons him that repents, has not
promised to give him to morrow to repent in. I have read of Archias, a
Lacedemonian, who being among his cups, one delivered him a Letter, and desired
him to read the Letter presently, being of serious business; he replied, seria
cras, I will mind serious things to morrow Plutarch.
; and that day he was slain. Thus, while men think to spin out their silver
thread, death cu^s it. Olaus Magnus observes of the Birds of Norway, that they
fly faster than the Birds of any other Country; not that their wings are
swifter than others, but by an instinct of nature, they knowing the days in
that climate to be very short, not above three hours long, do therefore make
the more haste to their nests: So we knowing the shortness of our lives, and
how quickly we may be called away by death, should fly so much the faster on
the wing of Repentance to Heaven.

But methinks I hear some say, they do Object.
not fear a sudden surprizal, they will repent upon their sickbed.

I do not so well like a sickbed Repentance Answ.
Poenitentia sera ^aro vera.
: He runs a desperate hazard, who will venture his salvation within the circle
of a few short minutes. Thou that put off Repentance till sickness, answer
me to these four queries.

1. How do thou know thou shall have a time of sickness? Death does not
always shoot its warning-piece by a lingering consumption; some it arrests
suddenly. What if God should presently send thee a summons to surrender thy
life!

2. Suppose thou should have a time of sickness, how do thou know thou
shall have the use of thy senses? Many are distracted on their sickbed.

3. Suppose thou should have thy senses, yet how do thou know thy mind
will be in frame for such a work as Repentance? Sickness does so discompose
body and mind, that one is but in an ill posture at such a time to take care
for his soul. In sickness a man is scarce fit to make his will, much less to
make his peace. The Apostle says, Is any sick among you, let him call for the
Elders of the Church, Iam. 5. 14. He does not say, is he sick, let him pray;
but let him call for the Elders that they may pray over him. A sick man is very
unfit to pray, or repent; he is like to make but sick work of it. When the body
is out of tune, the soul must needs jar in its devotion. Upon a sick bed a
person is more fit to exercise impatience, than Repentance. We read, that at
the pouring out of the fourth Vial, when God did smite the Inhabitants, and
scorched them with fire; They blasphemed the Name of God, and repented not,
Rev. 16. 9. So when the Lord pours out his Vial, and scorcheth the body with a
Fever, the sinner is fitter to blaspheme than repent.

4. How do thou who put off all to a sick bed, know, that God will give
thee in that very juncture of time grace to repent? The Lord usually punishes
neglect of Repentance in time of health, with hardness of heart in time of
sickness Multos peccati Veteranus ita con^opivit, ut ad seriam in ultimo agone
resipiscentiam nunquam perven^unt. Baldwin de Cas. Consc.
. Thou have in thy life time repulsed the Spirit of God, and art thou sure it
will come at thy call? Thou have not taken the first season, and perhaps thou
shall never see another spring-tyde of the Spirit more: All this considered,
may hasten our Repentance. Do not lay too much weight upon a sickbed, 2 Timothy 4.
21. Do thy diligence to come before winter. There is a winter of sickness, and
death a coming, therefore make haste to repent; let thy work be ready before
winter. To day hear Gods voice, Heb. 3. 7.

CHAP. X. The Trial of our Repentance.
IF any shall say, they have repented, let me desire them to try themselves
seriously by those seven Adjuncts or Effects of Repentance which the Apostle
lays down, 2 Cor. 7. 11. Exigunt (...) ^c vera pietatis a fucata distinguatur.
De Rive^.


1. Carefulness. The Greek word 1 Effect.
(...).
signifies a solicitous diligence, or careful shunning all temptations to sin.
The true penitentiary flies from sin, as Moses did from the Serpent Qui peniter
solicitus est ne peccet. Ambrose.
.

2. Clearing of our selves. The Greek word 2 Effect.
is Apology (...). Refutatio objecti criminis. Maldon.
. The sense is this, though we have never so much care, yet through strength of
temptation, we may slip into sin: now in this case the repenting soul will not
let sin lie festring in his conscience, but does judge himself for his sin; he
pours out tears before the Lord; he begs mercy in the Name of Christ, and never
leaves till he has gotten his pardon: Here he is cleared of guilt in his
conscience, and is able to make an Apology for himself against Satan. 3 Effect.


3. Indignation. He that repents of sin, his spirit rises against it
Poenitentia virtus est in irascibili. Bonavent. distinct. 14. ar^* 2. q^. 1. l.
4.
; as ones blood rises at the sight of him whom he mortally hates. Indignation
is a being fretted at the heart with sin. The penitent is vexed with himself.
David calls himself a fool and a beast Quid feci? quo prolapsus sum? itane
demens fui?
, Psalm. 73. 22. God is never better pleased with us, than when we fall out with
our selves for sin Quid est poenitens nisi homo iratus sibi? Aug. in L^c. Sermon.
35.
. 4 Effect.


4. Fear. A tender heart is ever a trembling heart. The penitent has felt sins
bitterness; this Hornet has stung him, and now having hopes that God is
reconciled, he is afraid to come near sin any more. The repenting soul is full
of fear; he is afraid to lose Gods favor, which is better than life; he is
afraid he should for want of diligence come short of salvation; he is afraid
lest after his heart has been soft, the waters of Repentance should freeze,
and he should harden in sin again, Prove. 28. 14. Happy is he that fears
always. A sinner is like the Leviathan, who is made without fear, Job 41. 29.
A repenting person fears and sins not, a graceless person sins and fears not.

5. Vehement desire. Sour sauce sharpens 5 Effect.
the appetite: So the bitter herbs of Repentance sharpen desire: But what does
the penitent desire? he desires more power against sin, and to be released from
it. It Is true, he has got loose from Satan, but he goes as a prisoner that
has broke Prison, with a fetter on his leg; he cannot walk with that freedom
and swiftness in the ways of God; he desires therefore to have the fetters of
sin taken off; he would be freed from corruption; he cries out with Paul, Who
shall deliver me from this body of death? Romans 7. 24. In short, he desires to
be with Christ, as every thing desires to be in its center.

6. Zeal. Desire and zeal are fitly put together; 6 Effect.
to show, that true desire puts forth it self in zealous endeavor. How does
the penitent bestir himself in the business of salvation! How does he take the
Kingdom of Heaven by force! Matthew. 11. 12. Zeal quickens the pursuit after
glory. Zeal encounters with difficulty, is imboldened by opposition, tramples
upon danger. Zeal makes a repenting soul persist in godly sorrow against all
discouragements and oppositions whatsoever. Zeal carries a man above himself
for Gods glory. Paul before conversion was mad against the Saints, Act. 26. 11.
And after conversion he was judged mad for Christ's sake, Act. 26. 4. Paul, thou
art besides thy self. But it was Zeal, not Phrenzy. Zeal does spirit and
animate duty; it causes fervency in Religion, which is as fire to the
sacrifice, Romans 12. 11. (...).
As fear is a bridle to sin, so Zeal is a spur to duty.

7. Revenge. A true Penetentiary pursues 7 Effect.
his sins with an holy malice; he seeks the death of them: As Sampson was
avenged on the Philistines for his two eyes: He uses his sins, as the Jews
used Christ; he gives them gall and vinegar to drink; he crucifies his lusts,
Gal. 5. 24. Qu^ severi^res in nos sumus eo sperare debemus magis propitium
Dominum. Calvin lib. 3. Instit.
A true child of God seeks to be revenged most of those sins which have
dishonored God most. Cranmer, who had with his right hand subscribed the
Popish Articles, was revenged on himself, he put his right hand first in the
fire Act and Monum. 1714.
. David did by sin defile his bed, after by Repentance he watered his bed with
tears. Israel had sinned by Idolatry, and afterward they did offer disgrace to
their Idols, 1 Samuel 30. 22. Ye shall defile the covering of thy graven Images
of silver. Mary Magdalen had before sinned in her eye, by adulterous glances,
and now she will be revenged on her eyes; she washes Christ's feet with her
tears Aquam ex oculis hausi^, ut quibus lascive fuer^t abusa, eos mordaci
lachrymarum cop^a castigaret. Brugens.
; she had sinned in her hair, it had entangled her Lovers; now she will be
revenged on her hair; she wipes Christ's feet with it Turpanda est facies
(inquit Paula) quam contra Dei praeceptum purpurisso, cerussa, and stybio saepe
depinxi, affl^gendum est corpus quod multis vacavit delitiis; mollia and s^a
pretiosissima asperitate cilicii co^mutanda. H^erom. in ejus Epitaph*
. The Israelitish women, who had been dressing themselves by the hour, and had
abused their Looking-glasses to pride, afterward by way of revenge as well as
zeal, offered their Looking-glasses to the use and service of Gods Tabernacle,
Exodus 38. 8. So those Conjurers who used curious Arts, o^ Magic (as it is in
the Syriack) when once they repented, brought their Books, and by way of
revenge burned them, Act. 19. 19. These are the blessed fruits and products of
Repentance; and if we can find these in our souls, we have arrived at that
Repentance which is never to be repented of.

CHAP. XI. A necessary Caution inserted.
SUch as have solemnly repented of their sins, let me speak to them,

1. By way of Caution. Though Repentance 1.
be so necessary and excellent as you have heard, yet take heed that you do not
ascribe too much to Repentance. The Papists are guilty of a double error; 1.
They make Repentance a Sacrament Scotus qu. 4. did. 14. Occam qu. 2. Gerson.
. Christ never made it so; and who may institute Sacraments, but he who can
give virtue to them? Repentance can be no Sacrament, because it wants an
outward sign. A Sacrament cannot properly be without a sign.

2. The Papists make Repentance meritorious: they say it does ex congruo merit
pardon Andreas Vega.
; this is a gross error. Indeed Repentance fits us for mercy. As the Plough
when it breaks up the ground, fits it for the seed: So when the heart is broken
up by Repentance, it is fitted for remission, but it does not merit it (...).
Chrysostom.
. God will not save us without Repentance, nor yet for it. Repentance is a
qualification, not a cause. I grant repenting tears are precious; they are, as
Gregory says, the fat of the sacrifice. And as Basil says, the medicine of
the soul. And as Bernard, the wine of Angels Lac^ymae poenitentium sunt vinum
Angelo rum. Bern. Sermon. 30. in Cant.
; but yet tears are not satisfactory for sin. We drop sin with our tears,
therefore they cannot satisfy. Austin says well, I have read of Peter's tears,
but no man ever read of Peter's satisfaction. Christ's blood only can merit
pardon Remissio quam resipiscentes adipiscuntur, causam habet in satisfactione
pro ipsis praestita. M^sius cont. Crellium.
. We please God by Repentance, but we do not satisfy him by it. To trust to
our Repentance, is to make it a Savior. Though Repentance helps to purge out
the filth of sin, yet it is Christ's blood washes away the guilt of sin Lavat
nos lachrymarum imber, magis autem lavat aqua illa preciosa quae de Font
P^atis, i. e. latere Christi emanavit. Bern. in dedicat. Eccles.
; therefore do not idolize Repentance: Do not rest upon this, that your heart
has been wounded for sin, but rather, that your Savior has been wounded for
sin. When you have wept, say as he, Lord Jesus, wash my tears in thy blood
Lava* Domine lachrymas meas.
.

CHAP. XII. Comfort to the Repenting Sinner.
2. LET me in the next place speak by 2.
way of comfort. Christian, has God given thee a repenting heart, know these
three things for thy everlasting comfort.

1. Thy sins are pardoned. Pardon of 1 Comfort.
sin circumscribes blessedness within it, Psalm. 32. 1. Whom God pardons, he
crowns, Psalm. 1^3. 4. Who forgiveth thy iniquities, who crowns thee with
loving kindness. A repenting condition is a pardoned condition. Christ said to
that weeping woman, Thy sins which are many are forgiven, Luke 7. 47. Pardons
are sealed upon soft hearts: O thou whose head has been a fountain to weep for
sin, Christ's side will be a fountain to wash away sin, Zach. 13. 1. Have thou
repented? God looks upon thee as if thou had not offended; he becomes a
friend, a father; he will now bring forth the best Robe, and put it on thee:
God is pacified toward thee, and will with the Father of the Prodigal, fall
upon thy neck and kiss thee. Sin in Scripture is compared to a cloud, Isa. 44.
22. No sooner is this cloud scattered by Repentance, but pardoning love shines
forth. Paul, after his Repentance, obtained mercy, 1 Timothy 1. 16. (...), I was
all bestrowed with mercy. When a spring of Repentance is open in the heart, a
spring of mercy is open in Heaven.

2. God will pass an Act of Oblivion; 2 Comfort.
he so forgives sin, as he forgets, Ier. 31. 34. I will remember their sin no
more. Have thou been penitentially humbled? the Lord will never upbraid thee
with thy former sins. After Peter wept, we never read that Christ upbraid^d him
with his denial of him. God has cast thy sins into the depth of the Sea, Micah
7. 19. How? not as Cork, but as Lead. The Lord will never in a judicial way
account for them. God when he pardons, does as a Creditor that blots the debt
out of his (...) delens.
Book, Isa. 43. 25. *. Some move the question, whether the sins of the godly
shall be mentioned at the last day? The Lord says, he will not remember them;
and he is blotting them out: So that if their sins be mentioned, it shall not
be to their prejudice, for the debt-book is crossed.

3. Conscience will now speak peace Tranquilla conscientia tranquillat omnia.
. 3 Comfort.
O the music of conscience! Conscience is turned into a paradise, and there a
Christian does sweetly solace himself, and pluck the flowers of joy, 2 Cor. 1.
12. The repenting sinner can go to God with boldness in prayer, and look upon
him not as a Judge, but a Father. He is born of God, and is heir to a Kingdom,
Luke 6. 20. He is incircled with Promises; he no sooner shakes the tree of the
Promise, but some fruit falls.

To conclude, the true penitentiary may look on death with comfort; his life
has been a life of tears, and now at death all tears shall be wiped away*
Death shall not be a destruction, but a Jail-deliver. Thus you see what great
comfort remains for repenting sinners. Luther said, before his conversion he
could not endure that bitter word Repentance, but afterward he found much
sweetness in it.

CHAP. XIII. The resolving of a Question.
SOme may propound a question, Whether Quest.
must our Repentance and sorrow be always alike?

A. Though Repentance must be always Answ.
kept alive in the soul, yet there are two special times wherein we must renew
our Repentance in an extraordinary manner.

1. Before the receiving of the Lords 1.
Supper. This spiritual Passover is to be eaten with bitter herbs. Now our
eyes should be fresh broached with tears, and the stream of sorrow overflow. A
repenting frame is a sacramental frame. A broken heart, and a broken Christ, do
well agree. The more bitterness we taste in sin, the more sweetness we shall
taste in Christ. When Jacob wept, he found God; And he called the name of the
place Peniel, for I have seen God face to face, Genesis 32, 30. The way to find
Christ comfortably in the Sacrament, is to go weeping thither. Christ will say
to an humble penitent, as to Thomas, Reach hither thy hand, and thrust it into
my side Joh. 20. 27.
, and let those bleeding wounds of mine heal thee.

Another time of extraordinary Repentance 2.
is, at the hour of death. This should be (...), a weeping season. Now is our
last work to be done for Heaven, and our best wine of tears should be kept
against such a time. We should repent now, that we have sinned so much, and
wept so little* that Gods bag has been so full Job 14. 17.
, and his bottle so empty. We should repent now, that we repented no sooner:
that the garrisons of our hearts, held out so long against God, ere they were
levelled by Repentance. We should repent now, that we have loved Christ no
more; that we have fetched no more virtue from him, and brought no more glory
to him. It should be our grief on our deathbed, that our lives have had so
many blanks and blots in them; that our duties have been so fly-blown with sin;
that our obedience has been so imperfect, and we have gone so lame in the
ways of God. When the soul is going out of the body, it should swim to Heaven
in a Sea of tears.

CHAP. XIV. The removing the Impediments of Repentance.
BEfore I lay down the Expedients and Means conducing to Repentance, I shall
first remove the Impediments. In this great City, when you want water, you
search the cause, whether the Pipes are broken or stopped, that the current of
water is hindered: So when no water of Repentance comes (though we have the
Conduit-pipes of Ordinances) see what the cause is; where is the stop that
these penitential waters do not run. There are ten Impediments of Repentance.

1. Men do not apprehend that they 1 Imped.
need Repentance; they thank God all is well with them, and they know nothing
they should repent of, Rev. 3. 17. Thou say, I am rich, and have need of
nothing. He who apprehends not any distemper in his body, will not take the
Physic prescribed. This is the mischief sin has done; it has not only made
us sick, but senseless. When the Lord bade the people return to him Revertimini
ad me per resipiscentiam, and revertar ad vos per beneficentiam.
, they answered stubbornly, Wherein should we return? Mal. 3. 7. So when God
bids men repent, they say, wherefore should they repent? they know nothing they
have done amiss. Surely no disease worse than that which is Apoplectical.

2. People conceit it an easy thing to 2 Imped.
repent: It is but saying a few prayers; a sigh, or a Lord have mercy, and the
work is done. This conceit of the easiness of Repentance, is a great hinderance
to it. That which makes a person bold, and adventrous in sin, must needs
obstruct Repentance; but this opinion does make a person bold in sin. The
Angler can let out his line as far as he will, and then pull it in again: So
when a man thinks he can lash out in sin as far as he will, and then pull in by
Repentance when he list, this must needs imbolden him in wickedness. But to
take away this false conceit of the easiness of Repentance, consider, 1. A
wicked man has a mountain of guilt upon him, and is it easy to rise up under
such a weight? Is salvation per saltum? Can a man jump out of sin into Heaven?
Can he leap out of the Devils arms into Abraham's bosom? 2. If all the power in
a sinner be employed against Repentance, then it is not easy. All the
faculties of a natural man join issue with sin, Ier. 2. 25. I have loved
strangers, and after them will I go. A sinner will rather lose Christ and
Heaven, than his lusts: death, which parts man and wife, will not part a wicked
man and his sins; and is it so easy to repent? The Angel rolled away the stone
from the Sepulcher; but no Angel, only God himself can roll away the stone from
the the heart. 3 Imped.


3. Presuming thoughts of Gods mercy. Many suck poison from this sweet flower.
Christ who came into the world to save sinners, 1 Timothy 1. 15. is accidentally
the occasion of many a man's perishing. Though to the Elect he is the bread of
life, yet to the wicked he is (...), a stone of stumbling, 1 Pet. 2. 7. * To
some (...) Lapis in quem graviter impingunt. Estius.
his blood is sweet wine, to others the water of Marah. Some are softened by
this Sun of Righteousness, others are hardened. Oh says one, Christ has died,
he has done all for me, therefore I may sit still and do nothing. Thus they
suck death from the Tree of Life, and perish by a Savior. So I may say of Gods
mercy, it is accidentally the cause of many a ones ruin: Because of mercy men
presume, and think they may go on in sin: But, should a Kings clemency make his
subjects rebel? The Psalmist says, there is mercy with God, that he may be
feared, Psalm. 130. 4. but not that we may sin. Can men expect mercy by
provoking justice? God will hardly show them mercy, who sin because mercy
abounds. 4 Imped.


4. A supine sluggish temper. Repentance is looked upon as a tedious thing, and
such as requires much industry, and men are settled upon their lees, and care
not to stir: They had rather go sleeping to Hell, than weeping to Heaven, Prove.
19. 24. A slothful man hides his hands in his bosom; he will not be at the
labor of smiting on his breast (...). Chrysostom.
. Many will rather lose Heaven, than ply the oar, and row thither upon the
waters of Repentance. We cannot have the world citra pulverem, without labor
and diligence, and would we have that which is more excellent Ut rosa de spinis
nascitur, sic de tristibus, and asperis fructus capitur jucundissimus. Erasm.
? Sloth is the canker of the soul, Prove. 19. 15. Slothfulness casts into a deep
sleep. It was a witty fiction of the Poets, when Mercury had cast Argus into a
sleep, and with an enchanted Rod closed his eyes, then he killed him. When
Satan has by his witcheries lulled men asleep in sloth, then he destroys
them. Some report, while the Crockadil sleeps with his mouth open, the Indian
Rat gets into his belly, and eats up his entrails: So while men sleep in
security, they are devoured.

5. Another obstruction of Repentance 5 Imped.
is the tickling pleasure of sin, ^ These. 2. 12. Who take pleasure in
unrighteousness. Sin is a sugared draught, but mixed with poison. The sinner
thinks there is danger in sin, but there is delight, and the danger does not so
terrify him, as the delight bewitcheth him. Plato calls love of sin, a great
Devil Magnus Demon.
. Delighting in sin hardens the heart. In true Repentance there must be a
grieving for sin; but how can one grieve for that which he loves. He who
delights in sin can hardly pray against it; his heart is so inveagled with sin,
that he is afraid of leaving it too soon. Sampson doted on Dalilahs beauty, and
her lap proved his grave. When a man rolls iniquity as a Sugared lump under his
tongue, it infatuates him, and is his death at last. Delight in sin Momentaneum
est quod delectat, aeternum quod cruciat.
is a silken halter, 2 Samuel 2. 26. Will it not be bitterness in the latter end?

6. An opinion that Repentance will 6 Imped.
take away our joy; but that is a mistake; it does not crucify, but clarify
our joy, and take it off from the fulsom lees of sin. What is all earthly joy?
it is but Hilaris insania, a pleasant phrensy.

-- Falsa inter gaudia noctem (...) Virgil.
-- Worldly mirth is but like a feigned laugh; it has sorrow following at the
heels Extrema gaudii luctus occupat.
. As the Magitians Rod, it is instantly turned into a Serpent: But divine
Repentance like Sampsons Lion, has an honeycomb in it. Gods Kingdom consists
as well in joy, as in righteousness, Romans 4. 17. None are so truly cheerful as
penitent ones.

-- Est quaedam flere voluptas -- * Ovid.
The oil of joy is poured chiefly into a broken heart, Isa. 61. 3. The oil of
joy for mourning. In the fields near Palermo, grow great plenty of Reeds, in
which there is a sweet juice of which sugar is made: So in a penitent heart,
which is the bruised Reed, grow the sugared joys of Gods Spirit. God turns the
water of tears, into the juice of the grape, which exhilerates and makes glad
the heart. Who should rejoice if not the repenting soul? he is heir to all the
Promises, and is not that matter of joy? God dwells in a contrite heart, and
must there not needs be joy there? Isa. 55. 17. I dwell with a contrite spirit,
to revive the heart of the contrite ones. Repentance does not take away a
Christians music, but raiseeth it a note higher, and makes it sweeter (...) in
(...) sancti^ vultus ^rum nunquam gratiori serenitate splendere, quando gratia
comp^ctionis corda ^orum amaricav^rit and lachrymis or^ perfuderit. (...)
Pariens. de virtute.
.

7. Another obstacle of Repentance is, 7 Imped.
despondency of mind. Oh says a sinner, it is a vain thing for me to set upon
Repentance; my sins are of that magnitude, that there is no hope for me
Desperare est in infernum descendere. Isidor.
, Ier. 18. 11, 12. Return ye now every one from his evil way, and they said,
there is no hope. Our sins are mountains, and how shall these ever be cast into
the Sea? Where unbelief represents sin in its bloody colors, and God in his
Judges Robes, the soul will sooner fly from him, than to him: This is
dangerous: Other sins need mercy, but despair rejects mercy; it throws the
cordial of Christ's blood on the ground. Judas was not damned only for his
treason and murder, but it was his distrust of Gods mercy destroyed him. Why
should we entertain such hard thoughts of God? he has bowels of love to
repenting sinners (...) Commiserans ex intimis visceribus, (...). Si multa sunt
peccata, multa ^st misericordia, and adhuc de spe decidis O peccator?
Quistorpius.
, Joel 2. 13. Mercy rejoices over justice. Gods anger is not so hot, but mercy
can cool it; nor so sharp, but mercy can sweeten it Quanta esset vis mellis
quae fell dulcoraret? long major vis ^onitatis Dei, etc.
. God counts his mercy his glory, Exodus 33. 18, 19. We have some drops of mercy
our selves, but God is the Father of mercies, who begets all the mercies that
are in us. He is the God of bowels (...) est misericordia visceralis, cum
scilicet q is alteri^s miseria ex intimis medullis ita tangitur, ut videatur
velle sua viscera in eum effundere.
. No sooner do we mourn, but Gods heart melts: no sooner do our tears fall, but
Gods repentings kindle, Hos. 11. 8. Say not then, there is no hope. Disband the
army of thy sins, and God will sound a retreat to his judgments. Remember,
great sins have been swallowed up in the Sea of Gods infinite compassions.
Manasseh made the streets run with blood, yet when his ^ead was a fountain of
tears, God grew propitious.

8. Hope of impunity. Men flatter themselves 8. Imped.
in fin* and think God having spared them all this while, he never intends to *
Impii benignitate Dei abutentes gaudent impunitate. Pareus.
punish; because the Assizes are put off therefore, surely there will be no
Assizes, Psalm. 10. 11. He has said in his heart, God has forgotten, he hides
his face, he will never see it. The Lord indeed is long-suffering toward
sinners, and would by his patience bribe them to Repentance, but here is their
wretchedness, because he forbears to punish, they forbear to repent. Know, that
the lease of Patience will soon be run out. There is a time when God says, My
Spirit shall no longer strive. A creditor may forbear his debtor, but
forbearance does not excuse the payment. God takes notice how long the glass of
his patience has been running, Rev. 2. 21. I gave her space to repent, but she
repented not. Iezabel added to her incontinency, impenitency, and what follows?
verse. 22. Behold I will cast her into a bed: Not a bed of pleasure, but a bed
of languishing, where she shall consume away in her iniquity. The longer Gods
Arrow is drawing, the deeper it wounds. Sins against patience, will make a man's
Hell so much the hotter*

The next Impediment of Repentance, 9 Imped.
is, fear of reproach: If I repent, I shall expose my self to men's scorns. The
Heathen man could say, when thou appliest thy self to the study of wisdom,
prepare for sarcasms and reproaches (...). Epictetus.
. But consider well who they are that reproach thee: they are such as are
ignorant of God Quid enim iniquius, quam ut oderint homines quod ignorant?
Tertull.
, and spiritually phrantick; and art thou troubled to have them reproach thee,
who are not well in their wits? who minds a mad man's laughing at him?

What do the wicked reproach thee for? is it because thou repentest? thou art
doing thy duty; bind their reproaches as a Crown about thy head. It Is better
that men should reproach thee for repenting, than that God should damn thee for
not repenting.

3. If thou can not bear a reproach for Religion, never call thy self
Christian; Christianus quasi crucianus Luther.
. Suffering is a Saints livery; and alas what are reproaches? they are but the
chips of the Cross; which are rather to be despised, than laid to heart Quid
iste faceret in igne, qui Christum rubuit in nube?
.

10. The last Impediment of Repentance, 10. Imped.
is, immoderate love of the world. No wonder Ezekiels hearers were hardened into
rebellion, when their heart went after covetousness, Ezok. 33. 31. The world
does so engross men's time, and bewitch their affections, that they cannot
repent; they had rather put gold in their bag, than tears in Gods bottle. I
have read of the Turks, that they mind neither Churches, nor Altars, but are
diligent in looking after their tillage. So many scarce ever mind Repentance;
they are more for the Plough, and breaking of the clods, than breaking up the
fallow ground of their hearts. The Thorns choke the word. We read of them who
were invited to Christ's Supper, who put him off with worldly excuses, Luke 14.
18. One said, I have bought a piece of ground, and must needs go see it, I pray
thee have me excused; and another, I have bought five yoke of Oxen, etc. The
farm and the shop so take up peoples time, that they have no leisure for their
souls (...)
: Their golden weights hinder their silver tears. There is an Herb in the
Country of Sardinia, like Baulm, which if they eat much of, will make them die
laughing: Such an herb (or rather weed) is the world, if men eat too
immoderately of it, instead of dying repenting, they will die laughing. These
are the obstructions of Repentance which must be removed, that the current may
be clearer.

CHAP. XV. Prescribing some Means for Repentance.
I Shall in the last place prescribe some Rules or Means conducible to
Repentance.

1. The first is serious consideration, 1.
Psalm. 119. 59. I thought on my ways, and turned my feet unto thy testimonies.
The Prodigal, when he came to himself, and did seriously consider his riotous
luxuriances, then he repented. Peter, when he thought of Christ's words, wept.
There are four things, which if they were well considered of, would be a means
to make us break off a course of sinning.

1. Consider seriously what sin is; and 1 Consid.
sure there is enough evil in it to make us repent: There are in sin these
twenty Evils.

1. Every sin is a recession from 1.
God Elongat hominem a Deo. Jacob de Valent.
, Ier. 2. 5. God is the supreme good, and our blessedness lies in union with
him; but sin, like a strong bias, draws away the heart from God. The sinner
takes his leave of God; he bids farewell to Christ and mercy. Every step forward
in sin, is a step backward from God, Isa. 1. 4. They have forsaken the Lord,
they are gone away backward. The (...) Ali n^runt se retro^sum. Ar. Mo^tan.
further one goes from the Sun, the nearer he approaches to darkness: the
further the soul goes from God, the nearer it approach to misery.

2. Sin is a walking contrary to God, 2.
Levit. 26. 27. The same word in the Hebrew * signifies both to commit sin, and
(...)
to rebel. Sin is Gods opposite: If God be of one mind, sin will be of another:
If God says sanctify the Sabbath, sin says, profane it. Sin strikes at Gods
very being: If sin could help it, God should be no longer God, Isa. 30. 11.
Cause the holy One of Israel to cease from before us. What an horrible thing is
this, for a piece of proud dust, to rise up in defiance against its maker!

3. Sin is an injury to God. For 1. It 3.
violates his Laws; here is crimen laesae majestatis. What greater injury can
be offered to a Prince, than to trample upon his royal edicts? A sinner offers
contempt to the Statute-Laws of Heaven, Nehem. 9. 26. They have cast thy Law
behind their back; as if they scorned to look upon it.

2. Sin robs God of his due. You injure a man when you do not give him his due.
The soul belongs to God, he lays a double claim to it; it is his by creation
and purchase: now sin steals the soul from God, and gives the Devil that which
of right belongs to God.

4. Sin is profound ignorance. The 4.
Schoolmen say, All sin is founded in ignorance Omne peccatum fundatur in
ignorantia.
; did men know God in his purity and justice, they durst not go on in a course
of sinning, Ier. 9. 3. They proceed from evil to evil, and know not me, says
the Lord. Therefore ignorance and lust are joined together, 1 Pet. 1. 14.
Ignorance is the womb of lust. Vapors arise most in the night: The black
vapors of sin arise most in a dark ignorant soul. Satan casts a mist before a
sinner, that he sees not the flaming sword of Gods wrath. The Eagle first rolls
himself in the sand, and then flies at the Stagg, and by fluttering his wings,
so bedusts the Staggs eyes, that he cannot see, and then he strikes him with
his tallons Pliny.
: So Satan that Eagle or Prince of the Air first blinds men with ignorance 2
Cor. 4. 4.
, and then wounds them with his darts of temptation. Is sin ignorance? there is
great cause to repent of ignorance.

5. Sin is a piece of desperateness. In every 5.
transgression, a man runs an apparent hazard of his soul; he treads upon the
brink of the bottomless pit. Foolish sinner, thou never committest a sin, but
thou do that which may undo thy soul for ever Quae ^e dementia cep^t? Virg.
. He who drinks poison, it is a wonder if it does not cost him his life. One
taste of the forbidden tree lost Adam Paradise: One sin of the Angels lost them
Heaven: One sin of Saul lost him his Kingdom. The next sin thou committest, God
may clap thee up prisoner among the damned. Thou that gallopest on in sin, it
is a question whether God will spare thy life a day longer, or give thee an
heart to repent, so that thou art desperate even to phrensy.

6. Sin is a befilthying thing; it is called (...), filthiness, Iam. 1. 21. The
Greek word signifies the putrid matter of ulcers. Sin is called (...), an
abomination, Deuteronomy. 7. 25. Nay, in the plural, abominations*, Deuteronomy. 20. 18. This
filthiness (...)
in sin is inward: a spot in the face may easily be wiped off; but to have the
liver and lungs tainted, is far worse: Such a pollution is sin, it has gotten
into the mind and conscience, Tit. 1. 15. It Is compared to a menstruous cloth,
Isa. 30. 22. The most unclean thing under the Law Hierom.
* A sinners heart is like a field spread with dung. Some think sin an ornament,
it is rather an excrement. So does sin befilthy a person, that God cannot abide
the sight of him, Zach. 11. 8. My soul loathed them.

7. In sin is odious ingratitude. God has 7.
^ed thee (O sinner) with Angels food; he has crowned thee with variety of
mercies, * Vir ingratus est dolium per^oratum. Lucian
yet do thou go on in sin? As David said of Nabal, in vain have I kept this
man's sheep, 1 Samuel 25. 21* So in vain has God done so much for the sinner. All
Gods mercies may upbraid, yea accuse the ungrateful person. May God say, I gave
thee wit, health, riches, and thou have employed all these against me, Hos. 2.
8. I gave them corn, and wine, and oil, and multiplied their silver and gold,
which they prepared for Baal. I sent in provisions, and they served their Idols
with them. The Snake in the fable which was frozen, stung him that brought it
to the fire, and gave it warmth: So a sinner goes about to sting God with his
own mercies. Is this thy kindness to thy friend? Did God give thee life to sin?
Did he give thee wages to serve the Devil?

8. Sin is a debasing thing; it degrades a 8.
person of his honor, Nahum 1. 14. I will make thy grave, for thou art vile
(...) signif. primo levem, vilem.
. This was spoken of a King Sennach.
; he was not vile by birth, but by sin: Sin blots our name, taints our blood:
nothing does so change a man's glory into shame, as sin does. It Is said of
Naaman, He was a great man and honorable, but he was a leper, 2 Kin. 5. 1. Let
a man be never so great with worldly Pomp, yet if he be wicked, he is a leper
in Gods eye. To boast of sin, is to boast of that which is our infamy; as if a
Prisoner should boast of his fetters, or be proud of his halter.

9. Sin is a damage. In every sin there is 9.
infinite loss. Never did any thrive by grazing on this Common. What does one
lose? he loses God, he loses his peace, he loses his soul. The soul is a
divine spark lighted from Heaven; it is the glory of the Creation; and what can
countervail this loss (...)? Chrysostom.
Matthew. 16. 26. If the soul be gone, the treasure is gone; so that in sin there
is infinite loss. Sin is such a trade, that whosoever follows it is sure to
break.

10. Sin is a burden, Psalm. 38. 4. My iniquities 10.
are gone over my head, as an heavy burden, they are too heavy for me. The
sinner goes with his weights and fetters on him. The burden of sin is ever
worst, when it is least felt. Sin is a burden wherever it comes. Sin burdens
God, Amos 2. 3. I am pressed with your sins, as a Cart is pressed under the
sheaves Sicut plaustrum stipulae vel foeni onere praegravatum stridore and
sonitu exululat, sic ego peccata vestra ultra non sustinens, clamo, etc. Hie^m.
. Sin burdens the soul; what a weight did Spira feel? how was Judas his
conscience burdened? insomuch that he hanged himself to quiet his conscience
Non recubat ad for as tanquam Canis dormiens D. Rivet.
. They that know what sin is, will repent that they carry such a burden.

11. Sin is a debt: It Is compared to a 11.
debt of ten thousond talents, Mat. 18. 24. Of all the debts we owe, our sins
are the worst* Vocabulum hoc (...) significat reatum and obligationem ad
poenam. Chemnit. Harm.
. In other debts a sinner may fly into foreign parts, but here he cannot, Psalm.
139. 7. Whither shall I fly from thy presence? God knows where to find out all
his debtors (...). Chrysostom.
. Death frees a man from other debts, but it will not free him from this: not
the death of the debtor, but of the creditor discharges this debt. 12.


10. There is deceitfulness in sin, Heb. 3. 13. Prove. 11. 18. The wicked
works a deceitful work. Sin is a mere cheat: while it pretends to please us,
it beguiles us. Sin does as Iaell, first she brought the milk and butter to
Sisera, then she struck the nail through his temples that he died, Judge. 5. 26.
Sin first courts, and then kills: It Is first a Fox, and then a Lion: Whomsoever
sin kisseth, it betraies. Those Locusts in the Revelations, are the perfect
Hierogly phicks and emblems of sin; On their heads were as it were Crowns like
gold, and they had hair as women, and their teeth were as the teeth of Lions,
and they had stings in their tails, Rev. 9. 7. Sin does just as the Usurer, who
feeds a man with money, and then makes him morgage his Land: So sin feeds the
sinner with delightful objects, and then makes him morgage his soul. Judas
pleased himself with the thirty pieces of silver, but they proved deceitful
riches; ask him now how he likes his bargain.

13. Sin is a spiritual sickness: One man 13.
is sick of pride, another of lust, another of malice: It Is with a sinner, as
it is with a sick Patient, his pallat is distempered; the sweetest things taste
bitter to him: So the word of God which is sweeter than the honeycomb, tastes
bitter to a sinner, Isa. 5. 20. They put sweet for bitter; and if sin be a
disease, it is not to be cherished, but rather cured by Repentance.

14. Sin is a bondage; it binds a man 14.
Apprentice to the Devil Haec est carnis licentia, quae nos sic a Dei servitute
manumittit, ut Diabolo mancipet. Calvin.
. Of all conditions, servitude is the worst. Every man is held with the cords
of his own sin. I was held before conversion (says Austin Aug. Confess.
) not with an Iron Chain, but with the obstinacy of my will. Sin is imperious
and tyrannical; it is called (...), a Law, Romans 8. 2, because it has such a
binding power over a man. The sinner must do as sin will have him: He does not
so much enjoy his lusts as serve them; and he will have work enough to do to
gratify them all O quam multos habet Dominos, qui non habet unum? Hierom.
, Eccles. 10. 7. I have seen Princes going on foot. The soul that princely
thing, which did once sit in a chair of State, and was crowned with knowledge
and holiness, now is made a lacky to sin, and runs on the Devils errand.

15. Sin has a spreading malignity in it; 15.
it does not only hurt to a man's self, but to others: one man's sin may occasion
many to sin. As one Beacon being lighted, may occasion all the Beacons in the
Country to be lighted. One man may help to defile many Nemo errat sibi ipsi,
sed dementiam spargit in proximos. Sen.
. A person that has the plague, going into company, does not know how many
have gotten the plague of him. Thou that art guilty of open sins, know not
how many have been infected by thee Quid alteri periculo es? tu illi gladius.
Tertul.
. There may be diverse for ought thou know, now in Hell, crying out, that
they had never come thither, if it had not been for thy bad example.

16. Sin is a vexatious thing; it brings 16.
trouble with it. The curse which God laid upon the woman, is most truly laid
upon every sinner, Genesis 3. 6. In sorrow thou shall bring forth. A man vexes
his thoughts in plotting of sin; and when sin has conceived, in sorrow he
brings forth: Like one who takes a great deal of pains in opening a flood-gate,
and when he has opened it, the flood comes in upon him, and drowns him: So a
man beats his brains to contrive sin, and then it vexes his conscience Omne
peccatum est sui ipsius poena.
, brings crosses in his estate, rots the wall and timber of his house, Zach. 5.
4. --

16. Sin is an absurd thing. What greater 17.
indiscretion than to gratify an enemy? Sin gratifies Satan. When lust or
anger burn in the soul, Satan warms himself at this fire. Men's sins feast the
Devil Mortalium errores epulae sunt daemonum.
. Sampson was called out to make the Lords of the Philistines sport, Judge. 16.
25. So the sinner makes the Devil sport. It Is meat and drink to him to see men
sin* How does he laugh to see them venturing their souls for the world! As if
one should venture Diamonds for Straws; or should fish for Gudgeons with golden
hooks. Every wicked man shall be indicted at the day of judgment for a fool.

18. There is cruelty in every sin. Every 18.
sin thou committest, thou give a stab to thy soul Quot vitia tot vulnera.
. While thou art kind to sin, thou art cruel to thy self; like him in the
Gospel, who did cut himself with stones till the blood came, Mark 5. 5. The
sinner is like the Jailer, who drew a sword to kill himself. Act. 16. 27. The
soul may cry out, I am murdering. Naturalists say, the Hawk chooses to drink
blood, rather than water Accipiter sanguinem non aquam bibit. Pierius.
: So sin drinks the blood of souls.

19. Sin is a spiritual death, Ephesians. 2. 1. 19.
Dead in trespasses. Austin says, that before his conversion, reading the
death of Dido, he could not refrain weeping; but wretch that I was (says he) I
bewailed the death of Dido forsaken of Aeneas, and did not bewail the death of
my soul forsaken of God Aug. con^ lib. 1. c. 13.
. The life of sin is the death of the soul. 1. A dead man has no sense: So a
person unregenerate has no sense of God in him, Ephesians. 4. 19. Persuade him to
mind his salvation, to what purpose do you make orations to a dead man? go to
reprove him for vice, to what purpose do you strike a dead man? 2. He who is
dead has no taste. Set a banquet before him, he does not relish it: So a
sinner tastes no sweetness in Christ or a Promise: They are but as cordials in
a dead man's mouth (...). Chrysostom.
. 3. The dead putrify; and if Martha said of Lazarus, Ioh. 11. 39. Lord, by
this time he stinketh, for he has been dead four days. How much more may we
say of a wicked man, who has been dead thirty or forty years in sin, by this
time he stinketh.

20. Sin without Repentance tends to 20.
final damnation. As the Rose perishes by the canker bred in it self: so do
men by the corruptions which breed in their souls. What was once said to the
Graecians of the Trojan horse, this Engine is made to be the destruction of
your City Haec in vestros fabricata est machina muros. Virgil. Aeneid.
. The same may be said to every impenitent person, this Engine of sin will be
the destruction of thy soul. Sins last scene is always Tragical. Diagoras
Florentinus would in a frolic drink poison, but it cost him his life ^oco
venenum bibit, serio mortem obiit. Reyn. Orat.
. Men drink the poison of sin in a merriment, but it costs them their souls,
Romans 6. 23. The wages of sin is death. What Solomon says of wine, the same I
may say of sin; at first it shows its color in the cup, at the last it biteth
like a Serpent, and stingeth like an Adder, Prove. 23. 31. Christ tells us of
the worm Horreo vermem mordacem, and mortem vivacem. (...) Flor.
and the fire, Mark 9. 48. Sin is like oil, and Gods wrath is like fire. So
long as the damned continue sinning, so long the fire will continue scorching;
and who can dwell with everlasting burnings? Isa. 33. 14. But men question the
truth of this, and are like that impious Devonax, who being threatened with Hell
for his villainies* made a mock at it, and said, I will believe there is an Hell
when I come there, and not before Tun^ cre^ dam cum illuc venero.
. We cannot make Hell enter into men, till they enter into Hell.

Thus we have seen the deadly evil in sin, which seriously thought on, may make
us repent, and turn to God. If for all this, men will persist in sin, and are
resolved upon a voyage to Hell, who can help it. They have been told what a
soul-damning Rock sin is; but if they will voluntarily run upon it, and split
themselves, their blood be upon their own head.

2. The second consideration to work 2 Consid.
Repentance, is, consider the mercies of God. A stone is soonest broken upon a
soft pillow; and an heart of stone is soonest broken upon the soft pillow of
Gods mercies O altitudo divitiarum misericordiae De^
, Romans 2. 4. The goodness of God leads thee to Repentance. The clemency of a
Prince does soonest cause relenting in a malefactor. While God has been
storming others by his judgments, he has been wooing us by his mercies.

What privative mercies have we had Plures sunt gratiae privativae.
? 1.
what mischiefs have been prevented? what fears blown over? When our foot has
been slipping, Gods mercy has held us up Psalm. 94. 18.
. Mercy has been always a screen between us and danger. When enemies like
Lions have risen up against us to devour us, free grace has snatched us out of
the mouth of these Lions. In the deepest waves, the arm of mercy has been
under, and kept our head above water; and will not this privative mercy lead us
to Repentance?

What positive mercies have we had! 2.
1. Supplying mercy. God has been a bountiful benefactor, Genesis 48. 15. The God
which fed me all my life long to this day. What man will spread a table for his
enemy? we have been enemies, yet God has fed us; he has given us the horn of
Oil; he has made the honeycomb of mercy drop upon us. God has been as kind to
us, as if we had been his best servants; and will not this supplying mercy lead
us to Repentance?

2. Delivering mercy. When we have been at the gates of the grave, God has
miraculously spun out our lives; he has turned the shadow of death into the
morning, and has put a song of deliverance into our mouth; and will not
delivering mercy lead us to Repentance? The Lord has labored to break our
hearts with his mercies. We read Judge. 2. -- When the Angel (which was a
Prophet) had preached a Sermon of mercy, the people lifted up their voices and
wept, verse 4. If any thing will move tears, it should be the mercy of God. He
is an obstinate sinner indeed, whom these great Cable-Ropes of Gods mercy will
not draw to Repentance.

3. Consider Gods afflictive providence, 3 Consid.
and see if our limbeck will not drop when the fire is put under. God has sent
us of late years to the school of the cross; he has twisted his judgments
together; he has made good upon us those two threatenings, Hos. 5. 12. I will
be to Ephraim as a moth. Has not God been so to England in decay of trading?
And ver. 14. I will be to Ephraim as a Lion. Has he not been to England in the
devouring Plague 1665.
? Well, all this while God waited for our Repentance; but we went on in sin,
Ier. 8. 6. I hearkened and heard, but no man repented him of his wickedness,
saying, what have I done? And of late God has been whipping us with a fiery
Rod 1666.
, in those tremendous flames in this City, which did hierogly phically resemble
the great Conflagration at the last day, when the Elements shall melt with
fervent heat 2 Pet. 3. 10.
. When Ioabs corn was on fire, then he went running to Absalom, 2 Samuel 14. 31.
God has set our houses on fire, that we may run to him by Repentance, Micah 6.
9. The Lords voice cries unto the City, Hear ye the Rod, and who has appointed
it. This is the language of the Rod, that we should humble our selves under
Gods mighty hand, and break off our iniquities by righteousness, Dan. 4. 27.
Manassehs affliction ushered in Repentance, 2 Chronicles. 33. 12. This God uses as
the proper medicine for security, Hos. 2. 5. Her Mother has played the Harlot;
that is, by idolatry. What course now will God take with her? verse. 6.
Therefore I will hedge up thy way with thorns Deus spi^is sepit, cum homines
variis circumcingit aerunin is, ut ad peccata tanquam amasios ^gredi non (...).
. This is Gods method, to set a thorn-hedge of affliction in the way. Thus to a
proud man contempt is a thorn; to a lustful man sickness is a thorn, both to
stop him in his sin, and to prick him for ward in Repentance.

The Lord teaches his people as Gideon did the men of Succoth, Judge. 8. 16. He
took the Elders of the City, and thorns of the wilderness and briars, and with
them he taught the men of Succoth. Here was tearing Rhetoric. So God has of
late been teaching us humiliation by thorny providence: he has torn our
golden fleece from us; he has brought our houses low, that he might bring our
hearts low. When shall we dissolve into tears if not now? Gods judgments are
so proper a means to work Repentance, that the Lord wonders at it, and makes it
his complaint, that his severity did not break men off from their sins, Amos 4.
7. I have withheld the Rain from you, verse. 9. I have smitten you with
blasting and mildew, verse. 10. I have sent among you the Pestilence; but still
this is the burden of the complaint, Yet ye have not returned to me. The Lord
proceeds gradually in his judgments: First he sends a lesser cross, and if
that will not do, then a greater. He sends upon one first a gentle fit of an
Ague, and afterward a burning Fever. He sends upon another first a loss at
Sea, then the loss of a child, then an husband. Thus by degrees he would try to
bring men to Repentance. Sometimes God makes his judgments go in circuit, from
family to family. The cup of affliction has gone round in the Nation, all have
tasted it; and if we repent not now, we stand in a contempt of God, and do
interpretatively bid God do his worst; and such a climax of wickedness will
hardly be pardoned, Isa. 22. 12, 13. In that day did the Lord of Hosts call to
weeping and mourning, and behold joy and gladness; It was revealed in mine ears
by the Lord of Hosts, surely this iniquity shall not be purged from you till
you dye: That is, this sin shall not be expiated by sacrifice. If the Romans
did severely punish a young man who was seen sporting in a window with a Crown
of Roses on his headin time of public Calamity: of how much sorer punishment
shall they be thought worthy, who strengthen themselves in wickedness, and
laugh in the very face of Gods judgments. The Heathen Mariners in a storm
repented, Jonah 1. 14. Not to repent now and throw our sins overboard, is to
to be worse than Heathens.

4. Let us consider how much we shall 4 Consid.
have to answer for at last, if we repent not. How many prayers, counsels,
admonitions, will be put upon the score. Every Sermon will come in as an
Indictment. As for such as have truly repented, Christ will answer for them;
his blood will wash away their sins; the mantle of free grace will cover them,
Ier. 50. 20. In those days says the Lord, the iniquity of Israel shall be
sought for, and there shall be none, and the sins of Judah, and they shall not
be found. Those who have judged themselves in the lower Court of Conscience,
shall be acquitted in the High Court of Heaven: but if we repent not, our sins
must be accounted all for at the last day; and we must answer for them in our
own persons, and have no counsel allowed to plead for us. Now O impenitent
sinner, think with thy self how thou will be able to look thy Judge in the
face; thou have a damned cause to plead, and wilt be sure to be cast at the bar
Foris erit mundus ardens, intus conscientia urens, heu miser peccator quo
fugies? Anselm.
, Job 31. 14. What then shall I do when God rises up? and when he visits, what
shall I answer him? Either therefore now repent, or else provide your answers,
and see what defense you can make for your selves when you come before Gods
Tribunal; but when God rises up, how will you answer him?

2. The second help to Repentance, 2.
is, a prudent comparison: Compare the penitent and impenitent condition
together, and see the difference: Spread them before your eyes, and by the
light of the word see the impenitent condition most deplorable, and the
penitent most comfortable. How sad was it with the Prodigal before he returned
to his Father! he had spent all; he had sinned himself into beggary, and he had
nothing left but a few husks; he was fellowcommoner with the Swine; but when he
came home to his Father, then nothing was thought too good for him. Then the
Robe was brought forth to cover him, and the Ring to adorn him, and the fatted
Calf to feast him. If the sinner continues in his impenitency, then farewell
Christ and mercy; but if he repent, then presently he has an Heaven within
him; then Christ is his, then all is peace. He may sing a requiem to his soul,
and say, Soul, take thy ease, thou have much goods laid up. Upon our turning to
God, we have more restored to us in Christ, than ever we lost in Adam. God
says to the repenting soul, I will clothe thee with the Robe of Righteousness,
I will enrich thee with the jewels and graces of my spirit, I will bestow my
love upon thee, will give thee a Kingdom; Son, all I ^ave is thine Tua sunt and
aeterna and temporaria, haec ad utendum, illa ad fruendum, Brugens.
. O my friends, do but ^ompare your estate before Repentance, and after
Repentance together. Before ^our repenting, there are nothing but ^louds to be
seen and storms; clouds in Gods face, and storms in conscience; but after
repenting, how is the weather al^ered! what sunshine above! what se^ene
calmness within! a Christians soul ^eing like the Hill Olympus, all light and
^lear, and no winds blowing.

3. A third means conducible to Re^entance, 3.
is, a settled determination to ^eave sin; not a faint velleity, but a resolved
vow, Psalm. 119. 106. I have sworn that I will keep thy righteous judgments.
All the delights and artifices of sin shall not make me forsworn. There must be
no haesitation, no consulting with flesh and blood; had I best leave my sin or
no? But as Ephraim, Hos. 14. 8. What have I to do any more with Idols Abe^nt
idola in malam c^ucem*
? I will be ^gulled no more by my sins, no longer fooled by Satan; this day I
will put a bill of divorce into the hands of my lusts. Till we come to this
peremptory resolution, sin will get ground of us, and we shall never be able to
shake off this Viper. No wonder if he be conquered by sin, who is not resolved
to be an enemy to it.

But this resolution must be built upon the strength of Christ more than our
own; it must be an humble resolution Frustra nititur qui non innititur. Bernard.
. As David when he went against Goliath, he put off his presumptuous confidence,
as well as his armor, ^ Sam. 17. 45. I come to thee in the name of the Lord.
So we must go out against our Goliah*lusts in the strength of Christ. It Is
usual for a person to join another in the bond with him: So being conscious of
our own inability to leave sin, let us get Christ to be bound with us, and
engage his strength for the mortifying of corruption.

4. The fourth means is earnest supplication 4.
(...). Chrysostom.
. The Heathens laid one of their hands on the Plough; the other they lifted up
to Ceres the goddess of Corn. So when we have used the means, let us look up to
God for a blessing; pray to him for a repenting heart Quis invenit si quaerens
frustratur? cui aperis, si pulsanti claudis? Anselm.
* Thou Lord who bidst me repent, give me grace to repent Da Domine quod ^bes,
etc. Austin.
. Pray that our hearts may be holy limbecks dropping tears; beg of Christ to
give to us such a look of love as he did to Peter, which made him go out and
weep bitterly: Implore the help of Gods Spirit; it is the Spirits smiting on the
Rocks of our hearts, that makes the waters gush out, Psalm. 147. 18. He causes
his wind to blow, and the waters flow. When the wind of Gods Spirit blows, then
the water of tears will flow.

Good reason we should go to God for Repentance, 1. Because it is his gift,
Act. 11. 18. Then has God also to the Gentiles granted Repentance unto life.
The Arminians hold, that it is in our power to repent. We can harden our
hearts, but we cannot soften them. This Crown of Free Will is fallen from our
head: nay, there is in us not only impotency, but obstinacy, Act. 7. 51.
Therefore beg of God a repentant spirit; he can make the stony heart bleed; his
word is verbum creativum, with his command he gives power.

2. We must have recourse to God for this blessing, because he has promised to
bestow it, Ezekiel. 36. 26. I will give you an heart of flesh. I will soften your
Adamant hearts in my Sons blood: show God his hand and seal: and there is
another gracious promise, Ier. 24. 7. They shall return unto me with their
whole heart. Turn this promise into a prayer; Lord give me grace to return unto
thee with my whole heart.

5. Endeavor after clearer discoveries 5.
of God, Job 42. 5. Now mine eye sees thee; wherefore I abhor my self and
repent in dust and ashes. Job having surveyed Gods glory and purity, as an
humble penitent he did abhor, or as it is in the Hebrew, he did even reprobate
(...)
himself*. By looking into the transparent glass of Gods holiness, we see our
own blemishes, and so learn to bewail them.

6. Lastly, Labor for Faith; but 6.
what is that to Repentance? Yes, Faith breeds union with Christ, and there can
be no separation from sin, till there be union with Christ. The eye of Faith
looks on mercy, and that thaws the heart. Faith carries us to Christ's blood,
and that blood mollifies. Faith persuades of the love of God, and that love
sets us a weeping.

Thus I have laid down the means or helps to Repentance: What remains now, but
that we set upon the work; and let us be in earnest, not as Fencers, but
Warriers. I will conclude all with that of the Psalmist, Psalm. 126. 6. He that
goes forth and weepeth, bearing precious seed, shall doubtless come again
rejoicing, bringing his sheaves with him.

FINIS.

