THE Godly Man's Picture, Drawn with a Scripture-Pensil.

OR Some Characteristical Notes of a Man that shall go to Heaven.

By THOMAS WATSON, Minister of the GOSPEL.

But know that the Lord has set apart him that is Godly for himself, Psalm 4.
3.

(...) Cl^m. Alex.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Parkhurst at the three Crowns, over against the
great Condu^t, at the lower end of Cheap Side, 1666.

To the Reader.
Christian Reader,
THe Soul being so precious, and Salvation so glorious, it is the highest point
of Prudence, to make preparations for another world: That there is an
Inheritance in Light, (...) beyond all dispute, and that there must be an
Idoneity and meetness for it, (...) in Sacred Writ most strenuously Colos^ 1.
12.
as^^rted. If any shall ask, who shall ^scend into the hill of the Lord? The
^nswer is, He that has clean hands, (...) a pure Psalm. 2. 4.
heart. To describe such (...) person, is the work of this ensuing ^^reatise:
Here you have the godly ^ans Effigies, and see him pourtrayed (...) his full
Lineaments: What a rare ^^ing is godliness! it is not airy and flatulent, but
solid, and such as will take up the heart and spirits: Godliness consists in an
exact harmony, between holy Principles and Practices: (...) that all into whose
hands this Book shall providentially come, may be (...) enamoured with Piety,
as to fall (...) the hearty embracing of it: So sublim^ is Godliness, that it
cannot be del^^neated in its perfect radiancy and luster, though an Angel
should take (...) Pensil: Godliness is our Vera est (...) came Hebrai ele^anter
appellant (...) (i. e.) esse^tiam. (...) 3. ^1
wisdom^ Job 28. 28. The fear of the Lord, th^^ is wisdom. Policy without
Piety, profound madness: Godliness is a Sp^ritual Queen, which whosoever
Ma^ries, is sure of a large Dowry with (...) 1 Timothy 4. 8. Godliness has the
pr^mise of the life that now is, and that which is to come. Godliness giv^
Isai. 32. 17.
assurance, yea holy triumph in Go^ and how sweet is Omni melle dulcior, omni
luce clarior. Aug.
that? It was (...) Latimers Speech, when sometimes I sit alone, and have a
settled assurance of the state of my Soul, and know that God is my God, I can
laugh at all troubles, and nothing can daunt me: Godliness puts a man in heaven
before his time. Christian, aspire after Piety, it is a lawful Ambition: Look
upon the Saints Characters here, and never leave till thou have gotten them
instamped upon thy own Soul. This is the grand business that should swallow up
your time and thoughts: Other Speculations, and Quaint Notions, are nothing to
the Soul: They are like Wafers which have fine works printed upon them, and are
curiously damasked to the eye, but are thin, and yield little nourishment. But
I will not stay you longer in the Porch; should I have enlarged upon any one
Character of the Godly Man, it would have required a Volume, but designing to
go over many, I have contracted my Sails, and given you only a brief Summary of
things: If this Piece (how indigested soever) may conduce to the good of Souls,
I have my Option; which that the God of Grace will effectually accomplish,
shall be the Prayer of him who is

Thine in all Christian affection, Thomas Watson.
Feb. 26. 1666.
THE Character of a Godly Man, drawn with a SCRIPTURE-PENSIL.
PSALM. 32. 6. For this shall every one that is godly pray unto thee.
CHAP. I.
Containing the Preface or Introduction.
HOly David in the front of this Psalm, shows us, wherein true happiness
consists; not in beauty, honor, riches, (the Worlds Trinity) but in the
forgiveness of sin. Verse. 1. Blessed is he whose transgression is forgiven. The
Hebrew word to forgive (...)
signifies to carry out of sight; which well agrees with that, Ierem. 50. 20. In
those days (says the Lord) the sins of Judah shall be sought for, and they
shall not be found. This is an incomprehensible blessing, and such as lays a
foundation for all other mercies. I shall but glance at it, and lay down these
five Assertions about it.

forgive (...).
deciphers the Original of pardon; it arises not from any thing inherent in us,
but is the pure result of Free Grace. Isa. 43. 25. I, even I am he, that
blotteth out thy transgressions for mine own sake. When a Creditor forgives a
Debtor, he does it freely. Pardon of sin is a fine thread spun out of the
bowels of Free Grace. Paul cries out, I obtained mercy, 1 Timothy 1. 13. (...), I
was be-mercied: he who is pardoned, is all bestrewed with mercy. When the Lord
pardons a sinner, he does not pay a Debt, but give a Legacy.

Adam eaten the Apple, but he saw the flaming sword, and heard the Curse; but
in remission God does indulge the sinner; he seems to say thus to him, Though
thou art fallen into the hands of my Justice, and deservest to die, yet I will
absolve thee, and whatever is charged upon thee, shall be discharged.

3. Forgiveness of sin is through the blood Christus se in cruce Deo oblatus
est sacrificium (...), sic nostra pians peccata. Maresius de ver. rel. lib. 3.
blood is the meritorious. Heb. 9. 22: Without shedding of blood is no
remission. Justice would be revenged either on the sinner or the surety. Every
pardon is the price of blood.

4. Before sin is forgiven, it must be repented of. Therefore repentance and
remission are linked together. Luke 24. 47. That Da Domin^ poenitentiam, and
postea indulgentiam. Fulgentius.
. Not that repentance does in a Popish sense merit forgiveness; Christ's blood
must wash our Tears: but repentance is a qualification, though not a cause. He
who is humbled for sin will the more value pardoning mercy. When there is
nothing in the soul but clouds of sorrow, and now God brings a pardon, which is
a setting up a Rainbow in the Cloud, to tell the sinner, that the flood of
wrath shall not overflow him; O what joy is there at the sight of this Rainbow!
The soul that before was steeped in tears, now melts in love to God. Luke 7.
38. 47.

5. God having forgiven sin, he will call it no more into remembrance, Ier. 31.
34. the Lord will make an Peccata semel remissa nunquam redeunt.
act of Indemnity, he will not upbraid us with former unkindnesses, or sue us
with a cancelled Bond. Micah 7. 19. he will cast our sins into the depth of the
sea. Sin shall not be cast in as Cork which rises up again; but as Lead which
sinks to the bottom. How should we all labor for this Covenant-blessing!

How sad is it to want it! It must needs be ill with the Malefactor who wants
his pardon: all the Curses of God stand in full force against the unpardoned
sinner; his very blessings are cursed. Mal. 2. 2. Caesar wondered at one of his
Soldiers, that was so merry when he was in debt. Can the sinner be merry who
is heir to all Gods Curses, and knows not how soon he may take up his Lodgings
among the damned?

How sweet is it to have it! 1. The pardoned soul is out of the gunshot of
Hell. Peccatum sic pessundatum est ut non possit nos damnare. Luther.
Romans 8. 33. Satan may accuse, but Christ will show a discharge. 2. The
pardoned soul may go to God with boldness in prayer. Guilt clips the wings of
prayer, that it cannot fly to the Throne of Grace; but forgiveness breeds
confidence: He who has his pardon, may look his Prince in the face with
comfort.

This great mercy of pardon David had obtained, as appears, verse. 5. Thou
forgavest me. And because he had found God a God of pardons, (...). Neh. 9. 17.
therefore he encourages others to seek God, in the words of the Text, For
this cause shall every one that is godly pray unto thee.

CHAP. II.
Opening the Nature of Godliness. Every one that is godly.
IT will first be enquired, What Godliness is? 1. Inquiry


I answer in general, Answ.
Godliness is the sacred impression, and workmanship of God in a man, whereby
of carnal he is made spiritual. When Godliness is wrought in a person, he does
not receive a new soul, but he has another spirit, Numb. 14. 24. The faculties
are not new, but the qualities; the Strings are the same, but the Tune is
mended. Concerning Godliness, I shall lay down these seven Maxims or Positions.

1. Godliness is a Real thing, it is not feverish conceit of a sick brain; a
Christian is no Enthusiast, one whose Religion is made up all of Fancy;
Godliness has Truth for its foundation; it is called the way of Truth, (...).
Psalm. 119. 30. godliness is a ray and beam that shines from God: if God be
true, then godliness is true.

intrinsecal thing: it lies chiefly in the heart. Romans 2. 29. Circumcision is
that of the heart. The dew lies on the leaf, the sap is hid in the root. The
Moralists Religion is all in the leaf, it consists only in Externals (...).
but godliness is an holy sap which is radicated in the soul. (...).
Psalm. 51. 6. in the hidden part, thou shall make me to know wisdom. The Chalde
expounds it, In the close place of the heart.

supernatural thing: by nature we inherit nothing but evil. Romans 7. 5. When we
were in the flesh, the motions of sin did work in our members: we did suck in
sin, as naturally as our Mothers milk; but godliness is the wisdom from above,
Jam. 3. 17. it is breathed in from heaven. God must light up the Lamp of Grace
in the heart: Weeds grow of themselves, flowers are planted. Godliness is a
Celestial Plant, that comes from the New Jerusalem: Therefore it is called a
fruit of the Spirit, Gal. 5. 22. A man has no more power to change himself
than to create himself.

4. Godliness is an extensive thing; it is These. 5. 23. The God of peace
sanctify you wholly. There is light in the understanding, order in the
affections, pliableness in the will, exemplariness in the life. We do not call
a Blackamore white because he has white teeth: he is not godly who is good
only in some part. Grace is called the new man, Col. 3. 10. not a new eye, or
tongue, but a new man: he who is godly is good all over; though he be
regenerate but in part, yet it is in every part.

5. Godliness is an intense thing; it does Romans 12. 11. Fervent in spirit.
Qualitates sunt in subjecto intensive.
We call water hot, when it is so in the third or fourth degree. He is godly
whose devotion is inflamed, and his heart boyls over in holy affections.

6. Godliness is a glorious thing: As the Reason makes us Men, Godliness makes
us earthly Angels; by it we partake of the divine nature, 2 Pet. 1. 4.
Godliness is near a kin to Glory, 2 Pet. 1. 3. Glory and Virtue. Godliness is
glory in the ^eed, and glory is godliness in the flower.

permanent thing. Aristotle says, denominations are given from the habit. We
do not call him sanguine that blusheth, but who is of a ruddy complexion 1 Samuel
17. 42.
A blush of godliness is not enough to denominate a Christian, but godliness
must be the temper and complexion of the soul. Godliness is a fixed thing:
There is a great deal of difference between a Stake in the Hedge, and a Tree in
the Garden; a stake rots and moulders, but a tree having life in it, abides and
flourishes. When godliness has taken root in the soul, it abides to eternity.
1 Ioh. 3. 9. his seed remains in him* Godliness being engraven in the heart
by the Holy Ghost, as with the point of a Diamond, can never be raced out.

CHAP. III.
A Reproof to such as are but Pretenders to Godliness. Use of Reproof.

Use. HEre is a sharp Reprehension to such as are Alchimy Christians, who do
only make a show of Non faciunt justitiam sed fing^nt. Melancth.
godliness: like Michal who put an Image in the bed, and so deceived Saul's
Messengers, 1 Samuel 19. 16. these our Savior calls whited Mar: 23.
Sepulchers. They do not Virtutem colere, but colorare. In ancient times a
third part of the Inhabitants of this Island were called Picts, which signifies
painted; it is to be feared they still retain their old name: How many are
painted only with the Vermilion of a Profession, whose seeming luster dazles
the eyes of beholders, but within there is nothing but putrefaction Matthew. 23.
27.
. Hypocrites are like the Swan, which has white feathers, but a black skin; or
like the Lilly, which has a fair color, but a bad sent. Rev. 1. 3. Thou have
a name to live, but thou art Quis pejor an profitens impietatem; an mentiens
sanctitatem. Bern.
dead. These the Apostle Jude compares to clouds without water, verse. 12. they
pretend to be full of the Spirit, but they are empty clouds; their goodness is
but a Religious Cheat.

Quest. But why do persons content themselves with a show of godliness?

Answ. This helps to keep up their fame. 1 Samuel 15. 30. Honor me before the
people. Men are ambitious of credit, and would gain repute in the world,
therefore they will dress themselves in the garb and mode of Religion, that
others may write them down for Saints. But alas, what is one the better to have
others commend him, and his Conscience condemn him? What good will it do a man
when he is in Hell, that others think he is gone to Heaven? O beware of this;
Counterfeit piety is double Simulata sanctitas duplex iniquitas.
iniquity.

(...).
Name; he carries Christ in his Bible, but not in his Heart; some politic
design spurs him on in the ways of God, he makes Religion a Lacquey to his
carnal Interest: What is this but to abuse God to his face, and to serve the
Devil in Christ's Livery? Hypocrisy makes the fury rise up in Gods face;
therefore he calls such persons the generation of his wrath, Isa. 10. 6. God
will send them to Hell to do penance for their hypocrisy.

Ajax in his frenzy took Sheep for Arietem occidit credens se Vlyssem
interemisse.
men; but it is a worse mistake to take a show of grace for grace. This is for
one to put a cheat upon himself. Iam. 1. 22. Deceiving your own souls: He who
has counterfeit Gold instead of true, wrongs himself most. The hypocrite
deceives others while he lives, but deceives himself when he dies.

3 To have only a name, and make a show but make a show: The wicked ^ate him
because he has so much as a mask (...) godliness, and God hates him because he
^ath no more, Act. 26. 28. Thou have almost ^erswaded me to be a (...)
Christian. The wicked ^ate the hypocrite, because he is almost a Christian,
and God hates him because he is (...) almost.

4 To be only Comets, and make a show of When ye ^asted and mourned, did ye at
all fast unto me, ^ven to me? as God will not recompense a ^othful, so neither
a treacherous servant. All ^he hypocrites reward is in this life, Matthew. ^. 5.
They have their reward. A poor reward, ^he empty breath of men. The hypocrite
may make his Acquittance, and write, Received in full payment. Augustus Caesar
had great triumphs granted him, but the Senate would not suffer him to be
Consul, or sit in the Senate House. Hypocrites may have the praise of men, but
though these triumphs be granted them, they shall never have the privilege to
sit in the Senate House of Heaven. What acceptance can he look for from God,
whose heart tells him he is no better than a Mountebank in Divinity?

blazing lamps, when they wanted oil? what is the lamp of Profession, without
the oil of Grace? he who has only a painted holiness, shall have a painted
happiness.

Sampson, to make the devil Judge. 16. 25.
sport. He will say, what is become of all thy Vows, Tears, Confessions? Is all
thy Religion come to this? Did thou so often defy the devil, and art thou now
come to dwell with me? could thou meet with no weapon to kill thee, but what
was made of Gospel-mettle? could thou suck poison no where but out of
Ordinances? could thou find no way to hell, but by seeming godly? what a
vexation will this be, to have the devil thus reproach a man! It Is sad to be
insulted over in this life; Cleopatra Queen of Egypt, when she saw she was
reserved by the Enemy for a triumph, that she might avoid the infamy, put
Aspes to her breasts, and dyed. What then will it be to have the devil triumph
over a man at the last day?

Let us therefore take heed of this kind of pageantry, or devout stage play.
That which may make us the more to fear our hearts, is, when we see tall Cedars
in the Church worm-eaten with hypocrisy. Balaam a Prophet, Iehu a King, Judas
an Apostle, all of them stand to this day upon record for hypocrites.

It Is true, there are the seeds of this sin, in the Vivit adhuc (...) quamdiu
aliquae fibrae manent, sed agree, and admodum languide.
best; but as it was with the Leprosy under the Law, all that had risings, or
spots in the skin of the flesh, were not reputed unclean; and put out of the
Levit. 13. 6.
Camp: so all that have the risings of hypocrisy in them, are not to be judged
hypocrites, for these may be the spots of Gods Deuteronomy. 32 5.
children. But that which denominates an hypocrite, is, when hypocrisy is
predominant, and is like a spreading humor in the body.

Quest. When is a man under the regency and power of hypocrisy?

Answ. There are two signs of its predominancy. 1 A squint eye, when one
serves God for sinister ends. 2 A right eye, when there is some sin dear to a
man, which he cannot part with. These two are as shrewd signs of an hypocrite,
as any I know.

Oh let us take David's candle and lanthorn, and search for this leven, and burn
it before the Lord.

Christian, if thou mournest for hypocrisy, yet find this sin so potent,
that thou can not get the mastery of it, go to Christ, beg of him that he
would exercise his Kingly Office in thy soul; that he would subdue this sin,
and put it under the yoke. Beg of Christ to exercise his spiritual Surgery
upon thee; desire him to lance thy heart, and cut out the rotten, and that he
would apply the medicine of his blood to heal thee of thy hypocrisy. Often make
that prayer of David, Psalm 119. 80. Let my heart be found in thy statutes.
Lord, let me be any thing rather than an hypocrite. Two hearts will exclude
from one heaven.

CHAP. IV.
Showing the Characters of a godly man.
2. IT will be enquired in the next place, 2 Inquiry.
Who is the godly man?

For the full answer whereunto, I shall lay down several specifical signs and
characters of a godly man.

SECT. I.
1 The first fundamental sign is, 1 Character.
a godly man is a man of (...). Arist.
Knowledge. Prove. 14. 18. The prudent are crowned with knowledge. The Saints
are called wise Virgins, Mat. 25. 4. A natural man may have some discursive
knowledge of God, but he knows nothing as he ought to know, 1 Cor. 8. 2. He
knows not God savingly: he may have the eye of Reason open, but he discerns not
the things of God after a spiritual Nihil agit ultra suam speciem.
manner. Waters cannot go beyond their Springhead: Vapors cannot rise higher
than the Sun draws them. (...) natural man cannot act above his sphere; (...)
no more able to judge aright of sacred things, than a blind man is to judge of
colors. 1 He sees not the evil of his heart; if a face be never so black and
deformed, yet it is not seen under a Vail: the heart of a sinner i^ so black,
that nothing but Hell can pattern it, yet the vail of ignorance hides it. 2 He
sees not the beauties of a Savior. Christ is a Pearl, but an hid Pearl.

But a godly man is (...), taught of God. 1 Ioh. 2. 27. The anointing teaches
you all Spiritus sanctus veluti oleo mentes fidelium perfundit and irrigat.
Estius.
things; that is, all things essential to salvation. A godly man has the good
knowledge of the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 30. 22. he has sound wisdom, Prove. 3. 21. he
knows God in Christ: to know God out of Christ, is to know him an enemy; but to
know him in Christ is sweet and delicious. A gracious soul has the savor of
knowledge, 2 Cor. 2. 14. There is a great difference between one that has read
of a Country, or viewed it in the Map, and another who has lived in the
Country, and tasted the Fruits and Spices of it. The knowledge wherewith a
godly man is adorned, has these eight rare Ingredients in it.

Col. 1. 27. If ye continue in the Faith grounded. It is not a believing as the
Church believes, but (...) Knowledge rests upon a double basis (...) Word and
Spirit; the one is a (...) other a witness: saving Knowledge is not pendulous
or doubtful, but has a certainty in it, John 6. 69. We believe, and are sure
thou art that Christ, 2 Cor. 5, 6. (...) being always confident Si caelum ruat,
si orbis illabatur praecept, ego in Deum erectus ero; Angelus licet de caelo
aliud mihi persuadere enitatur, dicam ei Anathema Anton. Marinar.
a godly man holds no more then he will dye for: The Martyrs were so confirmed
in the knowledge of the Truth, that they would seal it with their blood.

2. It is an appretiative knowledge. The Lapidary is said to know a Jewel, who
has skill to value it: He knows God, who esteems him above the glory of
heaven, Psalm. 73. 25.
and the comforts of the earth. To compare other things with God, is to debase
Deity;

3. The knowledge of a godly man is Psalm 119. 93. I will never forget thy
Precepts, for with them thou have quickened me. Knowledge in a natural man's
head, is like a Torch in a dead man's hand: True knowledge animates. A godly man
is like John Baptist, a burning and a shining Lamp: He does not only shine by
illumination, but burn by affection. Claritas in intellectu, parit ardorem in
affectu.
The Spouses knowledge made her sick of love, Cant. 2. 5. Per^ulsa sum, (...).
I am wounded with love. I am like a Deer that is struck with a Dart, my Soul
lies a bleeding, and nothing can cure me, but a sight of him whom my Soul loves.

Ioh 19. 25. I know that my Redeemer lives. A Medicine is best when it is
applied; this applicative Knowledge is joyful. Christ is called a Surety, Hebr.
7. 22. O what joy when I am drowned in debt, to know that Christ is my Surety!
Christ is called an Advocate, 1 Ioh. 2. 1. The Greek word for Advocate (...),
signifies a Comforter, O what comfort is it when I have a bad Cause, to know
Christ is my Advocate, who never lost any Cause he pleaded.

Quest. But how shall I know that I make a right application of Christ? an
Hypocrite may think he applies when he does not. Balaam, though a Sorcerer, yet
said, My God, Numb. 22. 18.

Answ. 1. He who rightly applies Christ, puts these two together, Jesus and
Lord, Phil. 3. 8. Christ Jesus my Lord: Many take Christ as a Jesus, but refuse
him as a Lord. Do you join Prince and Savior? Act. 5. 31. Would you as well be
ruled by Christ's Laws, as saved by his Blood? Christ is a Priest upon his
Throne, Zac. 6. 13. He will never be a Priest to intercede, unless your hear be
the Throne where he sways his Scepter* A true applying of Christ is, when we so
take him for an Husband, that we give up our selves to him as a Lord.

2. He who rightly applies Christ, fetches virtue from him: The Woman in the
Gospel having touched Christ, felt virtue coming from him, and her fountain of
blood was dried up, Mar. 5. 29. This is to apply Christ, when we feel a sin
mortifying virtue flow from him. Naturalists tell us, there is an Antipathy
between the Diamond and the Loadstone, insomuch that if a piece of iron be laid
by the Diamond, the Diamond will not suffer it to be drawn away by the
Loadstone: So that knowledge which is applicatory, has an antipathy against
sin, and will not suffer the heart to be drawn away by it.

5. The knowledge of a godly man is Cor. 3. 8. We all with open face, beholding
as in a glass the glory of the Lord, are changed into the same Image. As a
Painter, looking upon a face, draws a face like it in the Picture: So looking
upon Christ in the glass of the Gospel, we are changed into his similitude. We
may look upon other objects that are glorious, yet not be made glorious by
them: A deformed face may look upon beauty, and yet not be made beautiful: a
wounded man may look upon a Chyrurgion, and yet not be healed; but this is the
Excellency of Divine Knowledge, it gives us such a sight of Christ, as makes us
partake of his Nature; as Moses when he had seen Gods back-parts, his face
shined; some of the Rays and Beams of Gods glory fell upon him.

Cor. 8. 2. True knowledge brings a man out of love with himself, the more he
knows, the more he blusheth at his own ignorance. David a bright Star in Gods
Church, yet he thought himself rather a Cloud than a Star, Psalm 73. 22.

Col. 1. 10. Increasing in the knowledge of God. Tandem fit surculus arbor.
True knowledge is like the light of the morning, which increases in the
Horizon till it comes to the full Meridian: So sweet is Spiritual Knowledge,
that the more a Saint knows, the more thirsty he is of knowledge; it is called
the Riches of Knowledge, 1 Cor. 1. 5. the more riches a man has, the more
still he desires; though S. Paul knew Christ, yet he would know him more, Phil.
3. 10. that I may know him, and the power of his Resurrection.

John 10. 4. The Sheep follow him, for they know his voice. Though God requires
knowledge more than burnt-offering, Hos. 6. 6, yet it is a knowledge
accompanied with obedience: True knowledge does not only mend a Christians
sight, but mends his pace: It Is a reproach to a Christian to live in a
contradiction to his knowledge; to know he should be strict and holy, yet to
live loosly: Not to obey, is all one as not to know, 1 Samuel 2. 12. The Sons of
Eli knew not the Lord: they could not but know, for they taught others the
knowledge of the Lord; yet they are said not to know, because they did not
obey: when Knowledge and Practice, like Castor and Pollux, appear together,
then they presage much happiness.

Use 1. Use of Trial.
Let us try our selves by this Character.

1. Are they godly, who are still in the Region of darkness? 1 Bran.
Pro. 19. 2. That the Soul be without knowledge, it is not good; ignorant
persons cannot give God a reasonable service, Romans 12. 1. It Is sad, that after
the Sun of Righteousness has shined so long in our Hemisphere, yet that
persons should be under the power of ignorance: Perhaps in the things of the
world they are knowing enough, none shall out reach them, but in the things of
God they have no knowledge. Nahash would make a Covenant with Israel, that he
might put out their right eyes, 1 Samuel 11. 1. The Devil has left men their
left eye, knowledge in secular matters, but he has put out their right eye,
they understand not the Mystery of Godliness; it may be said of them as of the
Jews, To this day the vail is upon their heart, 2 Cor. 3. 15. Many Christians
are no better than baptized Heathens. What a shame is it to be without
knowledge! 1 Cor. 15. 34. Some have not the knowledge of God, I speak this to
your shame. Men think it a shame to be ignorant in their Trade, but no shame to
be ignorant of God; there is no going to Heaven blindfold, Isa. 27. 11. It is a
people of no understanding, therefore he that made them, will not have mercy on
them.

Surely ignorance in these days is affected; it is one thing nescire, another
thing nolle scire, it is one thing not to know, another thing not to be willing
to know, John 3. 19. They loved darkness rather than light. It Is the Owl loves
the dark: Sinners are like the Athlantes, a people in Aethiopia, which curse
the Sun. Wicked men shut their eyes wilfully, Mat. 13. 15. and God shuts them
judicially, Isa. 6. 10.

2. Are they godly, 2 Bran.
who though they have knowledge, yet they know not as they ought to know; they
know not God experimentally: How many knowing persons are ignorant? they have
Illumination, but not Sanctification; their knowledge has not a powerful
influence upon them to make them better. If you set up an hundred Torches in a
garden, they will not make the flowers grow, but the Sun is influential: Many
are so far from being better for their knowledge, that they are worse, Isa. 47.
10. Thy knowledge has perverted thee; the knowledge of most makes them more
cunning in sin; these have little cause to glory in their knowledge. Absalom
might boast of the hair of his head, but that hanged him; so these may boast of
the knowledge of their head, but it will destroy them.

3. Are they godly, 3 Bran.
who though they have some glimmering of knowledge, yet no fiducial applying of
Christ: Many of the Old World knew there was an Ark, but were drowned, because
they did not get into the Ark; Knowledge, which is not applying, will but light
a man to hell; it were better to live an Indian, than to die an Infidel under
the Gospel: Christ not believed in, is terrible. Moses Rod, when it was in his
hand, did a great deal of good, it wrought Miracles, but when it was out of his
hand, it became a Serpent: So Christ, when laid hold on by the hand of Faith,
is full of comfort, but not laid hold on, will prove a Serpent to sting.

Use 2. Use 2. of Exhort.
As we would evidence our selves godly, let us labor for this good knowledge
of the Lord: What pains will men take for the achievement of Natural
Knowledge! I have read of one Benchorat, who spent forty years in finding out
the motion of the Eighth Sphere; what pains then should we take in finding out
the knowledge of God in Christ? There must be digging and searching for it, as
one would search for a vein of silver, Pro. 2. 3. If thou seek her as
silver. -- Et pluteum coedit, Pers.
and dimorsos sapit ungues.

This is the best knowledge, Motive
it does as far Pro. 3. 15. She is more precious than Rubies. Job 28. 12, 13.
Man knows not the price thereof, the depth says it is not in me, it cannot be
valued with the gold of Ophir, with the precious Onyx, or the Sapphire. The dark
Chaos was a fit Emblem of an ignorant Soul, Genesis 1. 2. but when God lights up
the Lamp of Knowledge in the mind, what a new Creation is there? How does the
Soul sparkle as the Sun in its glory?

This knowledge is comfortable; Motive
we may say of the Knowledge of Nature, as Solomon, He that increases
knowledge, increases sorrow. The knowledge of Arts and Sciences is gathering
of straw, but the knowledge of God in Christ is gathering of Pearl. This
Knowledge ushers in Salvation, 1 Timothy 2. 4.

Quest. But how shall we get this Saving Knowledge?

Answ. Not by the power of Nature: Some speak of Reason well improved how far
it will go; but alas the plumb-line of Reason is too short to fathom the deep
things of God: A man can no more by the power of Reason reach the Saving
Knowledge of God, than a Pigmy can reach the Pyramides: The Light of Nature
will no more help us to see Christ, than the light of a Candle will help us to
understand, 1 Cor. 2. 14. The natural man receives not the things of God,
neither can he know them. What shall we do then to know God in a Soul-saving
manner? I answer, let us implore the help of Gods Spirit, Paul never saw
himself blind till a light shined from heaven, Act. 9. 3. God must anoint our
eyes ere we can see: What needed Christ have bid Laodicea to come to him for
eye salve, if she could see before, Revel. 3. 18. Oh! let us beg the Spirit,
which is a Spirit of Revelation, Ephesians. 1. 17. Saving Knowledge is not by
speculation, but by inspiration, Job 32. 8, The inspiration of the Almighty
gives understanding.

Narrat Cassianus Lib. 3. Constit. Mon, Cap. 33.
de Theodoro quodam, qui notitia Scripturarum praeclare emicuit, quam ei non
tam studium lectionis contulerat, quam Spiritus Sancti Gratia; siquidem vix
ipsius Graecae Linguae perpauca verba vel intelligere poterat, vel proloqui,
quae Sancti Patris Oration (inquit Acosta) non eo pertinere putanda est, ut
studium humanum floccipendamus, sed ut hoc nobis eluoeat, Divini Spiritus dono
interdum fieri, ut homo plura de Sacris Scripturis Saluifice intelligat vel
nuda lectione, quam magna vallatus copia commentariorum alioqui assequi possit.

We may have excellent notions in Divinity, but the Holy Ghost must enable us
to know them after a spiritual manner: A man may see the Figures upon a Dial,
but he cannot tell how the day goes unless the Sun shine. We may read many
Truths in the Bible, but we cannot know them savingly till Gods Spirit does
shine upon us, 1 Cor. 2. 10. The Spirit searches all things, yea the deep
things of God. The Scripture discovers Christ to us, but the Spirit reveals
Christ in us, Gal. 1. 16. The Spirit makes known that which all the world
cannot do, namely, the sense of Gods love.

Use 3. Use 3.
You who have this saluifical sanctifying knowledge flourishing in you, bless
God for it; this is the Heavenly Anointing: the most excellent objects cannot
be seen in the dark, but when the light appears, then every flower shines in
its Native beauty. So while men are in the midnight of a natural estate, the
Beauty of Holiness is hid from them; but when the light of the Spirit comes in
a saving manner, then those truths they slighted before, appear in that
glorious luster, as transports them with wonder and love.

Bless God, (ye Saints,) that he has taken off your Spiritual Cataract, and
has given you to discern those things, which by Natures Spectacles you could
never see. How thankful was Christ to his Father for this! Mat. 11. 25. I thank
thee, O Father, Lord of Heaven and Earth, that thou have hid these things from
the wise and prudent, and have revealed them unto babes. How should you admire
Free Grace, that God has not only brought the light to you, but given you eyes
to see it! that he has enabled you to know the truth as it is in Jesus, Ephesians.
4. 21. That he has opened, not only the eye of your understanding, but the eye
of your Conscience: This is a mercy you can never be enough thankful for, that
God has so enlightened you, that you should not sleep the sleep of death.

SECT. II.
2. The godly man is a man acted by Faith; 2 Character.
Fides est Sanctissima humani pectoris gemma.
as gold is the most precious among the metals, so is Faith among the Graces.
Faith cuts us off from the wild Olive of Nature, and inoculates us into Christ:
Faith is the vital artery of the Soul, Hab. 2. 4. The just shall live by his
Faith. Such as are destitute of Faith, though they breathe, yet they want life;
Faith is the quickner of the Graces; not a Grace stirs, till Faith sets it
awork; Faith is to the soul, as the animal spirits are to the body, they excite
lively operations in the body; Faith excites Repentance; it is like the fire to
the Still which makes it drop. When I believe Gods love to me this makes me
weep that I should sin against so good a God: Faith is the Mother of Hope;
first we believe the Promise, then we hope for it: Faith is the Oil which feeds
the Lamp of Hope; Faith and Hope are two Turtle-graces, take away one, and the
other languisheth. If the sinews be cut, the body is lame; if this sinew of
Faith be cut, Hope is lame; Faith is the ground of Patience: He who believes
God is his God, and all Providence work for his good, does patiently yield up
himself to the Will of God; thus Faith is a living Principle.

And the life of a Saint is nothing else but a life of Faith; his prayer is the
breathing of Faith, Iam. 5. 15. His obedience is the result of Faith, Romans 16.
26. A godly man by Faith lives in Christ, as the beam lives in the Sun, Gal. 2.
20. I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me. A Christian by the power of
Faith sees above Reason, 2 Cor. 4. 18.
trades above the Moon; by Faith his heart is finely quieted; Psalm. 112. 7.
he trusts himself, and all his affairs with God: As in a time of War, men get
into a Garrison, and trust themselves and their treasure there: So the Name of
the Lord is a strong Tower, Pro. 18. 10. and a Believer trusts all that ever he
is worth in this Garrison. 2 Timothy 1. 12. I know whom I have believed, and I am
persuaded he is able to keep that which I have committed unto him, against that
day. God trusted Paul with his Gospel, and Paul trusted God with his Soul.

Faith is a Catholicon, or remedy against all troubles; it is a godly man's
sheat-anchor that he casts out into the Sea of Gods mercy, and is kept from
sinking in despair. -- Si modo firma fides, nulla ruina nocet.

Use. Let us try our selves by this Character: Alas, how far are they from
being godly, that are destitute of Faith! such as are altogether drowned in
Sense. Most men are spiritually purblind, they can see but just before them;
(...).
2 Pet. 1. 9. I have read of a people of India who are born with one eye; such
are they who are born with the eye of Reason, but want the eye of Faith; who
because they do not see God with bodily eyes, they do not believe a God; they
may as well not believe they have Souls, because being Spirits they cannot be
seen.

O where is he who lives in Excelsis, who is gotten into the upper Region, and
sees (...) things not seen, Heb. 11. 27. (...). Chrysostom.
Did men live by Faith, would they use sinful policy for a livelihood? Were
there Faith, would there be so much fraud? Did Faith live, would men like dead
fish swim down the stream? In this Age there is scarce so much Faith to be
found among men, as there is among the Devils, for they believe and tremble.
Jam. 2. 19.
It was a grave and serious speech of Mr. Greenham, that he feared not Papisme,
but Atheism would be Englands ruin. But I shall not expatiate, having been
more large upon this Head in another discourse. See the Christians Charter in
Quarto, page 103.


SECT. III.
3. A godly man is fired with love to God, 3 Character.
Psalm 116. 1. Faith and Love are the two Poles on which all Religion turns. A
true Saint is carried in that Chariot, the midst whereof is paved with love,
Cant. 3. 10. As Faith does quicken, so love does sweeten every duty: The Sun
mellows the fruit, so love mellows the services of Religion, and makes them
come off with a better relish: A godly man is sick of love, Ioh. 21. 16. Lord,
thou know I love thee. Though dear Savior I did deny thee, yet it was for
want of strength, not for want of love: God is the Fountain and Quintessence of
goodness, his beauty and sweetness lay constraints of love upon a gracious
heart: God is the Saints portion, Psalm 119. 57. And what more loved then a
portion? I would hate my own Soul (says Austin) if I found it not loving (...)
A godly man loves God, therefore delight to be in his presence; he loves God,
therefore takes comfort in nothing without him, Cant. 3. 3. Saw ye him whom my
Soul loves? -- Lilia nigra videntur,
Pallentesque rosae, nec dulce rubens hyacinthus,
Nullos nec myrtus, nec laurus spirat odores.


The pious Soul loves God, therefore thirsts after him; the more he has of
God, the more still he desires; a sip of the Wine of the Spirit, provokes the
appetite after more: The Soul loves God, therefore rejoices to think of his
appearing, 2 Timothy 4. 8. He loves him, therefore longs to be with him: Christ
was in Paul's heart, and Paul would be in Christ's bosom, Phil. 1. 23. When the
Soul is once like God, it would fain be with God: A gracious heart cries out, O
that I had wings, that I might fly away, and be with my Love Christ. The Bird
desires to be out of the Cage, though it be hung with Pearl.

Such is the love a gracious Soulbears to God, that many waters cannot quench
it; he loves a frowning God. Herb. Poem.
Though I am out of sign, and clean forgot,
Let me not love thee, if I love thee not.


A godly man loves God, though he be reduced to straits: A Mother and her
Child of nine years old, being ready to perish with hunger, the Child looking
upon its Mother said, Mother, do you think God will starve us? No Child, said
the Mother, he will not: The Child replied, But if he do, we must love him,
and serve him.

Use. Let us try our godliness by this Touchstone; Do we love God? Is he our
Treasure and Amor ponit amantem extrase* Aquinas.
Center? Can we with David call God our Joy, yea our exceeding Joy? Psalm. 43.
4. Do we delight in drawing nigh to him, and come before him with singing?
Psalm. 100. 2. Do we love him for his Beauty more than his Jewels? Do we love
him, when he seems not to love us?

If this be sign of a godly man, how few will be found in the number? Where is
the man whose heart is dilated in love to God? Many court him, but few love
him: Plurima fier^ (...) sunt, quae speciem habent bonam, sed non ex radice
amoris proficiscuntur; habent and spinae flores; sit intus dilectio, non potest
ex ista radice nisi bonum existere. Aug. in Epist. Ioh. Tom. 9.
People are for the most part eaten up with self-love; they love their ease,
their worldly profit, their lusts, but they have not a drop of love to God: Did
they love God, would they be so willing to be rid of him? Job 21. 14. They say
to the Almighty depart from us. Did they love God, would they tear his Name by
their Oaths? Does he love his Father who shoots him to the heart? Though they
worship God, they do not love him; they are like the Soldiers that bowed the
knee to Christ, and mocked him, Mat. 27. 29. He whose heart is a grave, in
which the love of God is buried, deserves to have that Curse written upon his
Tombstone, 1 Cor. 16. ult. Let him be Anathema Maranatha. A Soul void of Divine
Love, is a temper that best suits with damned spirits. But I shall wave this,
and pass to the Sea Divine Cordial, page 123.
next.

SECT. IV.
4. A godly man is like God, 4 Character.
he has the same judgment with God; he thinks of things as God does; he has
a God-like disposition; he partakes of the Divine Nature, 2 Pet. 1. 4. A godly
man does bear Gods Name and Image; godliness is God-likeness. It Is one thing to
profess God, another thing to resemble him.

A godly man is like God in Summa religio est, imitari quem colis. Lactant.
Holiness: Holiness is the most orient Pearl of the King of Heavens Crown,
Exodus 15. 11. Glorious in Holiness. Gods power makes him Mighty, his mercy
makes him lovely, but his holiness makes him glorious: The Holiness of God is
the intrinsic purity of his Nature, and his abhorrency of sin: A godly man
bears some kind of Analogy with God in this: He has the Holy Oil of
Consecration upon him, Psalm. 106. 16. Aaron the Saint of the (...) Deo
consecratus and a rebus immundis sejunctus. River.
Lord. Holiness is the Badge and Livery of Christ's people, Isa. 63. 18. The
people of thy (...)
Holiness: The godly are as well an Holy as a Royal Priesthood, 1 Pet. 2. 9.
Nor have they only a Frontispiece of holiness, like the Egyptian Temples, which
were fair without; but they are like Solomon's Temple, which had gold within;
they have written upon their heart Holiness to the Lord: The holiness of the
Saints consists in their conformity to Gods Will, which is the rule and pattern
of all Holiness.

Holiness is a man's glory: Aaron put on garments for glory and beauty, Exodus
28. 2. So when a person is invested with the embroidered garment of Holiness,
it is for glory and beauty.

The goodness of a Christian lies in his Holiness, as the goodness of the Air
lies in the clearness of it; the worth of gold in the pureness.

Quest. Wherein do the godly discover their holiness?

Answ. 1. In hating the garment spotted by the flesh, Jude 3. The godly do set
themselves against evil, both in purpose and practice; they are fearful of that
which looks like sin, 1 These. 5. 22. The appearance of evil may prejudice a
weak Christian: If it does not defile a man's own Conscience, it may offend his
Brothers Conscience; and to sin against him, is to sin against Christ, 1 Cor.
8. 12. A godly man will not go as far as he may, least he go further than he
should; he will not swallow down all that others (bribed with preferment) may
plead for: It Is easy to put a golden color upon a rotten stuff.

2. The godly discover their holiness in being Advocates for Holiness, Psalm.
119. 46. I will speak of thy Testimonies before Kings, and will not be ashamed.
When Piety is calumniated in the world, the Saints will stand up in the defense
of it; they will wipe off the dust of a reproach from the face of Religion:
Holiness defends the godly, and they will defend Holiness; it defends them from
danger, and they will defend it from disgrace.

Use 1. Use 1.
How can those be reputed godly, who are unlike God? they have nothing of God
in them, not one shread of holiness: They call themselves Christians, but blot
out the word holiness; you may as well call it day at midnight.

So impudent are some, that they boast they are none of the holy ones: Is it
not the Spirit of Holiness which marks the sheep of Christ from the goats, Ephesians.
1. 13. Ye were sealed (or marked) with the Holy Spirit: And is it a matter for
men to boast of, that they have none of the Spirits ear-mark upon them? Does
not the Apostle say, that without holiness no man shall see the Lord, Heb. 12.
14. Such as bless themselves in their unholiness, had best go ring the Bells
for joy that they shall never see God.

Others there are that hate holiness: sin and holiness never meet but they
fight: holiness discharges its fire of zeal against sin, and sin spits its
venom of malice at holiness: Many pretend to love Christ as a Savior, but hate
him as he is the Holy One, Act. 3. 14.

Use 2. Use 2. of Exhort.
Let us labor to be like God in holiness.

Motive
it is the end of the Word preached: the silver drops of the Sanctuary are to
water the seed of grace, and make a crop of holiness spring up: What use is
there of the Promises but to bribe us to holiness? What are all Gods
Providential Dispensations, but to excite holiness? As the Lord makes use of
all the seasons of the year, frost and heat, to bring on the harvest; so all
prosperous and adverse providence, are for the promoting the work of holiness
in the soul. What is the end of the mission of the spirit, but to make the
heart holy? When the air is unwholesome by reason of foggy vapors, the wind is
a fan to winnow and purify the air: so the blowing of Gods Spirit upon the
heart, is to purify it, and make it holy.

Motive
(...). Aristot.
Tamerlain being presented with a pot of gold, asked whether the gold had his
Fathers stamp upon it: But when he saw it had the Roman stamp, he rejected it.
Holiness is Gods stamp and impress; if he does not see this stamp upon us, he
will not own us.

Motive
communion with God is a paradox to the men of the world; every one that hangs
about the Court, does not speak with the King: We may approach to God in
duties, and as it were hang about the Court of Heaven, yet not have communion
with God: That which keeps up the intercourse with God is holiness; the holy
heart enjoys much of Gods presence; he feels heart-warming and heart-comforting
virtue in an Ordinance: Where God sees his Likeness, there he gives his love.

SECT. V.
5. A godly man is very exact and curious about the Worship of God; 5 Character.
the Greek word for (...)
godly, signifies a right Worshipper of God: A godly man does reverence Divine
Institutions, and is more for the Purity of Worship than the Pomp: Mixture in
sacred things, is like a dash in the wine, which though it gives it a color,
yet does but adulterate it: The Lord would have Moses make the Tabernacle
according to the pattern in the (...).
Mount, Exodus 25. 40. If Moses had left out any thing in the pattern, or added
any thing to it, it would have been very provoking: The Lord has always given
testimonies of his displeasure against such as have corrupted his Worship:
Nadab and Abihu offered strange fire, (other than God had sanctified on the
Altar) and fire went out from the Lord, and devoured them, Levit. 10. 1.
Whatsoever is not of Gods own appointment in his Worship, that he looks upon as
strange fire; and no wonder he is so highly incensed at it; for as if God were
not wise enough to appoint the manner how he will be served: Men will go to
prescribe him, and as if the rules for his Worship were defective, they will
attempt to mend the Copy, and superadd their Qui Deum ad humani cerebri id
aeam, and ingenii tenuitatem admetiuntur, necesse est, ut in sua arrogantia
confusi jaceant. Rivet.
inventions.

A godly man dares not vary from the Pattern which God has shown him in the
Scripture; and probably this might not be the least reason, why David was
called a man after Gods own heart, because he kept the springs of Gods Worship
pure, and in matters sacred, did not super induce any thing of his own devising.

Use. By this Character we may try our selves, Use.
whether we are godly: Are we tender about the things of God? Do we observe
that mode of worship, which has the stamp of Divine Authority upon it? It Is of
dangerous consequence to make a medley in Religion.

1. Those who will add to one part of Gods Worship, will be as ready to take
away from another, Mar. 7. 8. Laying aside the Commandment of God, ye hold the
Traditions of men. They who will bring in a Tradition, will in time lay aside a
Command; This the Papists are highly guilty of; they bring in Altars and
Crucifixes, and lay aside the second Commandment: They bring in Oil and Cream
in Baptism, and leave out the Cup in the Lords Supper; they bring in praying
for the dead, and lay aside reading the Scriptures intelligibly to the living:
They who will introduce that into Gods Worship which he has not commanded,
will be as ready to blot out that which he has commanded.

2. Those who are for outward commixtures in Gods Worship, are usually
regardless of the Vitals of Religion; living by Faith, leading a strict
mortified life, these things are less minded by Si modo exteriorum rituum
pompis luxuriare poterint, sperant se Deo glaucoma obduxisse. Rivet.
them: Wasps have their Combs, but no honey in them; the Religion of many may
be likened to those ears which run all into straw.

3. Superstition and Profaneness kiss each Qui curios simulant, and bacchanalia
vivunt
other: Has it not been known that those who have kneeled at a Pillar, have
reeled against a Post.

4. Such as are devoted to Superstition, are seldom or never converted, Mat.
21. 31. Publicans and Harlots go into the Kingdom of God before you: It was
spoken to the Chief Priests, who were high Formalists; and the reason why such
persons are seldom wrought upon savingly, is, because they have a secret
antipathy against the power of godliness: the Snake is of a fine color, but it
has a sting; so outwardly men may look zealous and devout, but retain a sting
of hatred in their hearts against goodness. Hence it is, that they who have
been most hot for superstition, have been most hot for persecution. The Church
of Rome wears white linen, (an Emblem of Innocence) but the Spirit of God
paints her out in Scarlet, Rev. 17. 4. Whence is this? not only because she
puts on a scarlet Robe, but because her body is of a scarlet die, having
imbrued her hands in the blood of the Saints, Rev. 17. 6.

Let us then, as we would demonstrate our selves godly, keep close to the rule
of Worship, and in the things of Jehovah, go no further than we can say, it is
written.

SECT. VI.
6 A godly man is a servant of God, 6 Character.
and not a servant of men. This Character has two distinct branches, I shall
speak of both in order.

1. A godly man is a servant of God, 1 Bran.
Ezra 5. 11. We are the servants of the God of Heaven. Col. 4. 12. Epaphras a
servant of Christ.

Quest. In what sense is a godly man a servant of God?

Answ. In seven respects.

1. A servant leaves all other, and confines himself to one Master: so a godly
man ^eaves the service of sin, and betakes himself ^o the service of God, Romans
6. 22. Sin is a tyrannizing thing; a sinner is a slave, when he ^ins with most
(...)
freedom: The wages which sin gives, may deter us from its service, Romans ^.
23. The wages of sin is death. Here is ^amnable pay! A godly man Lists himself
(...) Gods Family, and is one of his menial ser^ants, Psalm 116. 16. O Lord,
truly I am thy servant, I am thy servant. David uses an in^emination; as if he
had said, Lord, I have taken earnest, none else can lay claim to me; ^^y ear is
bored to thy service.

2. A servant is not sui juris, at his own Thy will (...) done on earth. Some
will say to the godly, why cannot you do as others? Why will not you drink, and
swear, and profane the Sabbath as others do? The godly are Gods servants, they
must not do what they will, but be under the rules of the Family; they must do
nothing but what they can show their Masters hand for.

bound, there are Covenants and Indentures sealed between him and his Master.
Thus there are Indentures drawn in Baptism; and in Conversion, the Indentures
are renewed and sealed; we do there bind our selves to God to be his sworn
servants, Psalm. 119. 106. I have sworn, and I will perform it, that I will keep
thy righteous Judgments. A godly man has tied himself to the Lord by Psalm
56. 12.
Vow, and he makes conscience of his vow; he had rather die by Persecution,
than live by Perjury.

Paul did spend, and was spent for Christ, 2 Cor. 12. 15. He outwrought all the
other Apostles, 1 Cor. 15. 10. A godly man is active for God to his last
breath, Psalm 119. 112. only, The dead rest from their labors.

wonder after the Revel. 13. 3.
beast, he follows after the Revel. 14. 4.
Lamb. He will tread in the steps of Christ: If a Master leap over hedge and
ditch, the servant will follow him: A godly man will follow Christ through
afflictions, Luke 9. 23. If any man will come after me, let him take up his
Cross daily, and follow me. Peter would follow Christ upon the water: A godly
man will follow Christ though it be death every step; he will keep his
goodness, when others are bad; as all the water in the salt Sea cannot make the
Fish salt, but still they retain their freshness; so all the wickedness in the
world cannot make a godly man wicked, but still he retains his piety; he will
follow Christ in the worst times.

6. A servant is satisfied with his Masters Paul knew he was a servant,
therefore whether more or less fell to his share, he was indifferent, Phil. 4.
When Christians murmr at their condition, they forget that they are servants,
and must be at the allowance of their Heavenly Master: Thou that have the least
bit from God, wilt die in his debt.

Psalm. 119. 139. My zeal has consumed me. A servant of God appears for his
truths: They who can hear Gods Name reproached, and his ways spoken against,
yet be silent, God will be ashamed of such servants, and discard them before
men and Angels.

Use. Use.
Let us declare our selves godly, by being servants of the most high God.

Consider 1. Motive
God is the best (...). Euripides.
Master, he is punctual in all his promises, 1 Kin. 8. 23. There is no God like
thee in Heaven above, or on earth beneath, who keep Covenant with thy
servants. Ver. 56. There has not failed one word of all his good promise. God
is of a most sweet gracious disposition; he has this property, he is slow to
Psalm. 103 9.
anger, and ready to Psalm. 86. 5.
forgive: In our wants he does relieve us, in our weakness he does pity us; he
reveals his secrets to his Pro. 3. 32.
servants, Psalm. 25. 14. He wait on his servants: Was there ever such a Master?
Luke 12. 37. Blessed are those servants whom the Lord when he comes shall find
watching; verily I say unto you, that he shall gird himself, and make them sit
down to meat, and will come forth and serve them. When we are sick he makes our
bed, Psalm. 41. 3. Thou will make all their bed in their sickness. He holds our
head when we are fainting: Other Masters may forget their servants, and cast
them off when they are old, but God will not, Isa. 44. 21. Thou art my servant,
O Israel, thou shall not be forgotten of me. It Is a slander to say, God is an
hard Master.

2. Gods service is the best service: Motive
There are six privileges in Gods service.

1. Freedom. Though the Saints are bound to Gods service, yet they serve him
freely: Gods Spirit, which is called a free Psa. 51. 12.
spirit, makes them free and cheerful in obedience: The Spirit carries them
upon the wings of delight; it makes duty a privilege; it does not force, but
draw; it inlargeth the heart in love, and fills it with joy; Gods service is
perfect freedom.

2. Honor. David the King professes himself one of Gods Pensioners, Psalm.
143. 12. I am thy Servire est regnare.
servant. St. Paul, when he would blaze his Coat of Arms, and set forth his
best Heraldry, he does not call himself Paul, ^n Hebrew of the Hebrews, or Paul
of the Tribe of Benjamin, but Paul a servant of Christ, Romans 1. 1. Theodosius
thought it a greater dignity to be Gods servant, than to be an Nihil regio
splendore indignum, si ad hanc ingenuam (...) invitentur. Rivet.
Emperor. Christ himself, who is equal with his Father, yet is not ashamed of
the Title Servant, Isa. 53. 11. Every servant of God is a Son, every subject a
Prince: It Is more honor to serve God, than to have Kings serve us: The Angels
in Heaven are servitors to the Saints on Non est onerans sed ornans Dei
servitus.
earth.

3. Safety. God takes care of his servants; he gives them a protection, Isa.
41. 9, 10. Thou art my servant, fear not, I am with thee. God hides his
servants, Psa. 27. 5. In the secret of his Tabernacle In abdito tento rii^ sui.
shall be hide me; that is, he shall keep me safe, as in the most holy place of
the Sanctuary, where none but the Priests might enter. Christ's Mal 4. 2.
Wings are both for healing, and for hiding; for curing, and securing us: The
Devil and his Instruments would soon devour the servants of God, if he did not
set an invisible guard about them, and cover them with the golden feathers of
his Psalm. 91. 4.
Protection, Acts 18. 10. I am with thee, and no man shall set on thee to hurt
thee. Gods watchful eye is ever upon his people, and the Enemies shall not do
the mischief they intend, they shall not be destroyers, but Physicians.

4. Gain. Atheists say, It is vain to serve God; and what profit is it that we
have kept his Ordinances? Mal. 3. 14. besides the vails which God gives in this
life (sweet peace of Conscience) he reserves his best Wine till last; he gives
a glorious Kingdom to his (...). Origin Cont. Cells.
servants, Heb. 12. 28. The servants of God may for a while be kept under, and a
bused, but they shall have preferment at last, John 12. 26. Where I am, there
shall my servants be.

5. Assistance. Other Masters cut out work for their servants, but do not help
them in their work; but our Master in heaven does not only give us work, but
strength, Psalm 138. 3. Thou strengthenedst me with strength in my Soul. God
bids us serve him, and he will enable us to serve him, Ezekiel. 36. 27. I will
cause you to walk in my Statutes. The Lord does not only fit work for us, but
fit us for our work; with his Command he gives Da Domine quod jubes, and ju^e
quod vis. Austin.
power.

6. Supplies. A Master will not let his servants want; Gods servants shall be
provided for, Psalm. 37. 3. Verily thou shall be fed. Does God give us a Christ,
and will he deny us a crust? Genesis 48. 15. The God who has fed me all my days:
If God does not give us what we crave, he will give us what we need: the wicked
are fed, who are dogs, Phil. 3. 2. If a man feeds his dog, sure he will feed
his servant: Oh then who would not be in love with Gods service.

Motive
we are pretio empti, bought with a price, 1 Cor. 6. 20. It Is a Metaphor taken
from such as do ransom Captives out of prison, by paying a sum of money for
them, they are to be at the service of them that ransomed them: So when the
Devil had taken us prisoners, Christ ransomed us with a price, not of money,
but blood; therefore we are to be only at his service: If any can lay a better
claim to us than Christ, we may serve them; but Christ having the best right to
us, we are to cleave to him, and enroll our selves for ever in his service.

2. I pass to the second Branch of this Character: 2 Bran.
A godly man is not the servant of men, 1 Cor. 7. 23. Be ye not the servants of
men.

Quest. But is there no service we owe to men?

Answ. There is a threefold serving of men.

Civil service we owe to men; as the inferior to the superior* The servant is
a Living Tool, as Aristotle (...).
says, Ephesians. 6. 5. Servants obey your Masters.

2. There is a Religious service^we owe to men, when we are serviceable to
their souls, 2 Cor. 4. 5. Your servants for Jesus sake.

3. There is a sinful serving of men; this consists in three things.

1. When we prefer men's Injunctions before Gods Institutions; God commands one
thing, man commands another; God says, sanctify the Sabbath; man says,
profane it: When men's Edicts have more force upon us than Gods Precepts, this
is to be the servants of men.

2. When we do voluntarily prostitute our selves to the impure lusts of men; Ne
adulentur, and impiis aeliorum cupiditatibus se addicant, vetat Apostolus.
Calv. in 1 Cor. cap. 7.
we let them (...) lord it over our Consciences: when we are ductill and
frameable to any thing, either Arminian or Atheist, either for the Gospel or
the Alchoran, when we will be what others will have us; just of Issachars
temper, Genesis 49. 14. Issachar is a strong Ass, couching down between two
burdens. This is not humility, but sordidness, and it is a serving of men.

3. When we are Advocates in a bad Cause, pleading for any impious,
unjustifiable actings; when we baptize sin with the Name of Religion, and with
our Oratory wash the Devils face; this is to be the servants of men; in these
cases a godly person will not so unman himself, as to serve men; he says as
Paul, Gal. 1. 10. If I pleased men, I should not be the servant of Christ: And
as Peter, Act. 5. 23. We ought to obey God rather than men.

Use. Use.
How many leagues distant are they from godliness, who do (...), who either for
fear of punishment, or hope of preferment, comply with the sinful commands of
men, who will put their Conscience into any yoke, and sail with any wind that
blows profit: These are the servants of men; they have abjured their Baptismal
Vow, and renounced the Lord that bought them.

He who is such a Omnium scenarum homo. Erasm.
Proteus, who can change into any form, and bow as low as hell to please men, I
would say two things to him.

1. Thou that have learned all thy postures, who can cringe, and tack about,
how will thou look Christ in the face another day? When thou shall say upon thy
death bed, Lord look upon thy servant, Christ shall disclaim thee, and say,
(...) servant? No, thou did renounce my service, thou were a servant of men,
depart from me, I know you not. What a cooling card will this be at that day?

2. What does a man get by sinfully inslaving himself? he gets a blot in his
name, a curse in his estate, an hell in his Conscience, nay, even those that he
basely stoops to, will scorn and despise him. How did the Highpriests kick off
Judas, Mat. 27. 4. Look thou to that.

That we may not be the servants of men, let us abandon Esther 8. 17.
fear, and advance faith: Faith is a world-conquering grace, 1 Ioh. 5. 4. It
overcomes the worlds music and furnace; it steels a Christian with Divine
courage, and makes him stand immovable, as a Rock in the midst of the Sea.

SECT. VII.
7. A godly man is a Christ-prizer. 7 Character.
To illustrate this, I shall show;

1. That Jesus Christ is in himself precious.

2. That a godly man esteems him precious.

1. That Jesus Christ is in himself precious, 1 Pet. 2. 6. Behold I lay in Sion
a chief cornerstone, elect, precious. Christ is compared to things most
^recious.

1. To a bundle of myrrh, Cant. 1. 13. Myrrh is very Plin.
precious, it was one of the chief spices, whereof the holy anointing Oil was
made, Exodus 30. 25.

1. Myrrh is of a perfuming Nature; so Christ perfumes our persons and
services, that they are a sweet odor to God: whence is it the Church, that
heavenly Bride, is so perfumed with Cant. 3. 6.
grace, but because Christ, that Myrrhe-tree, has dropped upon her.

2. Myrrh is of an exhilarating nature; the smell of it does comfort and
refresh the spirits: So Christ does comfort the souls of his people, when they
are fainting under their sins and sufferings.

2. Christ is compared to a Pearl, Mat. 13. 46. When he had found one Pearl of
great price. Christ, this Pearl was little in regard of his humility, but of
infinite value. Jesus Christ is a Pearl that God wears in his John 1. 18.
bosom; a Pearl, whose luster drowns the worlds Gal. 6. 1^.
glory; a Pearl that enricheth the soul, the Angelical part of 1. Cor. 1. 5.
man; a Pearl that enlightens Rev. 21. 23.
heaven; a pearl so precious, that it makes us precious to Ephesians. 1. 6.
God; a Pearl that is cordial and Luke 2. 25.
restorative; a Pearl more worth than Col. 1. 16, 17.
heaven. The preciousness of Christ is seen three ways.

1. He is precious in his ^erson; he is the picture of his Fathers glory,
(...). Origin. Cont Cells.
Heb. 1. 3.

2. Christ is precious in his Offices; which are several Rays of the Sun of
Righteousness.

1. Christ's Prophetical Office is precious, Deuteronomy. 18. 15. He is the great
Oracle of Heaven; he has a preciousness above all the Prophets which went
before him; he teaches not only the ear, but the heart: He who has the Key of
David in his hand, opened the heart of Lydia, Act. 16. 14.

2. Christ's Priestly Office is precious: This is the solid basis of our
comfort, Heb. 9. 26. Now once has he appeared to put away sin, by the
sacrifice of Hic est in cujus typo immolabatur agnus, qui non solum suo
sanguine nos redemit, sed and lanis over^it. Hierom.
himself. By virtue of this Sacrifice, the soul may go to God with boldness;
Lord give me heaven, Christ has purchased it for me; he hung upon the Cross,
that I might sit upon the Per has ^^mas later^^ Christi licet (...) sugere me^
de Petra. ^ern.
Throne. Christ's Blood and Incense, are the two hinges on which our Salvation
turns.

3. Christ's Regal Office is precious, Rev. 19. 16. He has on his Vesture, and
on his Thigh, a name written, King of Kings, and Lord of Lords. Christ has a
pre-eminence above all other Kings for Majesty; he has the highest Throne, the
richest Crown, the largest Dominions, and the longest possession, Heb. 1. 8.
Thy Throne, O God, is for ever and ever. Though Christ has many Assessors,
Ephesians. 2. 6. yet no Successors. Christ sets up his Scepter where no other King
does; he rules the will and affections; his power binds the Conscience: The
Angels take the oath of Allegiance to him, Heb. 1. 6. Christ's Kingship is seen
in two Royal Acts.

1. In ruling his people.

2. In overruling his Enemies.

1. In ruling his people. He rules with Clemency; his Regal Rod has honey at
the end of it: Christ displays the Ensign of Mercy, which makes so many
Volunteers run to his Standard, Psalm. 110. 3. Holiness without Mercy, and
Justice without Mercy, were dreadful; but Mercy encourages poor sinners to
trust in him.

2. In overruling his Enemies. He pulls down their pride, befools their
policy, restrains their malice, Psalm 76. 10. The remainder of wrath thou shall
restrain: Or as it is in the Hebrew, Accinges. Arias Mont.
(...) thou shall girdle up. That stone cut out of the Moutains without hands,
which smote the Image, Dan. 2. 34. was an Emblem (says Austin) of Christ's
Monarchical power, conquering and triumphing over his Enemies.

3. Christ is precious in his benefits; by Christ all dangers are removed,
through Christ all mercies are conveyed; in his blood flows Justification, Act.
3. 9. Purgation, Heb. 9. 14. Fructification, Ioh. 1. 16. Pacification, Romans 5.
1. Adoption, Gal. 4. 5. Perseverance, Heb. 12. 2. Glorification, Heb. 9. 12.
This will be matter of sublimest joy to Eternity. We read, that those who had
passed over the Sea of Glass, stood with their Harps, and did sing the Song of
Moses and the Lamb, Revel. 15. 2. So when the Saints of God have passed over
the glassie Sea of this world, they shall sing Hallelujahs to the Lamb, who
has redeemed them from sin and hell, and has translated them into that
glorious Paradise, where they shall see God for ever and ever.

2. The second thing to be illustrated is, that every godly man does set an
high value and estimate upon Christ, 1 Pet. 2. 7. Unto you therefore who
believe, he is precious: In the Greek it is, (...) an honor: Believers have an
honorable esteem of Christ; the Psalmist speaks like one captivated with
Christ's amazing beauty, Psalm 73. 25. There is none upon earth that I desire
besides thee. He did not say he had nothing; he had many comforts on earth, but
he desired none but God; as if a wife should say, there is no ones company she
prizeth like her husbands: How did David prize Christ, Psa. 45. 2. Thou art
fairer than the children of men: The Spouse in the Canticles looked upon Christ
as the Coriphoeus, the most incomparable one, Cant. 5. 10. The chief among ten
(...).
thousand. Christ out-vies all others, Cant. 2. 3. As the appletree among the
trees of the wood, so is my beloved among the sons. Christ does infinitely more
excel all the beauties and glories of this visible world, than the appletree
does surpass the trees of the wild Forest: So did Paul prize Christ, that he
made him his chief study, 1 Cor. 2. 2. I determined to know nothing among you
save Jesus Christ; (...); I judged not any thing else of worth: St. Paul did
best know Christ, 1 Cor. 9. 1. Have I not seen Jesus our Lord? He saw him with
his bodily eyes in a Vision, when he was wrapped up into the third heaven, 2
Cor. 12. 2. and he saw him with the eye of his faith, in the blessed Supper,
therefore he did best know him; and behold, how he did slight, and vili-prize
other things, in comparison of Christ, Phil. 3. 8. I count all things but loss,
for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord. Gain he esteemed
loss, and gold dung for Christ. Indeed, a godly person cannot choose but set an
high valuation upon Christ, he sees a fullness of worth in him.

1. A fullness in regard of variety, Col. 2. 3. In whom are hid all (...).
Theophilact.
treasures. No Country has all commodities of its own growth; but Christ has
all kind of fullness; fullness of Merit, of Spirit, of Love; he has a treasure
adequate to all our wants.

2. A fullness in regard of degree: Christ has not only a few drops, or rays,
but is more full of goodness than the Sun is of light; he has the fullness of
the Godhead, Col. 2. 9.

3. A fullness in regard of duration: The fullness in the creature, like the
brooks of Arabia, is soon dried up; but Christ's fullness is (...).
inexhaustible, it is a fullness overflowing and ever-flowing.

And this fullness is for (...).
Believers: Christ is Communis Thesaurus (as Luther says) a common Treasury or
Magazine for the Saints, Ioh. 1. 16. Of his fullness have we all received; Set a
glass under a Still, and it receives water out of the Still drop by drop: So
those who are united to Christ, have the dews and drops of his grace distilling
upon Communio fundatur in unione.
them: Well then, may Christ be admired of all them that believe.

Use 1. Use 1.
Is a godly man an high prizer of Christ, then what is to be thought of them
who do not put a value upon Christ, are they godly or no? There are four sorts
of persons who do not prize Christ.

1. The Jews. They believe not in Christ, 2 Cor. 3. 15. Unto this day the vail
is upon their heart: They expect their saeculum futurum, a Messiah yet to come,
as their own Talmud reports: they blaspheme Christ, they slight righteousness
imputed: They despise the Virgin Mary, calling her in derision Marah, which
signifies bitterness: They vilify the Evangelium vocant avengelaion.
Gospel; they deny the Christian Sabbath; they have the Christians in
abomination; they hold it not lawful for a Jew to take physic of a Christian.
Schecardus relates of one Bendema a Jew, that being stung with a Serpent, a
Christian came to heal him, but he refused his help, and chose rather to die,
than to be healed by a Christian: So do the Jews hate Christ, and all that wear
his Livery.

2. The Socinians, who acknowledge only Christ's Humanity: this is to make him
below the Angels; for the Humane Nature simply considered, is inferior to the
Angelical, Psa. 8. 5.

3. Proud Professors; who do not lay the whole stress of their Salvation upon
Christ, but would mingle their dross with his gold, their duties with his
Merits; this is to steal a Jewel from Christ's Crown, and implicitly to deny him
to be a perfect Savior.

4. Airy Speculatists; who prefer the study of the Arts and Sciences before
Christ; not but that the knowledge of these is commendable: Moses was skilled
in all the knowledge of the Egyptians, Acts 7. 22. Humane Learning is of good
use to prepare for the study of better things; as a courser dye prepares the
cloth for a richer and a deeper dye: but the fault is, when the study of
Christ is neglected: The knowledge of Christ ought to have the pre-eminence: It
was not sure without a Mystery, that God suffered all Solomon's writings about
birds and plants to be lost; but what he wrote about spiritual wisdom, has
been miraculously preserved; as if God would teach us, that to know Christ (the
true Pro. ^. 12.
Wisdom) is the Crowning Knowledge: One leaf of this Tree of Life, will give us
more comfort on a deathbed, than the whole Idea and platform of Humane
Science: What is it to know all the motions of the Orbs; and influences of the
Stars, and in the mean time to be ignorant of Christ, the bright Morning Star?
Rev. 22. 16. What is it to understand the nature of Minerals, or precious
stones, and not to know Christ the true Cornerstone? Isa. 28. 16. It Is an
undervaluing, yea despising of Christ, when with the lodestone we draw iron,
and straw to us, but neglect him who has tried gold to bestow upon us, Rev. 3.
18.

Use 2. Use 2. of Trial.
Is it the sign of a godly person to be a Christ-prizer? then let us try our
godliness by this: Do we set an high estimation upon Christ?

Quest. How shall we know that?

Answ. 1. If we are prizers of Christ, then we prefer him in our judgments
before other things: We value Christ above honor and riches; the Pearl of Price
lies nearest our heart: He who prizeth Christ, esteems the gleanings of Christ
better than the worlds Vintage: He counts the worst things of Christ better
than the best things of the world, Heb. 11. 26. Esteeming the reproach of
Christ greater riches, than the treasures in Egypt. And is it thus with us? Is
the price of worldly things fallen? Gregory Nazianzene did solemnly bless God,
that he had any thing to lose for Christ's Naz.
sake But alas, how few Nazianzenes are to be found: You shall hear some say,
they have honorable thoughts of Christ, but they prize their Land and Estate
above him. The young man in the Gospel preferred his bags of gold before
Christ: Judas valued thirty pieces of silver above him: May it not be feared,
if an hour of trial come, there are many would rather renounce their Baptism,
and throw off Christ's Livery, than hazard the loss of their earthly possessions
for him.

2. If we are prizers of Christ, we cannot live without him; things which we
value, we know not how to be without: A man may live without music, but not
without food. A Child of God can want health and friends, but he cannot want
Christ: In the absence of Christ he says as Job, I went mourning without the
Sun, Job 30. 28. I have the starlight of creature comforts, but I want the Sun
of Righteousness. Give me Children (said Rachel) or I die, Genesis 30. 1. So says
the Soul, Lord give me Christ, or I die; one drop of the Water of Life to
quench my thirst: Let us try by this, do they prize Christ, who can make a
shift well enough to be without him? Give a child a rattle, and it will not
mind gold: If men have but worldly accommodations, corn and wine, they can be
well enough content without Christ: Christ is a Spiritual Rock, 1 Cor. 10. 4.
Let men have but oil in the cruse, they care not for honey out of this Rock: If
their Trading be gone, they complain, but if God takes away the Gospel, which
is the Ark wherein Christ the Manna is hid, they are quiet and tame enough: Do
these prize Christ, who can sit down content without him?

3. If we are prizers of Christ, then we shall not grutch at any pains to get
(...). Plut.
him. He who prizeth gold, will dig for it in the Mine, Psa. 63. 8. My Soul
follows hard after God. Plutarch reports of the Gauls, an ancient people in
France, after they had tasted the sweet wine of the Italian Grape, they
enquired after the country, and never rested till they had arrived at it. He in
whose eye Christ is precious, never rests till he has gotten Christ, Cant. 3.
1, 2, 4. I sought him whom my soul loves, I held him, and would no^ let him go.

Try by this! Many say they have Christ in high Veneration, but they are not
industrious in the use of means to obtain him. If Christ would drop as a ripe
fig into their mouth, they could be content to have him, but they will not put
themselves to too much trouble to get him: Does he prize his health, who will
not put himself upon physic or exercise?

4. If we are prizers of Christ, then we take much complacency in Christ: What
joy does a man take in that which he counts his treasure? He who prizeth
Christ, makes him the Head of his joy: He can delight in Christ, when other
delights are gone, Hab. 3. 17. Though the fig tree does not flourish, yet I
will rejoice in the Lord. Though a flower in a man's garden die, yet he can
delight in his money and Jewels: He who esteems Christ, can solace himself in
Christ, when there is an Autumn upon all other comforts.

5. If we are prizers of Christ, then we will part with our dearest lusts for
him. Paul says of the Galathians, they did so esteem him, that they were ready
to have pulled out their own eyes, and have given him, Gal. 4, 15. He who
esteems Christ, will pull out that lust, which is his right eye. A wise man
will throw away a poison for a cordial: He who sets an high value upon Christ,
will part with his pride, unjust gain, sinful Isaiah 30. 22.
fashions: He will set his feet upon the neck of his sins.

Try by this! How can they be said to prize Christ, who will not leave a vanity
for him? Not a spot in the face, not an oath, not an intemperate cup: What a
scorn and contempt do they put upon the Lord Jesus, who prefer a damning lust,
before a saving Christ.

6. If we are prizers of Christ, we shall think we cannot have him at too dear
a rate. We may buy gold too dear, but we cannot purchase Christ too dear:
Though we part with our blood for him, it is no dear bargain: The Apostles
rejoiced that they were graced so much, as to be disgraced for Christ, Act. 5.
41. They esteemed their fetters more precious than bracelets of gold: Let not
him say he prizeth Christ, who refuses to bear his Cross, Mat. 13. 21. When
persecution arises because of the Word, by and by he is offended.

7. If we are prizers of Christ, we will be willing to help others to a part in
him; that which we esteem excellent, we are desirous our friend should have a
share in: If a man has found a Spring of water, he will call others that they
may drink, and satisfy their thirst. Do we commend Christ to others? Do we
take them by the hand, and lead them to Christ? This shows how few prize
Christ, because they strive no more that their Relations should have a part in
him: They get land and riches for their posterity, but have no care to leave
them the Pearl of Price for their portion.

8. If we are prizers of Christ, then we prize him in health as well as in
sickness; when we are enlarged, as well as when we are straightened: A friend is
prized at all times* the Rose of Sharon is always sweet: He who values his
Savior aright, has as precious thoughts of him in a day of prosperity, as in
a day of adversity: The wicked make use of Christ, only when they are in
straits; as the Elders of Gilead went to Ieptha when they were in distress,
Judge. 11. 7. Themistocies complained of the Athenians, that they ran to him but
as to a Tree, to shelter them in a storm: Sinners desire Christ only for a
shelter: The Hebrews never chose their Judges, but when they were in some
imminent Godw. Jew. Antiq.
dangers: Godless persons never look after Christ, but at death, when they are
in danger of hell.

Use 3. As we would evidence to the world that we have the impress of godliness
on us, Use 3. of Exhort.
let us be prizers of Jesus Christ; he is Elect, Precious; Christ is the wonder
of beauty: Pliny says of the Mulberry Tree, there is nothing in it, but what
is medicinable and useful, the fruit, leaves, bark: So there is nothing in
Christ, but what is precious; his Name is precious, his Virtues precious, his
blood precious. -- Et precium mundi sanguiser at Domini --

Oh then let us have endearing thoughts of Christ; let him be accounted our
chief treasure and delight: This is the reason why millions perish, because
they do not prize Christ: Christ is the door by which men are to enter into
heaven, John 10. 9. If they do not know this door, or are so proud that they
will not stoop to go in at i^, how can they be saved? That we may have
Christ-admiring thoughts: Let us consider,

1. We cannot prize Christ at too high a rate; we may prize other things above
their worth; that is our sin, we commonly overrate the creature; we think there
is more in it than there is; therefore God withers our gourd, because we
over-prize it: But we cannot raise our esteem high enough of Christ, he is
beyond all value: There is no Ruby or Diamond but the Jeweller can set a just
price upon it, he can say it is worth so much, and no more; but Christ's worth
can never be fully known: No Seraphim can set a due value on him; his are
unsearchable riches, Ephesians. 3. 8. Christ is more precious than the Soul, than the
Angels, than Si tanti vitreum? quanti verum Margaritum? Tertull.
Heaven.

2. Jesus Christ has highly prized us; he took our flesh upon him, Heb. 2. 16.
He made his Soul an offering for us, Isa. 53. 10: How precious was our
Salvation to Christ? Shall not we prize and adore him, who has put such a
value upon us?

3. Not to prize Christ is high imprudence; Christ is our Guide to Glory; it is
folly for a man to slight his Guide; he is our Physician, Mal. 4. 2. It Is folly
to despise our Physician.

What, to set light by Christ for things of no value? Mat. 23. 17. Ye fools and
blind. How is a fool tried, but by showing him an Apple, and a piece of Gold,
if he choose the Apple before the Gold, he is judged to be a fool, and his
Estate is begged: How many such Idiots are there, who prefer Husks before
Manna, the gaudy empty things of this life, before the Prince of Glory, Will
not Satan beg them at last for fools?

4. Such as slight Christ now, and say, There is no beauty in him that he
should be Isa 53. 2.
desired: There is a day shortly coming, when Christ will as much slight them;
he will set as light by them, as they do by him; he will say, I know you not,
Luke 13. 27. What a slighting word will that be, when men shall cry, Lord Jesus
save us, and he shall say, I was offered to you, but you would none of ^sa. 81.
11.
me; you scorned me, and now I will set light by you, and your Salvation;
Depart from me, I know you not. This is all that sinners get by rejecting the
Lord of Life: Christ will slight them at the day of Judgment, who have
s^ighted him in the day of Grace.

SECT. VIII.
8. A godly man is an Evangelical weeper. 8 Character.
David did sometimes sing with his Harp, and sometimes the Organ of his eye did
weep, Psalm. 6. 6. I water my couch with tears. Christ calls his Spouse his
Dove, Cant. 2. 14. The Dove is a weeping creature: Grace dissolves and
liquifies and Soul, causing a spiritual thaw: The sorrow of the heart runs out
at the eye, Psa. 31. 9.

The Rabbis report, that the same night Israel departed out of Egypt toward
Canaan, all the Idols of Egypt were broken down by Lightning and Earthquake: So
at that very time men go forth out of their natural condition toward heaven,
all the Idols of sin in the heart must be broken down by Repentance: A melting
heart is the chief branch of the Covenant of Grace, Ezekiel. 36. 26. and the
product of the Spirit, Zac. 12. 10. I will power upon the House of David the
Spirit of Grace, and they shall look on me whom they have pierced, and they
shall mourn for him.

Quest. But why is a godly man a weeper? Is not sin pardoned, which is the
ground of Joy? Has ot he had a transforming work upon his heart, why then does
he weep?

Answ. A godly man finds matter enough of weeping.

1. He weeps for the in-being of sin, the Law in his members, Romans 7. 23. The
ebullitions, and first risings of Motus primo primi. Aquin.
sin; his Nature is a poisoned Fountain: A regenerate person grieves that he
carries that about him which is enmity to God; his heart is like the wide Sea,
wherein there are creeping things Psa. 104. 25.
innumerable; vain sinful thoughts: A Child of God laments hidden wickedness;
he has more evil in him than he knows Plangendae tenebrae Aug.
of: There are those Meanders in his heart which he cannot trace; a terra
incognita, an unknown world of sin, Psalm 19. 12. Who can understand his errors?

2. A godly man weeps for the adherency of Corruption; if he could get rid of
sin, there were some comfort, but he cannot shake off this Fomes iste and
stirps ^eccati, etiam in renatorum (...) medullis tenacissime i^h^ret.
Viper. Sin cleaves to him as the Leprosy to the wall, Lev. 14. 39. Though a
Child of God forsakes his sin, yet sin will not forsake him, Dan. 7. 12.
Concerning the rest of the beasts, they had their Dominion taken away, yet
their lives were prolonged for a season. So though the Dominion of sin is taken
away, yet the life of it is prolonged for a season; and while sin lives it
molests: The Persians were daily Enemies to the R^mans, and would be invading
upon their frontiers* So sin wars against the Soul, 1 Pet. 2. 11. And no
cessation of arms till death; will not this cause tears?

3. A Child of God weeps that he is sometimes overcome by the prevalency of
Corruption, Romans 7. 19. The evil I would not, that do I. Paul was like a man
carried down the stream: How often is a Saint overpowred with pride and passion!
When David had sinned, he steeped his Soul in the brinish tears of Repentance:
It cannot but grieve a regenerate person to think he should be so foolish, as
after he has felt the smart of sin, yet to put this fire in his bosom again.

4. A godly heart grieves that he can be no more holy; it troubles him that he
shoots so short of the Rule and Standard which God has set: I should, faith
he, love the Lord with all my heart: But how defective is my love? how far
short do I come of what I should be, nay, of what I might have been: What can I
see in my life, but either blanks or blots?

5. A godly man weeps sometimes, out of the sense of Gods love: Gold is the
finest and most solid of all the metals, yet is soonest melted with the fire:
Gracious hearts, which are golden hearts, are the soonest melted into tears by
the fire of Gods love. I once knew an holy man, who walking in his garden, and
shedding plenty of tears, a friend coming to him accidentally, asked him, why
he wept? He brake forth into this pathetical expression, O the love of Christ,
the love of Christ, Thus have we seen the Cloud melted into water by the
Sunbeams.

6. A godly person weeps, because the sins he commits are in some sense worse
than the sins of other men; the sin of a justified person is very odious.

1. Because he acts contrary to his own principles; he does not only sin
against the Rule, but against his Principles, against his knowledge, vows,
prayers, hopes, experiences: He knows how dear sin will cost him, yet he
adventures upon the forbidden fruit.

2. The sin of a Justified person is odious, because it is a sin of unkindness,
2 King. 11. 9. Peter's denying of Christ was a sin against love; Christ had
enrolled him among the Apostles, he had taken him up into the Mount of
Transfiguration, and showed him the glory of Heaven in a Vision; yet after all
this signal Mercy, that he should deny Christ, it was high ingratitude. This
made him go out and weep bitterly, Mat. 26. 75. He baptized himself, as it
were, in his own (...). Chrysostom. de poen,
tears: The sins of the godly go nearest to Gods Heart: Others sins anger God,
these grieve him: The sins of the wicked pierce Christ sides, the sins of the
godly wound his heart; the unkindness of a Spouse goes nearest the heart of her
Husband.

3. The sin of a Justified person is odious, because it reflects more dishonor
upon God, 2 Samuel 12. 14. By this deed, thou have given occasion to the Enemies
of the Lord to blaspheme. The sins of Gods people put black spots in the face
of Religion. Thus we see what cause there is, why a Child of God should weep
even after Conversion. -- Quis talia fando, temperet a lachrymis?

Now this sorrow of a godly man for sin, is not a despairing sorrow; he does
not mourn without hope. Psalm. 65. 3. Iniquities prevail against me: There is
the Holy Soul weeping; as for our transgressions thou shall purge them away:
There is Faith triumphing.

Divine sorrow is excellent: There is as much difference between the sorrow of
a godly man and a wicked, as between the water of a Spring which is clear and
sweet, and the water of the Sea which is salt and brackish. A godly man's sorrow
has these three qualifications,

1. It is internal; it is a sorrow of Soul; hypocrites disfigure their faces,
Mat. 6. 16. godly sorrow goes deep, it is a pricking at the heart, Acts 2. 37.
True sorrow is a spiritual Martyrdom therefore called Soul-affliction, Lev.
23. 29.

2. Godly sorrow is ingenuous; it is more for the evil that is in sin, than the
evil which follows after; it is more for the spot than the sting: Hypocrites
weep for sin only as it brings affliction. I have read of a Fountain that never
sends out streams, but the Evening before a Famine: Hypocrites never send forth
the streams of their tears, but when Gods Judgments are approaching.

3. Godly sorrow is influential; it makes the heart better, Eccles. 7. 3. By
the sadness of the countenance, the heart is made better. Divine tears do not
only wet, but wash, they purge out the love of sin.

Use 1. Use 1.
How far are they from being godly; who scarce ever shed a tear for sin: If
they lose a near Relation, they weep, but though they are in danger of losing
God and their Souls, they weep not. How few know what it is to be in an Agony
for sin, or what a broken heart means; their eyes are not like the Fish-pools
of Heshbon, full of water, Cant. 7. 4. but rather like the Mountains of Gilboa,
which had no dew upon them, 2 Samuel 1. 21. It was a greater plague for Pharaoh
to have his heart turned into stone, than to have his Rivers turned into blood.

Others, if they do sometimes shed a tear, yet they are never the better, they
go on in wickedness, and do not drown their sins in their tears.

Use 2. Use 2.
Let us labor for this Divine Character, be weepers. This is a repentance not
to be repented of, 2 Cor. 7. 10. It Is reported of Mr. Bradford Martyr, that he
was of a melting spirit, he seldom sat down to his meat, but some tears
trickled down his cheeks. There are two Lavors to wash away sin, Blood and
(...). Just. in Collat. cum Triph.
Tears: The Blood of Christ washes away the guilt of sin, tears wash away the
filth; repenting tears are precious, God puts them in his bottle, Psalm. 56. 8.
They are beautifying; a tear in the eye does more adorn, than a Ring on the
finger: Oil makes the face shine, Psalm. 104. 15. Tears make the heart shine;
tears are comforting; a sinners mirth turns to melancholy, a Saints mourning
turns to music: Repentance may be compared to Myrrh, which though it be
bitter to the taste, it is comforting to the spirits: Repentance may be bitter
to the fleshy part, but it is most refreshing to the spiritual. Wax that melts
is fit for the Seal; a melting Soul is fit to take the stamp of all heavenly
blessings: Let us give Christ the water of our tears, and he will give us the
Wine of his Blood.

SECT. IX.
9. A godly man is a lover of the Word, 9 Character.
Psalm. 119. 97. O how love I thy Law.

1. A godly man loves the Word written. Chrysostom compares the Scripture to a
garden set with knots and (...). Chrysostom. Psa. 48.
flowers: A godly man delights to walk in this garden, and sweetly solace
himself; he loves every branch and parcel of the Word.

1. He loves the counselling part of the Word, as it is a Directory and Rule of
life: The Word is the Mercurial Statue which points us to our duty; it contains
in it credendae and fac^enda, things to be believed and practiced: A godly man
loves the Aphorisms of the Word.

2. A godly man loves the Minatory part of the Word: The Scripture, like the
Garden of Eden, as it has a Tree of Life in it, so it has a Flaming Sword at
the Gates of it; this is the threatening of the Word; it flasheth fire in the
face of every person that goes on obstinately in wickedness, Psalm. 68. 21. God
shall wound the hairy scalp of such an one, as goes on still in his trespasses.
The Word gives no indulgence to evil; it will not let a man halt between God
and Sin: The true Mother would not let the Child be divided, and God will not
have the heart divided: The Word thunders out threatenings against the very
appearance of evil; it is like that flying Roll full of curses, Zac. 5. 1.

A godly man loves the menaces of the Word, he knows there is love in every
threatening: God would not have us perish, therefore does mercifully threaten
us, that he may scare us from sin: Gods threatenings are as the Sea-mark, which
shows the Rocks in the Sea, and threatens death to such as come near; the
threatening is a curbing bit to check us, that we may not run in a full careir
to hell; there is mercy in every threatening.

3. A godly man loves the consolatory part of the (...). Chry^ost.
Word, the Promises; he goes feeding upon these, as Sampson went on his way
eating the honeycomb, Judge. 14. 8. The Promises; are (...), all marrow and
sweetness; they are our Bezar-stone when we are fainting; they are the conduits
of the Water of Life, Psalm. 94. 19. In the multitude of my thoughts within me,
thy comforts delight my Soul. The Promises were David's Harp to drive away sad
thoughts; they were the breast which milked out Divine Consolation to him.

A godly man shows his love to the Word written:

1. By diligent reading of it: The Noble Bereans did search the Scriptures
daily, Act. 17. 11. Apollos was mighty in the Scriptures, Act. 18. 24. The Word
is our Magna Charta for heaven, we should be daily reading over this Charter:
The Word is index sui and obliqui, it shows what is truth; and what is error;
it is the field where the Pearl of Price is hid: How should we dig for this
Pearl! A godly man's heart is the Library to hold the Word of God, it dwells
richly in him, Col. 3. 16. It is reported of Melancthon, that when he was
young, he carried the Bible always about him, and did greedily read in Biblia
etiam adolescens semper secum circumtu^it, avideque legit in templo and alibi.
Melch. Adam in vit. Melancth.
it. The Word has a double work, to teach us, and to judge us: They that will
not be taught by the Word, shall be judged by the Word: Oh let us make the
Scripture familiar to us! What if it should be as in the ^imes of Dioclesian,
who commanded by Proclamation the Bible to be Eusebius. lib. 8. c. 3.
burned; or as in Queen Mary's days, wherein it was death to have a Bible in
English; by diligent conversing with Scripture, we may carry a Bible in our
head.

2. A godly man shows his love to the Word, by frequent meditating in it, Psalm
119. 97. It is my meditation all the day. A pious Soul meditates of the Verity
and Sanctity of the Word; he has not only a few transient thoughts, but lays
his mind a steeping in the Scripture; by meditation he suck^ from this sweet
flower, and concocts holy truths in his mind.

3. He shows his love to the Word by delighting in it, it is his recreation,
Ier. 15. 16. Thy word^ were found, and I did eat them, and thy Word wa^ unto me
the Joy and rejoicing of my heart. Never did a man take such delight in a dish
that he loved, as the Prophet did in the Word: And indeed, how can a Saint
choose but take great complacency in the Word, because all that ever he hopes to
be worth is contained in it: Does not a son take pleasure in reading over his
Fathers Will and Testament, where he makes a conveyance of his Estate to him?

4. He shows his love to the Word, by hiding it, Psalm. 119. 11. Thy Word have I
hid in my heart: As one hides a treasure that it should not be stolen away: The
Word is the Jewel, the heart is the Cabinet where it must be locked up: Many
hide the Word in their memory, but not in their heart. And why would David
enclose the Word in his heart? That I might be kept from sinning against thee.
As one would carry an Antidote about him, when he comes near an infected place;
so a godly man carries the Word in his heart as a spiritual antidote to
preserve him from the infection of Verbum Dei alexipharmacum.
sin: Why have so many been poisoned with error, others with moral vice, but
because they have not hid the Word as an holy antidote in their heart.

5. He shows his love to the Word by desending it: A wise man will not let his
Land be taken from him, but will defend his Title. David looked upon the Word
as his Land of Inheritance, Psalm. 119. 111. Thy Testimonies have I taken as an
Heritage for ever. And do you think he would let his Inheritance be wrested out
of his Potius ruat caelum quam pereat una mica veritatis. Luther.
hands? A godly man will not only dispute for the Word, but die for it, Rev. 6.
9. I saw under the Altar the souls of them that were slain for the Word of God.

6. He shows his love to the Word by preferring it above things most precious.
1. Above food, Job 23. 12. I have ^esteemed the words of his mouth, above my
necessary food. ^ Above riches, Psalm. 119. 72. The Law of thy mouth is better
unto me, then thousands of gold and (...) vocat. Zenoph.
silver. 3. Above worldly honor. Memorable is the story of King Edward the
Sixth, who upon the day of his Coronation, when they presented before him three
Swords, signifying to him that he was Monarch of three Kingdoms, the King
said, there is yet one Sword wanting; being asked, what that was? he answered,
the Holy Bible, which is the sword of the Spirit, and is to be preferred before
these Ensigns of Wolfius lect memorabil. Centur. 16.
Royalty.

7. He shows his love to the Word by talking of it, Psalm. 119. 172. My tongue
shall speak of thy Word. As a covetous man is talking of his rich purchase, so
a godly man is speaking of the Word: what a treasure it is, how full of beauty
and suavity; they whose mouths the Devil has gagged, who never speak of Gods
Word, it is a sign they never reaped any good by it.

8. He shows his love to the Word by conforming to it; the Word is his
Sun-Dial, by which he sets his life, the balance in which he weighs his
actions; he copies out the Word in his daily walk, 2 Timothy 4. 7. I have kept the
Faith. St. Paul kept the Doctrine of Faith, and lived the life of Faith.

Quest, Why is a godly man a lover of the Word?

Answ. 1. Because of the excellency of the Word.

1. The word written is our pillar of fire to guide (...). Clem. A^lexandrin.
us: It shows us what Rocks we are to avoid; it is the card by which we sail to
the new Jerusalem.

2. The word is a Spiritual Optic Glass, through which we may see our own
hearts: The Glass of Nature which the Heathen had, discovered spots in their
Conversation, but this Glass discovers spots in the Imagination; that Glass
discovered the spots of their unrighteousness, this discovers the spots of our
righteousness, Romans 7. 9. When the Commandment came, sin revived, and I died:
when the word came as a Glass, all my opinion of self-righteousness died.

3. The word of God is a Sovereign comfort in distress; while we follow this
Cloud, the Rock follows us, Psalm. 119. 50. This is my comfort in my affliction,
for thy word has quickened me. Christ is the Fountain of Living water, the word
is the Golden Pipe through which it runs: what can revive at the hour of death,
but the Word of Phil. 2. 16.
Life.

2. A godly man loves the word, because of the efficacy it has had upon him,
this day star has risen in his (...). Chrysostom.
heart, and ushered ^n the Sun of Righteousness.

2. A godly man loves the Word Preached; which is a Commentary upon the word
written: The Scriptures are the Sovereign oils and balsoms, the preaching of
the word is the pouring of them out: The Scriptures are the precious spices,
the preaching of the word is the beating of these spices, which causes a
wonderful fragrancy and delight. The word preached is the Rod of Gods strength,
Psalm. 110. 2. and the breath of his lips, Isa. 11. 4. What was once said of the
City Thebes, that it was built by the sound of Amphius his Harp, is much more
true of Soul-Conversion, it is built by the sound of the Gospel Harp; therefore
the preaching of the Word is called, the power of God to Salvation, 1 Cor. 1.
24. By this, Christ is said, (now) to speak to us from Heaven, Heb. 12. 5. This
Ministry of the word is to be preferred before the Ministry of Angels.

A godly man loves the word preached, partly from the good he has found by it;
he has felt the dew fall with this Manna; and partly because of Gods
Institution, the Lord has appointed this Ordinance to save him; the Kings
Image makes the Coin go current; the stamp of Divine Authority upon the word
preached, makes it an Engine conducible to men's Salvation.

Use. Use.
Let us try by this Character, whether we are godly: Are we lovers of the word?

1. Do we love the word written? What sums of money did the Martyrs give for a
few leaves of the Bible? Do we make the word our familiar? As Moses had often
the Rod of God in his hand, so should we have the Book of God in our hand: when
we want direction, do we consult with this sacred Oracle? when we find
corruptions strong, do we make use of this Sword of the Spirit to hew them
down? when we are disconsolate, do we go to this Aqua vitae bottle for comfort?
then we are lovers of the word! But alas, how can they say they love the
Scriptures, who are seldom conversant in them? their eyes begin to be sore
when they look upon a Bible: The two Testaments are hung by, like rusty Armor,
which is seldom or never made use of: The Lord wrote the Law with his own
finger, but though God took pains to write, men will not take pains to read;
they had rather look upon a pair of Cards, then upon a Bible.

2. Do we love the word preached? Do we prize it in our judgments? Do we
receive it into our hearts? Do we fear the loss of the word preached, more than
the loss of peace and trading? Is it the removal of the Ark that troubles us?

Again, do we attend the Word with Reverential Devotion? when the Judge is
giving his Charge upon the Bench all attend, when the word is preached, the
great God is giving us his Charge, do we listen to it as to a matter of life
and death? this is a good sign we love the word.

Again, do we love the Sanctity of the word? Psalm. 119. 140. The word preached
is to beat down sin, and advance holiness: Do we love it for its spirituality
and purity? Many love the word preached only for its eloquence and notion; they
come to a Sermon as to a Musick-lecture, Ezekiel. 33. 31. or as to a garden to
pick flowers, but not to have their lusts subdued, or their hearts bettered:
These are like a foolish woman which paints her face* but neglects her health.

Again, do we love the convictions of the word? Do we love the word when it
comes home to our Conscience, and shoots its arrows of reproof at our sins?
It Is the Ministers duty sometimes to reprove: He that can give smooth words in
the Pulpit, but knows not how to reprove, is like a sword with a fine hilt,
without an edge, Titus 2. 15. Rebuke them sharply: Dip the nail in oil, reprove
in love, but strike the nail home. Now Christian, when the word touches upon
thy sin, and says, Thou art the man, do thou love the reproof? Can thou
bless God that the sword of the Spirit has divided between thee and thy lusts?
This is indeed a sign of grace, and shows thou art a lover of the word.

A corrupt heart loves the comforts of the word, but not the reproofs, Amos 5.
10. They hate him that rebukes in the gate. -- Igne micant oculi -- Like
venomous creatures, that upon the least touch spit poison, Act. 7. 54. When
they heard these things they were cut to the heart, and gnashed upon him with
their teeth. When Stephen touched them to the quick, they were mad, and could
not endure Quales quaeso illi sunt, qui verbi redargutiones accipere nolunt,
sed contra, obstinati murmurant, and Ministros verbi Caelestis ob id odio
prosequuntur? Nimirum non sunt vasa contrita, sed serrea ac lapidea; and o
utinam malleo legis, hae petrae se concuti Paterentur, sed quia quotidie in
duricie sua pergunt, and diabo^o se regendos in solidum tradunt, idem Dei
malleus tandem in inferni barathru^^ eos percussione horrenda deturbabit.
Glassii ex eg. p. 4. in Johan.
it.

Quest. How shall we know that we love the reproofs of the word?

Ans. 1. When we desire to sit under an heart-searching Ministry; who cares for
Physic that will not work? A godly man chooses not to sit under such a
Ministry as will not work upon his Conscience.

2. When we pray that the word may meet with our sins; if there be any
traitorous lust got into our heart, we would have it found out, and Execution
done upon it; we would not have sin covered, but cured: we can open our breast
to the bullet of the word, and say, Lord smite this sin.

3. When we are thankful for a reproof, Psa. 141. 5. Let the righteous smite
me, it shall be a kindness, and let him reprove me, it shall be an excellent
oil which shall not break my Sermo vulnerans dolorem affert sed salutarem.
Molleru^.
head.

David was glad of a reproof. Suppose a man were in the mouth of a Lion, and
another should shoot the Lion and save the man, would not he be thankful? So,
when we are in the mouth of sin, as of a Lion, and the Minister by a reproof
shoots this sin to death, shall not we be thankful? A gracious soul rejoices
when the sharp Lance of the word has let out his Imposthume; he wears a
reproof as a Jewel on his ear, Pro. 30. 12. As an ear-ring of gold, so is a
reprover on an obedient ear. To conclude, it is convincing ^reach^ng must do the
soul good; a nipping reproof prepares for comfort, as a nipping frost prepares
for the sweet flowers of spring.

SECT. X.
10. A godly man has the Spirit of God residing in him, 10 Character.
2 Timothy 1. 14. The Holy Ghost which dwells in Gal. 4. 6.
us. The Schoolmen move the question, whether a man receive the Holy Ghost
himself or no? Montanus held that the godly have so Gods Spirit in them, that
they partake of his Essence, and are become one person with himself; but this
amounts to no less than blasphemy; then it would follow, that every Saint were
to be worshipped.

I conceive the spirit is in the godly per modum influxus, they have the
presence, and receive the sacred influences of it: When the Sun comes into a
room, not the body of the Sun is there, but the beams that sparkle from it:
Indeed, some Divines have thought, that the godly have more than the influx of
the spirit, though to say how it is more, is ineffable, and is fitter for some
Seraphique Pen to describe than mine. The Spirit of God discovers its self in a
gracious soul two ways.

1. By its motions: These are some of that sweet perfume the spirit breaths
upon the heart, whereby it is raised into a kind of Angelical frame.

Quest. 1. But how may we know the motions of the Spirit from a delusion?

Answ. The motions of the Spirit are always consonant to the word; the word is
the Chariot wherein the Spirit of God Verbum est vehiculum spiritus.
rides; which way the tide of the word runs, that way the wind of the spirit
blows.

Quest. 2. How may the motions of the Spirit in the godly, be distinguished
from the impulses of a Natural Conscience?

Answ. 1. A Natural Conscience may provoke sometimes to the same thing that the
spirit does, but not from the same principle. Natural Conscience is a spu^ to
duty, but it puts a man upon doing duties for fear of hell; as the Gally tugs
at the Oar for fear of being beaten: whereas the spirit moves a Child of God
from a more Noble Principle; it makes him serve God out of choice, and esteem
duty his privilege.

2. The impulses of a Natural Conscience, put men only upon more facil duties
of Religion, wherein the heart is less exercised; as perfunctory reading, or
praying; but the motions of the spirit in the godly go further, causing them to
set upon the most irksome duties, as self-reflection, self-humbling; yea
perilous duties, as confessing Christ's Name in times of danger: Divine motions
are in the heart like new wine which will have vent: When Gods Spirit
possesses a man, it carries him full-sail through all difficulties.

2. The Spirit discovers it self in the godly by its Spiritus Dei opulens
virtutibus suamque (...) impertiens Ambros. de Spir.
virtues. These are various.

1. Gods Spirit has a teaching virtue, the spirit teaches convincingly* (...).
Ioh. 16. 8. It does so teach, as it does persuade.

2. Gods Spirit has a sanctifying Omne agens producit sibi simile.
virtue, the heart naturally is polluted, but when the spirit comes into it, it
works sin out, and grace in: The Spirit of God was represented by the Dove*
Emblem of Purity; the spirit makes the heart a Temple for pureness, and a
Paradise for pleasantness: The holy Oil of Exodus 30. ^5.
Consecration, was nothing else but a prefiguring of the (...)* Chry.
spirit: The spirit sanctifies a man's fancy, causing it to mint holy
meditations; it sanctifies his will, byassing it to good: so that now it shall
be as delightful to serve God, as before it was to sin against him: sweet
powders perfume linen; so Gods Spirit in a man, perfumes him with holiness,
and makes his heart a Map of Heaven.

3. Gods Spirit has a vivifying virtue 2 Cor. 3. 6. The Spirit gives (...).
life: As the blowing in an Organ makes it sound, so the breathing of the
spirit causes life and mo^on: When the Prophet Elijah stretche^ himself upon
the dead Child it revived 1 Kin. 17. 22. so Gods Spirit stretching self upon
the soul infuseth life into it.

As our life, so our liveliness is from the spirits operation, Ezekiel. 3. 14. The
Spirit lifted me up. When the heart is bowed dow^ and is listless to duty, the
Spirit of God lift it up, it puts a sharp edge upon the affection^ it makes
love ardent, hope lively; the spir^^ takes off the weights of the soul, and
gives wings, Cant. 6. 12. Or ever I was aware, (...) Soul made me like the
Chariots of Ammin^^i* The wheels of the soul were before pulle^ off, and it did
drive on heavily, but when the spirit of the Almighty possesses a man now he
runs swiftly in the ways of God, an^ his soul is as the Chariots of Amminadib.

4. Gods Spirit has a Jurisdictive virtue it rules and governs; Gods Spirit
sits paramount in the Spiritus Dei habitat in nobis quia regit, and gubernat.
Paraeus.
soul, it gives check to the violence of corruption, it will not suffer man to
be vain and loose as others: The Spirit of God will not be put out of office,
exercises its authority over the heart, bringing every thought to the
obedience of Christ 2 Cor. 10. 5.

5. The spirit has a mollifying virtue; therefore it is compared to Act. 2. 3.
fire, which softens the wax: The spirit turns flint into flesh, Ezekiel. 36. 26.
I will give you an heart of flesh. How shall this be effected? Ver. 27. I will
put my spirit within you. While the heart is hard, it lies like a log, and is
not wrought upon either with judgments or mercies, but when Gods Spirit comes
in, it makes a man's heart as tender as his eye, and now it is made yielding to
Divine Impressions.

6. The spirit of God has a corroborating Spirit^ praeeunte nullus fit obex.
virtue, it infuseth strength and assistance for work, it is (...), a spirit of
Power, 2 Timothy 1. 7. Gods spirit carries a man above himself, Ephesians. 3. 16.
Strengthened with might by his spirit in the inner man: The spirit confirms
faith, animates courage, it lifts at one end of the Cross, and makes it lighter
to be (...)
born: The spirit gives not only a sufficiency of strength, but a redundancy.

Quest. How shall we know whether we act in the strength of Gods Spirit, or in
the strength of our own abilities?

Answ. 1. When we do humbly cast our selves upon God for assistance; as David
going out against Goliath, did cast himself upon God for help, 1 Samuel 17. 45. I
come to thee in the Name of the Lord. 2. When our duties are divinely
qualified, we do them with pure aims. 3. When we have found God going along
with us, we give him the glory of all, 1 Cor. 15. 10. This does clearly evince,
that the duty was carried on by the strength of Gods Spirit, more than by any
innate abilities of our own.

7. Gods Spirit has a comforting Spiritus super mel dulcis, qui vel ipsam
mortem suavem reddit. Bern.
virtue; disconsolacy may arise in a gracious Psa. 43.
heart; as the Heaven, though it be a bright lucid body, yet has interposition
of Clouds; this sadness is caused usually through the malice of Satan, who if
he cannot destroy us, he will disturb us, but Gods Spirit within us does
sweetly cheer and revive; he is called (...), the Comforter, Ioh. 14. 16. These
comforts are real and infallible: Hence it is called the Seal of the Spirit,
Ephesians. 1. 13. When a Deed is sealed, it is firm and unquestionable: so when a
Christian has the seal of the spirit, his comforts are confirmed; every godly
man has these revivings of the spirit in some degree, he has the seminals and
initials of joy, though the flower be not fully ripe and blown.

Quest. How does the Spirit give comfort?

Answ. 1. By showing us that we are in a state of Grace: A Christian cannot
always see his riches; the work of Grace may be written in the heart like
shorthand, which a Christian cannot read; the spirit gives him a Key to open
these dark Characters, and spell out his Adoption, whereupon he has joy and
peace, 1 Cor. 2. 12. We have received the Spirit which is of God, that we might
know the things which are freely given to us of God.

2. The spirit comforts, by giving us some ravishing apprehensions of Gods
love, Romans 5. 5. The love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy
Ghost. Gods love is a box of precious ointment, and it is only the spirit can
break open this box, and fill us with the sweet perfume of it.

3. The spirit comforts, by carrying us to the Blood of Christ; as when a man
is weary and ready to faint, carry him to the water, and he is refreshed: so
when we are fainting under the burden of sin, the spirit carries us to the
Fountain of Christ's Blood, Zac. 12. 1. In that day there shall be a Fountain
opened, etc. The spirit inables us to drink the waters of Justification which
run out of Christ's sides: The spirit applies whatever Christ has purchased, it
shows us that our sins are done away in Christ, and though we are spotted in
our selves, we are undefiled in our head.

4. The spirit comforts, by inabling Conscience to comfort; the Child must be
taught before it can speak: The spirit opens the mouth of Conscience, and helps
it to speak, and witness to a man that his estate is good, whereupon he begins
to receive comfort, Romans 9. 2. My Conscience bearing me witness in the Holy
Ghost. Conscience draws up a Certificate for a man, then the Holy Ghost comes
and sets his hand to the Certificate.

5. The spirit conveys the Oil of Joy through two Golden Pipes.

1. The Ordinances.

2. The Promises.

1. The Ordinances: As Christ in prayer had his countenance changed, Luk 9. 29.
There was a glorious luster upon his face; so often in the use of Holy
Ordinances, the godly have such raptures of joy, and soul-transfigurations,
that they have been carried above the world, and despised all things below.

2. The Promises: The Promises are comfortable: 1. For their sureness, Romans 4.
16. God in the Promises has laid his truth to (...). Chrysostom.
pawn. 2. For their suitableness, being calculated for every Christians
condition. The Promises are like a Physick-garden, there is no disease but some
herb may be found there to cure it; but the Promises of themselves cannot
comfort, only the spirit inables us to suck these Honey-combs: The Promises are
like a Limbeck full of herbs, but this Limbeck will not drop, unless the fire
be put under: So when the spirit of God (which is compared to fire) is put to
the Limbeck of the Promises, then they distill Consolation into the soul. Thus
we see how the spirit is in the godly by its virtues.

Object. But is this the sign of a godly man to be filled with the Spirit? Are
not the wicked said to partake of the Holy Ghost? Heb. 6. 4.

Answ. Wicked men may partake of the spirits working, but not of its
in-dwelling; they may have Gods spirit move upon them, the godly have it enter
into them, Ezekiel. 3. 24.

Object. But the unregenerate taste of the Heavenly Gift? Heb. 6.

Answ. It is with them as Cooks, who may have a smack and taste of the meat
they Mr. Perkins.
dress, but they are not nourished by it: Tasting there, is opposed to eating:
The godly have not only a drop or taste of the spirit, but it is in them as
river of living water, John 7. 38.

Use 1. Use 1.
It brands them for ungodly, who have none of Gods spirit, 1 Bran.
Romans 8. 9. If any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his: And if
he be none of Christ's, then whose is he? to what Regiment does he belong? It Is
the misery of a sinner he has none of Gods spirit: Me thinks it is very
offensive to hear men say, Take not thy holy spirit from us, who never had Gods
spirit: will they say they have Gods spirit in them, who are drunkards and
swearers? Have they Gods spirit who are malicious and unclean? It were
blasphemy to say these have the spirit: Will the blessed spirit leave his
Caelestial Palace, to come and live in a prison? A sinners heart is a Gaol,
both for darkness and noysomness, and will Gods free spirit Psalm. 51. 52.
be confined to a prison? A sinners heart is the Emblem of Hell, what should
Gods spirit do there? Wicked hearts are not a Temple, but an Hog^sty, where the
unclean spirit makes his abode, Ephesians. 2. 2. The Prince of the power of the
Air, the spirit that now works in the children of (...) Th^ophilact.
disobedience. We would be loath to live in an house haunted with evi^ spirits;
a sinners heart is haunted, Ioh. 13* 27. After the sop Satan entered. Satan
venture upon the godly, but enters into the wicked when the Devils went into the
herd of swine they ran violently down a steep place into the Sea, Mat. 8. 32.
Whence is it men run so greedily to the Commission of sin, but because the
Devil has entered into these Diabolus ab (...) impios propellit, donec in
aeternum ignem ruant Praecipites. Glassius.
Swine.

2. This cuts them off from being godly, who not only want the spirit, but
deride it: Like those Jews, Acts 2. 13. These men are full of new wine: And
indeed so the Apostles were, they were full of the wine of the spirit: How is
Gods spirit scoffed at by the sons of Belial? These (say they) are men of the
Spirit. O wretches, to make those tongues which should be Organs of Gods
praise, instruments to blaspheme: Have you none to throw your squibs at but the
spirit? Deriding of the spirit comes very near to the despighting of it: How
can men be sanctified but by the spirit? therefore to reproach that, is to make
merry with their own damnation.

Use 2. Use 3. Exhort.
As you would be listed in the number of the godly, labor for the blessed
indwelling of the spirit; pray with Melancthon, Lord inflame my soul with thy
holy Domine accende animam meam spiritu tu^ (...).
spirit; and with the Spouse, Awake O Northwind, aad come thou South, blow upon
my garden, Cant. 4. 16. As a Mariner would desire a wind to carry him to Sea,
so beg the prosperous gales of the spirit; and the Promise may add wings to
prayer, Luke 11. 13. If ye being evil know how to give good gifts unto your
children, how much more shall your heavenly Father give the Spirit to them that
ask him? Gods spirit is a rich Jewel, go to him for it, Lord give me thy
spirit, where is the Jewel thou did promise me? When shall my soul be as
Gideons Fleece, wet with the dew of heaven?

Consider how needful the spirit is, Motive
without it we can do nothing acceptably to God.

1 We cannot pray without it; it is a spirit of Supplication, Zac. 12. 10. It
both helps the invention, and the affection, Romans 8. 26. The spirit helps us
with sighs and Suspiria haec and gemitus, a caelesti columba didicerunt sancti.
Aug.
groans.

2. We cannot resist temptation without it, Act. 1. 8. Ye shall receive power,
after the Holy Ghost is come upon you: He who has the tide of corrupt nature,
and the wind of temptation, must needs be carried down the stream of sin, if
the contrary wind of the spirit does not blow.

3. We cannot be fruitful without the spirit. -- Aureus imber sitientia caelo
^orda rigans. --

Why is the spirit compared to dew and Si fluvius riparum editis superfusus
exu^dat, quanto magis spiritus superveniens animam, ^ffusiore quadam (...)
ubertate laetificat. Ambr. de Spir.
rain, but to show us how unable we are to bring forth a Crop of Grace, unless
the dew of God fall upon us?

4. Without the spirit no Ordinance is effectual to us; Ordinances are the
Conduit-Pipes of Grace, but the spirit is the Spring: Some content themselves
that they have a Levite to their Priest, but never look any further; as if a
Merchant should content himself that his ship has good tackling, and is well
manned, though it never have a gale of wind: The Ship of Ordinances will not
carry us to heaven, though an Angel were the Pylot, unless the wind of Gods
Spirit blow: The Spirit is the Soul of the Word, without which it is but a dead
letter: Ministers may prescribe Physic, but it is Gods spirit must make it
work: Our hearts are like David's body, when it grew old, they covered him with
clothes, but he gat no heat, 1 King. 1. 1. So though the Minister of God ply
us with prayers and counsels as with hot clothes, yet we are cold and chill
till Gods spirit comes, and then we say as the Disciples, Luke 24. 32. Did not
our hearts burn within us? Oh therefore, what need have we of the spirit?

3. You who have the blessed spirit manifested by its energy and vital
operations: Use 3.
1. Acknowledge Gods distinguishing love; the spirit is an ear-mark of
Election, 1 John 3. 4. Christ gave the bag to Judas, but not his spirit: The
spirit is a Love-token; where God gives his spirit for a pawn, he gives himself
for a portion: The spirit is an Epitomizing blessing, it is put for all good
things, Mat. 7. 11. What were you without the spirit, but as so many carcasses?
Without this Christ would not profit you; the Blood of God is not enough
without the Breath of God: Oh then, be thankful for the spirit; this Loadstone
will never leave drawing you, till it has drawn you up to heaven.

2. If you have this spirit do not grieve it, Ephesians. 4. 30. Shall we grieve our
Comforter?

Quest. How do we grieve the Spirit?

Answ. 1. When we unkindly repel the motions of it: The spirit sometimes
whispers in our ears, and calls to us as God did to Jacob, Genesis 35. 1. Arise,
go to Bethel. So says the spirit, Arise, go to prayer, retire thy self to meet
thy God: Now when we stifle these motions, and entertain temptations to vanity,
this is a grieving of the spirit; if we check the motions of the spirit, we
shall lose the comforts of the spirit.

2. We grieve the spirit, when we deny the work of the spirit in our hearts; if
one gives another a token, and he should deny it, and say he never received it,
this were to abuse the love of his friend: So Christian, when God has given
thee his spirit, witnessed by those meltings of heart, and passionate
breathings after heaven, yet thou deniest that thou ever had any renewing
work of the spirit in thee; this is high ingratitude, and is a grieving the
good spirit; renounce the sinful works of the flesh, but do not deny the
gracious work of the spirit.

SECT. XI.
11. The godly man is an humble man; 11 Character.
he is like the Sun in the Zenith, which when it is at the highest shows
lowest: 1 Distinction.
St. Austin calls Humility the Mother of the Graces; but ere I show you who is
the humble man, I shall lay down three distinctions.

1. I distinguish between being humbled and humble; a man may be humbled, and
not Quanti humiliantur and humiles non sunt. Bern.
humble; 2 Distinction.
a sinner may be humbled by affliction, his condition is low, but not his
disposition; a godly man is not only humbled, but humble, his heart is as low
as his condition.

2. I distinguish between outward humility and inward; there is a great deal of
difference between an humble carriage, and an humble Plurimi humilitatem vultu
menti entes superbia autem intus adeo tument, ut nulla vesica adeo sic inflata
ventoquam cor eorum fastu.
spirit; a person may carry it humbly:

1. Toward others, yet be proud; who more humble than Absalom in his outward
behavior? 2 Samuel 15. 5. When any man came near to do him obeisance, Absalom
took him by the hand and kissed him. But though he had an humble carriage, he
aspired after the Crown, ver. 10. As soon as ye hear the sound of the Trumpet,
ye shall say Absalom reigns in Hebron. Here was Pride dressed in Humilities
Mantle.

2. A person may behave himself humbly toward God, yet be proud, 1 King. 21.
27. Ahab put on sackcloth, and fasted, and went softly, but his heart was not
Nobilior humilitatis pars, animo inclusa latet, atque oculorum aciem effugit. 3
Distinction.
humble: A man may bow his head like a bull-rush, yet lift up the Ensigns of
Pride in his heart.

3. I distinguish between Humility and Policy; many make a show of Humility to
work their own Plurimi humilitatis umbram sectantur. Hierom.
ends: The Papists seem to be the most humble mortified Saints, but it is
rather subtilty than humility; for by this means they get the Revenues of the
earth into their possession; all this may be, and yet no godliness.

Quest. How may a Christian know that he is humble, and consequently godly?

Answ. 1. An humble soul is emptied of all swelling thoughts of himself:
Bernard calls Humility a Self-annihilation, Job 22. 29. Thou will save the
humble. In the Hebrew it is, Him that is of low (...)
eyes. An humble man has lower thoughts of himself than others can have of
Humilitas est (...) suae agnitio.
him: David, though a King, yet looked upon himself as a worm, Psalm. 22. 6. I
am a worm, and no man. Bradford a Martyr, yet subscribes himself a sinner, Job
10. 15. If I am righteous, I will not lift up my head: Like the Violet, a sweet
flower, but hangs down the head.

2. An humble soul thinks better of others than of himself, Phil. 2. 3. Let
each esteem others better than Humilitas est contemptus propriae excellentiae.
Bern. de guard. humil.
themselves. An humble man values others at an higher rate than himself; and
the reason is, because he can better see his own heart than he can another; he
sees his own corruption, and thinks sure it is not so with others, their Graces
are not so weak as his, their corruptions are not so strong; sure (thinks he)
they have better hearts than I: An humble Christian studies his own
infirmities, and another exellencies, and that makes him put an higher value
upon others than himself, Pro. 30. 2. Surely I am more brutish than any man.
And Paul, though he were the chief of the Apostles, yet he calls himself the
least of Saints, Ephesians. 3. 8.

3. An humble soul has a low esteem of his duties; Pride is apt to breed in
our holy things, as the worm breeds in the sweetest fruit, and forth comes from
the most generous wine: An humble person does not only deny his sins, but his
duties; when he has prayed and wept, alas, says he, how little have I done,
God might damn me for all this; he says as good Nehemiah, Chap. 13. 22.
Remember me O my God concerning this, and spare me. Remember Lord how I have
poured out my soul, but spare me, and pardon me; he sees that his best duties
weigh many grains too light, therefore he desires Christ's Merits may be put
into the Scales: The humble Saint blusheth when he looks upon his Copy, he sees
he cannot write even, nor without blotting; this humbles him to think that his
best duties run dregs; he drops poison upon his sacrifice: Oh, says he, I dare
not say I have prayed or wept, those which I write down for duties, God might
write down for sins.

4. An humble man is ever preferring Bills of Indictment against himself; he
complains not of his condition, but his heart: O this evil heart of unbelief!
Lord (says Hooper) I am hell, but thou art heaven. An hypocrite is ever
telling how good he is; an humble soul is ever saying how bad he is: Paul that
highflown Saint, who was caught up into the third heaven, how does this bird of
Paradise bemoan himself for his corruptions, Romans 7. 24. O wretched man that I
am, etc. Holy Bradford subscribes himself, the hardhearted sinner: The more
knowledge an humble Christian has, the more he complains of ignorance; the
more Faith, the more he bewails his Quanto quis plus proficit, eo minus se
reputet profecisse. Bern, de mod. Orand.
unbelief.

5. An humble man will justify God in an afflicted condition, Nehem. 9. 33.
Howbeit thou art just in all that is brought upon us. If men oppress and
calumniate, the humble soul acknowledges Gods righteousness in the midst of
severity, 2 Samuel 24. 17. Lo, I have sinned: Lord, my pride, my barrenness, my
Sermonsurfeiting has been the procuring cause of all these judgments; when
Clouds are round about God, yet righteousness is the habitation of his Throne,
Psa. 97. 2.

6. An humble soul is a Christ-Magnifier, Phil. 1. 20. he gives the glory of
all his actions to Christ, and Free Grace: King Canutus took the Crown off his
own head, and set it upon a Crucifix; so an humble Saint takes the Crown of
honor from his own head, and sets it upon Christ's; and the reason is, from
that (...) he bears to Christ; Love can part with (...) to the object loved:
Isaac loved (...) and he gave away his Jewels to Genesis 24. 53.
(...) humble Saint loves Christ entirely, therefore can part with any thing to
him: he gives away the honor and praise of all he does to Christ, let Christ
wear those Jewels.

7. An humble soul is willing to take a reproof for sin; a wicked man is too
high to stoop to a reproof: The Prophet Micaiah used to tell King Ahab of his
sin, and says he, I hate him, 1 Kin. 22. 8. Reproof to a proud man, is like
pouring water on lime, which grows the more hot; a gracious soul loves him that
reproves, Pro. 9. 8. Rebuke a wise man, and he will love thee. The
humblespirited Christian can bear the reproach of an Enemy, and the reproof of
a friend.

8. An humble man is willing to have his name and parts eclipsed, so Gods glory
may be more increased; he is content to be outshined by others in gifts and
esteem, so that the Crown of Christ may shine the brighter: This is the humble
man's Motto, Let me decrease, let Christ increase: It Is his desire that Christ
should be exalted, and if this be effected, let who will be the instrument, he
rejoices, Phil. 1. 15. Some preach Christ of envy; They preached to get away
some of Paul's hearers; Well, says he, Christ is preached, and I therein do
rejoice, ver* 8. An humble Christian is content to be laid aside, if God has
any other tools to work with which may bring him more glory.

9. An humble Saint likes that condition which God sees best for him; a proud
man murmures he has no more, an humble man wonders he has so much, Genesis 32.
10. I am not worthy of the least of all thy mercies: when the heart lies low,
it can stoop to a low condition. A Christian looking upon his sins, wonders it
is no worse with him, he does not say his mercies are small, but his sins are
great; he knows the worst piece God carves him, is better than he deserves,
therefore takes it thankfully upon his knees.

10. An humble Christian will stoop to the meanest person, and the lowest
office, he will visit the poorest member of Christ: Lazarus his sores are more
precious to him than Dives purple; he does not say, Stand by, come not near to
me, for I am holier than thou; but, condiscends to men of low estate, Romans 12.
16.

Use 1. Is Humility the inseparable Character of a godly man, Use 1. of Trial.
let us try our hearts by this Touchstone: Are we humble? alas, where does
their godliness appear, who are swelled with pride, and ready to Cristas
erigit, and jovem se putat.
burst? But though men are proud, they will not confess it: This Bastard of
Pride is born, but none are willing to father it; therefore let me ask a few
questions, and let Conscience answer.

1 Are not they proud who are given to glorying? 1 Cor. 5. 6. Your glorying is
not good. 1 Who glory in their riches; their hearts swell with their estates.
St. Bernard calls Pride the rich man's cousen. Ezekiel. 28. 5. Thy heart is lifted
up because of thy riches. 2 Who glory in their apparel. Many dress themselves
in such fashions, as they make the devil fall in love with them; Black-spots,
gaudy attire, naked breasts, what are these, but the flags and banners which
Pride does display? 3 Who glory in their beauty. The body is but dust and
blood kneaded together: Solomon says, Beauty is vain, Prove. 31. 30. Yet so
vain are some, as to be proud of vanity. 4 Who glory in their gifts. These
trappings and ornaments do not set them off in Gods eyes; an Angel is a knowing
creature, but take away humility from an Angel, and he is a devil.

2 Are not they proud who are highly opinionated of their own excellencies? who
beholding themselves in philautiae speculo, in the multiplying glass of
self-love, appear in their own eyes better than they are: Simon Magus gave out,
that himself was (...), some great one, Act. 8. 9. Alexander would needs be son
to Jupiter, and of the Race of the gods. Sapor King of Persia styles himself
Brother of the Sun and Moon. Projicit ampullas, and sesqui pedalia Horat.
verba.

I have read of a Pope, who trod upon the neck of Frederick the Emperor, and
as a Cloak for his pride, cited that Text, Psa. 91. 13. Thou shall tread upon
the Lion, and the Dragon shall thou trample under feet: No such Idol as Self;
the proud man bows down to this Idol.

3. Are not they proud who despise others? Luke 18. 9. The Pharisees trusted in
themselves that they were righteous, and despised Alto supercilio alios
intuentes, and quum loquuntur dictatores agunt.
others. The people of the Chinese say, that Europe has one eye, and they
have two, and all the world else is blind: A proud man looks upon others with
such an eye of scorn, as Goliath did upon David, 1 Samuel 17. 42. When the
Philistim looked about, and saw David, he disdained him. They who stand upon
the Pinnacle of Pride, look upon other men no bigger than Crows.

4. Are not they proud who are the Trumpets of their own Proprio laus sordet in
ore.
praise? Acts 5. 36. Before these days rose up Theudas, boasting himself to be
some body. A proud man is the Herald of his own good deeds, he blazeth his own
fame, and therein is his vice, to paint his own virtue.

5. Are not they proud who take the glory due to God, to themselves, Dan. 4.
30. Is not this great Babylon I have built? So says the proud man, are not
these the Prayers I have made? Are not these the works of Charity I have done?
When Herod had made an Oration, and the people cried him up for a God, Act. 12.
22. he was well content to have that honor done to him: Pride is the greatest
sacrilege, it robs God of his glory.

6. Are not they proud who are never pleased with their condition? they speak
hardly of God, taxing his care and wisdom, as if he had not dealt well with
them. A proud man God himself cannot please, but like Momus, he is ever finding
fault, and flying in the face of heaven.

Oh let us search if there be none of this leven of pride in us: Man is
Naturally a proud piece of flesh; this sin runs in a blood; our first Parents
fell by their Pride, they did aspire after a Deity; there are the seeds of this
in the best, but the godly do not allow themselves in it; they labor to kill
this weed by mortification. But certainly where this sin is regnant and
prevailing, it cannot stand with grace; you may as well call him a prudent man
who wants discretion, as a godly man who wants humility.

Use 2. Labor for this character; Use 2. Exhort.
be humble. It Is an Apostolical Exhortation, 1 Pet. 5. 5. Be clothed with
humility. Put it on as an embroydered (...), idem valet quod (...). Helychius.
robe: better want any thing than humility; better want parts than humility,
nay better want the comforts of the Spirit, than want humility. Micah 6. 8.
What does the Lord require of thee, but to walk humbly with thy Excelsa est
Patria humilis est Via.
God?

1. The more worth any man has, the more humble he is. Feathers fly up, but
Gold descends. Motive
The golden Saint descends Celidonian stone, which is little for substance, but
of rare virtue.

2. God loves an humble soul. It Is not our high birth, but our low hearts God
delights in. An humble spirit is Gods prospect. Isa. 66. 2. To this man will I
look, even to him that is poor, and of a contrite spirit; an humble heart is
Gods Palace, Isa. 57. 15. I dwell in the high and holy place, with him also
that is of an humble spirit. Great Personages besides their houses of state,
have lesser houses which upon occasion they retreat to. Besides Gods house of
state in Heaven, he has the humble soul for his retiring-house, where he takes
up his rest, and does solace himself. Let Italy boast that it is for pleasure
the Garden of the world; an humble heart glories in this, that it is the
Presence Chamber of the Great King.

3. The Times we live in are humbling: The Lord seems to say to us now, as he
did to Israel, Exodus 33. 5. Put off thy Ornaments from thee, that I may know
what to do to thee. My displeasure is breaking forth, I have eclipsed the light
of the Sanctuary, I have stained the waters with blood, I have shot the arrow
of Pestilence, therefore lay down your Pride, put off your Ornaments. Woe to
them that lift themselves up, when God is casting them down. When should a
people be humble if not under the rod? 1 Pet. 5. 6. Humble your selves under
the mighty hand of God. When God afflicts his people, and cuts them short in
their privileges, it is time then to sow sackcloath on their skin, and defile
their horn (or honor) in the dust, Job 16. 15.

4. What an horrid sin Pride is! St. Chrysostom calls it the mother of Hell.
Pride is a complicated evil: as Aristotle says, Justice comprehends all virtue
in it; so Pride comprehends all vice. It Is a spiritual drunkenness; it flies up
as Wine into the brain, and intoxicates it. It is (...).
idolatry; a proud man is a self-worshipper, It Is revenge; Hama^ plots
Mordicaies death, because he would not bow the knee.

How odious is this sin to 1 Pet. 5. 5.
God! Prove. 16. 5. Every one that is proud in heart, is an abomination to the
Lord.

5. The mischief of pride. It is the breakneck of Quem non gula (...)
superavit* Cyprian.
souls. Zeph. 2. 9, 10. Surely Moab shall be as Sodom, etc. this shall they
have for their pride. The Doves (says Pliny) take a pride in their feathers,
and in their flying high, at last they fly so high that they are a prey to the
Hawk. Men fly so high in pride, that at last they are a prey to the Devil the
Prince of the Superbiat homo, and tanquam Icariis pennis^e ipsum elevet,
deprimitur tamen in profundum ruinae barathrum. Rivet.
air.

6. Humility raises ones esteem in the eyes of others: All give respect to the
humble, Prove. 15. 33. Before honor is (...). Chrysostom.
humility.

Quest. What means may we use to be humble.

Answ. 1. Let us set before us the golden pattern of Christ. He commenced
Doctor ^n humility. Phil. 2. 7. But made himself of ^o reputation, and was made
in the likeness of flesh. O what abasement was it for the Son of God to take
our Flesh! nay, that Christ should take our Nature when it was in disgrace,
being stained with sin, this was the wonder of humility. Look upon an humble
Savior, and let the plumes of Pride fall.

2 Study Gods Immensity and Purity: a sight of glory humbles. Elijah wrapped his
face in a Mantle when Gods glory passed before him, 1 King. 19. 13. The Stars
vanish when the Sun appears.

3 Let us study our selves. First, our dark side: by looking our faces in the
glass of the Word we see our (...). Chrysostom.
spots: what a world of sin swarms in us! We may say as Bernard, Lord I am
nothing but peccatum aut sterilitas, either sinfulness or barrenness.

Secondly, Our light side. Is there any good in us? 1 How disproportionable is
it to the means of Grace we have enjoyed! There is still something lacking in
(...).
our Faith, 1 Thessalonians. 3. 10. O Christian be not proud of what thou have, but be
humble for what thou want.

2 The Grace we have is not of our ow^ growth: We are beholding to Christ an^
free Grace for it: as he said of that Ax^ which fell in the water, 2 King. 6.
5. Al^ master, for it was borrowed. So I may say (...) all the good and
excellency in us, it is bo^rowed. Were it not folly to be proud of Ring that is
Ne micam habes quam non Dei charismate accepisti; number sani hominis est de eo
gloriari quod non est suum sed alienum?
lent? 1 Cor. 4. 7. For (...) makes thee to differ from another? and wh^ have
thou, that thou did not receive? The Moon has no cause to be proud of (...)
light, when she borrows it from the Sun.

3. How far short do we come of others; perhaps other Christians are Giants in
Grace; they are in Christ not only before us, but above In quantis sis minor
cogita, non in quantis sis major. Aug. in Mat.
us. We are but as the foot in Christ's Body, they are as the eye.

4. Our beauty is spotted: The Church is said to be fair as the Moon, Cant. 6.
10. which when it shines brightest has a dark spot in it; Faith is mixed with
infidelity; a Christian has that in his very grace may humble him.

5. If we would be humble, let us contemplate our mortality: Shall dust exalt
it Cum sis humilimus, cur^ non humilimus?
self? The thoughts of the grave should bury our pride: They say when there is
a Tympany in the body, the hand of a dead man stroaking that part, cures the
Tympany: The serious meditation of death, is enough to cure the Tympany of
Pride.

SECT. XII.
12. A godly man is a praying man: 12 Character.
This is in the Text, Every one that is godly shall pray unto thee. As soon as
Grace is powered in; prayer is powered out, Psa. 109. 4. But I give my self to
prayer; in the Hebrew it is, (...) but I prayer: Prayer and I are all one;
Prayer is the Souls traffic with heaven; God comes down to us by his Spirit,
and we go up to him by prayer. Caligula placed his Effigies in the Capitol,
whispering in Jupiters ear; prayer whispers in Gods ear. A godly man cannot
live without prayer: A man cannot live unless he takes his breath; not can the
Soul, unless it breathes forth its desires to God: As soon as the Babe of Grace
is born it cries; no sooner was Paul converted, but, behold he prays, Act. 9.
11. No doubt he prayed before being a Pharisee, but it was either
superficially, or superstitiously; but when the work of Grace had passed upon
his soul, behold, now, he prays: A godly man is every day upon the Mount of
Prayer; he begins the day with prayer, before he opens his shop, he opens his
heart to Oration ^st clavis diei.
God. We use to burn sweet perfumes in our houses; a godly man's house is domus
aromatum, an house of perfume, he ayrs it with the incense of prayer; he
ingageth in no business without seeking God: Scipio never entered into the
Senate House, but first he ascended the Capitol, where he did his Prius in
Capitolium quam Seratum. Plutarch.
devotion: A godly man consults with God in every thing, he asks his leave, and
his blessing: The Grecians asked counsel at their Oracles; so does a godly man
enquire at the Divine Oracle, Genesis 24. 12. 1 Samuel 23. 3, 4. A true Saint
continually shoots up his heart to heaven by sacred ejaculations.

Quest. Is Prayer a sign of a godly man, may not an hypocrite pray eloquently,
and with seeming devotion?

Answ. He may, Isa. 58. 2. they seek me daily; but an hypocrite does not pray
(...), in the spirit, Ephesians. 6. 18. A man may have the gift of prayer, and not
have the spirit of prayer.

Quest. How shall we know that we have the Spirit of Prayer?

Answ. When the prayer which we make is spiritual.

Quest. What is it to make a Spiritual Prayer?

Answ. 1. When we pray with knowledge; under the Law, Aaron was to light the
Lamps, when he burned the Incense upon the Altar, Exodus 30. 7. Incense did
typifie prayer, and the lighting of the Lamps did typifie knowledge; when the
Incense of prayer burns, the Lamp of knowledge must be lighted, 1 Cor. 14. 15.
I will pray with the understanding. We must know the Majesty and Holiness of
God, that we may be deeply affected with reverence when we come before him; we
must put up such Petitions as are exactly adequate and agreeable to Gods will.
Eccles. 5. 2. Be not rash with thy mouth, to utter any thing before God: The
Lord would not have the blind offered to him, Mal. 1. 8. How can we pray with
affection, when we do not pray with judgment? The Papists pray in an unknown
tongue; Christ may reply to them as he did to the Mother of Zebedees Children,
Mat. 20. 22. Ye ask ye know not what. He that prays he knows not how, shall be
heard he knows not when.

2. A spiritual prayer is, when the heart and spirit pray; there are not only
words but (...). Chrysostom.
desires: It Is excellent when a man can say, Lord, my heart prays, 1 Samuel 1.
13. Hannah prayed in her heart: The sound of a Trumpet comes from within; and
the excellent Music of Prayer comes from within the (...). Chrysostom
heart; if the heart does not go along in duty, it is speaking, not praying.

3. A spiritual Prayer is a fervent (...). Act. 12. 5.
Prayer, Iam. 5. 16. An effectual fervent prayer prevails much. The heart, like
the Primum Mobile, should carry the affections in a most zealous and rapid
manner; fervency is the wing of Prayer, by which it ascends to heaven; Prayer
is expressed by sighs and groans, Romans 8. 26. It is not so much the gifts of
the spirit, as the groans of the spirit God likes: Prayer is called a
wrestling, Genesis 32. 24. and a pouring out of the Soul, 1 Samuel 1. 15. Prayer is
compared to Incense, Psa. 141. 2. Incense without fire makes no sweet smell;
Prayer without fervency, is like Incense without fire: Christ prayed with
strong cries and tears, Heb. 5. 7. crying Prayer Clamor iste penetrat nubes, ac
pertingit usque ad aures Dei. Luther.
prevails: When the heart is inflamed in Prayer, a Christian is carried as it
were in a Fiery Chariot up to heaven.

4. A Spiritual Prayer is such as comes from a broken heart, Psa. 51. 17. The
Sacrifices of God are a broken spirit. The Incense was to be beaten, to typifie
the breaking of the heart in Prayer: It Is not the voluble tongue, but the
melting heart God accepts: Oh says a Christian, I cannot pray as others; as
Moses said to the Lord, I am not eloquent: But can thou weep and sigh? Does
thy soul melt out at thy eyes? God accepts broken expressions, when they come
from broken hearts. I have read of a Plant that bears no fruit, but it weeps
forth a kind of Gum which is very costly: So, though thou do not flourish
with those gifts and expressions as others, yet if thou can weep forth tears
from a contrite heart, these are exceeding precious to God, and he will put
them in his bottle* Jacob wept in prayer, and had power ever the Angel, Hos.
12. 4.

5. A spiritual Prayer is a believing Prayer, Mat. 21. 22. Whatever ye shall
ask in prayer believing, ye shall receive: The reason why so many Prayers
suffer shipwreck, is because they split against the Rock of unbelief; Praying
without Faith, is shooting without Qui timide rogat docet negare. Seneca.
bullets: When Faith takes Prayer by the hand, then we draw near to God; we
should come to God in Prayer; as the Leper, Mat. 8. 2. Lord if thou will, thou
can heal Invoco te Domine quanquam languida and imbecilla fide, tamen fide.
Caspar. Cruciger.
me: It Is a disparagement to Deity, to have such a whisper in the heart, that
Gods ear is heavy, and cannot Isa. 59. 1.
hear: What is said of the people of Israel, may be applied to Prayer, It could
not enter in, because of Heb. 3. 19.
unbelief.

6. A Spiritual Prayer is an holy Prayer, 1 Timothy 2. 8. Wherefore lift up pure
hands: Prayer must be offered upon the Altar of a pure heart; sin lived in,
makes the heart hard, and Gods ear deaf; sin stops the mouth of Prayer, it does
as the Thief to the Traveller, puts a Gagg in his mouth, that he cannot speak;
sin poisons and infects prayer: A wicked man's prayer is sick of the Plague, and
will God come near him? The Loadstone loses its virtue, when it is bespread
with Garlic: so does prayer, when it is polluted with sin, Psa 66. 18. If I
regard iniquity in my heart, the Lord will not hear me.

It Is foolish to pray against sin, and then to sin against prayer; a spiritual
prayer, like the spirits of Wine, must be refined, and taken off the Lees and
dregs of sin, Mal. 3. 3. That they may offer to the Lord an offering in
righteousness: If the heart be holy, this Altar will sanctify the gift.

7. A spiritual prayer is an humble prayer, Psa. 10. 17. Lord thou have heard
the desire of the humble. Prayer is the asking of an Alms, which requires
humility, Luke 18. 13. The Publican standing afar off, would not lift up so
much as his eyes unto heaven, but smote upon his breast, saying, God be
merciful to me a Quanto cum tremore, quanta humilitate, accedere debet a Palude
sua repens ranuncula vilis Bern. de mod. Orandi.
sinner. Gods incomprehensible glory may even amaze us, and strike an holy
consternation into us when we approach nigh to him, Ezra 9. 6. O my God I blush
to lift up my face to thee: It Is comely to see a poor nothing lie prostrate at
the feet of its Maker, Genesis 18. 27. Behold, I have taken upon me to speak unto
the Lord, which am but dust and ashes. The lower the heart descends, the higher
the prayer ascends.

8. A spiritual prayer is when we pray in the name of Christ: To pray in the
name of Christ, is not only to name Christ in prayer, but to pray in the hope
and confidence of Christ's mediation: as a Child claims his Estate in the right
of his Father who purchased it, so we come for mercy in Christ's Name, who has
purchased it for us in his blood; unless we pray thus, we do not pray at all,
nay, we rather provoke God; as it was with Uzziah, when he would offer Incense
without a Priest, God was angry, and struck him with Leprosy, 2 Chronicles. 26. 16.
So when we do not come in Christ's Name in prayer, we offer up Incense without a
Priest, and what can we expect but to meet with wrath?

9. A spiritual prayer is when we pray out of love to prayer; A wicked man may
pray, but he does not love prayer, Job 27. 10. Will he delight himself in the
Almighty? A godly man is carried upon the wings of delight; he is never so well
as when he is praying; he is not forced with fear, but fired with love, Isa.
56. 7. I will make them joyful in my house of prayer.

10. A spiritual prayer is, when we have spiritual ends in prayer: There is a
vast difference between a spiritual prayer, and a carnal desire; the ends of an
Hypocrite are secular and carnal; he looks asquint in prayer; it is not the
sense of his spiritual wants that moves him, but rather lust, Iam. 4. 3. Ye ask
amiss, that ye may consume it upon your lusts. The sinner prays more for food
than Grace; this God does not interpret praying, but howling, Hosea 7. 14. They
howled upon their beds, they assemble for corn and wine. -- Da modo lucra mihi.
-- Ovid.


Prayers which want a good aim, want a good answer: A godly man has spiritual
ends in prayer; he sends out his prayer, as a Merchant sends out his Ship, that
he may have large returns of spiritual blessings; his design in prayer is, that
his heart may be more holy, and that he may have more communion with God: A
godly man drives the Trade of prayer, that he may increase the stock of Grace.

11. A spiritual prayer is accompanied with the use of means; there must be
(...) as well as (...): When Hezekiah was sick, he did not only pray for
recovery, but he laid a lump of figs to the boil, Isa. 38. 21. Thus it is in
case of the soul, when we pray against sin, and avoid temptations; when we pray
for Grace, and improve opportunities, this is the laying a fig to the boil,
which will make us recover: To pray for holiness, and neglect the means, is like
winding up the Clock, and pulling off the weights.

12. A spiritual prayer is that which leaves a spiritual frame behind upon the
heart; a Christian is better after prayer, he has gotten more strength over
sin, as a man by exercise gets strength: The heart after prayer keeps a
tincture of holiness, as the Vessel savours and relisheth of the Wine that is
put into it. Moses having been with God on the Mount, his face shined; so
having been on the Mount of prayer, our Graces shine, and our lives shine: This
is the sign of a godly man, he prays in the spirit: This is the right kind of
praying; the gift of prayer is ordinary, like Culinary fire; but spiritual
prayer is more rare and excellent, like Elementary fire which comes from heaven.

Use 1. Is a godly man of a praying spirit? Use. 1.
then this excludes them from being godly,

1. Who pray not at all: Their houses are unhallowed houses; it is made the note
of a Reprobate, he calls not upon God, Psalm. 14. 4. Does that indigent creature
think to have an Alms who never asks it? Do they think to have mercy from God
who never seek it? Truly then God should befriend them more than he did his own
Son; he offered up prayers and supplications with strong cries, Heb. 5. 7. None
of Gods Children are tongue tied, Gal. 4. 6. Because ye are sons, God has sent
forth the spirit of his son into your hearts crying Abba Father. Creatures by
the instinct of Nature cry to God, Psalm. 147. 9. The young Ravens which cry:
Psalm. 104. 21. The Lions seek their meat from God: Not to cry to God, is worse
than brutish.

2. Others pray, but it is seldom; like that profane Atheist Heylin speaks
of, who told God he was no common beggar, he never troubled him before, and if
he would hear him now, he would never trouble him again.

3. Others pray, but not in the Holy Ghost, Jude 20. They are rather Parrots,
than weeping Doves; their hearts do not melt in prayer; they exercise their
invention more then their affection.

Use 2. Use 2.
As you would evidence the New Birth, Exhort.
cry Abba Father; be men of prayer; pray at least twice a day: In the Temple
there was the Morning and Evening Sacrifice: Daniel prayed three times a day;
nay, so did he love prayer, that he would not neglect prayer to save his life,
Dan. 6. 10. Luther spent three hours every day in prayer.

Object. But what needs prayer, when God has made so many promises of
blessings?

Answ. Prayer is the condition annexed to the Promise: Promises turn upon the
hinge of prayer, Ezekiel. 36. 37. I will yet for this be enquired of by the house
of Israel. A King promises a pardon, but it must be sued out. David had a
promise that God would build him an house, but he sues out the promise by
prayer, 2 Samuel 7. 25. Christ himself had all the promises made sure to him, yet
he prayed, and spent whole nights in prayer.

Therefore if you would be counted godly, be given to Deus nunquam frustra
quaeritur, imo ne tunc cum inveniri non potest. Bernard.
Prayer: Prayer sanctifies your mercies, 1 Timothy 4. 5. prayer weeds out sin, and
waters Grace.

That I may encourage Christians, and hold up their heads in prayer, as Aaron
and Hur held up Moses hands, let me propound these few considerations.

1. Prayer is a seed sown in Gods ears; other seed sown in the ground may be
picked up by the Birds, but this seed (especially if watered with tears) is too
precious to be lost.

2. Consider the power of prayer: The Apostle having set down the whole Armor
of a Christian, brings in prayer as the chief part, Ephesians. 6. 18. Without this
(says Zanchy) all the rest are little Reliqua arma Parum prosunt. Zanch.
worth: By prayer Moses divided the Red Sea; Joshua stopped the course of the
Sun, and made it stand still, Josh. 10. 13. Nay, prayer made the Sun of
Righteousness stand still, Luke 18. 40. And Jesus stood still. Prayer is the
inlet to all blessings, spiritual and temporal. When Aurelius Antonius went
against the Germans, he had in his Army a Regiment of Christians, who upon
their earnest prayer, obtained Rain for the refreshment of his Army; and
because of the power of their prayers, he called them the Thundering Regiment.
Prayer has a power in it to destroy the insolent Enemies of the Church. We
read, the two Witnesses have a flame at their lips; fire proceeds out of their
mouths which devoures their Enemies, Rev. 11. 5. This fire is certainly to be
interpreted of their (...). Macar. Hom.
prayers: David prayed, Lord turn the counsel of Achitophel into foolishness, 2 Samuel 15. 31. This prayer made Achitophel hang himself. Moses prayer against
Amalek did more than Joshua's Sword: Prayer has a kind of Omnipotency in it,
it has raised the dead, overcome Angels, cast out Devils; it has influence
upon God Exodus 32. 10.
himself: Jacobs prayer held God* Genesis 32. 26. I will not let thee go till thou
bless Precibus suis velut vinculis ligatum tenuit Deum.
me. Prayer finds God free, but leaves him bound.

3, Jesus Christ prays over our prayers again; he takes the dross out, and
presents nothing but pure gold to his Father. Christ mingles his sweet odours
with the prayers of the Saints, Rev. 5. 8. Think of the dignity of his person,
he is God; and the sweetness of his Relation, he is a Son: Oh then what
encouragement is here for us to pray! Our prayers are put in the hand of a
Mediator; though as they come from us they are weak and imperfect, yet as they
come from Christ, they are mighty and powerful.

4. The sweet promises which God has made to prayer, Isa. 30. 19. He will be
very gracious unto thee at the voice of thy cry, Ier. 29. 13, 14. Then shall ye
go and pray unto me, and I will hearken unto you; and ye shall seek me, and
find me, when ye shall search for me with all your heart. And Isaiah 65. 24.
Before they call, I will answer, and while they are yet speaking, I will hear.
These promises keep the head of prayer above water; God is bound with his own
promises, as Sampson was bound with his own hair.

Let us then double our files, and with our Savior, pray yet more earnestly,
Luke 22. 44. Let us be importunate Suitors, and resolve with S. Bernard, that
we will not come away from God without Nunquam a te Domine absque te recedam.
Bern.
God: prayer is a Petarr, which will make heaven gates fly open.

Quest. How shall we do to pray aright?

Answ. Implore the Spirit of God, Jude 20. Praying in the Holy Ghost. The Holy
Ghost both Indights prayer, and inflames it: God understands no other language
but that of his spirit; pray for the Holy Ghost, that you may pray in the Holy
Ghost.

SECT. XIII.
13. A godly man is a sincere man, 13 Character.
John 1. 47. Behold an Israelite indeed, in whose spirit there is no guile. The
word for sincere, (...) signifies sine plicis, without pleats and folds: A
godly man is plain-hearted, having no subtle subterfuges; Religion is the
Livery a godly man wears, and this Livery is lined with Sincerity.

Quest. Wherein does the godly man's Sincerity appear?

Answ. 1. The godly man is that which he seems to be; he is a Jew inwardly,
Romans 2. 29. Grace runs through his heart, as silver through the veins of the
earth: The hypocrite is not what he seems. -- Front positus,
Astutam vapido servans sub pectore vulpem.


A picture is like a man, but it wants breath: The Hypocrite is an Effigies, a
picture, he does not breathe forth Sanctity; he is but like an Angel on a
Sign-post: A godly man answers to his profession, as the Transcript to the
Original.

2. The godly man labors to approve himself to God in every thing, 2 Cor. 5.
9. We labor that whether present or absent, we may be accepted of him. It Is
better to have God approve, than the world applaud: They that did run in the
Olympic Race, labored to have his approbation, who was the Judge and Umpire
of the Race: There is a time shortly coming, when a smile from Gods face will
be infinitely better than all the applauses of men: How sweet will that word
be, Euge bone serve, Well done thou good and faithful servant, Mat. 25. 21. A
godly man is ambitious of Gods Letters-Testimonial; the hypocrite desires to
carry it fair with men: Saul was for the vogue of the people, 1 Samuel 15. 30. A
godly man approves his heart to God, who is both the Spectator and the Judge.

3. The godly man is ingenuous in laying open of his sins, Psa. 32. 5. 1
confessed my sin to thee, and my iniquity have I not hid. The hypocrite does
vail and smother his sin; he does not abscindere peccatum, but abscondere; like
a Patient that has some loathsome disease in his body, he will rather die than
confess his disease: But a godly man's sincerity is seen in this, he will
confess and shame himself for sin, 2 Samuel 24. 17. Lo I have sinned, and I have
done wickedly: Nay, a Child of God will confess sin in particular; an unsound
Christian will confess sin by wholesale, he will acknowledge he is a sinner in
general; whereas David does as it were point with his finger to the sore, Psalm.
51. 4. I have done this evil: He does not say, I have done evil, but this evil;
he points at his bloud-guiltiness.

4. The godly man has blessed designs in all he does; he propounds this end in
every Ordinance, that he may have more acquaintance with God, and bring more
glory to God; as the herb Heliotropium turns about according to the motion of
the Sun; so a godly man's actions do all move toward the glory of God: It is an
axiom in Philosophy, The means are in order to the Media sunt appetenda propter
finem.
end. A godly man's praying and worshipping is, that he may honor God; though he
shoots short, yet he takes a right aim; the hypocrite minds nothing but
self-interest, the sails of his Mill move not, but when the wind of preferment
blows; he never dives into the waters of the Sanctuary, but to fetch up a piece
of gold at the bottom.

5. The godly man abhors dissimulation toward men, his heart goes along with
his Homo sine fuco. Erasm.
tongue, he cannot flatter and Psa. 28. 3.
hate, commend and censure, Romans 12. 9. Let love be without dissimulation.
Dissembled love is worse than hatred; counterfeiting of friendship is no better
than a Psa. 78. 36.
lie, for there is a pretense of that which is not: Many are like Ioab, 2 Samuel
20. 9. He took Amasa by the beard to kiss him, and smote him with his sword in
the fifth rib, and he Mel in ore, fell in cord.
died. -- Impia sub dulci melle venena latent. --

There is a River in Spain, where the fish seem to be of a golden color, but
take them out of the water, and they are like other fish: All is not gold that
glisters; there are some pretend much kindness, but they are like great veins
which have little blood; if you lean upon them, they are as a Leg out of joint:
For my part I much question his truth toward God, that will flatter and lie to
his friend, Pro. 10. 18. He that hides hatred with lying lips is a fool. By
all that has been said, we may try whether we have this note of a godly man,
to be sincere.

Sincerity (as I conceive) is not properly ^ grace, but rather the ingredient
into every grace: Sincerity is that which does qualify grace, and without
which grace is not true, Ephesians. 6. ult. Grace be with them, which love our Lord
Jesus Christ in sincerity: Sincerity qualifies our love; sincerity is to grace,
as the blood and spirits are to the body; there can be no life without the
blood, so no grace without sincerity.

Use. As we would be reputed godly, Use of Exhort.
let us labor for this Character of sincerity.

1. Sincerity renders us lovely in Gods eyes; Motive
God says of the sincere soul as of Sion, Psalm. 132. 14. This is my rest for
ever, here will I dwell, for I have desired it: A sincere heart is Gods
Paradise of Tali cord unice delectatur Deus, id veluti dulcisonum quoddam
spirituale nabl^um, harmoniae suae suavitate, modulorumque oblectamine, aures
ejus mirum in modum mulcet.
delight: Noah found grace in Gods eyes: Why, what did God see in Noah? he was
girt with the girdle of sincerity, Genesis 6. 9. Noah was perfect in his
Generation. Truth resembles God, and when God sees a sincere heart, he sees his
own Image, and he cannot choose but fall in love with it, Pro. 11. 20. He that
is upright in his way, is Gods delight.

2. Sincerity makes our services find acceptance with God; the Church of
Philadelphia had but a little (...).
strength; her grace was weak, her services slender, yet of all the Churches
Christ wrote to, he found the least fault with her: What was the reason?
because she was most sincere, Rev. 3. 8. Thou have kept fast my word, and have
not denied my Name. Though we cannot pay God all we owe, yet a little in
current Coin is accepted; God takes sincerity for full payment: A little gold,
though rusty, is better than Alchimy be it never so bright; a little sincerity,
though rusted over with many infirmities, is of more value with God, than all
the glorious flourishes of hypocrites.

3. Sincerity is our safety; false hearts that will step out of Gods way, and
use carnal policy, when they think to be most safe, they are least secure; he
that walks purely, walks surely, Pro. 10. 9. A sincere Christian will do
nothing but what the word warrants, and that is safe, as to the Conscience:
Nay, oftentimes such as are upright in their way, the Lord takes care of their
outward safety, Psalm. 4. I laid me down and slept. David was now beleaguered
with Enemies, yet God did so incamp about him by his Providence, that he could
sleep securely as in a Garrison: Ver. 5. The Lord sustained me: The only way to
be safe, is to be sincere.

4. Sincerity is Gospel perfection, Job 1. 8. Have thou considered my servant
Job, that there is none like him in the earth, a perfect, and an upright man.
Though a Christian be full of infirmities, and like a Child that is put out to
Nurse, weak and feeble, yet God looks upon him, as if he were completely
righteous: Every true Saint has the Thummim of perfection upon his
breast plate.

5. Sincerity is that which the Devil strikes most at: Satan's spite was not so
much at Jobs Estate, as his integrity; he would have wrested the Shield of
Sincerity from him, but Job held that fast, Job 27. 6. A Thief does not fight
for an empty purse, but for money: The devil would have robbed Job of the Jewel
of a good Conscience, and then he had been poor Job indeed: Satan does not
oppose Profession, but Sincerity: Let men go to Church, and make glorious
pretenses of holiness, Satan does not oppose this; this does him no hurt, nor
them no good; but if men will be sincerely pious, then Satan musters up all his
forces against them: Now that which the Devil does most assault, we must labor
most to maintain: Sincerity is our Fort-Royal, where our chief treasure lies;
this Fort is most shot at, therefore let us be more careful to preserve it:
While a man keeps his Castle, his Castle will keep him: While we keep
Sincerity, Sincerity will keep us.

6. Sincerity is the beauty of a Christian, wherein lies the beauty of a
Diamond, but in this, that it is a true Diamond? If it be counterfeit, it is
worth nothing: So wherein lies the beauty of a Christian, but in this, that he
has truth in the inward Psa. 51. 6
parts: Sincerity is a Christians Ensign of glory; it is both his Breast Plate
to defend him, and his Crown to adorn him.

7. The vileness of hypocrisy: The Lord would have no leven offered up in
Sacrifice; leven did typifie hypocrisy, Luke 12. 1. The hypocrite does the
devil double service, under the Vizor of Piety, he can sin more, and be less
(...). Eusebius.
suspected, Mat. 23. 14. W^ unto you Scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites, for ye
devour Widows houses, and for a pretense, make long prayers: Who would think
they were guilty of Extortion, that would pray so many hours together? Who
would suspect him of false weights, that has the Bible so often in his hand?
Who would think he would slander, that seems to fear an oath? Hypocrites are
the worst sort of sinners, they reflect infinite dishonor upon Religion;
hypocrisy for the most part ends in scandal, and that brings an evil report
upon the ways of God; one man breaking, makes such as are honest suspected; one
scandalous hypocrite, makes the world suspect that all Professors are so; the
hypocrite was born to do Religion a spite, and to bring it into an odium.

The hypocrite is a liar, he worships God with his knee, and his lusts with his
heart; like those 2 Kin. 17. 33. They feared the Lord, and served their own
gods.

The hypocrite is an impudent sinner, he knows his heart is false, yet he goes
on: Judas knew himself to be an hypocrite; he asks, Master is it I? Christ
replies, Thou have said it? Yet so shameless was he as to persist in his
falseness, and betray Christ: All the plagues and curses written in the Book of
God, are the hypocrites portion, Hell is his place of Randezvous, Mat. 24. 51.
Hypocrites are the chief guests the Devil expects, and he will make them as
welcome, as fire and brimstone can make them.

8. If the heart be sincere, God will wink at many failings, Numb. 23. 21. He
has not seen iniquity in Jacob. Gods love does not make him blind, he can see
infirmities, but how? not with an eye of revenge, but pity, as a Physician
sees a disease in his Patient to heal him: God does not see iniquity in Jacob,
so as to destroy him, but to heal him, Isa. 57. 18. He went on frowardly, I
have seen his ways, and I will heal him: How much pride, vanity, passion, does
the Lord pass by in his sincere ones! He sees the integrity, and pardons the
infirmity: How much did God overlook in Asa! the high places were not removed:
Yet it is said, 2 Chronicles. 15. 17. The heart of Asa was perfect all his days. We
esteem of a picture, though it be not drawn at the full length: So though the
graces of Gods people are not drawn at their full length, nay, have many scars
and spots, yet having something of God in sincerity, they shall find mercy; God
loves the sincere, and it is the nature of love to cover Pro. 12. 10.
infirmity.

9. Nothing but sincerity will give us comfort in an hour of trouble: King
Hezekiah thought he had been dying, yet this revived him, that Conscience drew
up a Certificate for him, Isa. 38. 2. Remember O Lord, how I have walked before
thee in truth, etc. Sincerity was the best flower of his Crown: What a golden
Shield will this be against Satan, when he shall roar upon us by his
temptations, and set our sins before us on our Deathbed, then we shall answer,
It Is true Satan, these have been our miscarriages, but we have bewailed them;
if we have sinned, it was against the bent and purpose of our heart; this will
stop the Devils mouth, and put him to a retreat; therefore labor for this
Jewel of Sincerity, 1 Ioh. 3. 24. If our heart condemn us not, then we have
confidence toward God: If we are cleared at the Petty Sessions in our own
Conscience, then we may be confident, we shall be acquitted at the Great
Assizes at the day of Judgment.

SECT. XIV.
14. A godly man is an heavenly man; 14 Character.
Heaven is in him, before he is in Heaven; the Greek word for Saint, (...),
signifies a man taken off from the earth: a person may live in one place, yet
belong to another; he may live in Spain, yet be a free Denizon of England;
Pomponius dwelt at Athens, yet was a Citizen of Rome: So a godly man is a while
in the Patria loci.
world, but he belongs to the Jerusalem Patria juris.
above; that is the place to which he aspires; every day is Ascension day with a
Believer: The Saints are called Stars, for their sublimeness; they are gotten
above into the upper Region, Pro. 15. 24. The way of life is above to the wise:
A godly man is Heavenly six ways.

1. In his Election. 2. In his Disposition. 3. In his Communication. 4. In his
Operation. 5. In his Expectation. 6. In his Conversation.
1. A godly man is heavenly in his Election; he chooses heavenly objects: David
did choose to be a Residentiary in Gods house, Psa. 84. 10. A godly person
chooses Christ and grace, before the most illustrious things under the Sun:
That a man is that his choice is; and this choosing of God is best seen in a
critical hour: When Christ and the World come in competition, and we part with
the world to keep Christ and a good Conscience, a sign we have chosen the
better Luke 10. 42.
part.

2. A godly man is heavenly in his Disposition; he sets his affections on
things above, Col. 3. 2. He sends his heart to heaven before he comes there; he
looks upon the world, but as a beautiful prison, and he cannot be much in love
with his Fetters, though they are made of gold: An holy person contemplates
glory and Eternity; his defires have gotten wings, and are fled to heaven:
Grace is in the heart like fire, which makes it sparkle upwards in Divine
breathings and ejaculations.

3. A godly man is heavenly in his Communication, his words are powdered with
salt to season others, Col. 4. 6. As soon as Christ was risen from the grave,
he was speaking of the things pertaining to the Kingdom of God, Act. 1. 3. No
sooner is a man risen out of the grave of Unregeneracy, but he is speaking of
heaven, Eccles. 10. 12. The words of a wise man's mouth are gracious: He speaks
so heavenly, as if he had been already in heaven; the love he bears to God,
will not suffer him to be silent; the Spouse being sick of love, her tongue was
as the pen of a ready writer, Cant. 5. 10. My beloved is white and ruddy, his
head is of fine gold, etc. If Wine be in the house, the Bush will be hung
forth, and where there is a principle of godliness in the heart, it will vent
it self at the lips; the Bush will be hung forth.

How can they be termed godly, 1. Who are possessed with a dumb devil? They
never have any good discourse; they are fluent and discoursive enough in
secular things; they can speak of their wares and drugs, they can tell what a
good crop they have, but in matters of Religion they are as if their tongue did
cleave to the roof of their mouth: There are many persons, if you come into
their company, you cannot tell what to make of them, whether they are Turks or
Atheists, for they never speak a word of Christ.

2. Whose tongues are set on fire of Hell: Their lips do not drop honey but
poison, to the defiling of others. Plutarch says, speech ought to be like
gold, which is then of most value, when it has least dross in it: O the
unclean malicious words that some persons utter! What an unsavory stench comes
from these dunghils; those lips had need have David's Psa. 39. 1
Bridle, that gallop so fast in sin: Can the body be healthful when the tongue
is black? Can the heart be holy when the devil is in the lips? A godly man
speaks the language of Canaan, Mal. 3. 16. They that feared the Lord, spoke
often one to another.

4. A godly man is heavenly in his Operation. The motions of the Planets are
Caelestial: A godly man is sublime and sacred in his motions, he works out
salvation, he puts forth all his strength, as they did in the Olympicks, that
he may obtain the Garland made of the Flowers of Paradise; he prays, fasts,
watches, he offers violence to heaven, he is divinely acted, he carries on
Gods Interest in the world, he does Angels work, he is in his Operations
Seraphical.

5. A godly man is heavenly in his Expectation; his hopes are above the Psa.
39. 7
world, Tit. 1. 2. In hope of eternal life: A godly man casts Anchor within the
Viget spei immobilis virtus. Cypr.
vail; he hopes to have his fetters of sin filed off; he hopes for such things
as eye has not seen; he hopes for a Kingdom when he dies; a Kingdom promised
by the Father, purchased by the Son, assured by the Holy Ghost; as an Heir
lives in hope when such a great Estate shall befall him, so a Child of God,
who is a Coheir with Christ, hopes for glory: This hope comforts him in all
varieties of condition, Romans 5. 2. We rejoice in the hope of the glory of God.

1. This hope comforts a godly man in affliction; hope does lighten and sweeten
the most severe Dispensations: A Child of God can laugh with tears in his
eyes; the time is shortly coming, when the Cross shall be taken off his
shoulders, and a Crown set upon his head: A Saint at present is miserable, with
a thousand troubles, in an instant, clothed with Robes of Immortality, and
advanced above Seraphims.

2. This hope comforts a godly man in death, Pro. 14. 32. The righteous has
hope in his death: If one should ask a dying Saint, when all his earthly
comforts were gone, what he had left? he would say, the Helmet of Hope. I have
read of a Martyr Woman, who when the Persecutor commanded that her breasts
should be cut off, she said, Tyrant do thy worst, I have two breasts which thou
can not touch, the one of Faith, the other of Hope. A soul that has this
blessed hope, is above the desire of life, or the fear of death: Would one be
troubled to exchange a sorry Lease for an Inheritance that will be for him and
his Heirs? Who would care to part with life, which is a Lease will soon be run
out, to be possessed of a glorious Inheritance in light?

6. A godly man is heavenly in his Conversation; he casts such a luster of
Holiness, as adorns his Profession; he lives as if he had seen the Lord with
bodily eyes; what zeal, sanctity, humility, shines forth in his life: A godly
person does emulate not only the Angels, but imitate Christ himself, 1 John 2.
6. The Macedonians celebrate the Birthday of Alexander, on which day they wear
his picture about their necks, set with Pearl and rich Jewels; so a godly man
carries the lively picture of Christ about him, in the heavenliness of his
deportment, Phil. 3. 20. Our conversation is in heaven.

Use 1. They must needs be cast over the Bar for ungodly, Use 1.
who are eaten up with the world; godly and earthly is a contradiction, Phil.
3. 18, 19. For many walk, of whom I now tell you even weeping, that they are
the Enemies of the Cross of Christ, whose god is their belly, who mind earthly
things. We read the earth swallowed up Korah alive, Numb. 16. 32. This
Judgment is on many, the earth swallows up their time, and thoughts, and
discourse, they are buried twice; their hearts are buried in the earth before
their bodies: How sad is it that the soul, that Princely thing, which is made
for Communion with God and Angels, should be put to the Mill to grind, and
made Mancipium terrae, a slave to the earth? How is the soul become like the
Prodigal, choosing rather to converse with swine, and feed upon husks, than to
aspire after Communion with the blessed Deity? Thus does Satan befool men, and
keep them from heaven, by making them seek an heaven here.

Use 2. Use 2.
As we would evidence our selves to be born of God, let us be of a sublime
heavenly temper: Exhort.
We shall never go to heaven when we die, unless we are in heaven whilst we
live: That we may be more Noble, and raised in our affections, let us seriously
weigh these four considerations.

1. God himself sounds a retreat to us, to call us off the world, 1 John 2. 15.
Love not the world: We may use it as a posie of flowers to smell to, but it
must not lie as a bundle of myrrh betwixt our breasts, Romans 12. 2. Be ye not
conformed to this world; do not hunt after the honors and profits of it, and as
Gods Precepts, so his Providence, are to beat us off the world: Why does he
send War and Pestilence? What means the heat of this great anger? Surely dying
times are to make men die to the world.

2. Consider how much below a Christian it is to be earthly-minded: We laugh
sometimes at Children when we see them busying themselves about toys, blowing
bubbles in the air out of a shell, kissing their Babies, etc. when in the mean
time we do the same; at death what will all the world be which we so hug and
kiss, but as a Baby of Clouts, it will yield us no more comfort then; and to be
taken up with these things, how far is it below an heaven-born soul! nay, for
such as profess to be enobled with a principle of Piety, and to have their
hopes above, for them to have their hearts below, how do they (...) disparage
their Heavenly Calling, and spot their silver wings of Grace, by beliming them
with earth?

3. Consider what a poor contemptible thing the world is, it is not worth
setting the affections on, it cannot fill the heart; if Satan should take a
Christian up to the Mount of Temptation, and show him all the Kingdoms and
glory of the world, what could he show him but a fancy, an apparition? Nothing
here can be proportionable to the immense soul of man, Job 20. 22. In the
fullness of his sufficiency he shall be in streights: Here is want in plenty;
the creature will no more fill the soul, than a drop will fill the bucket; and
that little sweet we suck from the creature, is intermixed with some
bitterness, like that Cup which the Jews gave Christ, Mar. 15. 23. They gave
him to drink wine mingled with myrrh. And this imperfect sweet will not last
long, 1 John 2. 17. The world passes away. The creature does but salute us,
and is presently upon the (...). socr ad Demon.
wing* The world rings Changes, it is never constant but in its
disappointments; how quickly may we remove our lodgings, and make our pillow in
the dust? The world is but a great Inn, where we are to stay a night or two,
and be gone; what madness is it so to set our heart upon our Inn, as to forget
our home?

4. Consider what a glorious place heaven is: We read of an Angel coming down
from heaven, who did tread with his right foot on the Sea, and with his left
foot on the earth, Revel. 10. 2. Had we but once been in heaven, and viewed the
superlative glory of it, how might we in an holy scorn trample with one foot
upon the earth, and with the other foot upon the Sea: Heaven is called a better
Country, Heb. 11. 16. But now they desire a better Country, that is an
heavenly: Heaven is said to be a better Country, in opposition to the Country
where we now sojourn: What should we mind but that better Sistitur appetitus in
via satiatur in Patria.
Country.

Quest. In what sense is heaven a better Country?

Answ. 1. In that Country above there are better delights; there is the Tree of
Life, the Rivers of Pleasure; there is amazing beauty, unsearchable riches;
there are the delights of Angels; there is the Flower of Joy fully blown; there
is more than we can ask or Ephesians. 3. 20.
think; there is glory in its full dimensions, and beyond all hyperbole.

2. In that Country there is a better dwelling house: 1. It is an house not
made with hands, 2 Cor. 5. 1. To denote the excellency of it: There was never
any house but was made with hands; but the house above surpasses the art of
man or Angel, none besides God could lay a stone in that building. 2. It is
eternal in the heavens; it is not a sojourning house, but a Mansion House, it
is an house will never be out of repair, Wisdom has built this house, and
hewn out her seven Pro. 8. 1.
Pillars, which can never moulder.

3. In that Country there are better provisions, in our Fathers house is bread
enough: Heaven was typified by Canaan, which did flow with milk and honey:
There is the Royal Feast, the spiced Wine, there is Angels food, there are
those rare viands and dainties served in, as exceed not only our expressions,
but our faith.

4. In that Country is better Society: There is God blessed for ever: How
infinitely sweet and ravishing will a smile of his face be? the Kings presence
makes the Court: There are the glorious Cherubims; in this terrestrial Country
where we now live, we are among Wolves and Serpents; in that Country above, we
shall be among Angels: There are the spirits of just men made perfect, Heb. 12.
23. Here the people of God are clouded with infirmities, we see them with spots
in their faces, they are full of pride, passion, censoriousness; in that
Jerusalem above, we shall see them in their Royal attire, decked with
unparalleled beauty, not having the least tincture or shadow of sin upon them.

5. In that Country there is a better air to breathe in: We go into the Country
for air; the best air is only to be had in that better Country, 1. It is a more
temperate air, the Climate is calm and moderate, we shall neither freeze with
the cold, nor faint with the heat; 2. It is a brighter air, there is a better
light shines there: The Sun of Righteousness enlightens that Horison with his
glorious beams, Rev. 21. 23. The Lamb is the light thereof. 3. It is a purer
air: The Fens, which are full of black vapors, we count a bad air, and
unwholesome to live in: This world is a place of Bogs and Fens, where the
noxious vapors of sin arise, which make it pestilential and unwholesome to
live in, but in that Country above, there are none of these vapors, but a
sweet perfume of holiness; there is the smell of the Orange-tree, and the
Pomgranate; there is the Myrrh and Cassia coming from Christ, which send forth
a most odoriferous smell.

6. In that Country there is a better soil; the Land or Soil is better

1. For its altitude; the earth lying low, is of a baser pedigree; the Element,
which is nearest heaven, is purer and more excellent, as the fire; that Country
above is the High Country, Psalm. 24. 3. it is seated far above all the visible
Orbs.

2. It is a better Land for its fertilness, it bear a richer Crop: The richest
Harvest on earth is the golden Harvest, but the Country above yields Nobier
Commodities, there are Pearls Caelestial, there is the Spiritual Vine, there is
the honeycomb of Gods love dropping, there is the Water of Life, the hidden
Manna; there is fruit that does not rot, flowers that never fade; there is a
Crop which cannot be quite reaped, it will be ever reaping time in heaven, and
all this the Land yields, without the labor of ploughing and sowing.

3. It is a better Land for its inoffensiveness: There are no briars there; the
World is a Wilderness where are wicked men, and the best of them is a bryar,
Mica 7. 4. They will be tearing the people of God in their spiritual Liberties;
but in the Country above there is not one bryar to be seen, all the briars are
burned.

4. It is a better Land for the rareness of the prospect; all that a man sees
there is his own: I account that the best prospect, where a man can see
furthest on his own ground.

7. In that Country is better union; all the Inhabitants are knit together in
love: The poysonful weed of malice does not grow there; there is harmony
without division, and charity without envy: In that Country above, as in
Solomon's Temple, no noise of Hammer is heard.

8. In that Country is better employment; while we are here we are complaining
of our wants, weeping over our sins, but there we shall be praising God: How
will the Birds of Paradise chirp when they are in that Caelestial Country?
There the Morning Stars will sing together, and all the Saints of God shout for
joy.

O what should we aspire after, but this Country above? Such as have their eyes
opened, will see that it does infinitely excel: An ignorant man looks upon a
Star, and it appears to him as a little silver spot; but the Astronomer who
has his Instrument to judge of the dimension of a Star, knows it to be many
degrees bigger than the earth: So a natural man hears of the heavenly Country,
that it is very glorious, but it is at a great distance; and because he has
not a spirit of discerning, the world looks bigger in his eye; but such as are
Spiritual Artists, who have the Instrument of Faith to judge of Heaven, will
say, it is far the better Country, and thither will they hasten with the Sails
of desire.

SECT. XV.
15. A godly man is a zealous man; grace turns a Saint into a Seraphim, Char.
15.
it makes him burn in holy zeal; zeal is a mixed affection, a compound of love
and anger, it carries forth our love to God, and anger against sin in the most
intense manner: Zeal is the flame of the affections; a godly man has a double
baptism, of water and fire, he is baptized with a spirit of zeal, he is
zealous for Gods honor, truth, worship, Psalm. 119. 139. my zeal has consumed
me; it was a crown set on Phineas his head, he was zealous for his God. Numb.
25. 13. Moses being touched with a coal from Gods altar, in his zeal he breaks
the Tables, Exodus 32. 19. our blessed Savior in his zeal, whips the buyers and
sellers out of the Temple, Ioh. 2. 17. the zeal of thy house has eaten me up.

But there is a Praeternatural heat, something looking like zeal, which is not,
a Comet looks like a Star: I shall therefore show some differences between a
true and a false zeal.

1 A false zeal is a blind zeal, Romans 10. 2. They have a zeal of God, but not
according to knowledge; this is not the fire of the spirit, but wildfire. The
Athenians were very devout and zealous, but they knew not for what, Acts 17.
23. I found an Altar with this Inscription, (...), To the unknown God, Thus the
Papists are zealous in their way, but they have taken away the key of knowledge.

2 A false zeal is a self-seeking zeal; Iehu cries, come see my zeal for the
Lord, 2 King. 10. 16. but it was not zeal, but ambition, he was fishing for a
Crown. Demetrius pleads for the Goddess Diana, but it was not her Temple, but
her Silver shrines he was zealous for: Such zealots Ignatius complains of in
his time, that they made a Trade of Christ and Religion, thereby to enrich
(...). Ignat
themselves. It Is probable many in King Henry the eights time were forward to
pull down the Abbeys, not out of any zeal against Popery, but that they might
build their own houses upon the ruins of those Abbeys; like Eagles which fly
aloft, but their eyes are down upon their prey: If blind zeal be punished seven
fold, hypocritical zeal shall be punished seventy and seven fold.

3 A false praeposterous zeal, is a misguided zeal; it runs out most in things
which are not commanded, It is the sign of an hypocrite to be zealous for
traditions, and careless of institutions. The Pharisees were more zealous about
washing of their cups than their hearts.

4 A false zeal is fired with passion. James and John, when they would call for
fire from heaven, were rebuked by our Savior, Luke 9. 54. Ye know not what
spirit ye are off, it was not zeal, but choler; many have espoused the cause
of Religion, rather out of faction and humor, than out of zeal to the truth.

But the zeal of a godly man, is a true and holy zeal, which evidenceth it self
in the effects of it.

1 True zeal cannot bear an injury done to God, zeal makes the blood rise, when
Gods honor is impeached, Rev. 2. 2. I know thy works and thy labor and
patience, and how thou can not bear them which are evil; he who zealously
affects his friend, cannot hear him spoken against, and be silent.

2 True zeal will encounter with the greatest difficulties; when the world
holds out a Gorgons head of danger to discourage us, zeal casts out fear; it is
quickened by Marcet sine adversario virtus. Sen. de provid.
opposition. Zeal does not say there is a Lion in the way; zeal will charge
through an Army of dangers, it will march in the face of death. Let news be
brought to Paul, that he was waylaid, in every City bonds and imprisonment did
abide him, this sets a keener edge upon his zeal, Acts 21. 13. I am ready not
only to be bound, but to dye for the name of the Lord Jesus: as sharp frosts
do by an antiparistasis make the fire burn hotter, so sharp oppositions do but
inflame zeal the more.

3 True zeal as it has knowledge to go before it, so it has sanctity to
follow after it: Wisdom leads the van of zeal, and holiness brings up the
rear: an hypocrite seems to be zealous, but he is vicious: the godly man is
white and ruddy, white in purity, as well as ruddy in zeal; Christ's zeal was
hotter than the fire, and his holiness purer than the sun.

4 Zeal that is genuine loves truth when it is despised, and opposed, Psalm.
119. 126. They have made void thy law, therefore I love thy commandments above
gold: the more others deride holiness, the more we love it; what is Religion
the worse for others disgracing it? does a Diamond sparkle the less, because a
blind man disparageth it? the more outrageous the wicked are against the
truth, the more courageous the godly are for it: When Mical scoffed at David's
religious dancing before the Ark, if (says he) this be to be vile, I will yet
be more vile, 2 Samuel 6. 22.

5 True zeal causes fervency in duty, Romans 12. 11. fervent in (...).
spirit: Zeal makes us hear with reverence, pray with affection, love with
ardency. God kindled Moses his sacrifice from heaven, Lev. 9. 24. There came a
fire out from before the Lord, and consumed upon the Altar the burnt offering:
when we are zealous in devotion, and our heart waxes hot within us, here is a
fire from heaven kindling our sacrifice: how odious is it for a man to be all
fire when he is sinning, and all y^e when he is praying: A pious heart, like
water seething hot, boils over in holy affections.

6. True zeal is never out of breath; though it be violent, it is perpetual; no
waters can quench the flame of zeal, it is torrid in the frigid zone: The heat
of zeal is like the natural heat coming from the heart, which lasts as long as
life: That zeal which is not constant, was never true.

Use 1. Use 1.
How opposite are they to godliness who cry down zeal, 1 Bran.
and count it a Religious frenzy? They are for the light of knowledge, but
not for the heat of zeal. When Basil was earnest in preaching against the
Arrian Heresy, it was interpreted folly and dotage. Religion is a matter
requires zeal; the Kingdom of heaven will not be taken but by violence, Mat.
12. 11.

Object. But why so much fervor in Religion? what becomes then of Prudence?

Answ. Though Prudence be to direct zeal, yet not to destroy it; because sight
is requisite, must the body therefore have no heat? If Prudence be the eye in
Religion, zeal is the heart.

Quest. But where is moderation?

Answ. Though moderation in things of indifferency be commendable, and
doubtless it would much tend to the settling the peace of the Church; yet in the
main Articles of Faith, wherein Gods glory and our Salvation lie at stake, here
moderation is nothing else but sinful neutrality: It was Calvin's advice to
Melancthon, that he should not so affect the name of moderate, that at length
he lost all his zeal.

Object. But the Apostle presses moderation, Phil. 4. 5. Let your moderation
be known to all?

Answ. The Apostle speaks there of moderating our passion; the Greek word for
(...)
moderation, signifies candor, and meekness, opposite to rash Beza.
anger; and so the word is rendered in another place (...)
Patient, 1 Timothy 3. 3. By moderation then, is meant meekness of spirit; and
that is clear by the subsequent words, The Lord is at hand: As if the Apostle
had said, avenge not your selves, for the Lord is at hand, he is ready to
avenge your personal wrongs, but this does not at all hinder, but that in
matters of Religion a Christian should be zealous.

2 What strangers are they to godliness, 2 Bran.
who have no zeal for the glory of God? they can see his ordinances despised,
his worship adulterated, yet their spirits are not at all stirred in them. How
many are of a dull, lukewarm temper, zealous for their own secular interest,
but have no zeal for the things of heaven; hot in their own cause, but cool in
Gods. The Lord does most abominate lukewarm professors, I had almost said, he
is sick of them, Rev. 3. 15. I would thou were cold or hot, (any thing but
lukewarm) but because thou art neither cold nor hot, I will spue thee out of my
mouth: A lukewarm Christian is but dough-baked, just like Ephraim, Hos. 7. 8.
Ephraim is a cake not turned: To keep up a form of Religion without zeal, is to
be like those bodies the Angels assumed, which moved, but had no life in them.
I would ask these Tepid neutral professors this question, If Religion be not a
good cause, why did they undertake it at first? if it be, why do they go so
faintly about it? why have they no more holy ardours of soul? these persons
would fain go to heaven in a soft bed, but are loath to be carried thither in
a fiery Chariot of zeal. Remember, God will be zealous against them, who are
not zealous; he provides the fire of hell, for those that want the fire of zeal.

Use 2. Use 2. Exhort.
As you would be found in the catalogue of the godly, labor for zeal; as good
be of no religion, as not to be zealous in religion. Beware of carnal policy;
This is one of those three things which Luther feared would be the death of
Melch. Adam in vit. Luth.
Religion. Some men have been too wise to be saved. Their discretion has
quenched their zeal; beware of stoth, which is an enemy to zeal, be zealous and
repent Rev. 3. 19. Christians, what do you reserve your zeal for? is it for
your gold that perishes? or for your lusts that will make you perish? can you
bestow your zeal better, than upon God? how zealous have men been in a false
religion? Isa. 46. 6. They lavish gold out of the bag, and weigh silver in the
balance. The Jews did spare no cost in their idolatrous worship, nay, Ier. 32.
35. They cause their Sons and Daughters to pass through the fire to Molech. They
were so zealous in their idol-worship, that they would sacrifice their Sons and
Daughters to their false Gods; how far did the purblinde Heathens go in their
false zeal? (...) the Tribunes of Rome complained they wanted gold in their
Treasur^es, to offer to Apollo, the Roman Matrons plucked off their chains of
gold, and rings, and bracelets, and gave them to the Priests to offer up Livy.
sacrifice: were these so zealous in their sinful worship, and will not you be
zealous in the worship of the true God? can you loose any thing by your zeal?
shall it not be super-abundantly recompensed? what is heaven worth? what is a
sight of God worth? was not Jesus Christ zealous for you? he sweat drops of
blood, he conflicted with his Fathers wrath; how zealous was he for your
redemption, and have you no zeal for him? is there any thing you your selves
hate more than dullness and slothfulness in your servants? you are weary of such
servants; do you dislike a dull temper in others, and not in your selves? what
are all your duties without zeal, but non entia, mere fancies and nullities.

Do you know what a glorious thing zeal is? it is the luster that sparkles from
grace, it is the flame of Ignis quidam flagrantissimi amoris. Aug.
love; it resembles the Holy Ghost, Act. 2. 2. There appeared cloven tongues
like fire, which sat upon them, and they were all filled with the Holy Ghost.
Tongues of fire, were an Emblem to represent that fire of zeal which the spirit
powered upon them.

Zeal makes all our religious performances prevalent with God: When the iron is
red hot, it enters best; and when our services are red hot with zeal, they
soonest pierce heaven.

SECT. XVI.
16. A godly man is a patient man, 16 Character.
Iam. 5. 11. Ye have heard of the patience of Job. Patience is a star which
shines in a dark night: There is a twofold patience.

1. Patience in waiting. 2. Patience in bearing.
1. Patience in waiting: A godly man, if he has not his desire presently, he
will wait till the mercy be ripe, Psa. 130. 6. My soul waits for the Lord.
Good reason God should have the Timing of our mercies, Isa. 60. 22. I the Lord
will hasten it in his time. Deliverance may tarry beyond our time, but it will
not tarry beyond Gods time.

Why should not we wait patiently upon God. 1. We are servants; it becomes
servants to be in a waiting posture. 2. We wait upon every thing else; we wait
upon the fire till it burns; we wait upon the seed till it grows, Iam. 5. 7.
Why cannot we wait upon God? 3. God has waited upon Isa. 30. 18.
us: Did not he wait for our repentance? How often did he come year after year
before he found fruit? Did God wait upon us, and cannot we wait upon him? A
godly man is content to stay Gods leisure, though the Vision tarry, he will
wait for Hab. 2. 3*
it.

2. Patience in bearing: This patience is twofold. 1. Either in regard of man;
when we bear injuries without revenging. Or 2. In regard of God; when we bear
his hand without repining: A good man will not only do Gods will, but bear his
will, Mica. 7. 9. I will bear the indignation of the Lord. This patient bearing
of Gods will is not

1. A Stoical Apathy: Patience is not insensibleness under Gods hand; we ought
to be sensible.

2. It is not patience upon force; to bear a thing because we cannot help it;
which (as Erasmus says) is rather necessity than patience. But, patience is a
cheerful submission of our will to God, Act. 21. 4. The will of the Lord be
done. A godly man does acquiesce in what God does, as being not only good, but
best for him: The great quarrel between God and us is, whose will shall stand:
Now the Regenerate will, falls in with the will of God: ^here are four things
opposite to this patient ^ame of soul.

1. Disquiet of spirit: When the soul is discomposed, and pulled off the
hinges, insomuch that it is unfit for holy duties; when the strings of a Lute
are snarled, the Lute is not fit to make Music; so when a Christians spirit is
perplexed and disturbed, he cannot make melody in his heart to the Lord.

2. Discontent; which is a sullen dogged humor: When a man is not angry at his
sins, but at his condition, this is different from patience: Discontent is the
daughter of pride.

3. Prejudice, which is a dislike of God and his ways, and a falling off from
Religion: Sinners have hard thoughts of God, and if he does but touch them in a
tender part, they will presently be gone from him, and throw off his Livery.

4. Self-vindication, when instead of being humbled under Gods hand, a man
justifies himself, as if he had not deserved what he suffers: A proud sinner
stands upon his own defense, and is ready to accuse God of unrighteousness,
which is as if we should tax the Sun with darkness; this is far from patience:
A godly man subscribes to Gods wisdom, and submits to his will; he says not
only good is the Word of the Lord, Isa. 3^^8. but good is the Rod of the Lord.

Use. Use.
As we would demonstrate our selves godly, let us be eminent in this grace of
patience, Eccles. 7. 8. The patient in spirit is better than the proud in
spirit: There are some Graces which we shall have no need of in heaven; we
shall have no need of Faith when we have full Vision, nor patience when we have
perfect joy; but in a dark sorrowful night, there is need of these stars to
Heb. 10. 36.
shine: Let us show our patience in bearing Gods will; patience in bearing Gods
will is twofold.

1. When God removes any comfort from us.

2. When God imposes any evil upon us.

1. We must be patient when God removes any comfort from us: Does God take away
any of our Relations? Ezekiel. 24. 16. I will take away the desire of thine eyes
with a stroke; yet it is our duty patiently to acquiesce in the Will of God:
The loss of a dear Relation, is like the pulling away a Limb from the Quae
arden er diligimus habita graviter suspiraemus ablae^ae.
body. -- Homo toties moritur, quoties amittit suos. --

But grace will make our hearts calm and sedate, and work us to an holy
patience under such a severe dispensation. I shall lay down eight
considerations, which may be as spiritual Physic to kill the worm of
impatience under the loss of Relations.

1. The Lord never takes away any comfort from his people, but he gives them
that which is better: The Disciples parted with Christ's corporal presence, and
he sent them the Holy Ghost: God eclipseth one joy, and augments another, he
does but make an exchange, he takes away a Flower, and gives a Diamond.

2. Godly friends dying are in a better condition, they are taken away from the
evil to come, Isa. 57. 1. They are out of the storm, and are gotten to the
Haven, Blessed are the dead that die in the Lord, Rev. 14. 13. The godly have a
portion promised them upon their marriage with Christ, but the portion is not
paid till the day of their death: The Saints at death are preferred to
Communion with God, they have that they so long hoped for, and prayed for; why
then should we be impatient at our friends preferment?

3. Thou that art a Saint, have a friend in heaven which thou can not lose:
The Jews have a saying at their Sit consolatio tua in caelis.
Funerals, Let thy consolation be in heaven. Art thou a close Mourner, look up
to heaven, and fetch comfort thence, thy best kindred are above, Psa 27. 10,
When my Father and Mother forsake me, then the Lord will take me up: God will
be with thee in the hour of death, Psa. 23. 4. Though I walk in the valley of
the shadow of death, thou art with me. Other friends thou can not keep, God
is a friend thou can not lose; he will be thy Guide in life, thy Hope in
death, thy Reward after death.

4 Perhaps God is correcting thee for a fault, and it so, it becomes thee to
be patient; it may be thy friend had more of thy love than God, and therefore
God did take away such a relation, that the stream of thy love may run bak to
him again. A gracious woman having been deprived, first of her Children, then
of her Husband, Lord (says she) thou have a plot upon me, thou intendest to
have all my love; God does not like it, to have any Creature set upon the
throne of our affections, he will take away that comfort, and then he shall
lie nearest our heart. If an Husband bestow a jewel upon his Wife, and she does
so fall in love with that jewel, as to forget her Husband, he will take away
the jewel, that her love may return to him again; a dear relation is this
jewel, if we begin to idolize it, God will take away the jewel, that our love
may return to him ^gain.

5 A Godly Relation is parted with, but not lost, that is lost, which we are
out of hope ever of seeing again; religious friends are but gone a little Non
sunt amissi sed pr^misse Cypr.
before. A time will shortly come, when there shall be a meeting without
parting, 1 These. 5. 10. How glad is one friend to see another, that has been
long absent? Oh what glorious acclamations shall there be, when old relations
shall meet together in heaven, and be in each others embraces? when a great
prince lands at the shore, the guns go off, in token of joy; when godly friends
shall be all landed at the heavenly shore, and shall congratulate one another
felicity, what stupendous joy will there be? what music in the quire of
Angels? how will heaven ring of their praises? and that which is the crown of
all, they who were here joined in the flesh, shall be joined nearer than ever
in the mystical body, and shall lie together in Christ's 1 These. 4. 17.
bosom, that bed of perfume.

6 We have deserved worse at Gods hands; has he taken away a child, a wife,
a parent? he might have taken away his spirit; has he deprived us of a
relation? he might have deprived us of salvation; does he put wormwood in the
cup? we have deserved poison, Ezra. 9. 13. Thou have punish^d us less than our
iniquities deserve; we have a sea of sin, and but a drop of suffering.

7 The patient soul does most sweetly enjoy it self; an impatient man is like a
troubled sea, that cannot rest; he tortures himself upon the wrack of his own
griefs and passions, whereas patience calms the heart, as Christ did the sea,
when it was rough, and now there is a sabbath in the heart, yea, an heaven,
Luke 21. 19. In your patience possess ye your souls: By faith a man possesses
God, and by patience he possesses himself.

8 How patient have many of the Saints been, when the Lord has broken the very
staff of their comfort, in berea^ing them of Relations; The Lord took away Jobs
children, and he was so far from murmuring, that he falls a blessing, Job 1.
21. The Lord has taken away, blessed be the name of the Lord. God foretold
the death of Elies sons, 1 Samuel 2. 34. In one day they shall dye both of them;
but how patiently did he take this sad news, 1 Samuel 3. 18. It is the Lord, let
him do what seems him good: See the difference between Eli and Pharaoh,
Pharaoh says, who is the Exodus 5. 2.
Lord? Eli says, it is the Lord: When God struck two of Aarons sons dead, Lev.
10. (...) Aaron held his peace; patience opens the ear, but shuts the mouth, it
opens the ear to hear the Rod, but shuts the mouth that it has not a word to
say against God, Behold here the patterns of patienc^; and shall not we write
after their fair Copies? these are heart-quieting considerations, when God sets
a deaths-head upon our comforts, and removes dear relations from us.

2 We must be patient, when God inflicts any evil upon us, Romans 12. 12. Patient
in Tribulation.

1 The Lord sometimes lays heavy affliction upon his people, Psalm. 38. 2. Thy
hand lies sore upon me. The Hebrew word for (...)
afflicted, signifies to be melted; God seems to melt his people in a furnace.

2 God does sometimes lay diverse afflictions on the Saints, Job 19. 17. He
multiplieth my wounds: as we have diverse ways of sinning, so the Lord has
diverse ways of afflicting; some he melts away their estates, others he
chains to a sick bed, others he confines to a Prison; God has various arrows
in his quiver, which he shoots.

3 Sometimes God lets the affliction lie long, Psalm. 74. 9. There is no more
any Prophet, neither is there among us any that knows how long: As it is with
diseases, there are some Chronical, that linger and hang about the body several
years together, so it is with afflictions, the Lord is pleased to exercise many
of his precious ones with Chronical afflictions, such as lie upon them a long
time; now in all these cases, it becomes the Saints, patiently to rest in the
will of God; the Greek word for (...).
patient, is a metaphor, alludes to one who stands invincibly under a burden.
This is the right notion of patience, when we bear affliction invincibly
without fainting, or fretting.

The trial of a Pilot is seen in a storm; so is the trial of a Christian seen
in affliction; he has the right art of navigation, who when the boistrous
winds blow from heaven, does steer the ship of his soul wisely, and not dash
upon the ^rock of impatience; a Christian should always keep a decorum, not
behaving himself unseemly, or disguising himself with intemperate passion, when
the hand of God lies upon him. Patience adorns suffering; affliction in
Scripture is compared to a net, Psa. 66. 11. Thou broughtest us into the net.
Such as have escaped the Devils net, yet the Lord suffers them to be taken in
the net of affliction, but they must not be as a wild Bull in a net, Isa. 51.
20. to kick and fling against their maker, but lie patiently till God break the
net, and makes away for their escape. I shall propound four cogent Arguments,
to excite patience under those evils which God inflicts on us.

1 Afflictions are (...), 1 Argu.
for our benefit. Heb. 12. 9. He for our profit, we pray that God would take
such a course with us as may do our souls Good, when God is afflicting us, he
is hearing our prayers, he does it* for our Domine hic ure, hic seca ut in
aeternum parcas. Aug.
profit: not that afflictions in themselves do profit us, but as Gods Spirit
works with them* For as the waters of Bethesda could not give health of
themselves, unless the Angel descended and stirred the water, John 5. 4. So the
waters of affliction are not in themselves healing till Gods Spirit co-operates
and sanctifies them to us: Afflictions are many ways Quod mundus noxium esse
putat, exitum utilem parit. Calv.
profitable.

1. They make men sober and wise: Physicians appoint distracted persons to be
bound in Chains, and to be dieted, and have hard fare to bring them to the use
of reason: Many run stark mad in prosperity, they neither know God nor
themselves; the Lord therefore binds them with cords of affliction, that he may
bring them to their right (...). Chrysostom.
understandings, Job 36. 8. If they be held in cords of affliction, then he
shows them their transgression, he opens also their ear to discipline.

2 Afflictions are a friend to grace.

1 They beget grace; Beza acknowledged God laid the foundation of his
Conversion in a violent sickness at Paris.

2 They augment grace, the people of God are beholding to their troubles, they
had never had so much grace, if they had not met with such sore trials; now,
the waters run, and the spices flow forth. The Saints thrive by affliction, as
the Lacedaemonians grew rich by war; God makes grace flourish most in the fall
of the leaf.

3 Afflictions quicken our pace in the way to heaven; it is with us, as with
children sent on an errand, if they meet with Apples or Flowers by the way,
they linger and make no great haste home, but if any thing fright them, then
they run with all the speed they can to their fathers house; so in prosperity,
we are gathering the Apples and Flowers, and do not much mind heaven, but if
troubles begin to arise, and the times grow frightful, then we make more haste
to heaven, and with David; run the way of Gods commandments. Psa. 119. 32. 2
Argu.


2 God intermixeth mercy with affliction, he steeps his-sword of justice in
the oil of Vindictae gladium misericordiae oleosemper exacuit.
mercy, there was no night so dark, but Israel had a Pillar of fire in it; there
is no condition so dismal, but we may see a Pillar of fire to give light, if
the body be in pain, conscience is in peace, there is mercy; affliction is for
the prevention of sin, there is mercy: In the Ark there was a rod and a pot of
Manna, the Emblem of a Christians condition, mercy interlined with Psa. 101. 1.
judgment, here is the rod and Manna.

3 Patience evidenceth much of God in the heart; 3 Argument.
patience is one of Gods titles; Romans 15. 5. The God of patience; thou that
have thy heart cast into this blessed mould, it is a sign God has imparted
much of his own nature to thee, thou shinest with some of his beams.

Impatience evidenceth much unsoundness of heart; as it is in the body, if the
body be of that temper, that every little scratch of a pin makes the flesh to
rancle, you will say, sure this man's flesh is very unsound; so for every petty
cross to fly out in impatience, and quarrel with providence, it is the sign of
a distempered Christian; if there be any grace in such an heart, they must have
good eyes that can see it; but he who is of a patient spirit, is a graduate in
Religion, and does much participate of the divine nature.

4 The end of affliction is glorious; 4 Argument.
the Jews were captive in Babylon, but what was the end? they departed out of
Babylon with vessels of silver, with gold and precious things, Ezra. 1. 6. So,
what is the end of affliction, it ends in endless glory, Acts 14. 22. 2 Cor. 4.
17. how may this rock our impatient hearts quiet: who would not willingly
travel through a little dirty way, and ploughed lands, at the end whereof is a
fair Meadow, and in that Meadow, a golden Mine?

Quest. How shall I get my heart tuned into a patient frame?

Answ. 1 Get faith; all our impatience proceeds from unbelief; faith is the
breeder of patience, when a storm of passion begins to arise, faith says to
the heart, as Christ to the Sea, peace, be still, and there is presently a calm.

Quest. How does faith work patience?

Answ. Faith argues the soul into patience; faith is like that Town-Clark in
Ephesus, who allayed the contention of the multitude, and argued them soberly
into peace, Act. 19. 35, 36. So when impatience begins to clamor and make an
hubbub in the soul; faith appeaseth the tumult, and argues the soul into holy
patience: Says faith, Why art thou disquieted O my Soul? art thou afflicted?
is it not thy Father has done it? he is carving and pollishing thee, and
making thee fit for glory, he smites that he may save; what is thy trial, is
it sickness? God shakes the Tree of thy body, that some fruit may fall, even
the peaceable fruit of righteousness, Heb. 12. 11. Art thou driven from thy
habitation? God has prepared for thee a City, Heb. 11. 16. Do thou suffer
reproach for Christ's sake? a spirit of God and glory rest upon thee, 1 Pet. 4.
14. Thus faith argues and disputes the soul into patience.

2 Pray to God for patience, patience is a flower of Gods planting; pray that
it may grow in your heart, and send forth its sweet perfume: Prayer is an holy
charm, to charm down the evil spirit; prayer composeth the heart, and puts it
in Tune, when impatience has broken the strings, and put all into a confusion:
Oh go to God, prayer delights Gods ear, it melts his heart, it opens his hand;
God cannot deny a praying soul; seek to him with importunity, and either he
will remove the affliction, or which is better, he will remove thy impatience.

SECT. XVII.
17 A Godly man is a thankful man; praise and thanksgiving, 17 Character.
is the work of heaven, and he begins that work here, which he shall be
always doing in heaven. The Jews have a saying, the world subsists by three
things; the Law, the worship of God, and Super tribus consistit mu^^dus, super
lege, and cultu sacro, and retributione. Aloys. novar.
thankfulness; as if where thankfulness were wanting, one of the Pillars of the
world were taken away, and it were ready to fall. The Hebrew word for praise,
comes from a radix, that signifies to shoot (...) jaculatus est. Hiph. (...)
confiteri, gratias agere. Buxtorf.
up; the Godly man sends up his praises, as a volly of shot toward heaven.
David who was modelled after Gods heart, how melodiously did he warble out Gods
praises? therefore was called the sweet singer of Israel, 1 Samuel 23. 1. Take a
Christian at the worst, yet he is thankful: The Prophet Jonah, who was homo
(...), a man of a waspish spirit; the sea did not so work with the tempest,
Jon. 1. 13.
as Ionahs heart wrought with passion; yet, through this cloud you might see
grace appear; he had a thankful heart, Jonah 2. 9. I will Sacrifice to thee
with the voice of thanksgiving, I will pay that which I have vowed. For the
clearer illustrating of this, I shall lay down these four particulars.

1 Praise and thanksgiving is a Saint-like work; we find in Scripture, the
godly are still called upon to praise God, Psa. 135. 20. Ye that fear the Lord,
bless the Lord. Psa. 149. 5. Let the Saints be joyful in glory, let the high
praises of God be in their mouth; praise is a work proper to a Saint.

1 None but the godly can praise God aright; as all have not skill to play on
the Lute, so every one cannot sound forth the harmonious praises of God; wicked
men are bound to praise God, but they are not fit to praise him; none but a
living Christian can tune Gods praise; wicked men are dead in sin, how can they
lift up Gods praises, that are dead? Isa. 38. 19. The grave cannot praise thee:
A wicked man stains and eclipseth Gods praise, if a foul hand work in Damask,
or flowred Satin, it will slur the beauty of it; God will say to the sinner,
what have thou to do, to take my name into thy mouth? Psa. 50. 16.

2 Praise is not comely for any, but the godly, Psa. 33. 1. Praise is comely
for the righteous: A profane man stuck with Gods praises, is like a dunghill
stuck with flowers; praise in the mouth of a sinner, is like an Oracle in the
mouth of a fool; how uncomely is it for him to praise God, whose whole life is
a dishonouring of God? it is as undecent for a wicked man to praise God, as it
is for an Usurer to talk of living by faith, or for the Devil to quote
Scripture; the godly only are fit to be queristers in Gods praises, it is called
the Garment of praise, Isaiah 61. 3. this garment sits handsome only on a
Saints back.

2 Thanksgiving is a more noble part of Gods worship; our wants may send us to
prayer, but it argues an heart highly ingenuous to bless God; the Raven cries,
the Lark sings; in petition we act like men, in thanksgiving we act like Angels.

3 Thanksgiving is a God-exalting work, Psa. 50. 23. Whosoever offers praise,
glorifieth me, though nothing can add the least cubit to Gods essential glory,
yet praise exalts him in the eyes of others; praise is a setting forth of Gods
honor, a lifting up of his name, a displaying the trophy of his goodness, a
proclaiming his excellency, a spreading his renown, a breaking open the box of
ointment, whereby the sweet savor and perfume of Gods name is sent abroad into
the world.

4 Praise is a more distinguishing work; by this a Christian excels all the
infernal spirits; do thou talk of God? so can the Devil, he brought
Scripture to Christ; do thou profess religion? so can the Devil, he
transforms himself into an Angel of light; do thou fast? he never eats; do
thou believe? the Devils have a faith of assent, they believe and tremble, Iam.
2. 19. but, as Moses wrought such a miracle, as none of the Magicians could do
the like; so here is a work Christians may be doing, which none of the Devils
can do, and that is the work of thanksgiving; they blaspheme, but do not bless;
Satan has his fiery darts, but not his harp and viol.

Use 1 See here the true genius and complexion of a godly man, Use 1.
he is much in doxologies and praises. 1 Bran.
It Is a saying of Lactantius, he cannot be a good man, who is unthankful to
Lactan. instit. c. 3.
his God: A godly man is a God-exalter; the Saints are Temples of the Holy
Ghost, 1 Cor. 3. 16. where should Gods praises be sounded, but in his Temples?
a good heart is never weary of praising God, Psa. 34. 1. His praise shall
continually be in my mouth. Some will be thankful while the memory of the
mercy is fresh, but afterward leave Plures sunt apud quos non diutius in animo
sunt donata quam in usu. Sen. de benef.
off; The Carthaginians used at first; to send the tenth of their yearly
revenue to Hercules, but by degrees they grew weary, and left off Diodor.
Siculus.
sending. David as long as he drew his breath, would chirp forth Gods praise,
Psa. 146. 2. I will sing praises to my God, while I have any being: David would
not now and then give God a fit of Music, and then the instrument must be hung
up, but he would continually be celebrating Gods praise.

A godly man will express his thankfulness in every duty, he mingles
thanksgiving with prayer, Phil. 4. 6. In every thing by prayer, with
thanksgiving, let your requests be made known to God. Thanksgiving is the more
divine part of prayer; in our petitions we express our own necessities, in our
thanksgivings we declare Gods excellencies. Then prayer goes up as incense,
when it is perfumed with thanksgiving.

And as a godly man expresses thankfulness in every duty, so in every
condition; he will be thankful in (...), Chrysostom. ad Antioch. ^om. 1. ^om. 17.
adversity, as well as prosperity, 1 These. 5. 18. In every thing giving thanks:
A gracious soul is thankful and rejoices, that he is drawn nearer to God,
though it be by the cords of affliction; when it goes well with him, he
praises Gods mercy; when it goes ill with him, he magnifies Gods justice; when
God has a rod in his hand, a godly man will have a Psalm in his mouth. The
Devils smiting of Job, was like the striking upon a musical instrument, he
sounded forth praise, The Lord has taken away, blessed be the name of the
Lord, Job 1. 21. Gods spiritual plants, when they are cut and do bleed, drop
thankfulness, the Saints Tears cannot drown their praises.

2 If this be the sign of a godly man, 2 Bran.
then the number of the godly will appear to be very small. Few are in the
work of praise, sinners cut God short of his thank-offering, Luke 17. 17 where
are the (...), Theodor.
nine? Often Leapers healed, there was but one returned to give praise; the
most of the world are Sepulchers, to bury Gods praise; you shall hear some
swearing and cursing, but few that bless God: Praise is the yearly rent that
men sit at, but most are behind hand with their rent. God gave King Hezekiah a
famous deliverance, but Hezekiah rendered not again, according to the benefit
done unto him, 2 Chronicles. 32. 25. that But, was a blot in his Scutchion; some
instead of being thankful to God, render evil for good, they are the worse for
mercy, Deuteronomy. 32. 6. Do ye thus requite the Lord, foolish people and unwise?
This is like the Toad, that converts the most wholesome herb to poison; where
shall we find a grateful Christian? We read of the Saints, Rev. 5. 8. Having
harps in their hand; the Emblem of praise; many have tears in their eyes, and
complaints in their mouths, but few that have harps in their hand who are
blessing and praising the name of God.

Use 2 Let us put our selves upon a scrutiny, and examine by this Character
whether we are godly, Use 2. Trial.
are we thankful for mercy? it is an hard thing to be thankful.

Quest. How may we know whether we are rightly thankful?

Answ. 1 When we are careful to register Gods mercy, 1 Chronicles. 16. 4. David
appointed certain of the Levites, to record and to thank and praise the Lord
God of Israel. Physicians say, the memory is the first thing that Memori^ primo
senescit.
decays; it is true in spirituals, Psalm. 106. 13. They soon forgot his works: A
godly man enters down his mercies, as a Physician his receipts into a book,
that they may not be lost. Mercies are Jewels that should be locked up; A
child of God keeps two books always by him, one to write his sins in, that he
may be humble, the other to write his mercies in, that he may be thankful.

2 Then we are rightly thankful, when our hearts are the chief instrument in
the music of praise, Psa. 111. 1. I will praise the Lord with my whole (...)
heart. David would not only put his Viol in tune, but his heart; if the heart
does not join with the tongue, there can be no consort; where the heart is
wanting, the Parrot is as good a Querister, as the Christian.

3 Then we are rightly thankful, when the favors which we receive, endear our
love to God the more. David's miraculous preservation from death, drew forth his
love to God, Psa. 116. 1. I love the Lord, it is one thing to love our mercies,
another thing to love the Lord; many love their deliverance, but not their
deliverer; God is to be loved more than his mercies.

4 Then we are rightly thankful, when in giving our praise to God, we take all
worthiness from our selves, Genesis 32. 10. I am not worthy of the least of all
the mercies, thou have showed unto thy servant; as if Jacob had said, Lord the
worst bit thou carvest me, is better than I deserve. 2 Samuel 9. 7. Mephibosheth
bowed himself, and said, what is thy Servant, that thou should look upon
such a dead dog as I am? So a thankful Christian, when he takes a survey of his
blessings, and sees how much he enjoyes, that others better than he want, Lord
says he, what am I, a dead dog, that free grace should look upon me, and that
thou should crown me with such loving kindness?

5 Then we are rightly thankful, when we put Gods mercies out of Use; we turn
our enjoyments into improvements; the Lord gives us health, and we spend and
are spent for Christ, 2 Cor. 12. 15. he gives us an estate, and we honor the
Lord with our substance, Prove. 3. 9. he gives us children, and we dedicate
them to God, and edugate them for God; we do not bury our Talents, but trade
them, this is to put out our mercies to Use: a gracious heart is like a piece
of good ground, that having received the seed of mercy, thrusts forth a crop of
obedience.

6 Then we are rightly thankful, when we can have our hearts more enlarged for
spiritual mercies, than for temporal: Ephesians. 1. 3. Blessed be God, who has
blessed us with all spiritual blessings: A godly man blesses God more for a
fruitful heart, than a full crop; he is more thankful for Christ, than for a
Kingdom: Socrates was wont to say, he loved the Kings smile more than his
gold: a pious heart is more thankful for a smile of Gods face, than he would
be for the gold of the Indies.

7 Then we are rightly thankful, when mercy is a when to duty, it causes a
spirit of activity for God; Mercy is not as the Sun to the fire, to dull it,
but as oil to the wheel, to make it run faster. David wisely argues from mercy
to duty, Psalm. 116. 8, 9. Thou have delivered my Soul from death, I will walk
before the Lord in the land of the living. It was a saying of Bernard, Lord I
have two Mites, a soul and a body, and I give them both to Du^s h^beo min^tias
domine, etc. Bern.
thee.

8 Then we are rightly thankful, when we excite others to this Angelical work
of praise: David would not only bless God himself, but calls upon others to do
so, Praise ye the Lord, Psalm. 111. 1. That is the sweetest music, which is in
consort; when many Saints join together in consort, then they make heaven ring
of their praises; as one drunkard will be calling upon another, so in an holy
sense, one Christian must be stirring up another to the work of thankfulness.

9 Then we are rightly thankful, when we do not only speak Gods praise, but
live his praise: It is called gratiarum actio, then we give thanks, when we
live thanks; such as are mirrours of mercy, should be patterns of piety, Obad.
17. Upon Mount Sion, shall be deliverance, and there shall be holiness: To give
God orall praise, and dishonor him in our lives, is to commit a barbarism in
religion, and is to be like those Jews who bowed the knee to Christ, and then
did spit upon him, Mark 15. 19.

10 Then we are rightly thankful, when we do propagate Gods praises to
posterity, we tell our children what God has done for us, in such a want he
supplied us, in such a sickness he raised us, in such a temptation he succored
us: Psa. 44. 1. O God our Fathers have told us, what work thou did in their
days, in the time of old. By transmitting our experiences to our Children,
Gods name is eternized, and his mercies will bring forth a plentiful crop of
praise when we are gone. He man puts the question, Psalm. 88. 10. Shall the
dead praise thee? Yes, in this sense, when we are dead, we praise God, because
having left the Chronicle of Gods mercies with our Children, we put them upon
thankfulness, and so make Gods praises live, when we are dead. -- dumque aurea
voluet astra polus,
Memori semper celebrabunt cantu. --


Use 3 Let us evidence our godliness by gratefulness, Use 3. Exhor.
Psa. 29. 2. Give unto the Lord the glory due unto his name.

1 It is a good thing to be thankful, Psalm, 147. 1. Motive
It is good to sing praises to our God. good, because this is all the creature
can do to lift up Gods name; and it is good, because it tends to the making us
good: the more thankful we are, the more holy; while we pay this tribute of
praise, our stock of grace increseth: in other debts, the more we pay, the less
we have, but the more we pay this debt of thankfulness, the more grace we
have.

2 Thankfulness is the quit-rent we owe to God, Psa. 148. 11, 13. King of the
earth, and all people, let them praise the name of the Lord: Praise is the
tribute or custom, to be paid into the King of heavens Exchequor: Surely
while God renews our Lease, we must renew our rent.

3 The great cause we have to be thankful, it is a principle grafted in nature,
to be thankful for Beneficium Postulat officium.
benefits: The Heathens praised Jupiter for their victories.

What full clusters of mercies hang upon us? when we go to enumerate Gods
mercies, we must (with David) confess our selves to be nonplussed, Psalm. 40.
5. Many, O Lord my God, are thy wonderful works which thou have done, they
cannot be reckoned up in Order. And as Gods mercies are past numbering, so they
are past measuring: David takes the longest measuring line he could get, he
measures from earth to the clouds, nay, above the clouds, yet this measure
would not reach the height of Gods mercies, Psalm. 108. 4. Thy mercy is great
above the heavens. O how has God enriched us with his silver showers? a whole
constellation of mercies, has shined in our Hemisphere.

1 What Temporal favors have we (...), Chrysostom.
received; every day we see a new tide of mercy coming in; the wings of mercy
have covered us, the breast of mercy has fed us, Genesis 48. 15. The God which
has fed me all my life long to this day. What snares laid for us have been
broken? what fears blown over? the Lord has made our bed, when he has made
others grave; he has taken such care of us, as if he had none else to take
care for; never was the cloud of providence so black, but we might see a
Rainbow of Love in the cloud? we have been made to swim in a sea of mercy, and
does not all this call for thankfulness?

2 That which may put a string more into the instrument of our praise, and make
it sound louder, is to consider what spiritual blessings God has conferred
upon us: he has given us of the upper-springs, (...)
he has opened the Wardrobe of Heaven, and fetched us out a better garment
than any of the Angels wear; he has given us the best robe, and put upon us
the Ring of faith, whereby we are married to him: These are mercies of the
first magnitude, which deserve to have an Asterist put upon them, and God keeps
the best Wine till last, here he gives us mercies but by retail, the greatest
things are laid up; here are some Honey drops, and fore-tastes of Gods love, the
Rivers of pleasure are reserved for Paradise; well may we take the harp and
viol, and triumph in Gods praise; who can tread upon these hot coals of Gods
love, and his heart not burn in thankfulness?

4 Thankfulness is the best policy, there is nothing lost by it; to be
thankful for one mercy, is the way to have more, it is like pouring water into a
Ascensus gratiarum descensus gratiae.
Pump, which fetches out more; Musicians love to sound their trumpets, where
there is the best Echo, and God loves to bestow his mercies, where there is
the best Echo of (...).
thankfulness.

5 Thankfulness is a frame of heart God delights in; if repentance be the joy
of heaven, praise is the (...).
music. Bernard calls thankfulness the sweet Balm that drops from a Christian.

Four Sacrifices God is much pleased with, the sacrifice of Christ's blood, the
sacrifice of a broken heart, the sacrifice of Alms, and the sacrifice of
thanksgiving: Praise and Thanksgiving (says Mr. Greenham) is the most
excellent part of Gods worship, for this shall continue in the heavenly quire,
when all other exercises of Religion shall cease.

6 What an horrid thing ingratitude is, it gives a dye and tincture to every
other sin, and makes it Crimson; ingratitude is the spirits of baseness, Obad.
v. 7. They that eat thy bread, have laid a Wound under thee: Ingratitude is
worse than brutish, Isa. 1. 3. It Is reported of Julius Caesar, that he would
never forgive an ungrateful person; though God be a sin-pardoning God, he
scarce knows not how to pardon for this, Ier. 5. 7. How shall I pardon thee for
this, thy children have forsaken me, when I had fed them to the full, they then
committed adultery. Draco (whose Laws were written in blood) published and
edict, that if any man had received a benefit from another, and it could be
proved against him, that he had not been grateful for it, he should be put to
death; an unthankful person is a monster in nature, a Pardox in Christianity;
he is the scorn of heaven, and the plague of earth; an ungrateful man, never
does well but in one thing, that is when he dies.

7 The not being thankful, is the cause of all the Judgments which have lain
upon us; our unthankfulness for health, has been the cause of so much
Mortality; our Gospel-unthankful thankfulness, and Sermon-surfeiting, has been
the reason why God has put so many Lights under a Bushel; as Bradford said, my
unthankfulness was the death of King Edward the sixth: Who will bestow cost on
a piece of ground, that brings forth nothing but briars? unthankfulness stops
the golden Vial of Gods bounty, that it will not drop.

Quest. How shall we do to be thankful?

Answ. 1. If you would be thankful, get an heart deeply humbled in the sense of
your own vileness; a broken heart is the best pipe to sound forth Gods praise;
he who studies his sins, wonders that he has any thing, and that God should
shine upon such a dunghill, 1 Timothy 1. 13. Who was before a Blasphemer, and a
Persecuter, but I obtained mercy: How thankful was he? how did he Trumpet forth
freegrace? A proud man will never be thankful, he looks upon all his mercies,
to be either of his own procuring or deserving; if he has an Estate, this he
has gotten by his wit and industry, not considering that Scripture, Deuteronomy. 8.
18. Thou shall remember the Lord thy God, for it is he that gives thee power to
get Riches. Pride stops the Current of gratitude: O Christian! think of thy
unworthiness, see thy self, the least of Saints, and the chief of Sinners, and
then thou will be thankful.

2 Labor for sound evidences of Gods love to you; read Gods love in the
impress of holiness upon your hearts; Gods love powered in, will make the
Vessels of Mercy run over with thankfulness, Rev. 1. 5, 6. Unto him that loved
us, be glory and dominion for ever. The deepest Springs yield the sweetest
water: hearts deeply sensible of Gods love, yield the sweetest praises.

SECT. XVIII.
18 A godly man is a lover of the Saints; Char. 18.
the best way to discern grace in ones self, is to love grace in others, 1 Ioh.
3. 14. We know we have passed from death to life, because we love the
Brethren: What is religion but religation? a knitting together of hearts; Faith
knits us to God, and love knits us one to another: There is a twofold love to
others.

1 A civil love; a godly man has a love of civility to all, Genesis 23. 7.
Abraham stood up and bewed to the children of Heth: Though they were
extraneous, and not within the pale of the Covenant, yet Abraham was affable to
them: grace does sweeten and refine nature, 1 Pet. 3. 8. be (...).
courteous: we are to have a love of civility to all.

1 As they are ex eodem luto, of the same lump and mould with our selves, and
are a piece of Gods curious Resert laertius de Aristotele, quum ipsi probo
daretur, quod flagitioso homini opem tulisset, eum respondisse, (...).
needle work.

2 Because our sweet deportment toward them, may be a means to win upon them,
and make them in love with the ways of God; a morose ruggid carriage, often
alienates the hearts of others, and hardens them the more against holiness,
whereas a loving behavior is very obliging, and may be as a lodestone to
draw them to religion.

2 There is a pious and an holy love, and this a godly man does bear chiefly to
them, who are of the household of Quemadmodum ignis ea intensius caleficit quae
adsita quam quae dissita sunt: ^ta charitatis ignis ferventius fidei domesticos
diliget, quam (...) qui sunt a fide extranei.
faith; the other was a love of courtesy, this of complacency: Our love to the
Saints (says Austin) should be more than to our natural relations, because
the bond of the spirit is nearer than Quia major est fraternitas spiritus quam
sanguinis. Aug. Tom. 0.
that of blood. This love to the Saints, which evidenceth a man godly, must
have seven ingredients in it.

1 Love to the Saints must be sincere, 1 Ioh. 3. 18. Let us not love in word
or in tongue, but in deed and in truth: The honey that drops from the comb is
pure, so must love be pure without deceit: Many are like Naphtali, Genesis 49. 21.
he gives goodly words: Pretended love is like a painted fire, which has no
heat in it. Some hide malice under a false veil of love; I have read of
Antoninus the Emperor, where he made a show of Friendship, there he intended
the most mischief.

2 Love to the Saints must be spiritual, we must love them because they are
Saints; not out of self-respects, because they are affable, or have been kind
to Ollaris amor, qui tamdiu fervet qua^ diu olla fervida est.
us, (...). Hesh. but we must love them under a spiritual notion, because of
the good that is in them; we are to reverence their holiness, else it is a
carnal love.

3 Love to the Saints must be extensive, we must love all that bear Gods A
quatenus ad omne valet consequentia.
image.

1 Though they have many infirmities; a Christian in this life, is like a good
face full of Freckles; thou that can not love another because of his
imperfections, did never yet see thy own face in the glass; thy brothers
infirmities may make thee pity him, his graces must make thee love him.

2 We must love the Saints, though in some things they do not coalesce and
agree with us: another Christian may differ from me in less matters, either
because he has more light than I, or because he has less light; if he
differs from me, because he has more light, then I have no reason to censure
him; if because he has less light, than I ought to bear with him, as the
weaker Vessel, in things of an indifferent nature, there ought to be Christian
connivance.

3 We must love the Saints, though their graces out-vye and surpass ours; we
ought to bless God for the eminency of another grace, because hereby religion
is honored; Pride is not quite slain in a believer; Saints themselves are apt
to grudge and repine at each others excellencies; is it not strange, that the
same person, should hate one man for his sin, and envy another for his virtue?
Christians had need look to their hearts; then is love right and genuine, when
we can rejoice in the graces of others, though they seem to eclipse ours.

4 Love to the Saints must be appretiating, we must esteem their persons above
others, Psa. 15. 4. He honors them that fear the Lord: we are to look upon the
wicked as lumber, but upon the Saints as jewels, these must be had in high
veneration.

5 Love to the Saints must be Social, we should delight in their company,
Psalm. 119. 63. I am a companion of all them that fear thee. It Is a kind of hell
to be in the company of the wicked, where we cannot choose but hear Gods name
dishonored: It was a capital crime, to have carried the Image of Tiberius,
engraven upon a Ring or Coin into any fordid place; They who have the Image of
God engraven upon them, should not go into any sinful fordid company. Never but
two that I read of, who were living, did desire to keep company with the dead,
and they were possessed with the Mat. 8. 28.
Devil: what comfort can a living Christian have, to converse with the dead?
Jude 2. but the society of Saints is eligible; this is not to walk among the
Tombs, but among beds of spices. Believers are Christ's garden, their graces are
the flowers, their savory discourse is the fragrant smell of these flowers.

6 Love to the Saints must be demonstrative; we should be ready to do all
offices of love to them; vindicate their names, contribute to their
necessities, and like the good Samaritan, pour Oil and Wine into their wounds,
Haec erat aqua limpida ex font charitat is in miserum profluens, Solitarius
erat, Samaritanu^ accedit eum, and visitat; vulner atus erat, haec sine naus^ae
vin^ expurgat, oleo lenit; semi-mortuus erat, hic suo jumento ipsum vehit;
peregrinus erat, hic in hospitium invehit; pauper erat, hic pecuniam pro illo
erogat. Glass exeg. p. 4. in luc.
Luke 0. 34. 35. Love cannot be concealed, but is active in its sphere, and
will lay out it self for the good of others.

7 Love to the Saints must be constant, 1 John 4. 16. He that dwells in love:
Our love must not only lodge for a night, but we must dwell in love, Heb. 13.
1. Let Brotherly love (...).
continue: as love must be sincere without hypocrisy, so constant without
deficiency; love must be like the pulse, always beating; not like those
Galathians, who at one time were ready to pull out their eyes for Paul, Gal. 4.
15. and afterward were ready to pluck out his eyes; love should not expire but
with our life: and surely if our love to the Saints, be thus divinely
qualified, we may hopefully conclude that we are enrolled among the godly, Ioh.
13. 35. By this shall all men know that ye are my disciples, if ye have love
one to another.

That which induces a godly man to love the Saints, is, because he is nearly
related to them, there ought to be love among relations, there is a spiritual
consanguinity among believers, they have all one head, therefore should all
have one heart, they are stones of the same building, 1 Pet. 2. 5. and shall
not these stones be cemented together with Quando quidem lapides vivi sumus,
nos coadunari in unu^^ templum, ac mutua charitate conglutinari necesse est.
Calvin. Use 1.
Love?

Use 1. Is this the distinguishing Mark of a godly man, to be a lover of the
Saints, then how sad is it to see this grace of love in an eclipse? this
Character of godliness, is almost blotted out among Christians England was once
a fair garden, where the flower of love did grow, but sure now this flower is
either plucked or withered; where is that amity and unity as should be among
Quam ardent ubique odia regnat discordia, germana illa (...) non secus ac si in
tenebrosum aliquem carcerem esset inclusa, aut in exilium pulsa, nusquam fere
inter Christianos conspicitur.
Christians? I appeal to you, would there be that censuring and despising,
that reproaching and undermining one another if there were love? instead of
bitter Tears, there are bitter spirits; a sign iniquity abounds, because the
love of many waxes cold; there is that distance among some professors, as if
they had not received the same spirit, or as if they did not hope for the same
heaven: In the Primitive times, there was so much love among the godly, as set
the heathens a wondering, and now there is so little, as may set Christians a
blushing.

Use 2 Use 2.
As we would be written down for Saints in Gods Calendar, Exhort.
let us love the 1 Pet. 2. 17.
Brotherhood: they who shall one day live together, should love together; what
is it makes a disciple but Charitati nihil (...), est virtutum regina
Christianorum vexillum, discipulorum (...), perfectionis vinculum.
love? John 13. 35. The Devil has knowledge, but that which makes him a Devil
is, that he wants love. To persuade Christians to love, consider,

1 The Saints have that in them, which may make us love them; they are the
curious embroidery and workmanship of the Holy ghost, Ephesians. 2. 10. they have
those rare lineaments of grace, as none but a pensil from heaven could draw;
their eyes sparkle forth beauty, Cant. 4 9. their breasts are like clusters of
grapes, Cant 7. 7. This makes Christ himself delight in his spouse: The King is
held in the galleries. The Church is the daughter of a Prince, Cant. 7. 1. she
is waited on by Angels, Heb: 1. ult. she has a Palace of glory reserved for
her, Ioh. 14. 2. and may not all this draw forth our love?

2 Consider how evil it is for the Saints not to love.

1 It is Unnatural, the Saints are Christ's Lambs, Ioh. 21. 15. for a dog to
worry a Lamb is usual, but for one Lamb to worry another, is unnatural: The
Saints are brethren, 1 Pet. 3. 8. how barbarous is it for brethren not to love?

2 Not to love is a foolish thing; have not Gods people enemies enough, that
they should fly in the faces one of another? the wicked confederate against
the godly, Psalm. 83. 3. They have taken crafty counsel against thy people:
though there may fall out a private grudge betwixt such as are wicked, yet they
will all agree and unite against the Saints: if two Gray-hounds are snarling at
a bone, yet, put up an Hare between them, and they will leave the bone, and
follow after the Hare; so if wicked men have private differences amongst
themselves, yet if the godly be near them, they will leave snarling at one
another, and will pursue after the godly; now, when Gods people have so many
enemies abroad, who watch for their halting, and are glad when they can do them
a mischief; shall the Saints fall out, and divide into parties among themselves?

3 Not to love is very unseasonable; Gods people are in a common calamity, they
suffer in one cause, and for them to disagree, is altogether unseasonable; why
does the Lord bring his people together in affliction, but to bring them
together in affection? Metals will unite in a furnace, if ever Christians
unite, it should be in the furnace of affliction. Chrysostom compares
affliction to a shepherds Dog, which makes all the sheep run together: Gods Rod
has this loud voice in it, Love one another; how unworthy is it when
Christians are suffering together, to be then striving together.

4 Not to love is very Sinful.

1 For Saints not to love, is to live in a contradiction to Scripture; the
Apostle is continually beating upon this string of love, as if it made the
sweetest music in Religion, Romans 13. 8. Col. 3. 14. 1 Pet. 1. 22. 1 Ioh. 3.
11. 1 John 4. 21. This Commandment we have from him, that he who loves God,
love his Brother also: not to love, is to walk Antipodes to the word; can he be
a good Physician, who goes against the rules of Physic? can he be a good
Christian, who goes against the rules of Religion?

2 Want of love among Christians, does much silence the spirit of prayer: hot
passions, make cold prayers; where animosities and contentions prevail, instead
of praying one for another, Christians will be ready to pray one against
another; like the Disciples, who prayed for fire from heaven upon the
Samaritans, Luke. 9. 54. and will God, think you, hear such prayers as come
from a wrathful heart: will he eat of our leavened bread? will he accept of
those duties, which are sowered with bitterness of spirit? shall that prayer
ever go up as incense, which is offered with the strange fire of our sinful
passions?

3 These heart-burnings, hinder the progress of piety in our own souls; the
flower of grace, will not grow in a wrathful heart; the body may as well thrive
while it has the Plague, as a soul can, that is infected with malice: while
Christians are debating, grace is abating; as the spleen grows, health decaies,
and as hatred increases, holiness declines.

5 Not to love is very fatal; the differences among Gods people, portend Omne
divisibile est corruptibile.
ruin: all mischiefs come in at this gap of division, Mat. 12. 25. Animosities
among Saints, may make God leave his Temple, Ezekiel. 10. 4. The glory of the
Lord, went up from the Cherub, and stood upon the threshold: Does not God seem
to stand upon the threshold of his house, as if he were taking his wings to
^lye? and woe to us, if God depart from Hos. 9. 12
us: If the Master leave the ship, it is near sink^ng indeed: if God leave a
land, it must needs ^ink in ruin.

Quest. How shall we attain this excellent grace of love?

Answ. 1 Beware of the Devils Foot^osts, I mean such as run on his errand, and
make it their work to blow the coals of contention among Christians, and render
one party odious to another.

2 Keep up friendly meetings; Christians should not be shy one of another, as
if they had the Plague.

3 Let us plead that promise, Ier. 32. 39. I will give them one heart, and one
way: Let us pray that there may be no strife among Christians, but who shall
love most; let us ^ray that God will divide Babylon, and unite ^ion.

Use 3 Is this a mark of a godly man, Use 3.
to love* the Saints? then they must stand inlighted for ungodly, who hate the
Saints; the wicked have an implacable malice against Gods Impii sanctorum
statuas coronant, eorumque virtutes odio habent.
people, and how can antipathies be reconciled? To hate Saint-ship, is a brand
of a reprobate: they that malign the godly, are the curse of the creation; if
all the scalding drops in Gods Vial, will make them miserable, they shall be
so: Never did any^ who were the haters and persecuters of Saints, thrive upon
that Trade: What became of Julian, Dioclesian, Maximinus, Valerian, Cardinal
Crescentius, and others, some of them, their bowels came out, others choked
with their own blood, that they might be set up as standing monuments of Gods
vengeance, Psa. 34. 21. They that hate the righteous shall be desolate.

SECT. XIX.
19 A godly man does not indulge himself in any sin. 19 Character.
Though sin lives in him, yet he does not live in sin. Every man that has wine
in him, is not in wine. A godly man may step into sin through infirmity, but
he (...) not keep the road, Psalm. 139. 24. See if there be any way of
wickedness in me.

Quest. What is it to indulge sin?

Answ. 1 To give the breast to it, and feed it; as a fond Parent humors his
child, and lets him have what he will, so to indulge sin, is to humor sin.

2 To indulge sin, is to commit it with delight, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 12. They have
pleasure in unrighteousness.

In this sense a godly man does not indulge sin; though sin be in him, he is
troubled at it, and would fain get rid of it; there is as much difference
between sin in the wicked, and the godly, as between poison being in a Serpent,
and in a Man; Poison in a Serpent, is in its natural place, and is delightful:
But poison in a man's body is offensive, and he uses Antidotes to expel it. So
sin in a wicked man is delightful, being in its natural place, but sin in a
child of God is burdensome, and he uses all means to expel it. This pares
off from the sin; the will is against it. A godly man enters his protest
against sin, Romans 7. 15. What I do, I allow not. A child of God while he
commits sin, hates the sin he Suae ipsius (...) odio habet.
commits; Romans 7. in particular, there are four sorts of sins which a godly man
will not allow himself in.

1 Secret sins, Some are more modest than to commit gross sin, that would be a
stain to their reputation, but they will sit brooding upon sin in a corner, 1 Samuel 23. 9. Saul secret^y practiced mischief. All will not sin in a Belcony,
but perhaps they will sin behind the curtain. Rachel did not carry her fathers
Images as a Sumpter-cloath, to be exposed to public view, but she put them
under her, and sat upon them, Genesis 31. 34. many carry their sins secretly, as
a candle in a dark lant^orn.

But a godly man dares not sin secretly: 1 he knows that God sees in secret,
Psalm. 44. 21. as God cannot be deceived by our subtilty, so he cannot be
excluded by our secresy.

2 A godly man knows that secret sins are in some sense worse than others: they
discover more guile and Atheism; The Curtain-sinner makes himself believe God
does not see, Ezekiel. 8. 12. Son of man, have thou seen what the Ancients of the
house of Israel have done in the dark; for they say, the Lord sees us not.
They that have bad eyes, think the Sun is dim; how does this provoke God, that
men's Atheism should give the lie to his Omnisciency, Psalm. 94. 9. He that
formed the eye, shall he not (...), Cyril.
see?

3 A godly man knows that secret sins shall not escape Gods Justice; a Judge on
the Bench can punish no offense but what is proved by Witness; he cannot punish
the Treason of the heart: but the sins of the heart are as visible to God, as
if they were written upon the forehead. As God will reward secret duties, so
he will revenge secret sins.

2 A godly man will not allow himself in gainful sins. Gain is the golden bait,
with which Satan fisheth for souls. -- dulcis odor lucri --

This was the last temptation he used to Christ, Mat. 4. 9. All this will I
give thee. But Christ saw the hook under the bait. Many who have escaped gross
sins, yet are caught in a golden Net: To gain the world, they will use indirect
courses. A godly man dares not travel for riches through the Devils highway.
Those are sad gains, that make a man lose peace of conscience, and heaven at
last. He who gets an estate by injustice, stuffs his pillow with thorns, and
his head will lie very uneasy when he comes to dye.

3 A godly man will not allow himself in a beloved sin; there is usually one
sin that is the Peccatum in delitiis. Aug.
favorite, the sin which the heart is most fond of: A beloved Sin lies in a
man's bosom, as the Disciple, whom Jesus loved, leaned on his bosom, Ioh. 13.
23. A godly man will not indulge a darling sin, Psa. 18. 23. I have kept my
self from mine iniquity. The Sin of my constitution, to which the byas of my
heart does more naturally incline, 1 Kings 22. 31. Fight neither with small nor
great, save only with the King: a godly man fights with this King-sin. The
Oracle of Apollo answered the people of Cyrrha, that if they would live in
peace among themselves, they must make continual war with those strangers,
which were upon their confines. If we would have peace in our souls, we must
maintain a war against our complexion-sin, and never leave till it be (...),
Thucid.
subdued.

Quest. How shall we know the beloved sin?

Answ. 1 That sin which a man does not love to have reproved, is the darling
Sin. Herod could not endure to have his incest spoken against; if the Prophet
medles with that sin, it shall cost him his head: men can be content to have
other sins declaimed against, but if the Minister put his finger upon the sore,
and touches this sin, their hearts begin to burn in malice against him; a
shrewd sign, that is the Herodias.

2 That sin the thoughts run most upon, is the darling sin; which way the
thoughts go, the heart goes; he that is in love with a person, cannot keep his
thoughts off the object; examine what sin runs most in your mind, what sin is
first in your thoughts, and salutes you in the morning, that is the
praedominant (...).

3 That sin which has most power over us, and does most easily lead us
captive, that is the beloved of the soul; there ^re some sins a man can make
better resistance against; if they come for entertainment, he can more easily
put them off; but there is one sin, if that comes to be a suitor, he cannot
deny it, but is overcome by it, this is the bosom sin. The young man in the
Gospel, had given a repulse to many sins, but there was one sin foiled him,
that was covetousness: Christians, mark what sins you are soonest led captive
by, that is the Harlot in your bosom. It Is a sad thing that a man should be
so bewitched by lust, that if it ask to part with, not only half the Kingdom,
Esth. 7. 2.
but the whole Kingdom of heaven, he must part with it, to gratify that lust.

4 That sin which men use arguments to defend, is the beloved sin; he that has
a jew^l in his bosom, will defend it as his life; so when there is any sin in
the bosom, men will defend it; the sin we are advocates and disputants for, is
the complexion-sin; if the sin be passion, and we plead for it, Io^. 4. 9. I do
well to be angry: if the sin be covetousness, and we vindicate it, and perhaps
wrest Scripture to justify it, that is the sin which lies nearest the heart.

5. That sin which does most trouble us, and flies most in our face in an hour
of sickness and distress, that is the Dalilah-sin: When Joseph's Brethren were
distressed, their sin came to remembrance, in selling their Brother, Genesis 42.
21. We are verily guilty concerning our brother, in that we saw the anguish of
our brother when he be sought us, and we would not hear, therefore is this
distress come upon us. So, when a man is upon his Sickbed, and Conscience
shall say, thou have been guilty of such a sin, thou did go on in it, and
roll it as honey under thy tongue, Conscience reads a sad Lecture, sure that
was the beloved sin.

6. That sin which a man does most hardly let go his hold of, is the endeared
sin: Jacob could of all his sons most hardly part with Benjamin, Genesis 42. 36.
Joseph is not, and Simeon is not, and ye will take Benjamin away: So says the
sinner, this and that sin I have parted with, but must Benjamin go, must I part
with this delightful sin, that goes to the heart* As it is with a Castle that
has several Forts about it, the first and second Fort are taken, but when it
comes to the Castle* the Governor will rather fight and die than yield that:
So a man may suffer some of his sins to be demolished, but when it comes to one
sin, that is the taking of the Castle, he will never yield to part with that;
surely, that is the Master-sin.

The complexion-sin is a God-provoking sin. The wise men of Troy counseled
Priame to send back Helena to the Grecians, not suffering himself to be any
longer abused by the Charms of her beauty, because the keeping her within the
City, would lay the foundation of a fatal war: So should we put away our
Dalilah-sin, least it incense the God of heaven, and make him commence a war
against us.

The complexion-sin is of all other most dangerous: As Sampsons strength lay in
his hair, so the strength of sin lies in this beloved sin: This is like an
humor striking to the heart, which brings death. A godly man will lay the Axe
of Repentance to this sin, and hew it down; he sets this sin, as Uriah, in the
forefront of the battle, that it may be slain: He will sacrifice this Isaac,
he will pluck out this right eye, that he may see the better to go to heaven.

4. A godly man will not allow himself in those which the world counts lesser
sins: There is no such thing as little sin, yet some may be deemed less
comparatively; but a good man will not indulge himself in these.

As (...) Sins of Omission. Some think it no great matter to omit Family, or
Closet-prayer; they can go several months and God never hear of them: A godly
man will as soon live without food, as without prayer: He knows every creature
of God is sanctified by prayer, 1 Timothy 4. 5. The Bird may sh^me many
Christians, it never takes a drop, but the eye is lift up toward heaven.

2. A godly man da^es not allow himself in vain frothy discourse, much less in
that which looks like an oath: If God will reckon for idle words, will he not
much more for idle oaths?

3. A godly man dares not allow himself in rash censuring: Some think this a
small matter, Use of Exhort.
they will not swear, but they will slander: this is very evil; thou woundest a
man in that which is dearest to him: He who is godly turns all his censures
upon himself, he judges himself for his own sins, but is very chary, and
tender of the good name of another.

Use. As you would be numbered among the Genealogies of the Saints, do not
indulge your selves in any Quam absurdum est postula re a Deo omnium peccatorum
veniam, and ^olle repromittere omnium peccatorum fugam?
sin; consider the mischief that one sin lived in will do.

1. One sin gives Satan as much advantage against thee as more: The Fowler can
hold the Bird by one wing: Satan held Judas fast by one sin.

2. One sin lived in argues the heart is not sound; he who hides one Rebel in
his house is a Traitor to the Crown; that person who indulgeth one sin, is a
traiterous hypocrite.

3. One sin will make way for more; as a little Thief can open the door to
more: Sin is linked and chained Omne peccatum est connexum. Aquin.
together; one sin will draw on more: David's adultery made way for murder: One
sin never goes alone; if there be but one Nest-egg, the Devil can brood upon it.

4. One sin is as well a breach of Gods Law as more, Iam. 2. 10. He that shall
offend in one point, is guilty of all. If the King make a Law against Felony,
Treason, Murder, if a man be guilty but of one of these, he is as well a
Transgressor of the Law, as if he were guilty of all.

5. One sin lived in keeps out Christ from entering; one stone in the Pipe keeps
out the water; one sin indulged obstructs the soul, and keeps the streams of
Christ's Blood from running into it.

6. One sin lived in will spoil all thy good duties: A drop of poison will
spoil a glass of Wine: Abimeleck, a Bastard, destroyed threescore and ten of
his Brethren, Judge. 9. 5. One Bastard-sin will destroy threescore and ten
prayers: One dead fly will corrupt the box of ointment.

7. One sin lived in will be a Canker-worm to eat out the peace of Conscience,
it takes away the Manna out of the Ark, and leaves only a Rod. -- Eheu quis
intus scorpio? Sen. Trag.
--

One sin is a Pyrate to rob a Christian of his comfort; one jarring string
brings all the Music out of tune; one sin countenanced, will spoil the Music
of Conscience.

8. One sin allowed will damn as well as more; one disease is enough to kill:
If a Fence be made never so strong, leave open but one gap, the wild Beast may
enter, and tread down the corn: If there be but one sin allowed in the soul,
you set open a gap for the Devil to enter. It Is a simile of Chrysostom, a
Soldier that has his Headpiece on and Breast Plate, if in but one place he
wants Armor, the bullet may enter there, and he may as well be shot, as if he
had no Armor on: So if thou favourest but one sin, thou leavest a part of thy
soul unarmed, and the Bullet of Gods Wrath may enter there and ^hoot thee. One
sin may shut thee out of heaven; and as Hierom Quid refert an uno, an pluribus?
Hier.
faith, What difference is there in being shut out for more sins, or for one?
Therefore take heed of cherish^ng one sin: One Millstone will sink a man into
the Sea as well as an hundred.

9. One sin harbored in the soul will unfit for suffering: How soon may an
hour of Trial come; he who has an hurt in his shoulder, cannot carry an heavy
burden, and he who has any guilt in his Conscience, cannot carry the Cross of
Christ: Will he deny his life for Christ, that cannot deny his lust for Christ?
One sin in the soul unmortified, will bring forth the bitter fruit of Apostasy.

Would you then show your selves godly, give a Bill of Divorce to every sin,
kill the Goliah-sin, Romans 6. 12. Let not sin reign: In the Original it is
(...), let not sin King it over you: Grace and Sin may be together, but Grace
and the love of Sin cannot. Therefore parley with sin no longer, but with the
Spear of Mortification, let out the heart-bloud of every sin.

SECT. XX.
20. A godly man is good in his Relations: 20 Character.
To be good in general is not enough, but we must show forth Piety in our
Relations.

1. He is godly who is good as a Magistrate: The Magistrate is Gods
Representative; a godly Magistrate holds the balance of Justice, and gives to
every one his Ius suum cuique tribuit.
right, Deuteronomy. 16. 19. Thou shall not respect persons, neither take a gift, for
a gift does blind the eyes. A Magistrate must judge the Cause, not the person:
He who suffers himself to be corrupted with bribes, is not a Judge, but a
Party: A Magistrate must do that which is (...), according to Law, Act. 23. 3.
And that he may do Justice, he must examine the Cause: The Archer that will
shoot right, must first see the mark.

2. He is godly who is good as a Minister. A Minister must be

1. Painful, 2 Timothy 4. 1, 2. Preach the Word, be instant in season, out of
season. The Minister must not be idle; sloth is as inexcusable in a Minister,
as sleep in a Sentinel: John Baptist was a voice crying, Mat. 3. 3. A dumb
Minister is of no more use than a dead Physician: A man of God must work in the
Lords Oportet Episcopum concionantem mori. B. Jewel.
Vineyard: It was Austins wish, that Christ might find him at his coming,
either praying or preaching.

2. A Minister must be knowing, Mal. 2. 7. The Priests lips should keep
knowledge, and they should seek the Law at his mouth. It was said in the honor
of Nazianzene, that he was (...), an Ocean of Divinity. The Prophets of old
were called Seers, 1 Samuel 9. 9. It Is absurd to have our Seers blind: Christ
said to Peter, Feed my sheep, Ioh. 21. 16. But how sad is it when the Shepherds
need to be fed? Ignorance in a Minister, is like blindness in an Oculist. Under
the Law, he who had the plague in his head was unclean, Levit. 13. 44.

3. A Minister must preach plain, suiting his matter and style to the capacity
of his Auditory, 1 Cor. 14. 19. Some Ministers, like Eagles, love to soar aloft
in abstruse Metaphyfical notions; thinking they are most admired, when they are
least understood; they who preach in the Clouds, instead of hitting their
peoples Conscience, shoot over their heads.

4 A Minister must be zealous in reprooving sin, Tit. 1. 13. Rebuke them
sharply. Epiphanius says of Eliah, he sucked fire out of his Mother breasts; a
man of God must suck the fire of zeal, out of the breasts of Scripture. Zeal in
a Minister, is as proper as fire on the Altar; some are afraid to reprove; like
the Sword-fish, which has a sword in his head, but is without an heart; so
they carry the sword of the spirit about them, but have no heart to draw it out
in a reproof against sin; Eze. 13. 18
how many have sown pillows under their people, making them sleep so securely,
that they have never waked, till they have been in hell.

5 A Minister must be holy in heart and life.

1 In heart. How sad is it for a Minister, to preach that to others, which he
never felt in his own soul; to exhort others to holiness, and himself a
stranger to it: O that it were not thus too often! how many blow the Lords
Trumpet with a foul breath.

2 In Life. The Priests under the Law, before they served at the Altar, washed
in the Lavor; such as serve in the Lords house, must first be washed from
gross sin, in the Lavor of repentance: The life of a Minister should be a
walking Bible. Basil said of Nazianzene, he did thunder in his doctrine, and
lighten in his conversation: A Minister must imitate John Baptist, who was not
only a voice crying, Isa* ^. 3. but a light shining, Ioh. 5. 35. they disgrace
this excellent calling, who live in a contradiction to what they preach; they
turn their codices into calices, Pet. Blessens. ep. 7.
their books into cups, and though they are Angels by office, yet are Devils in
their lives, Ier. 23. 15.

3. He is godly, who is good as an Husband, he fills up that relation with
love, Ephesians. 5. 25. Husbands love your Wives: The Vine twisting its branches
about the Elm, and embracing it, may be an emblem of that entire love, which
should be in the conjugal relation; a married condition would be sad, if it
has cares to imbitter it, and not love to sweeten it: Love is the best diamond
in the marriage Ring: Isaac loved Rebeckah, Genesis 24. 57. Unkindnesses in this
near relation, are very unhappy. We read in Heathen Authors, that Clitemnestra
the wife of Agamemnon, to revenge an injury received from her Husband, first
rent the Vail of her chastity, and afterward consented to his death: The
Husband should show his love to his Wife, by covering infirmities, by avoiding
occasions of strife, by sweet endearing expressions, by pious counsel, by
love tokens, by encouraging what he sees amiable and virtuous in her, by mutual
prayer, by associating with her, unless detained by urgency of business: The
Pilot that goes from his ship, and quite leaves it to the merciless waves,
declares that he does not esteem it, or reckon any treasure to be in it.

The Apostle gives a good reason, why there should be mutual love between
Husband and Wife, 1 Pet. 3. 7. That your prayers be not hindered: where
passions prevail, there prayer is either intermitted, or interrupted.

4 He is godly who is good, as a Father.

1 A Father must drop holy instructions into his Children, Ephesians. 6 4. Bring them
up in the nurture and admonition of the Lord: Thus did Abraham, Genesis 18. 19. I
know Abraham, that he will command his children, and his household, and they
shall keep the way of the Lord. Children are young plants, which must be
watered with good education, that they may with Obadiah, fear the Lord from
their youth up, 1 Kings 18. 12. Plato says, in vain does he expect an harvest,
who has been negligent in sowing; nor can a parent look to reap any good from
a child, where he has not sown the seed of wholesome instruction; and though
notwithstanding all counsel and admonition, the child should dye in sin, yet
it is a comfort to a godly Parent, to think that before his child dyed, he
gave it spiritual physic.

2. A parent must pray for his Children: Monica the Mother of Austin, prayed
for his Conversion, and one said, It was impossible a Son of so many Prayers
and Tears should miscarry: The soul of thy Child is in a snare, and wilt not
thou pray that it may be recovered out of the snare of the Devil, 2 Timothy 2.
26. many Parents are careful to lay up portions for their children, but they do
not lay up prayers for them.

3 A Parent must give his children discipline, Prove. 23. 13. Withhold not
correction from the child, for if thou beatest him with the rod, he shall not
dye: The rod beats out the dust and moth of sin; a child indulged and humoured
in wickedness, will prove a burden instead of a blessing: David cockered
Adonijah, 1 King. 1. 6. His Father had not displeased him at any time, saying,
why have thou done so? and he afterward was a grief of heart to his Father,
and would have put him besides his throne; correction is a hedge of thorns, to
stop Children in their full Car^eir to hell.

5 He is godly who is good, as a Master; a godly man promotes religion in his
family; he sets up piety in his house, as well as in his heart, Psalm 101. 2. I
will walk within my house with a perfect heart, Joshua 24. 15. I, and my
household will serve the Lord. I find it written in the honor of Cranmer, his
Family was Palaestra Pietatis, a Nursery of Piety: A godly man's house is a
little Church, Col. 4. 15. The Church which is in his house.

1. A good man makes known the Oracles of God to them, who are under his roof;
he reads the Word, perfumes his house with prayer: It is recorded of the Jews,
that they had sacrifices in their Family, as well as in the Tabernacle, Exodus
12. 3.

2. A godly man provides necessaries; he relives his servants in health and
Sickness; he is not like that Amalakite, who shook off his servant when he was
sick, 1 Samuel 30. 13. But rather like the good Centurion, who sought to Christ
for the healing of his sick servant, Mat. 8. 5.

3. A godly man sets his servants a good example, he is sober and heavenly in
his deportment, his virtuous life is a fair glass for the servants in the
family to dress themselves by.

6. He is godly who is good in the Relation of a Child, He honors his
parents. Philo the Jew, placed the fifth Commandment in the first Table; as if
Children had not performed their whole devotion to God, till they had given
honor to their Parents. This honoring of Parents consists in two things.

1. In reverencing their persons; which reverence is shown both by humility of
speech and gesture: The contrary to this is, when a Child does behave himself
unseemly and proudly. Among the Lacedaemonians, if a Child had carried himself
imperiously toward his parent, it was published by Authority, that it was
lawful for the Father to appoint whom he would to be his Heir, and to
dis-inherit that Child.

2. Honoring of Parents lies in obeying their Commands, Ephesians. 6. 1. Children
obey your Parents in the Lord. Duty is the Interest money which children pay
their Parents, for the Principal they have had from (...). Isocr.
them. Christ has set all Children a pattern of obedience to their Parents,
Luke 2. 51. He was subject unto them. The Rechabites were eminent for this,
Ierem. 35. 5. 1 set before the Rechabites pots full of wine, and said to them
drink ye wine, but they said we will drink no wine, for Jonadab the son of
Rechab our Father commanded us saying, Ye shall drink no wine, neither ye, nor
your sons for ever. Solon among the many Laws he made, one asked him, Why he
made no Law against disobedient Children; he answered, because he thought none
would be so wicked. God has punished Children, who have refused to pay the
tribute of obedience. Absalom, a disobedient son, was hanged in an Oak betwixt
Heaven and Earth, as being worthy of neither. Manlius, an old man, being
reduced to much poverty, and having a rich son, he entreated him only for an
alms, but could not obtain it; the son disowned him as his Father, and gave him
reproachful language; the poor old man let tears fall (as witnesses of his
grief) and went away; God to revenge this disobedience of the son, soon after
struck him with Beards Theat.
frenzy; he in whose heart godliness lives, makes as well Conscience of the
fifth Commandment as the first.

6. He is godly who is good as a servant, Col. 3. 22. Ephesians. 6. 5. Servants be
subject to them who are your Masters, according to the flesh, with fear and
trembling. The goodness of servants lies

1. In (...). Ig at. Ep. ad Tarsens.
diligence: Abraham's servant made haste to dispatch the business his Master
entrusted him with, Genesis 24. 33.

2. Cheerfulness: Servants must be Free-willers: Thus the Centurions servants,
Luke 7. 8. If I say to one go, he goes.

3. Faithfulness; which consists in two things: 1. In not defrauding, Titus 2.
10. Not purloyning. 2. In keeping counsel; it argues the badness of a stomach,
when it cannot retain what is put into it; and the badness of a servant, when
he cannot retain those secrets which his Master has committed to him.

4. Silentness, Titus 2. 9. Not answering ^^gain. It Is better to mend a fault,
than to mince it; and that which may quicken a servant in his work, is that
encouraging Scripture, Col. 3. 24, Knowing that of the Lord ye shall receive
the reward of the Inheritance, for ye serve the Lord Christ. If Christ should
bid you do a piece of work for him, would ye not do it? While you serve your
Master, you serve the Lord Christ: If you ask what Salary you shall have, Ye
shall receive the reward of the Inberitance.

Use 1. Is this the Grand Sign of a godly man, Use 1.
to be relatively holy (...) ^hen the Lord be merciful to us, Inform.
how few godly ones are to be found? Many put on the Coat of Profession, they
will pray, and discourse of points of Religion, but what means the bleating of
the sheep? They are not good in their Relations: How ill does it sound when
Christians are defective in Relative Piety: Can we call him godly who is a bad
Magistrate? He perverts equity, Psalm 58. 1. Do ye judge uprightly, O ye sons
of men? You weigh the violence of your hands in the earth. Can we call him
godly, who is a bad Parent? He never teaches his Child the way to heaven: He
is like the Ostrich, which is cruel to her young, Job 39. 19. Can we call him
godly who is a bad Master? Many Masters leave their Religion at Church, (as the
Clerk does his book) they have nothing of God at home, their houses are not
Bethels, but Bethavens; not little Temples, but little Hells. How many Masters
at the last day must hold up their hand at the Bar, though they have fed their
servants bellies, they have starved their souls: Can we call him godly, who is
a bad Child? He stops his ear to his Parents counsel; you may as well call him
a good subject who is disloyal: Can we call him godly, who is a bad servant? He
is slothful and wilful; he is more ready to spy a fault in another, than to
mend it in himself. To call one godly, who is bad in his Relations, is a
contradiction, it is to call evil good, Isa. 5. 20.

Use 2. As we desire to have God approve us, Use 2.
let us show forth godliness in our Relations: Exhort.
Not to be good in our relations, spoils all our other good things; Naaman was
an honorable man, but he was a Leaper, 2 King. 5. 1. That But, spoiled all;
so such an one is a great hearer, but he neglects relative duties, this stains
the beauty of all his other actions; as in Printing, though the Letter be never
so well carved, yet if it be not set in the right place, it spoils the sense;
so let a man have many things commendable in him, yet if he be not good in his
right place, making conscience how he walks in his relations, he does hurt to
religion. There are many, to whom Christ will say at last, as to the young man,
Luke 18. 22. Unum deest, yet lackest thou one thing, thou have miscarried in
thy relative capacity; as therefore we tender our salvation, and the honor of
religion, let us shine forth in that Orb of relation, where God has fixed us.

SECT. XXI.
21 A godly man does spiritual things in a spiritual manner, 21 Character.
Phil. 3. 3. We are the Circumcision, which worship God in the spirit:
Spirit-worship is Virgin-worship, 1 Pet. 2. 5. Ye are built up a spiritual
house, an holy priesthood, to offer up spiritual Templum dei est vir pius, and
ubicunque locoru^ fuerit, altar in cord suo ponere potest.
sacrifices; not only spiritual for the matter, but the quality; a wicked man
either lives in the total neglect of duty, or else discharges it in a dull
careless manner; in stead of using the world, as if he used it not, 1 Cor. 7.
30.
he serves God, as if he served him not; a godly man spiritualizeth duty, he
is not only for the doing of holy things, but for the holy doing of things.

Quest. What is it to perform spiritual duties spiritually?

Answ. It consists in three things.

1. To do duties from a spiritual principle, viz. a renewed principle of grace:
let a man have gifts to admiration, let him have the most melting ravishing
expressions, let him speak like an Angel dropped out of heaven, yet his duties
may not be spiritual, because he wants the grace of the spirit; whatever a
moral unregenerate person does, is but nature refined, though he may do duties
better than a godly man, yet not so well; better as to the matter and elegancy,
yet not so well, as wanting a renewed principle; a Crab-tree may bear as well
as a Pippin, the fruit may be bigger and fairer to the eye, yet it is not so
good fruit as the other, because it does not come from so good a stock; so an
unregenerate person may perform as many duties as a child of God, and these
may seem to be more glorious to the outward view, but they are harsh and sower,
because they do not come from the sweet and pleasant root of grace: a true
Saint gives God that wine, which comes from the pure grape of the spirit.

2 To perform duties spiritually, is to do them with the utmost intention; a
Christian is very serious, and labors to keep his thoughts close to the work
in hand, 1 Cor. 7. 35. That ye may attend upon the Lord without distraction.

Quest. But may not a godly man have roving thoughts in duty?

Answ. Yes, sad experience sets seal to it, the thoughts will be dancing up
and down in prayer; the Saints are called Stars, and many times in duty they
are wandering stars. The heart is like Quicksilver, which will not fix. It Is
hard to tie two good thoughts together; we cannot lock our hearts so close, but
that distracting thoughts, like wind, will get in. Hierom Aut per^ porticus de
ambulo, ^ut de faenore computo, etc.
complains of himself, sometimes says he, when I am about Gods service, I am
walking in the galleries, or casting up of accounts.

But these wandering thoughts in the godly, are not allowed, Psa. 119. 113. I
hate vain thoughts, they come as unwelcome guests, which are no sooner spied,
but are turned out of doors.

Quest. Whence do these impertinent thoughts arise in the godly?

Answ. 1 From the pravity of nature, they are the mud which the hear casts up.

2. From Satan; the Devil if he cannot hinder us from duty, ^hee will hinder us
in duty; when we come before the Lord, he is at our right hand to resist us,
Zac. 3. 1. As when one is going to write, another stands at his elbow and jogs
him, that he cannot write even; Satan will set vain objects before the fancy,
to cause a diversion: the Devil does not oppose formality but fervency; if he
sees we set our selves in good earnest to seek God, he will be whispering
things in our ears, that we can scarce mind what we are doing.

3 These impertinent thoughts arise from the world; these vermin are bred out
of the earth, worldly business often crowds into our duties, and while we are
speaking to God, our hearts are talking with the world, Ezekiel. 33. 31. They sit
before me as my people, but their heart goes after their covetousness. While we
are hearing the word, or meditating, one worldly business or other commonly
knocks at the door, and we are taken off the duty, while we are in the duty.
It Is with us as with Abraham, when he was going to worship; the fowls came
down upon the sacrifice, Genesis 15. 11.

Quest. How may we get rid of these wandering thoughts, that we may be more
spiritual in duty?

Answ. 1 Eye Gods purity; he is an holy God whom we serve, and cannot endure
when we are worshipping him, that we should converse with vanity: Will a King
like it, that while his subject is speaking to him, he should be playing with
a feather? will God endure light feathery hearts? how devout and reverend are
the Angels, they cover their faces, and cry Holy, Holy.

2 Think of the Grand importance of the duties we are engaged in; as David
said, concerning his building an house for God, 2 Chronicles. 29. 1. The work is
great; when we are hearing the word, the work is great; this is the word by
which we shall be judged; when we are at prayer, the work is great, we are
pleading for the life of our souls, and is this a time to trifle?

3 Come with affection to duty; the nature of love, is to fix the mind upon
the object; he who is in love, his thoughts are still upon the person he loves,
and nothing can take them off. He that loves the world, his thoughts are ever
intent upon it; were our hearts more fired with love, they would be more fixed
in duty; and O! what cause have we to love duty? is not this the direct road to
heaven? do we not meet with God here? can the spouse be better than in her
Husbands company? where can the soul be better, than in drawing nigh to God?

4 Consider the mischief that these vain distracting thoughts do; they fly-blow
our duties, they hinder fervency, they show high irreverence, they tempt God to
turn away his ear from us; how do we think God should mind our prayers, when
we our selves scarce mind them?

3 To do duties spiritually, is to do them in faith, Heb. 11. 4. By faith Abel
offered a better sacrifice than Cain. (...).
The holy oil for the Tabernacle, had several spices put into it, Exodus 30.
34. Faith is the sweet spice, which must be put into duty: It Is a wrong to God,
to doubt either of his Mercy or Truth; a Christian may venture his soul upon
the public faith of heaven.

Use 1 How far are they out of the way of Godliness, Use 1.
who are unspiritual in their worship? who do not duties from a renewed
principle, and with the utmost intention of soul, but merely to stop the mouth
of conscience: many people look no farther than the bare doing of duties, but
never mind how they are done. God does not judge of our duties by the length,
but by the love: when men put God off with the dreggish part of duty, may not
he say as Isa. 58. 5. Is it such a Fast that I have chosen? Are these the
duties I required? I called for the heart and spirit, and you bring nothing but
the Carcass of Duty, should I receive comfort in this?

Use 2. Let us show our selves godly, Use 2.
by being more spiritual in duty; Exhort.
it is not the quantum, but the quale; it is not how much we do, but how well. A
Musician is commended not for playing long, but for playing well: We must not
only do what God appoints, but as God appoints: O how many are unspiritual in
spiritual things? they bring their services, but not their hearts; they give
God the skin, not the fat of the offering: God is a Spirit, Ioh. 4. 24. And it
is the spirituality of duty he is best pleased Nobis cum Deo est negotium, cui
nihilo minus cum carne dissidium quam igni cum aqua.
with, 1 Pet. 2. 5. Spiritual Sacrifices acceptable to God: The spirits of the
Wine are best; so is the spiritual part of duty, Ephesians. 5. 19. Making melody in
your hearts to the Lord: It is the heart makes the Non chordula musica sed cor.
Music; the spiritualizing of duty gives life to it; without this, it is dead
praying, dead hearing, and dead things are not pleasing; a dead flower has no
beauty, a dead breast has no sweetness.

Quest. How may we do to perform duties in a spiritual manner?

Answ. 1. Let the Soul be kept a Virgin; lust does besot and dis-spirit a man;
beware of any tincture of uncleanness, Iam. 1. 21. Wood that is full of sap
will not easily burn; and an heart steeped in sin, is not fit to burn in holy
devotion. Can he be spiritual in worship, who feeds carnal lust? Hos. 4. 11.
Whoredom and wine, and new wine, take away the heart. Any sin lived in takes
away the heart; such an one has no heart to pray, or meditate: The more alive
the heart is in sin, the more it dies to duty.

2. If we would be spiritual in duty, let us revolve these two things in our
mind.

1. The profit which comes from a duty performed in a spiritual manner; it
infeebles Corruption, it increases Grace, it defeats Satan, it strengthens our
Communion with God, it breeds peace of Conscience, it procures Answers of
Mercy, and it leaves the heart always in a better tune.

2. The danger of doing duties in an unspiritual manner, they are as if they
had not been done; for what the heart does not do, is not Quiequid cor non
facit non fit.
done: Duties slubbered over, turn Ordinances into Judgments: Therefore many,
though they are often in duty, they go away worse from duty: If Physic be not
well made, and the ingredients rightly tempered, it is as bad as poison for the
body: So if duties are not well performed, they leave the heart more hard and
sinful than before.

Duties unspiritual often create Judgments temporal, 1 Chronicles. 15. 13. The Lord
our God made a breach upon us, for that we sought him not after the due order.
Therefore God makes breaches in Families and Relations, because persons worship
him not in that manner and due order which he requires.

3. If we would have our duties spiritual, we must get our hearts spiritual; an
earthly heart cannot be spiritual in duty: Let us beg of God a spiritual
pallat, to relish a sweetness in holy things; for want of spiritual hearts, we
come to duty without delight, and go away without profit: If a man would have
the wheels of his Watch move regularly, he must mend the Spring. Christian, if
thou would move more spiritually in duty, get the Spring of thy heart mended.

SECT. XXII.
22. A godly man is thorow-paced in Religion, 22 Character.
he obeys every Command of God, Act. 13. 22. I have found David a man after mine
own heart, which shall fulfill all my will. In the Greek (...) all my wills. A
godly man labors to walk according to the full breadth and latitude of Gods
Law. Every Command has the same stamp of Divine Authority upon it, and he who
is godly, will obey one Command as well as another, Psalm. 119. 6. Then shall I
not be ashamed, when I have respect to all thy Commandments. A godly man goes
through all the Body of Religion, as the Sun through all the Signs of the
Zodiac. He that is to play upon a ten-stringed Instrument, must strike upon
every string, or he spoils all the Music. The ten Commandments may be compared
to a ten-stringed Instrument, we must obey every Commandment, strike upon every
string, or we can make no sweet Music in Religion: True obedience is fil^al;
it is fit the Child should obey the Parent in all just and sober commands:
Gods Laws are like the Curtains of the Tabernacle, which were looped together;
they are like a Chain of Gold, where all the links are coupled: A conscientious
man will not willingly break one Link of this Chain; if one Command be
violated, the whole Chain is broken, Iam. 2. 10. Whosoever shall keep the whole
Law, yet offend in one point, is guilty of all. A voluntary breach of one of
Gods Laws, involves a man in the guilt, and exposes him to the curse of the
whole Law: True obedience is entire and uniform: A good heart, like the Needle,
points that way which the Lodestone draws.

This is a grand difference between a Child of God and an hypocrite; the
hypocrite does pick and choose in Religion; some duties he will perform which
are more facil, and do gratify his pride or interest, but other duties he
makes no reckoning of, Mat. 23. 23. Ye pay tithe of Mint and Annis, and have
omitted the weightier matters of the Law, Judgment, Mercy, and Faith. To sweat
in some duties of Religion, and freeze in other, is the symptom of a
distempered Christian. Iehu was zealous in destroying the Idolatry of Baal, but
let the golden Calves of Jeroboam stand, 2 Kin. 10. 30. This shows men are not
good in truth, when they are good by halves. If your servant should do some of
your work you set him about, and leave the rest undone, how would you like
that? The Lord says, Walk before me, and be perfect, Genesis 17. 1. How are our
hearts perfect with God, when we prevaricate with him? Some things we will do,
and other things we leave undone; he is good, who is good universally. -- Pater
adsum, impera quid vis. Plautus.
--

There are ten duties God calls for, which a godly man will conscientiously
perform; and indeed these Duties may serve as so many other Characters and
Touch-stones to try our godliness by.

1 A godly man will be often calling his heart to account; 1 Duty.
he takes the candle of the word, and searches his inward parts, Psa. 77. 6. I
commune with my own heart, and my spirit made diligent search: a gracious soul
searches whether there be any duty omitted, any sin cherished; he examines his
evidences for heaven; as he will not take his gold upon trust, so neither his
grace; he is a spiritual Merchant, he casts up the estate of his soul, to see
what he is worth; he sets his house in order; often reckonings keep God and
conscience friends; a carnal person cannot abide this heart-work, he is
ignorant how the affairs go in (...) soul; he is like a man, who is well
acquainted in foreign parts, but a stranger in his own country. -- ut nemo
insese tentat descendere, nemo?

2 A godly man is much in closet-prayer, he keeps his hours for private
devotion; Jacob when he was left alone, wrestled with God, Genesis 32. 24. So when
a gracious heart is alone, it wrestles in prayer, and will not leave God till
it has a blessing; a devout Christian exercises eyes of faith, and knees of
prayer.

Hypocrites, who have nothing of religion, besides the frontispiece, love to
be seen. Christ has Characterized them, Mat. 6. 5. They love to pray in the
corners of the streets, that they may be (...), plus valet qua (...), Beza.
seen: The hypocrite is devout in the Temple; there all will gaze on him; but
he is a stranger to secret communion with God; he is in the Church a Saint, but
in his closet an Atheist; a good Christian holds secret intelligence with
heaven: -- ille dolet vere, qui sine test dolet.

Private prayer keeps up the trade of godliness; when closet-holiness is laid
aside, there is a stab given to the hear^ of religion.

3 3 Duty.
A godly man is diligent in his Nullus mihi per otium dies exit. Sen. ep. 8.
calling; he takes care to provide for his family: the Church must not exclude
the shop. It Is a speech of Mr. Perkins, though a man be endued with excellent
gifts, and hear the word with reverence, and receive the sacrament, yet if he
practice not the duties of his calling, all is but hypocrisy; religion did
never grant a pattent for idleness, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 11, 12. There are some which
walk among you disorderly, working not at all; them that are such, we command
and exhort by our Lord Jesus, that with quietness, they work, and eat their own
bread: That bread eats most sweet, which is got with most sweat; a godly man
had rather fast, than eat the bread of idleness. Vain professors talk of living
by faith, but do not live in a calling; they are like the Lillies of the field,
they toil not, neither do they spin; an idle person is the Devils Tennis-ball;
which he bandies up and down with temptation, and at last the Ball falls into
the Hazard.

4 A godly man sets bounds to himself in things lawful; 4 Duty.
he abates in matters of recreation and diet, he takes only so much for the
recruits of nature, as may the better dispose him for Gods service. Hierom
lived abstemiously, his diet was a few dried Figs, and cold water. And Austin
in his Confessions says thus, Lord, thou have taught me, to go to my meat as
to a Lib. 10. confess.
medicine: If the snaffle of reason, much more should the curbing-bit of grace
check the Magnu^ sum and (...) majora natus, (...) ut sim corporis mei
mancipium Seneca.
appetite; the life of a Sinner is brutish; the glutton feeds without fear,
Jude 2. and the drunkard drinks without (...) Claud
reason: Too much oil choaks the Lamp, whereas a lesser quantity makes it burn
brighter; a godly man holds the golden bridle of temperance, and will not
suffer his Table to be a snare.

5 A godly man is careful about moral righteousness; 5 Duty.
he makes conscience of equity, as well as piety; the Scripture has linked
both together, Luke 1. 75. That we might serve him in righteousness and true
holiness: Holiness, there, is the first Table, Righteousness, there, is the
second Table: Though a man may be morally righteous, and not godly, yet no man
can be godly, but he must be morally righteous: This moral righeousness is
seen in our dealings with men; a good man observes that golden maxim, Mat. 7.
12. Whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do ye even so to them. There
is a threefold injustice in matters of dealing.

1 Using of false weights, Hos. 12. 7. The balances of deceit are in his
hands: men by making their weights lighter, make their sin heavier, Amos 5. 8.
They make the Ephah small: the Ephah was a measure they used in selling; they
made the Ephah small, they gave but scant measure; a godly man, who takes the
Bible in one hand, dares not use false weights in the other.

2 Imbasing a commodity, Amos 8. 6. They sell the refuse of the wheat: they
would pick out the best grains of the wheat, and sell the worst at the same
price as they did the best, Isa. 1. 22. Thy wine is mixed with water: they did
adulterate their wine, yet make their customers believe it came from the pure
grape.

3 Taking a great deal more than the commodity is worth, Lev. 25. 14. If thou
sell ought to thy neighbor, ye shall not oppress one another: a godly man
deals exactly, but not exactingly, he will sell so as to help himself, but not
damnifie another. His motto is, A conscience void of offense, toward God, and
toward men, Act. 23. 16.

The Hypocrite separates these two, which God has joined together,
Righteousness and Holiness, he pretends to be pure, but is not just: This
brings religion into contempt, when men hang forth Christ's colors, yet will
use fraudulent circumvention, and under a mask of piety, neglect morality; a
godly man makes conscience of the second Table, as well as the first.

6 A godly man will forgive them that have wronged him, 6 Duty.
revenge is sweet to nature. (...). Hom. II.


A gracious spirit passes by affronts, forgets injuries, and counts it a
greater victory to conquer an enemy by patience, than by Haud quaquam offensas
^^bi illatas chaly^eo stilo marmore insculpit, se^ Dei (...) imitatur, qui
injurias molli inscribit palimpsesto, cui gratiae suae spongia alligata est, ut
illas statim deleat.
power: This is truly heroical, To overcome evil with good. Though I would not
trust an Enemy, yet I would endeavor to love him; though I would exclude him
out of my Creed, yet not out of my prayer, Mat. 5. 4.

Quest. But does every godly man arrive at this, to forgive, yea love his
Enemies?

Answ. He does it in a Gospel-sense; that is, 1. Quoad assensum, he subscribes
to it in his judgment, as a thing which ought to be done, Romans 7. 18. With my
mind I serve the Law of God. 2. Quoad dolorem: A godly man mourns that he can
love his Enemies no more, Romans 7. 24. O wretched man that I am! O this base
cankered heart of mine, that have received so much mercy, and can show so
little! I have had Talents forgiven me, yet I can hardly forgive Pence. 3.
Quoad votum: A godly man prays that God will give him an heart to love his
Enemies; Lord pluck this root of bitterness out of me, perfume my soul with
love, make me a Dove without gall. 4. Quoad conatum: A godly man does in the
strength of Christ resolve and strive against all rancour, and virulency of
spirit: This is in a Gospel-sense to love our Amicos ^iligere omnium est,
inimico^ autem s^lorum Christi anorum. Tert. ad Scapull. cap. 8.
Enemies; a wicked man cannot do this, his malice boils up to revenge. 7. Duty.


7. A godly man lays to heart the miseries of the Church, Psalm. 137. 1. We wept
when we remembered Sion. I have read of certain Trees, whose leaves if cut or
touched, the other leaves begin to contract, and shrink up themselves, and for
a space hang down their heads: Such a spiritual sympathy is there among
Christians, when other parts of Gods Church suffer, they feel themselves as it
were touched in their own persons. Ambrose reports, that when Theodosius was
sick unto death, he was more troubled about the Church of God, than about his
own sickness. When Aeneas would have saved Anchises his life, says he, Absit
ut excisa possim supervivere Troia. Virg.
Far be it from me that I should desire to live when Troy is buried in its
ruins; there are in Music two Unisons, if you strike one, you shall perceive
the other to stir, as if it were affected: When the Lord strikes others, a
godly heart is deeply affected, Isa. 16. 11. My bowels shall sound like an
Harp. Though it be well with a Child of God in his own particular, he dwells
in an house of Cedar, yet he grieves to see it go ill with the public. Queen
Esther enjoyed the Kings favor, and all the delights of the Court, yet when a
bloody Warrant was signed for the death of the Jews, she mourns and fasts, and
ventures her own life to save theirs.

8. 8 Duty.
A godly man is contented with his present Dives est qui ni nil concupiscit.
condition; if provisions grow low, his heart is tempered to his condition: Many
(says Cato) blame me because I want, and I blame them because they cannot
want: A godly man puts a candid interpretation upon Providence; when God brews
him a bitter Cup, this (says he) is my diet-drink; it is to purge me, and do
my soul good, therefore he is well Phil. 4* 11.
content.

9. A godly man is fruitful in good works, 9 Duty.
Titus 2. 7. The Hebrew word for godly (...) signifies merciful; implying, that
to be godly and charitable, are (...), one and the same. A good man feeds the
hungry, clothes the naked, he is ever merciful, (...) Cyrill.
Psalm. 37. 6. The more devout sort of the Jews, at this day, distribute the
tenth part of their Estate to the poor; and they have a Proverb among them,
give the tenth, and you will grow Decima ut dives fias.
rich. The hypocrite is all for Faith, nothing for Works; like the Laurel that
makes a flourish, but bears no fruit.

10. A godly man will suffer persecution; 10 Duty.
he will be married to Christ, though he settle no other Jointure upon him but
the Cross; he suffers out of Heb. 11. 35.
choice, and with a spirit of gallantry. Argerius wrote a Letter to his friend,
dated, From the pleasant Garden of the Leonine prison. The blessed Martyrs, who
put on the whole Armor of God, did by their courage blunt the edge of
Persecution. The Juniper Tree makes the coolest shadow, and the hottest coal:
So Persecution makes the coal of love hotter, and the shadow of death cooler.

Thus a godly man goes round the whole Circle of Religious Duties, and obeys
God in what ever he commands. (...). Polynices ap. Erip.


Object. But it is impossible for any one to walk according to the full breadth
of Gods Law, and to follow God fully?

Answ. There is a twofold obeying Gods Law; the first is perfect; when all is
done that the Law requires, this we cannot arrive at in this life. Secondly,
There is an incomplete obedience, which in Christ is accepted. This consists in
four things.

1. An approving of all Gods Commandments, Romans 7. 12. The Commandment is just,
and holy, and good; and ver. 16. I consent unto the Law that it is good. There
is both assent, and consent.

2. A sweet complacency in Gods Commands, Psalm. 119. 47. I will delight my self
in thy Commandments which I have loved.

3. A cordial desire to walk in all Gods Commands, Psalm. 119. 5. O that my ways
were directed to keep thy Statutes.

4. A real endeavor to tread in every path of the Command, Psalm. 119. 59. I
turned my feet unto thy Testimonies. This God esteems perfect obedience, and is
pleased to take it in good part. Zacharias had his failings, he did hesitate
through unbelief, for which he was stricken dumb; yet it is said he did walk in
all the Commandments of the Lord blameless, Luke 1. 6. Because he did cordially
endeavor to obey God in all things. Evangelical obedience is true for the
essence, though not perfect for the degree; and wherein it comes short, Christ
puts his Merits into the Scales, and then there is full weight.

SECT. XXIII.
23. A godly man walks with God, 23 Character.
Genesis 6. 9. Noah walked with God. The Age in which Noah lived was very corrupt,
ver. 5. The wickedness of man was great in the earth: But the iniquity of the
times could not put Noah out of his walk; Noah walked with God. Noah is called
a Preacher of Righteousness, 2 Pet. 2. 5.

Noah preached 1. By Doctrine; his preaching was (say some of the Rabbis)
after this manner; Turn ye from your evil ways, that the waters of the Flood
come not upon you, and cut off the whole seed of the Race of R. Eli^z. c. 22.
Adam.

2. Noah preached by his life; he preached by his humility, patience, sanctity;
Noah walked with God.

Quest. What is it to walk with God?

Answ. Walking with God imports five things.

1. A walking as under Gods eye: Noah did reverence a Deity: A godly man sets
himself as in Gods presence, knowing his Judge looks (...) Iso^r.
on, Psalm* 16. 8. I have set the Lord always before me, Here was David's
Optics.

2. Walking with God implies the familiarity and intimacy the soul has with
God: Friends walk together, and solace themselves one with another: The godly
make known their requests to God, and he makes known his love to them. There is
a sweet intercourse between God and his people, 1 John 1. 3. Our (...), our
Communion is with the Father, and his Son Jesus.

3. Walking with God, is a walking above the earth: A godly man is elevated
above all sublunary objects; that person must ascend very high, who walks with
God: A Dwarf cannot walk among the Stars; nor can a dwarfish earthly soul walk
with God.

4. Walking with God, denotes visible piety; walking is a visible posture;
grace must be conspicuous to the beholders: He walks with God, who discovers
something of God in his carriage; he shines forth in a Bible-Conversation.

5. Walking with God, imports a continued progress in Grace; it is not only a
step, but a walk; there is a going on toward perfection: A godly man does not
sit down in the middle of his way, but goes on till he comes at the Quid
prodest currere and ante cursus metam defecere? Bern.
end of his Faith, 1 Pet. 1. 9. Though a good man may be extra semitam, yet not
extra viam: He may through infirmity step aside (as Peter did) but he recovers
himself by repentance, and goes on in a progress of holiness, Job 17. 9. The
righteous also shall hold on his way.

Use 1. See from hence, Use 1. Inform.
how improper it is to call them godly, who do not walk with God: They would
have Noah's Crown, but they do not love Noah's walk: Most are found in the Devils
black walk, Phil. 3. 18. Many walk, of whom I tell you weeping, that they are
the Enemies of the Cross of (...). Cyrill.
Christ.

1. Some will commend walking with God, and say it is the rarest life in the
world, but will not set one foot in the way; all that commend Wine do not come
up to the price; many a Father commends virtue to his Child, but does not set
him a pattern.

2. Others walk a few steps in the good old Jer. 6. 16.
way, but they retreat back again: If the ways of God were not good, why did
they enter into them? If they were good, why did they forsake them? 2 Pet. 2.
21. For it had been better for them not to have known the way of righteousness,
than after they have known it, to turn from the holy Commandment.

3. Others slander walking with God, that it is a melancholy walk, and such as
are less zealous, are more prosperous; this God accounts blasphemy, 2 Pet. 2.
2. The way of truth shall be evil spoken of: In the Greek it is (...), it shall
be blasphemed.

4. Others deride walking with God, as if it were a way of foolish preciseness:
What, you will be of the Holy Tribe? You will be wiser than Psalm. 137. 3.
others? There are some persons, if it were in their power, would jeer Holiness
out of the world: The Chair of the Scornful stands at the Mouth of Pro. 19. 29.
Hell.

5. Others instead of walking with God, walk (...) after the 2 Pet. ^. 10.
flesh.

1. They walk by Fleshly Opinions. 2. They walk after Fleshly Lusts.
1. They walk by Fleshly Opinions. There are six of these.

1. That it is best to do as the most do, 1 Opin.
to steer (...), after the course of the World; to be in the Mode, not to get a
new heart, but to get into a new fashion.

2 That Reason is the highest Judge and Umpire in matters of Religion; 2 Opin.
we must believe no farther, than we can see; for a man to become a fool that
he may be wise, 1 Cor. 3. 18 Phil. 3. 9.
to be saved purely by the righteousness of another* to keep all, Mar. 10. 39
by loosing all; this the natural man will by no means put in his Creed.

3 That a little Religion will serve the turn; 3 Opin.
the life-less form may in policy be kept up, but zeal is Frenzy; the world
thinks that religion to be best, which like leaf-gold, is spread very thin.

4 That way is not good, 4 Opin.
which is exposed to affliction, a stick, though it be straight, yet under
water it seems crooked: So Religion, if it be under affliction, appears to a
carnal eye crooked.

5 That all a man's care should be for the present; 5 Opin.
as that profane Cardinal said, he would leave his part in Paradise, to keep
his Cardinalship in Paris.

6 That Sinning is better than Suffering; 6 Opin.
it is more discretion to keep the skin whole, than the Conscience pure: These
are such Rules, as the Crooked Serpent has found out, which whosoever walk by,
shall not know Peace.

2 They walk after fleshly lusts, they do (...) turn Caterers for the Animalia
ventris, Luther.
flesh, Romans 13. 14. such an one was the Emperor Heliogabalus, he so indulged
the flesh, that he never sat but among sweet flowers, mixed with Amber and
Musk; he attired himself with Purple, set with precious stones; he burned in
his Lamps, instead of oil, a costly Balsome brought from Arabia, very
odoriferous; he bathed himself in perfumed waters, he did (...), he put his
body to no other use, Epictetus.
but to be a strainer for meat and drink to run through.

Thus Sinners walk after the flesh, if a drunken or unclean lust call, they
gratify it; they brand all for cowards, who dare not sin after the same rate
as they do. These instead of walking with God, walk contrary to him: Lust is
the Compass they sail by, Satan is their Pilot, and Hell the Port they are
bound for.

Use 2 Let us try whether we have this Character of the godly, Use 2.
do we walk with God? Trial.
That may be known,

1 By the way we walk in; it is a private retired way, wherein only some few
holy ones walk: therefore it is called a Pathway, to distinguish it from the
common road, Pro. 12. 28. In the pathway thereof is no death.

2 If we walk with God, then we walk in the fear of God, Genesis 5. 22. Enoch
walked with God: The Chalde Version renders it, he walked in the fear of the
Lord; the godly are fearful of that which may displease God, Genesis 39. 9. How
then can I do this great wickedness, and sin against God: this is not a base
servile fear, but

1 A fear springing from affection, Hos. 3. 5. a child fears to offend his
father, out of the tender affection he bears to him: This made holy Anselm say,
If Sin were on one side, and Hell on the other, I would rather leap into Hell,
than willingly offend my God.

2 It is a fear joined with affiance, Heb. 11. 7. By faith, Noah moved with
fear: Faith and fear go hand in hand; when the soul looks upon Gods holiness,
he fears; when he looks upon Gods promises, he believes: A godly man does
tremble, yet trust; fear preserves reverence, faith preserves cheerfulness;
fear keeps the soul from lightness, faith keeps it from overmuch sadness: By
this we may know whether we walk with God, if we walk in the fear of God, we
are fearful of infringing his Laws, and forfeiting his love: It is a brand set
upon sinners, Romans 3. 18. They have not the fear of God before their eyes. The
godly fear and offend not, Psa. 4. 4. the wicked offend and fear not, Ierem. 5.
23, 24. Loose and dissolute walking will soon estrange God from us, and make
him weary of our company, 2 Cor. 6. 4. What communion has light with darkness?

Use 2. Let me persuade all who would be accounted godly, Use 2.
to get into Noah's walk: Exhort.
Though the truth of grace be in the heart, yet the beauty of it is seen in the
walk.

1. Walking with God is very pleasing to God: He that walks with God, declares
to the world what is the company he loves most; his fellowship is with the
Father; he counts those the sweetest hours which are spent with God; this is
very grateful and acceptable to God, Genesis 5. 24. Enock walked with God. And see
how kindly God took this at Enocks hands, Heb. 11. 4. He had this testimony,
that he pleased God.

2. Close walking with God, will be a good means to entice and allure others to
walk with him. The Apostle exhorts Wives to walk so, that the Husbands might be
won by the Conversation of the Est pellax virtutis odor.
Wives, 1 Pet. 3. 1. Justin Martyr confessed he became a Christian, by
beholding the holy and innocent lives of the Primitive Eusebius.
Saints.

3. Close walking with God, would put to silence the Adversaries of the Truth,
1 Pet. 2. 15. A loose carriage, puts a Sword into wicked men's hands to wound
Religion: What a sad thing is it, when it shall be said of Professors, they are
as proud, as coverous, as unjust as others: Will not this expose the ways of
God to contempt? But holy and close walking, would stop the mouths of sinners,
that they should not be able to speak against Gods people, without giving
themselves the lie. Satan came to Christ, and found nothing in him, John 14.
30. What a confounding thing will it be to the wicked, when they shall have
nothing to fasten as a crime upon the godly, but their holiness, Dan. 6. 5. We
shall not find any occasion against this Daniel, unless we find it against him
concerning the Law of his God.

4. Walking with God is a pleasant walk: The ways of Wisdom are called
Pleasantness, Pro. 3. 17. Is not the light pleasant? Psalm. 89. 15. They shall
walk (O Lord,) in the light of thy countenance. Walking with God, is like
walking among Beds of (...) Arist (...). l. 1. (...)
Spices, which send forth a fragrant perfume. This is it which brings peace,
Act. 9. 31. Walking in the fear of the Lord, and in the joys of the Holy Ghost.
While we walk with God, what sweet Music does the Bird of Conscience make in
our breast? Psalm. 138. 5. They shall sing in the ways of the Lord.

5. Walking with God is honorable; it is a credit for one of an inferior rank
to walk with a King: What greater dignity can be put upon a mortal man, than to
converse with his Maker, and to take a turn with God every day.

6. Walking with God leads to rest, Heb. 4. 9. There remains a rest for the
people of God. The Philosopher says, Motion tends to Motus tendit ad quietem.
rest. Indeed there is a motion which does not tend to rest; they who walk with
their sins shall never have rest, Re. 4. 8. They rest not day and night: But
they that walk with God, shall sit down in the Kingdom of God, Luke 13. 29. As a
weary traveller when he comes home sits down and rests him, Rev. 3. 21. To him
that overcomes will I grant to sit with me in my Throne. A Throne denotes
Honor, and sitting, denotes rest.

7. Walking with God is the most safe walking: Walking in the ways of sin, is
like walking upon the edge of a River: The sinner treads upon the banks of the
bottomless Pit, and if Death gives him a jogg, he tumbles in; but it is safe
going in Gods way, Pro. 3. 23. Then shall thou walk in thy way safely: He walks
safe, who walks with a Guard; he that walks with God, shall have Gods Spirit to
guard him from sin, and Gods Angels to guard him from danger, Psalm. 91. 11.

8. Walking with God will make death sweet: It was Augustus his wish, that he
might have an (...), a quiet easy death, without much pain. If any thing make
our Pillow easy at death, it will be this, that we have walked with God in our
Generation: Do we think walking with God can do us any hurt? Did we ever hear
any cry out upon their Deathbed, that they have been too holy, that they have
prayed too much, or walked with God too much? No, that which has cut them to
the heart, has been this, that they have walked no more closely with God; they
have wrung their hands, and torn their hair, to think that they have been so
bewitched with the pleasures of the World: Close walking with God, will make
our Enemy (Death) to be at peace with us. King Ahashuerus, when he could not
sleep, called for the Book of Records, and read in it, Esther 6. 1. So when the
violence of sickness causes sleep to depart from our eyes, and we can call for
Conscience (that Book of Records) and find written in it, such a day we humbled
our souls by fasting, such a day our hearts melted in prayer; such a day we had
sweet communion with God; what a reviving will this be? How may we look death
in the face with comfort, and say, Lord, now take us up to thee in Heaven,
where we have so often been by affection, let us now be by fruition.

9 Walking with God; is the best way to know the mind of God; friends who walk
together, impart their secrets one to another, Psa. 25. 14. The secrets of the
Lord, is with them that fear him. Noah walked with God, and the Lord revealed a
great secret to him, of destroying the Old World, and saving him in the Ark.
Abraham walked with God, Genesis 24. 40. and God made him one of his
Privy Council, Genesis 18. 17. Shall I hide from Abraham that thing which I do?
God does sometimes sweetly unbosome himself to the soul in Prayer, and in the
holy Supper, as Christ made himself known to the Disciples, in the breaking of
bread, Luke 24. 35

10 They who walk with God, shall never be wholly left of God; the Lord may
retire himself for a time, to make his people cry after him the more, but he
will not quite leave them, Isa. 54. 8. I hid my face for a moment, but with
everlasting kindeness will I have mercy on thee. God will not cast off any of
his old acquaintance, he will not part with one that has born him company.
Enoch walked with God, and he was not, for God took him, Genesis 5. 24. He took
him up to heaven, as the Arabic renders it; Enoch was lodged in the bosom of
divine Love.

Quest. How may we do to walk with God?

Answ. 1 Get out of the old road of sin; he that would walk in a pleasant
meadow, must turn out of the road. The way of sin is full of Travelers, there
are so many traveling in this road, that hell, though it be of a great
circumference, is fain to enlarge it self, and make room for them, Isa. 5. 14.
This way of sin seems pleasant, but the end is damnable. I have (says the
Harlot) perfumed my bed, with Mirrhe, Aloes, and Cinnamon, Prove. 7. 17. See how
with one sweet (the Cinnamon) there were two bitters, Myrrh, and Aloes: for
that little sweet in sin at present, there will be a far greater proportion of
bitterness afterward: Therefore get out of these briars, you cannot walk with
God and sin, 2 Cor. 6. 14. What fellowship has righteousness with
unrighteousness?

2 If you would walk with God, get acquaintance with him, Job 22. 21. Acquaint
now thy self with him. Know God in his attributes and promises; strangers do
not walk together.

3 Get all differences removed, Amos 3. 3. Can two walk together except they
are agreed? This agreement and reconciliation is made by faith, Romans 3. 25.
Whom God has set forth to be a propitiation, through faith in his blood. When
once we are friends, then we shall be called up to the Mount as Moses, and have
this dignity conferred on us, to be the favorites of heaven, and to walk with
God.

4 If you would walk with God, get a liking to the ways of God: They are
adorned with beauty, Prove. 4. 18. svveetned with pleasure, Prove. 3. 17.
fenced with truth, Rev. 15. 3. accompanied with Life, Acts 2. 28. lengthned
with eternity, Hab. 3. 6. be enamoured with the way of Religion, and you will
soon walk in it.

5 If you would walk with God, take hold of his arm; such as walk in their own
strength, will soon grow weary and tire: Psalm. 71. 16. I will go in the
strength of the Lord God: We cannot walk with God, without God; let us press
him with his promise, Isa. 36. 27. I will cause you to walk in my statutes: If
God take us by the hand, then we shall walk and not faint, Isa. 40. 31.

SECT. XXIV.
24 He who is godly, 24 Character.
labors to be an instrument of making others godly; he is not content to go to
heaven alone, but would bring others thither; Spiders work only for themselves,
but Bees work for others: A godly man is both a Diamond and a Lodestone; a
Diamond for the sparkling luster of grace, and a Lodestone for his
attractiveness, he is ever drawing others to the embracing of Piety: Living
things have a propagating virtue; where Religion lives in the heart, there will
be an endeavor to propagate the life of grace, in those we converse with,
Philemon v. 10. My son Onesimus, whom I have begotten in my bonds. Though God
be the fountain of grace, yet the Saints are pipes to transmit living streams
to others. This thirsty endeavor after the conversion of souls, proceeds,

1 From the nature of Godliness; it is like fire, which assimilates and turns
every thing into its own nature; where there is the fire of grace in the heart,
it will endeavor to inflame others; grace is an holy leaven, which will be
seasoning and leavening others with divine principles. Paul would fain have
converted Agrippa; how did he court him with Rhetoric? Act. 26. 27. King
Agrippa, beleevest thou the Prophets? I know that thou beleevest: his Zeal and
Eloquence had almost captivated the King, ver. 28. Then Agrippa said unto Paul,
almost thou perswadest me to be a Christian.

2 A godly man attempts the conversion of others, out of a spirit of
compassion: Grace makes the heart tender; a godly man cannot choose but pity
such as are in the gall of bitterness; he sees what a deadly cup is a brewing
for the wicked; they must without repentance, be bound over to Gods wrath; the
fire which rained on Sodom, was but a painted fire, in comparison of
hellfire; this is a fire with a vengeance, Jude 7. Suffering the Vengeance of
eternal fire: now, a godly man seeing captive Sinners ready to be damned,
labors to convert them from the error of their way, 2 Cor. 5. 11. Knowing the
terror of the Lord, we persuade men.

3 A godly man endeavors the good of others, out of an holy zeal he bears to
Christ's glory; the glory of Christ is dear to him, as his own salvation;
therefore that this may be promoted, he labors Summo conatu, to bring in souls
to Christ.

It Is a glory to Christ, when multitudes are born to him; every star adds a
luster to the sky, every convert, is a member added to Christ's body, and a
jewel adorning his Crown. Though Christ's glory cannot be increased, as he is
God, yet as he is Mediator, it may; the more are saved, the more Christ is
exalted; why else should the Angels rejoice at the Conversion of a Luke 15. 10.
Sinner? but because now Christ's glory shines the more.

Use 1. This excludes them from the number of godly, Use 1.
who are spiritual Eunuchs, 1 Bran.
they labor not to promote the Salvation of others. Nascitur indigne per quem
non nascitur alter. --

Did men love Christ, they would endeavor to draw as many as they could to
him. He who loves his Captain, will persuade others to come under his Banner;
this unmasks the hypocrite. Though an hypocrite may make a show of Grace
himself, yet he never minds the procuring Grace in others; he is (...) without
bowels. I may allude to that, Zac. 11. 9. That which dies, let it die, and that
which is cut off, let it be cut off. Let souls go to the Devil, he cares not.

2. How far are they from being godly, 2 Bran.
who instead of endeavoring Grace in others, labor to destroy all hopeful
beginnings of Grace in them? Instead of drawing them to Christ, they draw them
from Christ; their work is to poison and mischief souls: This mischieving of
souls is three ways.

1. By evil Edicts: So Jeroboam made Israel sin, 1 King. 17. 26. He forced them
to Idolatry.

2. By evil Examples: Examples speak louder than Precepts; but principally the
examples of great ones are influential: Men placed on high, are like the Pillar
of Cloud, when that went, Israel went: If great ones move irregularly, others
will follow after.

3. By evil Company; the breath of sinners is Nemo errat sibi ipsi, sed
dementiam suam spargit in Proximos. Sen. Epist.
infectious; they are like the Dragon which cast a flood out of his mouth,
Revel. 12. 15. They cast a flood of oaths out of their mouth: Wicked tongues
are set on fire of Hell, Iam. 3. 6. The sinner finds Match and Powder, and the
Devil finds fire: The wicked are ever setting snares, and temptations before
others; as the Prophet speaks in another sense, Ier. 35. 5. I set pots full of
wine, and cups, and said unto them drink. So the wicked set pots of Wine before
others, and make them drink till Reason be stupefied, and Lust inflamed: These
are prodigiously wicked, who make men Proselites to the Devil: How sad will
their doom be, who besides their own sins, have the blood of others to answer
for?

3. If it be the sign of a godly man to promote Grace in others, 3 Bran.
then much more ought he to promote it in his near Relations. A godly man will
be careful that his Children should know God; he would be sorry that any of his
flesh should burn in hell; he labors to see Christ formed in them, who are
himself in another Edition. Austin says, That his Mother Monica traveled with
greater care and pain for his Spiritual Birth, than for his Lib. 5. Confess.
Natural.

The time of Childhood is the fittest time to be sowing seeds of Religion in
our Children, Isa. 28. 9. Whom shall he make understand Doctrine? Them that are
weaned from the milk, that are drawn from the breasts. The Wax, while it is
soft and tender, will take any impression: Children while they are young will
fear a reproof, when they are old they will hate it,

1. It is pleasing to God that our Children should know him betimes: When you
come into a garden, you love to pluck the young bud, and smell to it; God loves
a Saint in the bud; of all the Trees the Lord made choice of in a Prophetical
Vision, it was the Almond Tree, which blossoms one of the first of the Jer. 1
11
Trees: Such an Almond Tree is an early Convert.

2. By endeavoring to bring up our Children in the fear of the Lord, we shall
provide for Gods glory when we are Celebre honoris divini trophaeum, etiam
mortui in altum feremus.
dead. A godly man should not only honor God while he lives, but do something
that may promote Gods glory when he is dead: Our Children being seasoned with
gracious Principles, will stand up in our room, when we are gone, and will
glorify God in their generation. A good piece of ground does not only bear a
fore-crop, but an after-crop; he that is godly, does not only bear God a crop
of obedience himself while he lives, but by principling his Child with
Religion, he bears God an after-crop when he is dead.

Use 2. Let all who have Gods Name named upon them, Use 2. Exhort.
do what in them lies to advance Piety in others: A Knife touched with a
Loadstone will draw the Needle; he whose heart is divinely touched with the
Loadstone of Gods Spirit, will endeavor to draw those who are near him to
Christ: The Heathen could say, We are not born for our selves Non nobis solum
nati.
only. The more excellent any thing is, the more communicative; in the body
every member is diffusive, the eye conveys light, the head spirits, the liver
blood; a Christian must not move altogether within his own circle, but
endeavor the welfare of Vir bonus magis aliis prodest quam sibi.
others: To be diffusively good, makes us resemble God, whose sacred influence
is universal.

And surely it will be no grief of heart, when Conscience can witness for us,
that we have brought glory to God in this manner, by laboring to fill heaven.

Not that this is any ways Meritorious, Caution.
or has any causal influence upon our Salvation. Christ's blood is the cause;
but our promoting Gods glory in the Conversion of others, is a signal evidence
of our Salvation: As the Rainbow is not a cause why God will not drown the
World, but it is a sign that he will not drown it; or as Rahabs Scarlet thread
she hung out of the Josh. 2. ^8.
window, was not a cause why she was exempted from destruction, but it was a
sign of her being exempted; so our building up others in the Faith, is not a
cause why we are saved, but it is a Symbol of our Piety, and a presage of our
felicity.

And thus I have shown the Marks and Characters of a godly man. If a person
thus described be reputed a Phanatick, then Abraham, and Moses, and David, and
Paul, were Phanaticks, which I think none will dare to affirm, but Atheists.

CHAP. V.
Containing two Conclusions.
COncerning the Characteristical signs, aforementioned, I shall lay down two
Conclusions.

1 These Characters are a Christians box of evidences; 1 Conclus.
for as an impenitent sinner has the signs of reprobation upon him, whereby,
as by so many spots and tokens, he may know he shall dye; so he who can show
these happy signs of a godly man, may see the Symptoms of Salvation in his
Soul, and may know he is passed from death to life; he is as sure to go to
heaven, as if he were in heaven already; such a person is undoubtedly a member
of Christ, and if he should perish, then something of Christ might perish.

These blessed Characters, may comfort a Christian under all worldly
dejections, and Diabolical suggestions; Satan tempts a Child of God with this,
that he is an hypocrite, and has no title to the Land of promise; a Christian
may pull out these evidences, and put the Devil to prove, that ever any wicked
man or hypocrite, had such a fair Certificate to show for heaven: Satan may
sooner prove himself a liar, than the Saint an hypocrite.

2 He who has one of these Characters in truth, 2 Conclus.
has seminally all, he who has one link of a Chain, has the whole Chain.

Object. But may a Child of God say, either I have not all these Characters,
or they are so weakly wrought in me, that I cannot discern them?

Answ. To satisfy this scruple, you must diligently observe the distinctions
the Scripture gives of Christians; it casts them into several classes and
orders; some are infantuli, little children, who are but newly laid to the
breast of the Gospel; others are adulti, Young men, who are grown up to more
maturity of Grace; others are patres, Fathers, who are ready to take their
degree of Glory, 1 John 2. 12. 13, 4. Now, you who are but in the first rank or
classis, yet you may have the vitals of Godliness, as well as those who have
arrived at an higher stature in Christ: the Scripture speaks of the Cedar, and
the bruised Reed, the last of which is as true a Plant of the heavenly
Paradise, as the other; so that the weakest ought not to be discouraged; all
have not these characters of godliness written in Text-Letters, if they be but
dimly stamped upon their souls, God can read the work of his spirit there.
Though the seal be but weakly set upon the wax, it ratifies the will, and gives
a real conveyance of an estate: (...) 1 Kings 14. 13.
If there be found but some good thing toward the Lord (as it was said of
Abijah) God will accept it.

CHAP. VI.
Containing the first Use, Exhorting all to become Godly.
Use 1 FRom all that has been said, I would draw three great Uses. Use 1.


First, Such as are still in their natural estate, who never yet did relish any
sweetness in the things of God; let me beseech them in the bowels of Christ,
that they would labor to get these Characters of the Godly, engraven upon
their hearts; though godliness be the object of the worlds scorn and ha^ed (as
in Tertullians days, the name of a Christian was a Ideo torquemur confitentes,
quia nominis prali^^ est. Tertu^ Apol.
crime) yet be not ashamed to espouse godliness; know, that persecuted
godliness, is better than prosperous wickedness; what will all the world avail
a man, without godliness? To be learned and ungodly, is like a Devil
transformed into an Angel of light; to be beautiful and ungodly, is like a fair
picture hung in an infected room; to be honorable in the world and ungodly, is
like an Ape in purple, or like that Image, which had an head of gold upon feet
of clay; it is godliness, Dan. 2. 33.
that en-nobles and consecrates the heart, making God and Angels fall in love
with it.

Labor for the reality of godliness, rest not in the common workings of Gods
spirit; Col. 1. 6.
think not that it is enough to be intelligent and discurive, a man may
discourse of Religion to the admiration of others, yet not feel the sweetness
of those things in his own Soul: the Lute gives a melodious sound to others,
but is not at all sensible of the sound it self; Judas could make an elegant
discourse of Christ, but did not feel virtue from him.

Rest not in having your affections a little stirred; an hypocrite may have
affections of sorrow, as Ahab; affections of desire, as Balaam, these are
slight and flashy, and do not amount to real godliness. Oh I labor to be as
the Kings daughter, glorious within, Psa. 45. 13.

That I may persuade the sons of men to become godly, I shall lay down some
forcible Motives and Arguments, and the Lord make them as nails fastened by his
spirit.

1 Let men seriously weigh their misery, Motive
while they remain in a state of ungodliness; which may make them hasten out of
this Sodom: the misery of ungodly men appears in nine particulars.

1 They are in a state of death, Ephesians. 2. 1. dead in Manet hoc porisma, unione^
anim e nostrae cum Christo, veram esse and unica^ ejus vitam, ac proinde extra
Christu^ nos esse penitus mortuos, quia regnat in nobis pecca^u^ mortis
materia^ Calvin.
Trespasses: dead they must needs be, who are cut off from Christ, the
principle of life; for as the body without the soul is dead, so is the soul
without Christ. This spiritual death is visible in the effect, it bereaves men
of their senses: sinners have no sense of God in them, Ephe. 4. 19. who being
without feeling: all their moral endowments, are but strewing flowers upon a
dead corpse; and what is hell, but a sepulcher to bury the dead in.

2 Their offerings are polluted; not only the Pro. 21. 4.
Ploughing, but the praying of the wicked is sin, Prove. 15. 8. The sacrifice of
the wicked is an abomination to the Lord: If the water be foul in the well, it
cannot be clean in the bucket; if the heart be full of sin, the duties cannot
be pure: In what a strait is every ungodly person, if he does not come to the
Ordinance, he is a contemner of it, if he does come, he is a defiler of it.

3. Such as live and die ungodly, have no right to the Covenant of Grace, Ephesians.
2. 12. At that time ye were without Christ, (...), strangers from the Covenants
of Promise. And to be without Covenant, is to be like one in the old World,
without an Ark. The Covenant is the Gospel-Charter, which is enriched with many
glorious privileges, but who may plead the benefit of this Covenant? Surely
only such whose hearts are in-laid with grace. Read the Charter, Ezekiel. 36. 26.
A new heart will I give you, and I will put my spirit within you: Then it
follows, ver. 28. I will be your God. A person dying in his ungodliness, has
no more to do with the New Covenant, than a Ploughman has to do with the
privileges of a Corporation.

Gods Writing is always before his Seal, 2 Cor. 3. 3. Ye are declared to be the
Epistle of Christ, written not with ink, but with the spirit of the living God,
not in Tables of stone, but in fleshy Tables of the heart. Here is a golden
Epistle, the writing is the work of Faith, the Table it is written in, is the
heart, the finger that writes it is the spirit: Now, after the Spirits writing,
follows the Spirits sealing, Ephesians. 1. 13. After ye believed ye were sealed
with the Spirit; that is, ye were sealed up to an assurance of glory: What have
ungodly men to do with the seal of the Covenant, who have not the writing?

4. The ungodly are spiritual fools; Psalm 75. 4. I said to the fools deal not
foolishly, and to the wicked, lift not up the Nonne isti moriones qui dum
animam suam vulnerant rident?
horn. If one had a Child very beautiful, yet if he were a fool, the Parent
would take little joy in him: The Scripture has dressed the Sinner in a Fools
Coat; and let me tell you, better be a fool void of Reason, than a fool void of
Grace: This is the Devils fool, Pro. 14. 9. Is not he a fool who refuses a
rich portion? God offers Christ and Salvation, but the Sinner refuses this
portion, Psalm. 81. 11. Israel would none of me. Is not he a fool who prefers an
Annuity before an Inheritance? Is not he a fool who tends his mortal part, and
neglects his Angelical part? As if one should paint the wall of his house, and
let the Timber rot: Is not he a fool who will feed the Devil with his Soul? As
that Emperor who fed his Lion with Heliogab.
Feasant: Is not he a fool who lays a snare for himself? Pro. 1. 18. Who
consults his own shame, Hab. 2. 10. who loves death, Pro. 8. 36.

5. The ungodly are vile persons, Nahum. ^ 14. I will make thy grave, for thou
art vile. (...) men base, it blots their name, it taints their blood, Psalm. 14.
3. They are altogether become filthy: In the Hebrew it is, rancidi facti sunt,
they are become (...)
stinking. Call wicked men never so bad, you cannot call them out of their
name; they are swine, (...). Cyrill*
Mat. 7. 6. Vipers, Mat. 3. 7. Devils, John 6. 70. The wicked are scoria and
gluma, the dross and refuse, Psalm 119. 119. And heaven is too pure to have any
dross mingle with it.

6. Their Temporal Mercies are continued in Judgment: The wicked may have
health and estate, yea more than heart can wish, Psa. 73. 7. But their Table is
a snare, Psa. 69. 2^. Sinners have their mercies with Gods leave, but not with
his love: The people of Israel had better been without their Quails, than to
have had such sour sauce. The ungodly are Usurpers, they want a spiritual
Title to what they possess; their good things are like cloth taken up at the
Drapers, which is not paid for; death will bring in a sad reckoning at last.

7. Their Temporal Judgments are not removed in Mercy: Pharaoh had ten Arrows
shot at him (ten Plagues) and all those Plagues were removed, but his heart
remaini^g hard those Plagues were not removed in Mercy; it was not a
preservation* but a reservation: God reserved him for a signal Monument of his
Justice, when he was drowned in the depth of the Sea: God may reprieve men's
persons when he does not remit their sins: The wicked may have sparing Mercy,
but not saving Mercy.

8. The ungodly while they live are exposed to the wrath of God, Ioh. 3. 36. He
that believes not, the wrath of God abides on him. He who wants Grace, is
like one who wants a pardon, he is every hour in fear of Execution: How can a
wicked man rejoice? Over his head the Sword of Gods Justice hangs, and under
him hell fire burns.

9. The ungodly at death must undergo Gods fury and indignation, Psalm. 9. 17.
The wicked shall be turned into hell. I have read of a Loadstone in Aethiopia,
which has two Vincentius.
corners, with one it draws the iron to it, with the other it puts the iron from
it: So God has two hands, of Mercy and Justice, with the one he will draw the
godly to heaven, with the other he will thrust the sinner to hell: And O how
dreadful is that place! It is called a fiery (...)
lake, Rev. 20. 15. A lake, to denote the plenty of Torments in hell; a fiery
lake, to show the fierceness of them: Fire is the most torturing Element.
Strabo in his Geography mentions a Lake in Galilee, of such a pestiferous
nature, that it scaldeth off the skin of whatsoever is cast into it: But alas,
that Lake is cool, compared with this fiery Lake, into which the damned are
thrown. To demonstrate this fire terrible, there are two most pernicious
qualities in it. 1. It is Sulphurous, it is mixed with brimstone, Revel. 21.
8. which is unsavory and suffocating. 2. It is unextinguishable; though the
wicked shall be choked in the flames, yet not consumed, Revel. 20. 10. And the
Devil was cast into the lake of fire and brimstone, where the Beast and the
False Prophet Poenam inextinguibilem and foetorem maximum minatur Deus Muscul.
are, and shall be tormented day and night for ever and ever. Behold the
deplorable condition of all ungodly ones, in the other world, they shall have a
life that always dies, and a death that always lives: May not this affright men
out of their sins, and make them become godly, unless they are resolved to try
how hot hell fire is?

Motive
Pro. 12. 26. The righteous is more excellent than his Neighbor. As the Flower
of the Sun, as the Wine of Lebanon, as the sparkling upon Aarons Breast Plate,
such is the Orient splendour of a person imbellished with godliness: The
exce^lency of the persons of the godly, appears in seven particulars.

1. They are precious; therefore they are set apart for God, Psalm. 4. 3. Know
that the Lord has set apart him that is godly for himself: We set apart things
that are precious; the godly are set apart as Gods peculiar treasure, Psa. 135.
4. As his garden of delight, Cant. 4. 12. As his Royal Diadem, Isa. 62. 3. The
godly are the excellent of the earth, Psa. 16. 2. Comparable to fine gold, Lam.
4. 2. Double refined, Zach. 13. 9. They are the glory of the Creation, Isa. 46.
13. Origin compares the Saints to Saphires and (...). Origin. Cont. Cel^.
Crystal: God calls them Jewels, Mal. 3. 17. They are so:

1. For their value; Diamonds (says Pliny) were not known a long time but
among Princes, and were hung upon their Diadem: God does so value his people,
that he will give Kingdoms for their ransom, Isa. 43. 5. He laid his best
Jewel to pawn for them, Ioh. 3. 6.

2. They are Jewels for their luster: If one Pearl of grace does shine so
bright that it does delight Christ's heart, Cant. 4. 9. Thou have ravished my
heart with one of thine eyes; that is, one of thy Graces: Then how illustrious
are all the Graces met in a Constellation?

2. The godly are honorable, Isa. 43. 4. Thou have been (...). Gloriosus
fuisti.
honorable: The godly are a Crown of glory in the hand of God, Isa. 62. 3.
They are plants of Renown, Ezekiel. 16. 14. They are not only Vessels of Mercy,
but Vessels of Honor, 2 Timothy 2. 21. Aristotle calls Honor, the chief good
(...).
thing. The godly are near a Kin to the blessed Trinity, they have the Tutelage
and Guardianship of Angels; they have Gods Name written upon them, Revel. 3.
12. and the Holy Ghost dwelling in them, 2 Timothy 1. 14.

The godly are a sacred Priesthood; the Priesthood under the Law was
honorable; the Kings Daughter was wife to Iehoiada the Priest, 2 Chronicles. 22.
11. It was a custom among the Egyptians, to have their Kings chosen out of
their Priests: The Saints are a Divine Priesthood to offer up spritiual
sacrifices, 1 Pet. 2. 9. They are (...), Coheirs with Christ, Romans 8. 17. They
are Kings, Rev. 1. 6. Novarinus relates of an ancient King who invited a
Company of poor Christians, and made them a great Feast, and being asked why he
showed so much respect to persons of such mean birth and Extract, he told them,
these I must honor as the Children of the most high God, they will be Kings
and Princes with me in another world. The godly are in some sense higher than
the Angels, the Angels are Christ's friends, these are his spouse; the Angels
are called morning-stars, Job 38. 7. but the Saints are clothed with the Sun of
righteousness, Rev. 12. 1. all men says (...), Chrysostom.
Chrysostom, are ambitious of honor; behold then the honor of the godly!
Prove. 7. 8. Wisdom is the principal thing, therefore get wisdom, exalt her,
and she shall promote thee, she shall bring thee to honor, when thou do
embrace her: The Trophies of the Saints renown, will be erected in another
world. -- Famaque post cineres major --

3 The godly are beloved of God, Psalm. 47. 4. The excellency of Jacob whom he
loved: An holy heart, is the garden where God plants the flower of his love:
Gods love to his people is an ancient love, it bears date from eternity, Ephe.
1. 4. he loves them with a choice distinguishing love, they are the dearly
beloved of his soul, Ier. 12. 7. The men of the world have bounty dropping from
Gods fingers, but the godly have love dropping from Gods heart; he gives the
one a golden cup; the other a golden kiss; he loves the godly, as he loves
Christ, John 17. 26. it is the same love for kind, though not for degree: here
the Saints do but pitissare, sip of Gods love, in heaven they shall drink of
Rivers of pleasure, Psa. 36. 8. And this love of God is permanent; death may
take away their life from them, but not Gods love from them, Ier. 31. 4. I have
loved thee with a love of (...)
perpetuity.

4 The godly are prudent persons, they have good Insight and Foresight.


1 They have good insight, 1 Cor. 2. 10. He that is spiritual judges all
things: the godly have insight into Persons and Things.


1 They have insight into persons, they have the anointing of God, and by a
spirit of discerning, they can see some difference between the precious and the
vile, Ier. 15. 19. Gods people are not censorious, but they are juditious; they
can see a wanton heart, through a naked breast, and a spotted face; they can
see a revengeful spirit, through a bitter tongue; they can guess at the Tree by
the fruit, Mat. 12. 33. They can see the Plague-tokens of sin, appear in the
wicked, which makes them remove from the tents of those sinners, Number. 16. 26.

2 The godly have insight into Things Mysterious.

1 They can see much of the mystery of their own hearts: Take the greatest
Politician, who understands the mysteries of state, yet he does not understand
the mystery of his own heart; you shall sometimes hear him swear, his heart is
good; but a Child of God sees much heart-corruption, 1 King. 8. 38. though
some flowers of grace grow there, yet he sees how fast the weeds of sin grow,
therefore is continually weeding his heart by repentance and mortification.

2 The godly can discern the mystery of the times, 1 Chronicles. 12. 32. The
children of Issachar were men that had understanding of the times: The godly
can see when an age runs dregs, when Gods name is dishonored, his messengers
despised, his Gospel ecclipsed; the people of God labor to keep their garments
pure, Rev. 16. 15. their care is, that the times may not be the worse for them,
nor they the worse for the times.

3 The godly understand the mystery of living by faith, Heb. 10. 38. The just
shall live by faith: they can trust God, where they cannot trace him; they can
fetch comfort out of a promise, as Moses did water out of the rock: Hab. 3. 17.
Though the Fig Tree does not blossom, yet I will rejoice in the Lord.

2 The godly have good foresight:

1 They foresee the evil of a Temptation, 2 Cor. 2. 11. We are not ignorant of
his devices; The wicked swallow temptations like Pills, and when it is too
late, feel these Pills gripe their Conscience; but the godly foresee a
Temptation and will not come near; they see a snake under the green grass, they
know Satan's kindness, is craftiness; he does as I^phtha's daughter, he brings
forth the Timbrel, and danceth before men with a temptation, and then brings
them very low, Judge. 11. 35.

2. The godly foresee temporal dangers, Pro. 22. 3. A prudent man foreseeth
the evil, and hides himself. The people of God see when the Cloud of wrath is
ready to drop upon a Nation, and they get into their Chambers, Isa. 26. 20. The
Attributes and Promises of God; and into the clifts of the Rock, the bleeding
wounds of Christ, and hide themselves; well therefore may they be baptized with
the name of Wise Virgins.

5. The godly are the bull-wark of a Nation, 2 Kin. 2. 12. O my Father, the
Chariots of Israel, and the horsemen thereof. The godly are the Pillars to keep
a City and Nation from falling; they stave off Judgment from a Land: It was
said of old, so long as Hector lived, Troy could not be demolished: God could
do nothing to Sodom till Lot was gone out of it, Genesis 19. 22. Golden
Christians are Brazen Walls. The Lord would soon break up house in the world,
were it not for the sakes of a few Religious ones: Would God (think we)
preserve the world only for Drunkards and Swearers? He would soon sink the Ship
of Church and State, but that some of his Elect are in it: Yet such is the
indiscretion of men as to injure the Saints, and to count them burdens which
are the chief Isa. 1^. 24.
blessings.

6. The godly are of a brave Heroic spirit, Numb. 14. 24. My servant Caleb,
because he had another spirit. An excellent spirit was found in Daniel, Cap. 5.
12. The godly hate that which is base and sordid, they will not enrich their
purses by inslaving their Consciences; they are Noble and courageous in Gods
Cause, Pro. 28. 1. The righteous are bold as a Lion. The Saints live suitably
to their high birth, they breathe after Gods love, they aspire after glory,
they set their feet where worldly men set their heart; they display the Banner
of the Gospel, lifting up Christ's Name and interest in the world.

7. The godly are happy persons: King Balak sent to curse the people of God,
but the Lord would not suffer it, Numb. 22. 12. God said unto Balaam, thou
shall not curse the people, for they are blessed: And Moses afterward records
it as a thing memorable, that that intended Curse of the King, God did convert
into a blessing, Deuteronomy. 23. 5. The Lord thy God turned the curse into a blessing
unto thee. They must needs be happy who are always on the strongest side, Psa.
118. 6. The Lord is on my side: they are happy who have all conditions
sanctified to them, Romans 8. 28. Who are crowned with peace while they live,
Psa. 119. 165. and with glory when they die, Psalm. 73. 24. And may not this
tempt all to become godly? Deuteronomy. 33. 29. Happy art thou, O Israel; a people
saved by the Lord.

3. Motive
To endeavor after godliness, is most

1. It is the highest act of Reason, for a man to become another man: If while
he remains in Natures Soil, he is poisoned with sin, no more actually fit for
communion with God, than a Toad is fit to be made an Angel, then it is very
consonant to Reason, that he should endeavor after a change.

2. It is rational, because this change is for the better, Ephesians. 5. 8. Now are
ye light in the Lord. Will not any man be willing to exchange a dark prison
for a Kings Palace? Will he not change away his brass for gold? Thou that
becomest godly* changest for the better; thou changest thy pride for humility,
thy uncleanness for holiness; thou changest a lust that will damn thee for a
Christ that will save thee: Were not men besotted, had not their fall beat off
their headpiece, they would see it were the most rational thing in the world
to become godly.

4. The excellency of godliness. Motive
Auro quid melius? jaspis, quid jaspide? virtus.

The excellency of godliness appears several ways.

1. Godliness is our spiritual beauty, Psa. 110. 3. The beauties of holiness:
Godliness is to the soul as the light to the world, to illustrate and adorn it:
It Is not greatness sets us off in Gods eye, but goodness: What is the beauty of
the Angels but their sanctity? Godliness is the curious imbroidery and
workmanship of the Holy Ghost: A soul furnished with godliness, is damask'd
with beauty, it is enameled with purity, this is the clothing of wrought
gold, which makes the King of heaven fall in love with us: were there not an
excellency in holiness, the hypocrite would never go about to paint it:
Godliness sheds a glory and luster upon the Saints: What are the Graces, but
the golden feathers in which Christ's Dove Psa* 68. 13.
shines?

2. Godliness is our defense: Grace is called the Armor of Light, Romans 13. 12.
It is light for beauty, and armor for defense. A Christian has armor of Gods
making, which cannot be shot through; he has the Shield of Faith, the Helmet of
Hope, the Breast Plate of Righteousness; this is armor of proof, which defends
against the assaults of temptation, and the terror of (...). Chrysostom.
hell.

3 Godliness breeds solid peace, Psa. 119. 165. Great peace have they that love
thy Law. Godliness composeth the heart, making it sedate and calm, like the
upper Region, where there are no winds and tempests. How can that heart be
unquiet where the Prince of Peace dwells, Col. 1. 27. Christ in you. An holy
heart may be compared to the doors of Solomon's Temple, 1 Kin. 6. 32. which were
made of Olive Tree, carved with open Flowers. There is the Olive of peace, and
the open Flowers of joy in that heart: godliness does not destroy a Christians
mirth, but refine it; his Rose is without prickles, his wine without froth; he
must needs be full of joy and peace, who is a favorite of heaven; he may truly
sing a Requiem to his soul, and say, Soul take thy Luke 12. 19.
^ase. King Ptolomy asked one how he might be in rest when he dreamed? He
replied, Let piety be the scope of all thy actions: If one should ask me how he
should be in rest when he is awake? I would return the like answer, Let his
soul be in-laid with godliness.

4. Godliness is the best Trade we can drive, it brings profit; wicked men say,
It is vain to serve God, and what profit is it? Mal. 3. 14. To be sure there is
no profit in sin, Pro. 10. 2. Treasures of wickedness profit nothing. But,
godliness is profitable, 1 Timothy 4. 8. It is like digging in a gold Mine, where
there is gain as well as toil: godliness makes God himself over to us as a
portion, Psa. 16. 5. The Lord is the portion of my Inheritance: If God be our
portion, all our estate lies in Jewels; where God gives himself, he gives every
thing else; he who has the Manor has all the Royalties belonging to it: God
is a portion that can neither be spent nor lost, Psa. 26. 73. Thus we see
godliness is a thriving Trade.

And as godliness brings profit with it, so it is profitable (...) for all
things, 1 Timothy 4. 8. What is so besides godliness? Food will not give a man
wisdom, gold will not give him health, honor will not give him beauty; but
godliness is useful for all things, it fenceth off all troubles, it supplies
all wants, it makes soul and body completely happy.

5. Godliness is an enduring substance, it knows no fall of the leaf.

All worldly delights have a Deaths-Head set upon them; they are but shadows,
and they are flying: Earthly comforts are like Paul's friends, who brought him
to the Ship, and there left him, Acts 20. 38. So these will bring a man to his
grave, and then take their farewell; but godliness is (...), a possession we
cannot be robbed of, it runs parallel with Eternity; force cannot weaken it,
age cannot wither it; it out-braves sufferings, it our-lives death, Pro. 10. ^.
Death may pluck the stalk of the body, but the Flower of grace is not hurt. --
numquam stygias fertur ad umbras inclyta virtus. Seneca.


6 Godliness is so excellent, that the worst men would have it when they are
going hence; though at present godliness be despised, and under a cloud, yet at
death all would be godly: A Philosopher asking a young man, whether he would be
rich Croesus, or virtuous Socrates? answered, he would live with Croesus, and
dye with Socrates: So men would live with the wicked in pleasure, but dye with
the godly, Numb. 23. 10. Let me dye the death of the righteous, and let my end
be like his: If then godliness be so desirable at death, why should we not
pursue after it now? godliness is as needful now, and would be more feasible.

5 There are but few godly; they are as Motive
most receive the Mark of the Beast, Rev. 13. 17. The Devil keeps open house
for all comers, and he is never without ghuests; this may prevail with us to
be godly, if the number of the Saints be so small, how should we labor to be
found among these pearls? Romans 9. 27. but a remnant shall be saved: it is
better going to Heaven with a few, than to Hell in the crowd.

Motive
about which, persons void of godliness busy themselves; men are taken up
about the (...) things of this life, and what profit has he that has labored
for the wind? Eccles. 5. 16. can the wind fill? what is gold but dust? Amos 2.
8. which will sooner choke, than satisfy: pull off the mask of the most
beautiful thing under the Sun, and look what is within, there is care and
vexation; and the greatest care is yet behind, and that is account: The things
of the world, are but as a bubble in the water, or a Meteor in the air.

But godliness has a real worth in it, if you speak of true honor, it is to
be born of God; if of true valor, it is to fight the good fight of faith; if
of true delight, it is to have joy in the Holy ghost. Oh then espouse
godliness! here is reallity to be had; of other things, we may say as Zac. 10.
2. They comfort in vain.

CHAP. VII.
Prescribing some helps to Godliness.
Quest. But what shall we do that we may be godly?

Answ. I shall briefly lay down some rules or helps to godliness.

1 Be diligent in the use of all means, 1 Rule.
that may promote godliness, Luke 13. 24. strive to enter in at the straight
gate: what is purpose without pursuit? when you have made your estimate of
godliness, prosecute those mediums which are most expedient for obtaining it.

2 If you would be godly, 2 Rule.
take heed of the world; it is hard for a clod of dust to become a star, 1 Ioh.
2. 15. love not the world: many would be godly, but the honors and profits of
the world divert them; where the world fills both head and heart, there is no
room for Christ; he whose mind is rooted in the earth, is likely enough to
deride godliness; when our Savior was preaching against sin, the Pharisees,
who were covetous, derided him, Luke 16. 14. The world eats out the heart of
godliness, as the lvy eats out the heart of the Oak; the world kills with her
silver darts.

3 Inure your selves to holy thoughts; 3 Rule.
serious meditation, represents every thing in its native color; it shows an
evil in sin, and a luster in grace. By holy thoughts, the head grows clearer,
and the heart better, Psa. 119. 59. I thought on my ways, and turned my feet
unto thy testimonies: Did men step aside a little out of the noise and hurry of
business, and spend but half an hour every day, in thinking upon their souls,
and eternity, it would produce a wonderful alteration in them, and tend very
much to a real and blessed conversion.

4 Watch your hearts; 4 Rule.
it was Christ's watchword to his Disciples, Mat. 24. 42. Watch therefore; the
heart will praecipitate us to sin, before we are aware; a subtle heart, needs a
watchful eye; watch your thoughts, your affections; the heart has a thousand
doors to run out at: O keep close sentinel in your souls! stand continually
upon your Watchtower, Hab. 2. 1. when you have prayed against sin, watch
against Haud militi tutum cum in castris ei excuba^dum est, vel ad quadrantem
hor ae a somno opprimi.
tentation; most wickedness in the world, is committed for want of
watchfulness; watchfulness maintains godliness, it is the selvedge which keeps
religion from ravelling out.

5 Make Conscience of spending your time, 5 Rule.
Ephesians. 5. 16. redeeming the time: Many persons fool away their Aut aliud agendo
aut male agendo^ Sen.
time; some in idle visits, others in recreations and pleasures, which secretly
bewitch the heart, and take it off from better things: What are our golden
hours for but to mind our souls? Time mis-improved, is not time lived, but time
lost. Time is a precious commodity; a piece of wax in it self, is not much
worth, but as it is affixed to the label of a Will, and conveyes an estate, so
it is of great value: Thus time, simply in it self, is not so considerable, but
as salvation is to be wrought out in it, and a conveyance of heaven depends
upon the well improvement of it, so it is of infinite concernment.

6 Think of your short stay in the world, 6 Rule.
1 Chronicles. 29. 15. Our days on the Earth are as a shadow, and there is none
abiding. There is but a span between the Cradle and the Grave: Solomon says,
there is a time to be born, and a time to dye, Eccles. 3. 2. but mentions no
time of living, as if that were so short, it were not worth naming; and time,
when it is once gone, cannot be recalled; the Scripture compares time to a
flying Eagle, Io^ 9. 6. -- yet, herein time differs from the Eagle, the Eagle
flies forward, and then back again, but time has wings only to fly forward, it
never returns back. -- fugit irrevocabile tempus --

The serious thoughts of our short abode here, would be a great means to
promote godliness; what if death should come before we are ready? what if our
life should breathe out, before Gods spirit has breathed in? he that considers
how flitting and winged his life is, will hasten his repentance; when God is
about to make a short work, he will not make a long work.

7 Possess your selves with this maxim, 7 Rule.
that godliness is the end of your Creation; God never sent men into the world,
only to eat and drink* and put on fine clothes, but that they might serve him
in righteousness and holiness, Luke 1. 75. God made the world only as an
attiring room, to dress our souls in; he sent us hither upon the grand errand
of godliness; should nothing but the body (the brutish part) be looked after,
this were basely to degenerate, yea, to invert and frustrate the very end of
our being.

8. Be often among the godly; 8 Rule.
they are the salt of the earth, and will help to season (...). Clem. Alex.
Paed. l. 3.
you. Their counsels may direct their prayers may quicken: Such holy sparks may
be thrown into your breasts, as may inkindle devotion in you: It is good to be
among the Saints to learn the trade of godliness, Pro. 13. 20. He that walks
with wise men shall be wise.

CHAP. VIII.
Exhorting such as have made a Profession of Godliness, to persevere.
Use 2. MY next Use is to exhort those who wear the Mantle, Use 2.
and in the judgment of others are looked upon as godly, that they would Non
cepisse sed perfecisse virtutis est
persevere, Heb. 10. 23. Let us hold fast the profession of our Faith. This is
a seasonable Exhortation in these times, when the Devils Factors are abroad,
whose whole work is to unsettle people, and make them fall off from that former
strictness in Religion which they have professed: It Is much to be lamented to
see Christians

1. Wavering in Religion: How many do we see desultorii ingenii, unresolved and
unsteady: Like Reuben, unstable as water, Genesis 49. 4. These the Apostle fitly
compares to waves of the Sea, and wandering Stars, Jude 13. They are not fixed
in the principles of godliness. Beza writes of one Bolsechus, his Religion
changed like the Religionem Ephemeram habuit.
Moon: Such were the Ebionites, who kept the Jewish Sabbath and the Christian:
Many Professors are like the River Euripus, ebbing and flowing in matters of
Religion; they are like reeds, bending every way, either to the Mass or the Hos
cum hyaena merito comparaveris, de qua Plinius lib. 7. cap. 2. Hyaena sicut and
ichneumon, nunc mas est nunc faemina, it a quidem sui dissimiles, nunc Deo
serviunt, nunc carni, ab uno ad aliud transferuntur, tipula leviores.
Alchoran: They are like the Planet Mercury, which does vary, and is seldom
constant in its motion: When men think of heaven, and the recompense of reward,
then they will be godly; but when they think of Persecution, then they are like
the Jews, who deserted Christ, and walked no more with him, John 6. 66. Did
men's faces alter as fast as their Opinions, we should not know them: to be thus
vacillant and wavering in Religion, argues lightness: Feathers are blown any
way, so are feathery Christians.

2. It Is to be lamented to see men fall from that godliness which once they
seemed to have; they are turned to worldliness and wantonness, the very mantle
of their Profession is fallen off; and indeed if they were not fixed stars, it
is no wonder to see them falling stars. This spiritual Epilepsie, or
falling sickness, was never more rife; this is a dreadful sin, for men to fall
from that godliness they-seemed once to have. Chrysostom says, Apostates are
worse than they who are openly flagitious, they bring an evil report upon
godliness: The Apostate (says Tertullian) seems to put God and Satan in the
balance, and having weighed both their services, prefers the Devils service,
and proclaims him to be the best Master, in which respect the Apostate is said
to put Christ to open shame, He. 6. 6

This will be bitter in the end, Heb. 10. 38. What a worm did Spira feel in his
Conscience? How did Stephen Gardener cry out in horror of mind upon his
Deathbed, that he had denied his Master with Peter, but he had not repented
with Peter.

That we may be (...) Ig^at.
(...), steadfast in godliness, and persevere, let us do two things.

1. Let us take heed of those things which will make us by degrees fall off
from our profession.

1. Let us beware of covetousness, 2 Timothy 3. 2. Men shall be covetous, ver. 5.
Having a form of godliness, but denying the power. One of Christ's own Apostles
was caught with a silver bait: Covetousness will make a man betray a good
cause, and make shipwreck of a good Conscience. I have read of some in the time
of the Emperor Valens, who denied the Christian Faith, to prevent the
confiscation of their goods.

2. Beware of unbelief, Heb. 3. 12. Take heed least there be in any of you an
evil heart of unbelief, in departing from the living God. No evil like an evil
heart, no evil heart like an unbelieving heart; why so? It makes men depart
from the blessed God; he that believes nor Gods mercy, will not dread his
Justice; Infidelity is the Nurse of Apostasy; therefore unbelieving and
unstable go together, Psalm. 78. 22. They believed not in God, ver. 41. They
turned back and tempted God.

3. Take heed of cowardliness; he must needs be evil, who is afraid to be good,
Pro. 29. 25. The fear of man brings a snare. They who fear danger more than
sin, to avoid danger will commit sin. Origin out of a spirit of fear, offered
Incense to the Idol. Aristotle says, the reason why the Camelion turns into so
many colors, is through excessive fear: Fear will make men change their
Religion, as often as the Camelion does her color. Christian, thou who have
made a profession of godliness so long, and others have noted thee for a Saint
in their Calendar, why do thou fear, and begin to shrink back? The Cause is
good which thou art imbarqued in; thou fightest against sin; thou have a good
Captain which marches before thee; Christ the Captain of thy Salvation, Heb.
2. 10. What is it thou fear? Is it loss of liberty? What is liberty worth,
when Conscience is in bonds? Better lose thy liberty and keep thy peace, than
lose thy peace and keep thy liberty: Is it loss of Estate? Do thou say as
Amaziah, 2 Chronicles. 25. 9. What shall we do for the hundred Talents? I would
answer with the Prophet, The Lord can give thee much more than this: He has
promised thee in this life an hundredfold, and if that be not enough, he will
give thee life everlasting, Mat. 19. 29.

2. If you would hold fast the profession of godliness, use all means for
perseverance, 1. Labor for a real work of Grace in your soul; Grace is the
best fortification, Heb. 13. 9. It is a good thing that the heart be
established with grace.

Quest. What is this real work of Grace?

Answ. It consists in two things.

1. It lies in an heart-humbling work: The thorn of sin pricked Paul's
Conscience, Romans 7. 9. Sin revived, and I died. Though some are less humbled
than others, as some bring forth Children with less pangs, yet all have pangs.

2 Grace lies in an heart-changing work, 1 Cor. 6. 11. But ye are washed, but
ye are sanctified; A man is so changed, as if another soul did live in the same
body; if ever you would hold out in the ways of God, get this vital principle
of grace; why do men change their religion, but because their hearts were never
changed? they do not fall away from grace, but for want of grace.

2 If you would hold on in godliness, be deliberate and judicious, weigh things
well in the balance, Luke 14. 28. Which of you intending to build a Tower,
sits not dow^ first, and counts the cost: Think with your selves, what it
will cost you to be godly, you must expect the hatred of the world, Ioh. 15.
19. the wicked hate the godly for their piety* it is strange they should do so;
do we hate a flower because it is sweet? the godly are hated for the perfume of
their graces; is a Virgin hated for her beauty? the wicked hate the godly for
the beauty of holiness, which shines in them; and secret hatred will break
forth into open violence, 2 Timothy 3. 12. Christians must count the cost before
they build; why are people so hasty in laying down Religion, but because they
were so hasty in taking it up?

3 If you would hold fast your profession, get a clear distinct knowledge of
God, know the love of the Father, the merit of the Son, the efficacy of the
Holy Ghost: Such as know not God aright, will by degrees renounce their
profession: The Samaritans sometimes sided with the Jews, when they were in
favor, afterward they disclaimed all kindred with the Jews, when they were
persecuted by Josephus
Antiochus; and no wonder they did shuffle so in their religion, if you
consider what Christ says of the Samaritans, Ioh. 4. 22. Ye worship ye know
not what; they were inveloped with ignorance; blind men are apt to fall, so
are they who are blinded in their minds.

4 If you would persist in godliness, enter upon it purely, out of choice, Psa.
119. 30. I have chosen the way of truth: espouse godliness for its own worth;
he that would persevere, must rather choose godliness with reproach, than sin
with all its worldly pomp; he who takes up religion for fear, will lay it down
again for fear; he who imbraceth godliness for gain, will desert it when the
^ewels of preferment are pulled off; be not godly out of a wordly design, but a
religious choice.

5 If you would persevere in godliness, labor after integrity; this will be a
golden pillar to support you; a tree that is hollow, must needs be blown down;
the hypocrite sets up in the trade of religion, but he will soon break, Psa.
78. 37. Their heart was not right with him, neither were they steadfast: Judas
was first a sly hypocrite, and then a Traitor; if a piece of copper be gilded,
the guilding will wash off, nothing will hold out but sincerity, Psa. 25. 21.
Let integrity preserve me: How many storms was Job in? not only Satan, but God
himself set against him, Job 7. 20. which was enough to have made him desist
from being godly, yet Job stood fast, because he stood upright, Job 27. 6. My
righteousness I hold fast, and will not let it go, my heart shall not reproach
me, so long as I live: those colors hold best, which are laid in oil; if we
would have our profession hold its color, it must be laid in the oil of
sincerity.

6 If you would hold out in godliness, hold up the life and fervor of duty,
Romans 12. 1. 1. Fervent in spirit, serving the Lord: We put coals to the fire to
keep it from going out, when Christians grow into a dull formality, they begin
to be dis-spirited, and by degrees abate in their godliness; none so fit to
make an Apostate, as a lukewarm professor.

7 If you would persevere in godliness, be much in the exercise of self-denial,
Mat. 16. 24. let him deny himself, self-ease, Nemo d^ displicet nisi qui sibi
placet. Bernard
self ends; whatever comes in competition with, or stands in opposition to
Christ's glory and interest, must be denied; Self is the great snare, self-love
undermines the power of godliness. The young man in the Gospel, might have
followed Christ, but that something of self Nemo laeditur nisi a se ipso.
hindered, Mat. 19. 20, 22. Self-love, is self hatred, he will never get to
heaven, that cannot get beyond himself.

8 If you would hold on in godliness, preserve an holy jealousy over your
hearts, Romans 11. 20. Be not high-minded, but fear: he that has Gun powder in
his house, fears lest it should catch fire; sin in the heart is like
Gunpowder, it may make us fear, lest a sparkle of temptation falling upon us,
should blow us up: There are two things may make us always jealous of our
hearts; the deceits of our hearts, and the lusts of our hearts: When Peter was
afraid he should sink, and cried to Christ, Lord save me, then Christ took him
by the hand and helped him, Mat. 14. 31. but when Peter grew confident, and
thought he could stand alone, then Christ suffered him to fall. Oh let us be
suspicious of our selves, and in an holy sense, cloathe our selves with
trembling, Eze. 26. 16.

9 If you would continue your progress in godliness, labor for assurance, 2
Pet. 1. 10. Give diligence to make your calling and election sure: He who is
sure God is his God, is like a Castle built upon a rock, all the powers of Hell
cannot shake him: How can he be constant in religion, who is at a loss about
his spiritual estate, and knows not whether he has grace or no? it will be a
difficult matter for him to dye for Christ, who does not know that Christ has
died for him; assurance establishes a Christian in shaking times; he is the
likeliest to bear witness to the truth, who has the spirit of God bearing
witness to his heart, Romans 8. 16. Oh give diligence! be much in prayer,
reading, holy conference; these are the oil, without which the lamp of
assurance will not shine.

10 If you would hold out in godliness, lay hold of Gods strength; God is
called the strength of Israel, 1 Samuel 15. 29. It is in his strength we stand,
more than our own; the child is safest in the Nurses hands; it is not our
holding God, but his holding us, preserves us; a little pinnace tied fast to a
rock, is safe, so are we, when we are tied to the rock of ages.

CHAP. IX.
Motives to persevere in Godliness.
THat I may excite Christians to persevere in the profession of Godliness, I
shall propose these four considerations.

1 It is the glory and Crown of a Christian, to be gray headed in godliness,
Act. 21. 16. Mnason of Cyprus, an old Disciple: What an honor is it to see a
Christians garments red with blood, yet his conscience pu^e white, and his
graces green and flourishing?

2 How do sinners persevere in their sins, they are settled on their lees, Zeph.
1. 12. The judgments of God will not deter or remove them; they say to their
sin, as Ruth to Naomi, Ruth 1. 16. Where thou go, I will go, the Lord do so
to me, and more, if ought but death part thee and me; so nothing shall part
between men and their sins; Oh! what a shame is it, that the wicked should be
fixed in evil, and we unfixed in good? that they should be more constant in the
Devils service than we are in Christ's.

3 Our perseverance in godliness, may be a means to confirm others; Cyprians
hearers followed him to the place of his suffering, and seeing his stedfastness
in the faith, ^^iamur ^ul cum ^cto Escopo, in ^ss. Cypr.
cried out, Let us also dye with our holy Pastor, Phil. 4. 14. Many of the
Brethren waxing confident by my Bonds, are much more bold to speak the Word.
St. Paul's zeal and constancy, did animate the beholders; his Prison-chain made
converts in Neroes Court; and two of those Converts were afterward Martyrs, as
History relates.

4 We shall lose nothing by our perseverance in Godliness: There are eight
glorious Promises which God has intailed upon the persevering Saints.

The first is Rev. 2. 10. Be thou constant to the death, and I will give thee a
Crown of Tria amplectitur corona, ^uae beatitudini apprime conve^iunt, nimirum
tranquilitatem, ^uia corona dat praemium post ^ertamen; deinde plenit^dinem,
quia corona habet perfectam figuram, utpote circularem; and denique
sublimitatem, quandoquidem corona est summi honoris ^signe. Brond.
life. Christian, thou may lose the breath of life, but not the Crown of
life.

The second promise is Revel. 2. 7. To him that ^vercometh will I give to eat
of the tree of life. This Tree of life is the Lord Jesus. This tree infuseth
life, and prevents Lignum vitae ea virtute est praeditum, ut animi vires
roboret, nec senium obrepere unquam patiatur, Alchazar.
death; in the day we eat of this tree, our eyes shall indeed be opened to see
God.

The third promise is Rev. 2. 17. To him that overcomes will I give to eat of
the hidden Manna, Vincere, est peccatum and mundum fide calcare and veritatem
nunquam deserere. Muscul.
and will give him a white stone, and in the stone a new name written, which no
man knows, saving he that receives it. This Promise consists of three
branches.

1 I will give to eat of the hidden Manna, This is mysterious, it signifies the
love of God; which is Manna, for its sweetness, and hidden for its rarity.

2 I will give him a white stone; Alb^ lap^^^^ not ar^ dicitur qui probatur.
that is absolution, it may be called a precious stone says Hierom.

3 And in the stone a new name; That is, Adoption, he shall be reputed an Heir
of Heaven, and no man can know it, saving he who has the privy seal of the
spirit to assure him of it.

The fourth promise is, Rev. 3. 5. he that overcomes the same shall be
clothed in white raiment, and I will not blot his name out of the book of
life, but I will confess his name before my Father, and before his Angels. The
persevering Saint shall be clothed in White; This is an Emblem of joy, Festos
Albatus celebret. Horat
Eccles. 9. 8. He shall put off his mourning, and be clothed in the white robe
of glory; and I will not blot his name out of the book of life: God will blot a
Believers sins out, but he will not blot his name out; the Book of Gods Decree
has no Errataes in it. But I will confess his Name; he who has owned Christ
on earth, and worn his colors, when it was death to wear them, Christ will not
be ashamed of him, but will confess his Name before his Father, and the holy
Angels. Oh what a comfort and honor will it be to have a good look from Christ
at the last day; nay, to have Christ own us, by Name, and say, these were they
who stood up for my truth, and kept their garments pure, in a defiling age;
These shall walk with me in white, for they are worthy.

The fifth promise is, Rev. 3. 12. Him that overcomes will I make a Pillar in
the Temple of my God, and he shall go no more out, and I will write upon him
the Name of my God, and the Name of the City of my God. Here are many excellent
things couched in this Promise; I will make him a Pillar in the Temple of my
God; The Hypocrite is calamus, a Reed shaken with the wind, but the conquering
Saint shall be columna, a glorious Pillar; a Pillar for strength, and a Pillar
in the Temple, for sanctity; and he shall go no more out; I understand this of
a glorified state, He shall go no more out; that is, after he has overcome,
he shall go no more out to the Wars; he shall never have sin or temptation
more to conflict with, no more noise of Drum, or Cannon shall be heard, but
the Believer having won the field, he shall now stay at home, and divide the
spoil. And I will write upon him the Name of my God. That is, he shall be
openly acknowledged for my Child; as the Son bears his Fathers Name. How
honorable must that Saint be who has Gods own Name written upon him! And I
will write upon him, the Name of the City of my God. That is, he shall be
enrolled as a Denison or Citizen of the Jerusalem above, he shall be made
free of the Angelical society.

The sixth promise is, Rev. 2. 26. He that overcomes, and keeps my works
unto the end, to him will I give power over the nations: this may have a double
mystery, either it may be understood of the Saints dwelling upon earth; they
shall have power over the nations; their zeal and patience shall overpower the
adversaries of Necesse est ut Veritati cedat mendacium, Piis impii.
truth, Act. 6. 10. or principally, it may be understood of the Saints
triumphing in heaven, they shall have power ^ver the nations; they shall share
with Christ in some of his power; they shall join with him in judging the world
at the last day; 1 Cor. 6. 2. Know ye not, that the Saints shall judge the
world?

The seventh promise is, Rev. 3. 21. To him that overcomes, will I grant to
sit with me upon my throne.

1 Here is first the Saints dignity, they shall sit upon the throne.

2 Their safety, they shall sit with Christ; Christ holds them fast, and none
shall pluck them out of his throne; the Saints may be turned out of their
houses, but they cannot be turned out of Christ's throne; men may as well pluck
a star out of the sky, as a Saint out of the throne.

The eighth promise is, Rev. 2. 28. I will give him the morning-starre: Though
the Saints may be sullied with reproach in this life, they may be termed
factious and disloyal; St. Paul himself suffered trouble (in the opinion of
some) as an evil doer, 2 Timothy 2. 9. yet God will bring forth the Saints
righteousness, as the light, and they shall shine as the Morning Star, which is
brighter then the rest, Rev. 22. 16
I will give him the morning star. -- This morning star is meant of Christ, as
if Christ had said, I will give the persevering Saint, some of my beauty, I
will put some of my splendid rays upon him, he shall have the next degree of
glory to me, as the mornning Star is next the Sun.

O what soul-ravishing promises are here! who would not persevere in godliness?
he that is not wrought upon by these promises, is either a stone or a brute.

CHAP. X.
The third Use referring to the Godly.
Use 3. LEt me in the next place direct my self to those, Use 3.
who have a real work of godliness upon their hearts, and I would speak to them
by way of, 1 Caution. 2 Counsel. 3 Comfort.


1 By way of Caution, that they do not blur these Characters of grace in their
souls; though Gods children cannot quite deface their graces, yet they may
disfigure them; too much carnal liberty, may weaken their evidences, and so dim
their luster, that they cannot be read: These Characters of the godly are
precious things, the gold and crystal cannot be compared with them. O keep
them fair written in your hearts! and they will be so many living comforts in a
dying hour; it will not affright a Christian, to have all the signs of death in
his body, when he can see all the signs of grace in his soul, he will say as
Simeon, Lord now let thou thy servant depart in peace.

2 By way of Counsel, you who are enriched with the treasures of godliness,
bless God for it: This flower does not grow in natures garden; when you had
listed your selves under the Devil, and taken pay on his side, fighting against
your own happiness, that then God should come with converting grace, and put
forth a (...), a loving and gentle violence, causing you to espouse his quarrel
against Satan; when you had lain many years soaking in wickedness, as if you
had been par-boild for Hell, that then God should lay you a steeping in Christ's
blood, and breathe holiness into your heart, O what cause have you to write
your selves eternal debtors to free grace. He denies God to be the Author of
his Grace, who does not give him the praise of it; Negat beneficium, qui
beneficium non honorat. Tertul.
O acknowledge the love of God; admire distinguishing mercy, set the Crown of
your praise upon the head of free grace. If we are to be thankful for the
fruits of the earth, much more for ^he fruits of the Spirit; it is well there
is an eternity coming, when the Saints shall triumph in God, and make his
praise glorious.

3 Let me speak to the godly by way of Comfort; you that have but the least
dram of godliness in sincerity, let me give you two rich Consolations.

1 That Jesus Christ will not discourage the weakest Grace, 1 Consolation.
but will cherish and preserve it to Eternity: Grace which is but newly budded,
shall by the beams of the Sun of Righteousness be concocted and ripened into
Glory: This I shall speak more fully to in the next.

CHAP. XI.
Showing, that the least degree of Godliness shall be preserved.
Mat. 12. 20. A bruised Reed shall he not break, and smoking flax shall he
not quench, till he send forth Judgment unto Victory.
THis Text is spoken Prophetically of Christ; Isa. 42. 3.
he will not insult over the infirmities of his people, he will not crush
Grace in the infancy; A bruised Reed shall he not break, and smoking flax shall
be not quench. -- I begin with the first, the bruised Reed.

Quest. What is to be understood here by a Reed?

Answ. It is not to be taken literally, but mystically, It is a Rational
Reed; the Spiritual part of man; the Soul, which may well be compared to a
Reed, because it is subject to imbecility, and shaking in this life, till it
grow up unto a firm Cedar in Heaven.

Quest. What is meant by a bruised Reed?

Answ. It is a soul humbled and bruised in the sense of (...) animan contrit^^,
interpret^tur. Erasm.
sin, it weeps, but does not despair, it is tossed upon the waves of fear, yet
not without the Anchor of Hope.

Quest. What is meant by Christ's not breaking this (...).
reed?

Answ. The sense is, Christ will not discourage any mournful spirit, who is in
the pangs of the New Birth: If the bruise of sin be felt, it shall not be
mortal: A bruised reed shall he not break. In the words there is a Mi^o^^s, he
will not break, that is, he will bind up the bruised reed, he will comfort it.

The result of the whole is, to show Christ's compassion to a poor dejected
sinner, that smites upon his breast, and dares hardly lift up his eye for
mercy, the bowels of the Lord Jesus yern toward him, this bruised reed he will
not break.

In the Text there are two parts: 1. A Supposition, a soul penitentially
bruised. 2. A Proposition, it shall not be broken.

Doct. The bruised soul shall not be broken, Psalm. 147. 3. He binds up their
wounds: For this end Christ received both his Mission and Unction, that he
might bind up the bruised soul, Isa. 61. 1. The Lord has anointed me to bind
up the brokenhearted* But why will not Christ break a bruised reed?

1. Out of the sweetness of his Nature, Reas. 1.
Iam. 5. 11. the Lord is (...), very pitiful; he begets bowels in other
creatures, therefore is called the Father of mercies, 2 Cor. 1. 3. and surely
he himself is not without bowels; when a poor soul is afflicted in spirit, God
will not exercise harshness toward it, lest he should be thought to put off
his own tender disposition.

Hence it is, the Lord has been ever most solicitous for his bruised ones; as
the Mother is most careful of her Children, that are weak and sickly, Isa. 40.
11. He shall gather the Lambs with his arm, and carry them in hi^ bosom: Such
as have been spiritually bruised, who like Lambs, are weakly and tender, Christ
will carry them in the arms of free grace.

2 Jesus Christ will not break the bruised reed, Reas. 2.
because a contrite heart is his sacrifice, Psa. 51. 17. A bruised spirit sends
forth tears, which are as precious wine, Psa. 56. 8. A bruised soul is big with
holy desires, yea, is sick of love; therefore if a bruised reed has such
virtue in it, Christ will not break it; no Spices when they are bruised, are so
fragant to us, as a contrite spirit is to God.

3 The bruised reed shall not be broken, Reas. 3.
because it does so nearly resemble Christ Jesus Christ was once bruised on the
cross* Isa. 53. 10. It pleased the Lord to bruise him, his hands and feet were
bruised with the nails, his side was bruised with the Spear: A bruised reed,
resembles a bruised Savior; nay, a bruised reed is a member of Christ, which
though it be weak, Christ will not cut off, but cherish so much the more.

1. Will not Christ break the bruised reed? Use 1.
this tacitly implies he will break unbruised reeds; Inform.
such as were never touched with trouble of spirit, 1 Bran.
but live and die in impenitency, these are hard reeds, or rather rocks: Christ
will not break a bruised reed, but he will break an hard reed: Many know not
what it is to be bruised reeds; they are bruised outwardly by affliction, but
they are not bruised for sin; they never knew what the pangs of the New birth
meant: You shall hear some thank God they were always quiet, they never had any
anxiety of spirit, these bless God for the greatest Curse: Such as are not
bruised penitentially, shall be broken judicially; they whose hearts would not
break for sin, shall break with despair; in hell there is nothing to be seen
but an he^p of stones, and an hammer; an heap of stones, that is hard hearts,
and an hammer, that is Gods Power and Justice, breaking them in pieces.

2. Will not Christ break a bruised reed? 2 Bran.
See then the gracious disposition of Jesus Christ, he is full of clemency, and
sympathy; though he may bruise the soul for sin, he will not break it: The
Chyrurgion may lance the body and make it bleed, but he will bind up the wound;
as Christ has beams of Majesty, so bowels of mercy: Christ gives the Lion in
his Scutchion, and the Lamb; the Lion, in respect of his fierceness to the
wicked, Psalm. 50. 22. And the Lamb, in respect of his mildness to his people;
his name is Jesus, a Savior, and his office is an healer, Mal. 4. 2. Christ
made a plaster of his own blood to heal a broken Cum debilitati nostrae ita se
attemperat Christus, ejus (...) deo^culari discamus. Musc.
heart: Christ is the quintessence of love? One says, if the sweetness of all
flowers were in one flower, how sweet would that flower be? How full of Mercy
is Christ, in whom all mercy meets? Christ has a skilful hand, and a tender
heart: He will not break a bruised reed.

Some are so full of Ostracisme and cruelty, as to add affliction to
affliction, which is to lay more weight upon a dying man; but our Lord Jesus is
a compassionate High Priest, Heb. 2. 17. He is touched with the feeling of our
infirmity; every bruise of the soul goes to his heart; none refuse Christ, but
such as do not know him. He is nothing but love incarnated: He himself was
bruised, to heal them that are bruised.

3. See then what encouragement here is for Faith! 3 Bran.
Had Christ said, he would break the bruised reed, then indeed there were
ground for despair; but when Christ says, he will not break a bruised reed,
this opens a door of hope for humble bruised souls: Can we say we have been
bruised for sin, why do we not believe? Why do we go drooping under our fears
and discouragements, as if there were no mercy for us? Christ says, He will
heal the broken in heart, Psalm. 147. 3. No, says Unbelief, he will not heal
me: Christ says, he will cure the bruised soul: No, says Unbelief, he will
kill it: Unbelief, as it makes our comforts void, so it goes about to make the
Word void; as if all Gods Promises were but forgeries, or like Blanks in a
Lottery: Has the Lord said, he will not break a bruised reed, can Truth lie? O
what a sin is unbelief! Some think it dreadful to be among the number of
drunkards, swearers, whoremongers, let me tell you, it is no less dreadful to
be among the number of Rev. 21. 8.
Unbelievers: Unbelief is worse than any other sin, because it brings God into
suspicion with the Creature, it robs him of the richest Jewel of his Crown, and
that is his truth, 1 Ioh. 5. 10. He that believes not; has made God a liar.

Oh then, let all humbled sinners go to Jesus Christ: Christ was bruised with
desertion to heal them who are bruised with sin: If you can show Christ your
sores, and touch him by faith, you shall be healed of all your soul-bruises:
Will not Christ break thee, then do not undo thy self by despair.

Use 2. Will not Jesus Christ break a bruised reed, Use 2.
then it reproves those who do (what in them lies) to break the bruised reed;
Reproof.
and they are such as go about to hinder the work of Conversion in others, when
they see them wounded and troubled for sin, they dishear^en them, telling them,
that Religion is a sour melancholy thing, they had better return to their
former pleasures: when an Arrow of Conviction is shot into their Conscience,
these pull it out again, and will not suffer the work of Conviction to go
forward. Thus when the soul is almost bruised, they hinder it from a through
bruise: This is for men to be Devils to others: If to shed the blood of another
makes a man guilty, what is it to damn another soul?

Use 3. This Text is a spiritual honeycomb, Use 3.
dropping consolation into all bruised hearts; Consol.
as in the body, when there is a Lipothimy, or fainting of the vital spirits,
we apply cordials; so when sinners are bruised for their sins, I shall give
them some cordial-water to revive them: This text is comfortable to a poor
soul, who sits with Job among the Ashes, and is dejected in the sense of its
unworthiness: Ah! says the soul, I am unworthy of mercy, what am I, that ever
God should look upon me? those who have greater parts and Graces, perhaps may
obtain a look from God, but alas! I am unworthy; does thy unworthiness trouble
thee? what more unworthy than a bruised reed? yet there is a promise made to
that, a bruised reed he will not break* the promise is not made to the
Fig Tree, or Olive, which are fertile plants, but to the Bruised reed: Though
thou art despicable in thy own eyes, a poor shattered reed, yet thou may be
glorious in the eyes of the Lord; let not thy unworthiness discourage thee; if
thou see thy self vile, and Christ precious, this promise is thine, Christ
will not break thee, but will bind up thy wounds.

Quest. But how shall I know that I am savingly bruised?

Answ. Did God ever bring thee upon thy knees? has thy proud heart been
humbled? did thou ever see thy self a sinner, and nothing but a sinner? did
thou ever with a weeping eye, Zac. 12. 10.
look upon Christ? and did those tears drop from the eye of faith? Mar. 9. 24.
This is a Gospel-bruising: can thou say, Lord, though I do not see thee, yet
I love thee, though I am in the dark, yet I cast Anchor? this is to be a
bruised reed.

Object. 1 But I fear I am not bruised enough?

Answ. It Is hard to prescribe a just measure of humiliation; it is in the new
birth, as in the natural, some bring forth with more pangs, some with fewer;
but would you know when you are bruised enough? when your spirit is so
troubled, that you are willing to let go those lusts, which did bring in the
greatest income of pleasure and delight; when sin is not only discarded, but
disgusted, then you have been bruised enough; then the Physic is strong
enough, when it has purged out the disease, then the soul is bruised enough,
when the love of sin is purged out.

Object. 2 But I fear I am not bruised as I should be, I find my heart so hard?

Answ. 1 We must distinguish between hardness of heart, and an hard^heart; the
best heart may have some hardness, but though there be some hardness in it, it
is not an hard heart; denominations are from the better part; if we come into a
field that has Tares and Wheat in it, we do not call it a field of Tares, but
a Wheat-field; so though there be hardness in the heart, as well as softness;
yet God, who judges by that part which is more excellent, looks upon it as a
soft heart.

2 There is a great difference between the hardness in the godly and the
wicked; the one is natural, the other is only accidental; the hardness in a
wicked man, is like the hardness of a stone, which is an innate continued
hardness; the hardness in a child of God, is like the hardness of Ice,
which is soon melted with the Sunbeams; perhaps God has at present withdrawn
his spirit, whereupon the heart is congealed as Ice, but let Gods spirit as the
Sun, return and shine upon the heart, now it has a gracious thaw upon it, and
it melts in love.

3 Do not thou grieve under thy hardness? thou sighest for want of groans,
thou weepest for want of tears; the hard reed cannot weep, if ^hou were not a
bruised reed, all this moisture could not come from thee.

Object. 3 But I am a barren reed, I bring forth no fruit, therefore I fear I
shall be broken.

Answ. Gracious hearts are apt to overlook the good that is in them, they can
spy the worm in the leaf, but not the fruit. Why do thou say thou art
barren? if thou art a bruised reed, thou art not barren. The spiritual reed
ingrafted into the true Vine is fruitful, there is so much sap in Christ, as
makes all, who are inoculated into him, bear fruit Christ distills grace, as
drops of dew, upon the soul, Hos. 14. 5, 6. I will be as the de^ unto Israel,
he shall grow as the Lilly, his branches shall spread, and his beauty shall be
as the Olive Tree. That God, who made the dry rod blossom, will make the dry
reed flourish.

So much for the first expression in the Text, I proceed to the second,

The smoking Flax shall he not quench.
Quest. What is meant by smoke?

Answ. By smoke is meant corruption: Smoke is offensive to the eye, so sin
offends the pure eye of God.

Quest. What is meant by smoking flax?

Answ. It is meant Grace mingled with corruption; as with a little fire there
may be much smoke, so with a little grace there may be much corruption*

Quest. What is Christ's not quenching the Smoking Flax?

Answ. The meaning is, though there be but a spark of grace with much sin,
Christ will not put out this spark. -- In the words there is a figure, He will
not (...)
quench, that is, he will increase: Nothing more easy than to quench Smoking
Flax, the least touch does it, but Christ will not quench it; he will not blow
the spark of Grace out, but will blow it Ellychnium prope extinctum, sufflavit,
magis ut clare arderet. Musculus.
up; he will increase it into a flame; he will make this Smoking Flax a
burning Taper.

Doct. That a little grace mixed with much corruption, shall not be quenched.
For the illustrating of this, I shall show you

1. That often a little grace is mixed with much corruption.

2. That this little grace interlined with corruption, shall not be quenched.

3. The Reasons of the Proposition.

1. Often in the godly a little grace is mingled with much corruption, Mark 9.
24. Lord I believe, there was some Faith; help my unbelief; there was
corruption mixed with it: There are in the best Saints interweavings of sin and
grace; a dark side with the light: much pride mixed with humility, much
earthliness with heavenliness: Grace in the godly does relish of an old
Crabtree stock.

Nay, in many of the Regenerate there is more corruption than grace, so much
smoke that you can scarce discern any fire, so much distrust, that you can
hardly see any 1 Samuel 27. 1.
Faith, so much passion, that you can hardly see any meekness. Jonah a peevish
Prophet, he quarrels with God; nay, he justifies his passion, Jonah 4. 9. I do
well to be angry to the death. Here was so much passion, that it was hard to
see any grace. A Christian in this life, is like a glass that has more froth
than wine; or like a diseased body, that has more humors than spirits: This
may humble the best, to consider how much corruption is interlarded with their
grace.

2. This little grace mixed with much corruption shall not be quenched: The
smoking flax he will not quench: The Disciples Faith was at first but small,
they forsook Christ and Mat. 26. 56.
fled. Here was smoking flax, but Chirst did not quench that little grace, but
cherish and animate it; their Faith afterward grew stronger, and they did
openly confess Acts 4. 29. 30.
Christ. Here was the flax flaming.

3. The Reasons why Christ will not quench the smoking flax.

1. Because this Scintilla, this little light which is in the smoking flax is
of divine production, it comes from the Father of Lights, and the Lord will not
quench the work of (...) own grace: Every thing by the instinct of Nature will
preserve its Omne agens est full conservativum.
own: The Hen that hatcheth her young, will preserve and cherish them, she will
not destroy them as soon as they are hatched: God who has put this tenderness
into the Creature to preserve its young, will much more cherish the work of his
own spirit in the heart: Will he light up the Lamp of Grace in the soul, and
then put it out? This would be neither for his interest nor honor.

2. Christ will not quench the beginnings of grace, because a little grace is
precious as well as more: A small Pearl is of value: Though the Pearl of Faith
be little, yet if it be a true Pearl it shines gloriously in Gods eyes: A
Goldsmith makes reckoning of the least filings of gold, and will not throw them
away: The pupilla oculi, the apple of the eye, is but little, yet of great use,
it can at once view an huge part of the heavens: A little Faith can justify; a
weak hand can tie the Nuptial Knot; a weak Faith can unite to Christ as well as
a strong; a little grace makes us like God; a silver penny bears the Kings
Image upon it as well as a larger piece of Coin: The least dram of grace bears
Gods Image on it, and will God destroy his own Image? When the Temples in
Greece were demolished, Xerxes caused the Temple of Diana to be preserved for
the beauty of its structure: When God shall destroy all the glory of the world,
and set it on fire, yet he will not destroy the least grace because it bears a
print of his own likeness upon it: That little spark in the smoking flax is a
ray and beam of Gods own glory.

3. Christ will not quench the smoking flax, because this little light in the
flax may grow bigger: Grace is resembled to a grain of Mustard Seed, of all
seeds it is the least, but when it is grown, it is the greatest among herbs,
and becomes a Tree, Mat. 13. 32. The greatest grace was once little; the Oak
was once an Acorn; the most Renowned Faith in the world was once in its
Spiritual Infancy; the greatest flame of zeal was once but smoking flax:
Grace, like the waters of the Sanctuary, rises higher: If then the least
Embryo and seed of holiness be of a ripening and growing nature, the Lord will
not suffer it to be abortive.

4. Christ will not quench the smoking flax, because when he preserves a
little light in a great deal of smoke, here the glory of his power shines
forth: The trembling soul thinks it shall be swallowed up of sin, but God by
preserving a little quantity of grace in the heart, nay, by making that spark
prevail over corruption, as the fire from heaven licked up the water in the
trench, 1 King. 18. 38. Now, God gets himself a glorious Name, and carries away
the Trophies of Honor, 2 Cor. 12. 9. My strength is made perfect in weakness.

1. See the different dealings of God and men, Use 1.
men for a little smoke will quench a great deal of light; Inform.
God for a great deal of smoke will not quench a little light: 1 Bran.
It Is the manner of the world, if they see a little failing in another, for
that failing they will pass by and quench a great deal of worth: This is our
nature, to aggravate a little fault, and diminish a great deal of virtue; to
see the infirmities, and darken the excellencies of others; as we take more
notice of the twinkling of a Star, than the shining of a Star: We censure
others for their passion, but do not admire them for their piety. Thus for a
little smoke that we see in others, we quench much light.

God does not thus, for a great deal of smoke he will not quench a little
light; he sees the sincerity, and over-looks many infirmities, the least sparks
of grace he cherishes, and blows them gently with the breath of his spirit,
till they break forth into a flame.

-- 2 If Christ will not quench the smoking flax, 2 Bran.
then we must not quench the smoking flax in our selves; if grace does not
increase into so great a flame as we see in others, therefore to conclude we
have no fire of the spirit in us, this is to quench the smoking flax, and to
bear false witness against our selves; as we must not credit a false evidence,
so neither must we deny a true; fire may be hid in the embers, so may grace be
hid under many distempers of soul; some Christians are so skilful at this, in
accusing themselves for want of grace, as if they had received a fee from
Satan, to plead for him, against themselves.

This is a great mistake, to argue from the weakness of grace, to the nullity;
it is one thing to be wanting in faith, and another thing to want faith; he
whose eyesight is dim, is wanting in his sight, but he does not want sight; a
little grace is grace, though it be smothered under much corruption.

3 If the least spark of grace shall not be quenched, then this follows as a
great truth, that there is no falling from Fides justificans semel habita, non
potest in totum amitti.
grace; if the least dram of grace should perish, then the smoking flax should
be quenched; grace may be shaken by fears and doubtings, but not blown up by
the Gratia concutitur non excutitur. Aug.
roots: I grant, seeming grace may be lost, this wilde-fire may be blown out,
but not the fire of the Spirits kindling; Grace may be dormant in the soul, but
not dead, as a man in an Appoplexy, does not put forth vital operations: Grace
may be eclipsed, not extinct, a Christian may lose his comfort, like a tree in
Autumn, that has shed its fruit, but still there is sap in the vine, and the
seed of God remains, 1 Ioh. 3. 9. Grace is a flower of eternity.

This smoking flax cannot be quenched by affliction, but like those trees,
Pliny writes of, growing in the red Sea, which being beaten upon by the waves,
stand immoovable, and though they are sometimes covered with water, flourish
the more; grace is like a true orient Diamond, that sparkles, and cannot be
broken.

I confess it is matter of wonder, that grace should not be wholly
annihilated, especially if we consider two things.

1 The malice of Satan, he is a malignant spirit, and lays bars in our way to
heaven; the Devil with the wind of temptation, labors to blow out the spark of
grace in our hearts; if this will not do, he stirs up wicked men, and raises
the Militia of Hell against us: what a wonder is it, that this bright Star of
grace, should not be swept down with the tail of the Dragon?

2 It is an amazing thing, that grace should subsist, if we consider the world
of corruption in our hearts; sin makes the major part in a Christian; there is
in the best heart more dregs than spirits. The heart swarms with sin; what a
deal of pride and Atheism is in the soul? now is it not admirable, that this
Lilly of grace, should be able to grow among so many thorns? it is as great a
wonder, that a little grace, should be preserved in the midst of so much
corruption, as to see a Taper burning in the Sea, and not extinguished.

But though grace lives with so much difficulty, as the infant that struggles
for breath, yet being born of God it is immortal, grace conflicting with
corruption, is like a Ship tossed and beaten with the waves, yet it weathers
out the storm, and at last gets to the desired Haven. If grace should expire,
how could this Text be verified, The smoking flax he will not quench.

Quest. But whence is it, that grace, even the least degree of it, should not
be quenched?

Answ. It is from the mighty operation of the Holy Ghost; the Spirit of God,
who is origo originans, does continually excite and quicken grace in the heart:
He is every day at work in a believer; he powers in oil, and keeps the Lamp of
Grace burning: Grace is compared to a river of life, Ioh. 7. 38. The river of
grace can never be dri^d up, for the Spirit of God is the Spring which feeds it.

Now that the smoking flax cannot be quenched, is evident from the Covenant of
Grace, Isa. 54. 10. The Mountains shall depart, and the Hills be removed, but
the Covenant of my peace shall not be removed, says the Lord. If there be
falling from grace, how is it an immovable Covenant? If grace die, and the
smoking flax be quenched, wherein is our state in Christ better than it was in
Adam? The Covenant of Grace is called, A better Covenant, Heb. 7. 22. How is it
a better Covenant than that which was made with Adam? Not only because it has
a better Surety, and contains better privileges, but because it has better
conditions annexed to it, It is ordered in all things, and sure, 2 Samuel 23. 5.
Status ante la^sum purior, in Christo certior.
Such as are taken into the Covenant, shall be as stars fixed in their Orb, and
shall never fall away: If grace might die, and be quenched, then it were not a
better Covenant.

Object. But we are bid not to quench the spirit, 1 These. 5. 19. which implies,
that the grace of the Spirit may be lost, and the smoking flax quenched.

Answ. We must distinguish between the common work of the spirit, and the
sanctifying work, the one may be quenched, but not the other: The common work
of the spirit, is like a picture drawn upon the ice, which is soon defaced: The
sanctifying work is like a Statute carved in gold, which endures: The gifts of
the spirit may be quenched, but not the grace; there is the enlightening of the
spirit, and the anointing; the enlightening of the spirit may fail, but the
anointing of the spirit abides, 1 Ioh. 2. 27. The anointing which ye have
received of him, abides in you. The hypocrites blaze goes out, the true
believers spark lives and flourishes, th^^ one is the light of a Comet which
wastes and Mat, 25. 8.
evaporates, the other is the light of a star which retains its luster.

From all that has been said, let a Saint of the Lord be persuaded to these
two things, 1. To believe his privilege. 2. To pursue his duty.


1. To believe his privilege: This is the incomparable and unparalled
happiness of a Saint, that his coal shall not be 2 Samuel 14* 7.
quenched: That grace in his soul, which is minute at^ languid, shall not give
up the Ghost, but recover its strength, and increase with the increase of God:
The Lord will make the smoking flax a burning lamp: It were very sad, that a
Christian should be continually upon the Tropicks, one day a member of Christ,
and the next day a limb of Satan; one day to have grace shine in his soul, and
the next day his light put out in obscurity: This would spill a Christians
comfort, and break asunder the golden Chain of Salvation; but be assured, O
Christian, he who has begun a good work, will ripen it into perfection: Christ
will send forth judgment unto victory; he will make grace victorious over all
opposite corruption: If grace should finally perish, what would become of the
smoking flax? And how would that title properly be given to Christ, Finisher
of the Heb. 12. 2.
Faith?

Object. No question this is an undoubted privilege to such as are smoking
flax, and have the least beginnings of grace, but I fear I am not smoking
flax, I cannot see the light of grace in my self?

Answ. That I may comfort the smoking flax, why do thou thus dispute against
thy self? What makes thee think thou have no grace? I believe thou have more
than thou would be willing to part with; thou valuest grace above the gold of
Ophir: How could thou see the worth and luster of this Jewel, if Gods Spirit
had not opened thy eyes? Thou would fain believe, and mournest that thou
can not believe, are not these tears the Initials of Faith? Thou desire
Christ, and can not be satisfied without him; this beating of the pulse
evidenceth life: The iron could not move upward, if the Loadstone did not draw
it; the heart could not ascend in holy breathings after God, if some heavenly
Loadstone had not been drawing it. Christian, can thou say sin is thy burden,
Christ is thy delight? and as Peter once said, Lord, thou know I love thee:
This is smoking flax, and the Lord will not quench it; thy grace shall
flourish into glory; God will sooner extinguish the light of the Sun, than
extinguish the dawning light of his spirit in thy heart.

2. Let a Christian pursue his duty: There are two duties required of
believers, 1. Love. 2. Labor.


1. Love. Will not the Lord quench the smoking flax, but make it at last
victorious over all opposition? how should the smoking flax flame in love to
God? Psalm. 31. 23. love the Lord all ye his Saints: The Saints owe much to God,
and when they have nothing to pay, it is hard if they cannot love him: O ye
Saints, it is God who carries on grace progressively in your souls: He is like
a Father who gives his son a small stock of money to begin with, and when he
has traded a little, he adds more to the stock: So God adds continually to
your stock, he is every day dropping oil into the lamp of your grace, and so
keeps the lamp burning: This may inflame your love to God, who will not let the
work of grace miscarry, but will bring it to perfection: The smoking flax he
will not quench: How should Gods people long for heaven, when it will be their
constant work, to breathe forth love, and found forth praise?

2. The second duty required of Christians is labor: Some may think if Christ
will not quench the smoking flax, but make it burn brighter to the Meridian of
glory, then we need take no pains, but leave God to bring his own work about.
Take heed of drawing so bad a Conclusion from such good premises: What I have
spoken, is to encourage Faith, not to indulge sloth: Do not think God will do
our work for us, and we sit still: As God will blow up the spark of grace by
his spirit, so we must be blowing it up by holy endeavors: God will not bring
us to heaven sleeping, but praying: The Lord told Paul, all in the Ship should
come safe to shore, but it must be in the use of means, Act. 27. 21. Except ye
abide in the Ship, ye cannot be saved. So the Saints shall certainly arrive at
Salvation, they shall come to shore at last, but they must abide in the Ship,
in the use of Ordinances, else they cannot be saved: Christ assures his
Disciples, None shall pluck them out of his hand, Ioh. 10. 28. But yet he gives
that counsel, Watch and pray, that ye enter not into temptation, Mat, 26. 41.
The seed of God shall not die, but we must water it with our tears; the
smoking flax shall not be quenched, but we must blow it up with the breath of
our endeavor.

The second comfort to the godly, 2 Conclusion.
is that godliness advances them into a near and glorious union with Jesus
Christ: But of this in the next.

CHAP. XII.
Showing the Mystical union between Christ and the Saints.
CANT. 2. 16. My beloved is mine, and I am his.
IN this Book of the Canticles, we see the love of Christ and his Church,
running toward each other in a full torrent.

The Text contains three general Parts.

1 A Symbol of affection, my beloved. 2 A term of appropriation, is mine. 3 An
holy resignation, I am his.
Doct. That there is a conjugal union between Christ and believers.

The Apostle having treated at large of marriage, he winds up the whole
chapter thus, Ephesians. 5. 32. This is a great mystery, but I speak concerning
Christ and the Church: what nearer than union? what sweeter? there is a twofold
union with Christ,

1 A natural union; this all men have, Christ having taken their nature upon
him, and not the Angels, Heb. 2. 16. but if there be no more, than this natural
union, it will give little comfort; thousands are damned, though Christ be
united to their nature.

2 There is a sacred union, whereby we are mystically united to Christ; the
union with Christ is not personal; if Christ's essence were transfused into the
person of a believer, then it would follow, that all which a believer does,
should merit.

But the union between Christ and a Saint, is,

1 Faederal; Religio nostra non mis^et naturas sed personas conf^derat
my beloved is mine; God the Father gives the bride, God the Son receives the
bride, God the Holy ghost ties the knot in marriage; he knits our wills to
Christ, and Christ's love to us.

2 This union is vertual; Christ unites himself to his spouse, by his graces
and influences, John 1. 16. Of his fullness have we all received, and grace for
grace: Christ makes himself one with the spouse, by conveying his Image, and
stamping the impress of his own holiness upon her.

This union with Christ, may well be called mystical, it is hard to describe
the manner of it; as it is hard to show the manner how the soul is united to
the body, so how Christ is united to the soul; but though this union be
spiritual, it is real: Things in nature work often insensibly, yet really,
Eccles. 11. 5. we do not see the hand move on the Dial, yet it moves; the Sun
exhales and draws up the vapors of the earth insensibly, yet really; so the
union between Christ and the soul, though it be imperceptible to the eye of
reason, yet is real, 1 Cor. 6. 17.

Before this union with Christ, there must be a separation; the heart must be
separated from all other lovers; as in marriage there is a leaving of Father
and Mother, Psa. 45. 10. Forget also thine own people, and thy Fathers house;
So there must be a leaving of our former sins, a breaking off the old league
with hell, before we can be united to Christ, Hos. 14. 8. Ephraim shall say,
what have I to do any more with Idols? or as it is in the Hebrew, with sorrows:
(...)
Those sins which before were looked upon as lovers, now they are sorrows;
there must be a divorce, before an union.

The end of our conjugal union with Christ is twofold.

1 Co-habitation; this is one end of marriage, to live together, Ephesians. 3. 17.
That Christ may dwell in your hearts; it is not enough to give Christ a few
complemental visits in his ordinances, hypocrites may do so; but there must be
a mutual associating; we must dwell upon the thoughts of Christ, 1 John 3. 24.
he that dwells in God; married persons should not live asunder.

2 Fructification, Romans 7. 4. That ye should (...) married to another, even to
him who is raised from the dead, that we should bring forth fruit unto God: the
Spouse brings forth the fruits of the spirit, love, joy, peace, long-suffering,
gentleness, Gal. 5. 22. Barrenness is a shame in Christ's spouse.

This marriage-union with Christ, is the most noble and excellent union.

1 Christ unites himself to many; in other marriages there is but a person
taken, but here millions are taken; alas, else poor souls might cry out, Christ
has married himself to such an ones person, but what is that to me? I am left
out; no, Christ marries himself to thousands; it is casta polygamia, an holy and
chaste polygamy; multitudes of persons does not defile this marriage bed; no
poor sinner, but bringing an humble believing heart, may be married to Christ.

2 In this holy marriage, is a nearer conjunction, than can be in any other, in
other marriages, two make one flesh, but Christ and the believer make one
spirit, 1 Cor. 6. 17. He that is joined to the Lord, is one spirit: now as the
soul is more excellent than the body, and admits of far greater joy; so this
spiritual union, brings in more astonishing delights and ravishments, than any
other marriage-relation is capable of; the joy that flows from the mystical
union, is unspeakable and full of glory, 1 Pet. 1. 8.

3 This union with Christ never cease. -- Foelices ter and amplius, Horat. 1.
Carm. 13.
quos irrupta tenet copula --

Other marriages are soon at an end, Death cuts asunder the marriage-knot, but
this conjugal union is eternal: thou that art once Christ's spouse, shall never
be a widow more, (...)
Hos. 2. 19. I will betroth thee unto me for ever: to speak properly, our
marriage with Christ begins, where other marriages end, at death.

In this life is but the contract; the Jews had a time set between their
espousals and marriage, sometimes a year, or more: in this life is but the
affiancing and contract, promises are made on both sides, and love passes
secretly between Christ and the soul; he gives some smiles of his face, and the
soul sends up her sighs, and drops tears of love: But all this is but a
praevious work, and something tending to the marriage, the glorious completing
and solemnizing of the Nuptials, is reserved for heaven; there is the
marriage-supper of the Lamb, Rev. 19. 9. and the Bed of glory perfumed with
love, where the souls of the elect shall be perpetually solacing themselves, 1
These. 4. 17. then shall we ever be with the Lord; so that death does but begin
our marriage with Christ.

Use 1 If Christ be the head of the body Mystical, Use 1.
Ephesians. 1. 22. then this Doctrine does behead the Pope, that man of sin, who
usurps this prerogative, to be Ecclesiae caput, the head of the Church, and so
would defile Christ's marriage bed; what blasphemy is this? two heads is
monstrous; Christ is head, as he is husband, there is no vice-husband, no
deputy in his room: The Pope is the Beast in the Revelation, Ca. 13. 11
to make him head of the Church, what were this, but to set the head of a
Beast, upon the body of a Man?

Use 2 Is there such a conjugal union, Use 2. Trial.
let us try whether we are united to Christ.

1 Have we chosen Christ to set our love upon? and is this choice founded upon
knowledge?

2 Have we consented to the match? it is not enough that Christ is willing to
have us, but are we willing to have him? God does not so force salvation upon
us, as that we shall have Christ whether we will or no; we must consent to
have him; many approve of Christ, but do not give their consent: and this
consent must be,

1 Pure and genuine, we consent to have him for his own worth and excellency,
Psa. 45. 2. Thou art fairer, than the Children of men.

2 It must be a present consent, 2 Cor. 6. 2. now is the accepted time; if we
put Christ off with delays and excuses, perhaps he will come no more, he will
leave off wooing, his spirit shall no longer strive, and then poor finner what
will thou do? when Gods wooing ends, thy woes begin.

3 Have we taken Christ, faith is vinculum unionis, the bond of the union;
Christ is joined to us by his spirit, and we are joined to him by faith: Faith
ties the marriage-knot.

4 Have we given up our selves to Christ? thus the spouse in the Text, I am
his; as if she had said, all I have is for the use and service of Christ; have
we made a surrender? have we given up our name and will to Christ? when the
Devil solicites by a temptation, do we say, we are not our own, we are Christ's,
our tongues are his, we must not defile them with oaths, our bodies ar^ his
temple, we must not pollute them with sin: if it be thus, it is a sign the Holy
ghos^ has wrought this blessed union between Christ and us.

Use 3. Is there this Mystical Union? then from hence we may draw many
Inferences.

1. See the dignity of all true believers* 1. Infer.
they are joined in Marriage with Christ, there is not only assimilation, but
union, they are not only like Christ, but one with Christ; This honor have all
the Saints: A King marrying a Beggar, by virtue of the union she is ennobled
and made of the Bloud-Royal; (...) wicked men are united to the Prince of
darkness, and he settles Hell upon them for their Jointure: So the godly are
divinely united to Christ, who is King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, Rev. 19.
16. By virtue of this Sacred Union, the Saints are dignified above the Angels,
Christ is their Lord, but not their Husband.

2. See how happily all the Saints are married; 2. Infer.
they are united to Christ, who is the best Husband, Cant. 5. 10. The chief of
ten thousand. Christ is a Husband that cannot be paralleled, 1. For tender
care. 2. For ardent affection.


1. For tender care: The Spouse cannot be so tender of her own soul and credit,
as Christ is tender of her, 1 Pet. 5. 7. He cares for you. Christ has a
debating with himself, a consulting and projecting how to carry on the work of
our Salvation; he transacts all our affairs, he minds our business as his own;
indeed he himself is concerned in it; he brings in fresh supplies to his
Spouse; if she wanders out of the way, he guides her; if she stumble, he holds
her by the hand, if she falls, he raises her; if she be dull, he quickens her
by his spirit, if she be froward, he draws her with cords of love; if she be
sad, he comforts her with promises.

2. For ardent affection: No Husband like Christ for love: The Lord says to
the people, I have loved you; and they say, Wherein have thou loved us? Mal. 1.
2. But we cannot say to Christ, wherein have thou loved us? Christ has given
real Demonstrations of his love to his Spouse: He has sent her his Word, which
is a Love-letter; and he has given her his Spirit, which is a Love-token:
Christ loves more than any other Husband.

1. Christ puts upon his Bride a richer Robe, Isa. 61. 10. He has clothed me
with the garments of Salvation, he has covered me with the Robe of
Righteousness. In this Robe God looks upon us as if we had not sinned: This is
as truly ours to justify, as it is Christ's to bestow: this Robe does not only
cover, but adorn: Having on this Robe we are reputed righteous, not only as
Angels, but as Christ, 2 Cor. 5. 21. That we might be made the righteousness of
God in him.

2. Christ gives his Bride, not only his Golden Garments, but his Image: He
loves her into his own likeness: An Husband may bear a dear affection to his
Wife, but he cannot stamp his own Effigies upon her; if she be deformed, he may
give her a Vail to hide it, but he cannot put his beauty upon her: But Christ
imparts the beauty of holiness to his Spouse, Ezekiel. 16. 14. Thou were comely
through my comeliness. When Christ marries a soul, he makes it fair, Cant. 4.
7. Thou art all fair my Spouse. Christ never thinks he has loved his Spouse
enough, till he can see his own face in her.

3. Christ discharges those debts which no other Husband can: Our sins are the
worst debts we owe, (if all the Angels should go to make a Purse, they could
not pay one of these debts) but Christ frees us from these; he is both an
Husband and a Surety; he says to Justice, as Paul concerning Onesimus, If he
ows thee any thing, put it upon my score, I will repay it, Philem. 19.

4. Christ has suffered more for his Spouse, than ever any Husband did for a
Wife; he suffered poverty and ignominy: He who crowned the heavens with stars,
was himself crowned with (...). Chrysostom.
thorns: He was called a companion of sinners, that we might be made companions
of Angels; he was regardless of his life; he leaped into the Sea of his Fathers
wrath to save his Spouse from drowning.

5. Christ's love does not end with his life. He loves his Spouse for ever, Hos.
2. 19. I will betroath thee unto me for ever. Well may the Apostle call it, a
love that passes knowledge, Ephesians. 3. 19.

3. See how rich believers are, 3 Infer.
they are matched into the Crown of Heaven, and by virtue of the Conjugal Union
all Christ's riches go to believers, Communion is founded in Union. Christ
communicates his Graces, John 1. 16. As long as Christ has it, believers shall
not want; and he communicates his Privileges, Justification, Glorification: He
settles a Kingdom upon his Spouse for her Jointure, Heb. 12. 28. This is a Key
to the Apostles Riddle, 2 Cor. 6. 10. As having nothing, yet possessing all. By
virtue of the Marriage-Union, the Saints are interested in all Christ's riches.

4 See how fearful a Sin it is to abuse the Saints; 4. Infer.
it is an injury done to Christ, for believers are mystically one with him,
Act. 9. 4. Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me; when the body was wounded, the
head being in heaven cried out; in this sense men crucify Christ afresh, Heb.
6. 6. because what is done to his members, is done to him; if Gideon was
avenged upon those who slew his brethren, Judge. 8. 21. will not Christ much
more be avenged upon those that wrong his Spouse? Will a King endure to have
his Treasure rifled? his Crown thrown in the dust? his Queen beheaded? will
Christ bear with the affronts and injuries done to his Bride? the Saints are
the apple of Christ's eye, Zac. 2. 8. and they that strike at his eye, let them
answer it, Isa. 49. 26. I will feed them that oppress thee with their own
flesh, and they shall be drunken with their own blood, as with sweet wine.

5 See the reason why the Saints do so rejoice in the Word and Sacrament, 5.
Infer.
because here they meet with their Husband Christ; the Wife desires to be in
the presence of her Husband: The Ordinances are the chariot in which Christ
rides, the lattice through which he looks forth and shows his smiling face;
here Christ displaies the banner of love. Can. 2. 4. The Lords Supper is
nothing else but a pledge and earnest of that eternal communion the Saints
shall have with Christ in heaven: Then he will take the Spouse into his bosom;
if Christ be so sweet in an Ordinance, when we have but short glances, and dark
glimpses of him by says, Oh then, how delightful and ravishing will his
presence be in heaven, when we shall see him face to face, and be for ever in
his loving embraces?

4 This mystical union affords much comfort to believers, Use 4. Consol.
in several cases.

1 In case of the dis-respects and unkindenesses of the world, Psa. 55. 3. In
wrath they hate me: but though we live in an unkind world, we have a kind
Husband, Ioh. 15. 9. As the father has loved me, so have I loved you: What
Angel can tell how God the Father loves Christ? yet the Fathers love to Christ,
is made the copy and pattern of Christ's love to his Spouse; this love of
Christ, as far exceeds all created love, as the Sun out shines the light of a
Torch; and is not this matter of comfort? what though the world hates me, yet
Christ loves me.

2 It is comfort in case of weakness of grace; the believer cannot lay hold
upon Christ, but with a trembling hand; there is a spirit of infirmity upon
him, but O weak Christian! here is strong consolation; there is a conjugal
union, thou art the Spouse of Christ, and he will bear with thee as the weaker
vessel: will an Husband divorce his Wife, because she is weak and sickly? no he
will be the more tender of her; Christ hates treachery, but he will pity
infirmity; when the spouse is faint, and ready to be discouraged, Christ puts
his left hand under her head Can. 2. 6. this is the spouses comfort, when she
is weak, her Husband can infuse strength into her, Isaiah 49. 5. My God shall
be my strength.

3 It is comfort in case of death; when believers dye, they go to their
Husband; who would not be willing to shoot the Gulf o^ death, that they might
meet with their Husband Christ? Phi. 1. 23. I desire (...) to loose Anchor, and
be with Christ; what thoug^ the way be dirty, seeing we are going to ou^
friend; when a woman is contracted, she longs for the day of marriage; after
the Saints funeral, begins their marriage; the body is ergastulum animae, a
Prison to the soul who would not desire to exchange a Prison for a Marriage
bed? How glad was Iosep^ to go out of Prison to the Kings court God is wise, he
lets us meet with changes an^ troubles here, that he may we an us from the
world, and make us long for death; when the soul is divorced from the body, it
is married to Christ.

4 It is comfort in case of passing the sentence, at the day of Judgment:
There is a marriage union, and O Christian, thy Husband shall be thy Judge; a
Wife would not fear to be cast at Bar, if her Husband sat Judge; what though
the Devil bring in many indictments against thee? Christ will expunge thy sins
in his blood; he will say, shall I condemn my spouse? O what a comfort is this?
the Husband is Judge: Christ cannot pass the sentence against his spouse, but
he must pass it against himself, for Christ and believers are one.

5 It is comfort in case of the Saints sufferings; The Church of God is exposed
in this life to many injuries, but she has an Husband in heaven, that is
mindeful of her, and will turn her waters into wine; now it is a time of
mourning with the Spouse, because the Bridegroom is absent, Mat. 9. 15. But
shortly she shall put off her mourning, Christ will wipe off the tears of blood
from the cheeks of his Spouse, Isa. 25. 8. The Lord God will wipe off tears
from off all faces.

Christ will comfort his spouse after the time wherein she has been afflicted,
he will solace her with his love, he will take away the cup of trembling, and
give her the cup of consolation, and now she shall forget all her sorrows being
called into the banqueting house of heaven, and having the banner of Christ's
love displayed over her.

5. Let me press several duties upon such as have this Marriage-Union with
Christ. Use 5.


1. Make use of this Relation; 1 Duty.
in two cases.

1. When the Law brings in its Indictments against you; here are, says the
Law, so many debts to be paid, and it demands satisfaction; acknowledge the
debt, but turn over all to your Husband Christ: It Is a Maxim in Law, that the
suit must not go against the wife as long as the Husband is Uxori lis no^
intenditur.
living: Tell Satan when he accuses thee, it is true the debt is mine, but go
to my Husband Christ, he will discharge it: Would we take this course, we might
ease our selves of much trouble; by Faith we turn over the debt to our Husband:
Believers are not in a state of Widdow-hood, but Marriage: Satan will never go
to Christ, he knows Justice is satisfied, and the Debt-book cancelled, but he
comes to us for the debt that he may perplex us, we should send him to Christ,
and then all Lawsuits would cease: This is a believers Triumph, when he is in
himself guilty, in Christ he is worthy, when he is spotted in himself, he is
pure in his head.

2. In case of desertion: Christ may (for ends best known to himself) step
aside for a time; Cant. 5. 6. My beloved had withdrawn himself; say not
therefore Christ is quite gone: It Is a fruit of jealousy in a Wife, when her
Husband has left her a while, to think he is quite gone from her: Upon every
removal out of sight, for us to say (as Sion) The Lord has forsaken me, Isa.
49. 14. This is jealousy, and it is a wrong done to the love of Christ, and
the sweetness of this Marriage-Relation: Christ may forsake his Spouse in
regard of comfort, but he will not forsake her in regard of union: An Husband
may be a thousand miles distant from his Wife, but still he is an Husband:
Christ may leave his Spouse, but still the Marriage Knot holds.

2. Love your Husband Christ, 2 Duty.
Cant. 2. 5. love him, though he be reproached and persecuted: A Wife loves her
Husband when in prison: To inflame your love toward Christ, consider, 1.
Nothing else is fit for you to love: If Christ be your Husband, it is not fit
to have other Lovers, that would make Christ grow jealous. 2. He is worthy of
your love; he is of unparalled beauty, Cant. 5. 10. altogether lovely. 3. How
pregnant is Christ's love toward you? he loves you in your worst condition, he
loves you in affliction: The Goldsmith loves his gold in the Furnace: he loves
you notwithstanding your scars and blemishes: The Saints infirmities cannot
wholly take off Christ's love from them, Ier. 3. 1. Oh then how should the
Spouse be endeared in her love to Christ! This will be the excellency of
Heaven, our love will then be as the Sun in its full strength.

3. Rejoice in your Husband Christ; 3 Duty.
has Christ honored you to take you into the Marriage-Relation, and make you
one with himself? this calls for joy: By virtue of the Union, believers go
sharers with Christ in his riches. It was a custom among the Romans, when the
Wife was brought home, she received the Keys of her husbands house, intimating,
that the treasure and custody of the house was now committed to her: When
Christ shall bring his Bride home to those glorious Mansions which he is gone
before to Prepare for her, John 14. 2. He will deliver up the keys of his
treasure to her, and she shall be as rich as heaven can make her; and shall not
the Spouse rejoice, and sing aloud upon her bed? Psalm. 149. 5. Christians, let
the times be never so sad, you may rejoice in your spiritual Espousals, Hab. 3.
17. Let me tell you, it is a sin not to rejoice; you disparage your Husband
Christ. When a wife is always sighing and weeping, what will others say, This
woman has a bad husband: Is this the fruit of Christ's love to you, to reflect
dishonor upon him? A melancholy spouse sads Christ's heart: I deny not but a
Christian should grieve for sins of daily incursion, but to be always weeping
(as if he mourned without hope) is dishonorable to the Marriage-Relation,
Phil. 4. 4. Rejoice in the Lord always. Rejoicing does credit your husband;
Christ loves a cheerful Bride; and indeed the very end of Gods making us sad,
is to make us rejoice; we sow in tears, that we may reap in joy: The excessive
sadness and contristation of the godly, will make others afraid to embrace
Christ, they will begin to question whether there be that satisfactory joy in
Religion as is pretended: Oh ye Saints of God forget not consolation, let
others see that you repent not of your choice; it is joy that puts liveliness
and activity into a Christian, Nehem. 8. 10. The joy of the Lord is your
strength. Then the soul is swiftest in duty, when it is carried upon the wings
of joy.

4. Adorn this Marriage-Relation, 4 Duty.
that you may be a crown to your husband. 1. Wear a vail. We read of the
spouses vail, Cant. 5. 7. This vail is humility. 2. Put on your Jewels. These
are the graces, which for their luster are compared to rows of Pearl, and
chains of gold, Cant. 1. 10. These precious Jewels distinguish Christ's Bride
from strangers. 3. Carry your selves as becomes Christ's Spouse. 1. In chastity.
2. In sanctity.


1. In chastity: Be chaste in your judgments, defile not your selves with
error, error adulterates the mind, 1 Timothy 6. 5. it is one of Satan's artifices,
first to defile the judgment, then the conscience.

2. In sanctity: It is not for Christ's Spouse to do as Harlots; a naked breast,
a wanton tongue, does not become a Saint; Christ's Bride must shine forth in
Gospel-purity, that she may make her husband fall in love with her. A woman
being asked what Dowry she brought her husband, answered, she had no Dowry, but
she promised to keep her self chaste: so though we can bring to Christ no
Dowry, yet he looks we should keep our selves pure, not spotting the breasts of
our Virginity by contagious and scandalous sins.

FINIS.
AN ALPHABETICAL TABLE.
A
AFflictions on the Saints various. 172 Afflictions may lie long. ibid.
Affliction compared to a Net. 173 Apostasy dangerous. 301 Arguments to
patience in affliction. 174 Assurance to be endeavored after 308
B
Benefits by Christ, precious. 56 Bruised reed, what. 318 When a soul is
bruised enough. 326 Bruised Reed not barren. 328
C
Caution to the Godly. 315 Characters of a godly man. 15 Children to honor
their Parents. 225 Christ of a merciful disposition. 322 Christ full of
preciousness. 53 Christ prized by a Saint. 57 Comfort to the real Christian.
317 Company of the godly to be frequented. 299 Complexion-sin how known. 210
Contentment with our condition. 247 Covetousness to be avoided. 301 Counsel to
the godly. 316
D
Danger in allowing one sin. 215 Decay of Charity to be bewailed. 200 Diligence
in a man's calling. 242 Disobedient children punished. 226 Distinctions about
humility. 103 Distractions in duties, whence they arise. 232 How they may be
cured. 233
E
Earthly and godly, a contradiction. 146 Endeavors of a Christian to be
quickened. 342 Examples of patience. 171 Examples speak louder than precepts.
267 Excellency of the Word written. 83
F
Faith excites all the graces. 28 Few know the mystery of Faith. 30 Faiths
encouragement. 323 Falling from grace refuted. 334 Fathers to instruct and pray
for children. 223 Forgiveness of sin. 2 How sad to want it. 4 How sweet to have
it. ib.
G
Gainful sins make men loosers. 209 God the best Master. 46 Godliness what. 5
Seven maxims about godliness. 6 Godly man like God. 34 Godly man a lover of the
Word. 77 Godly man exact about the worship of God. 39 Godly man instrumental
for the good of others. 263 Godliness exhorted to. 273 Godly men prudent. 284
Godly men the Bulwark of a nation. 285 Helps to godliness. 295 Grace to be
promoted in our relations. 268 One grace in truth, has all linked with it. 272
H
Hardness of heart differenced from an hard heart 327 Haters of Saints put in
Gods black Book. 206 Heart to be called toaccount. 240 Heart to be watched. 296
Heavenly mindedness the note of a Saint. 141 How many ways a godly man is
heavenly. 142 Heaven-aspiring motives. 147 How heaven is a better country. 150
Holiness Gods glory. 35 Holiness of Saints, wherein discovered. 36 Honoring of
Parents, wherein it consists. 225 Humble Soul Characterized. 104 Humility
exhorted to. 113 How to be attained. 115 Husbands must love their Wives. 221
Hypocrisy a vile sin. 138 Hypocrites, partial in matters of Religion. 239
I
Ignorance in Gospel Times inexcusable. 22 Indulging sin, what. 206 Ingratitude
odious. 193 Injuries to be forgiven. 245
K
Divine Knowledge, how qualified. 16 To be sought after. 24 How obtained. 25
L
Life of a Saint a life of believing. 29 Love of God to his people. 283 Love to
God. 31 Love to the Scriptures, how shown. 79 Love to the Word Preached. 84
Whether we are Lovers of the Word. 85 Love to the Saints, how qualified. 196
Motives to Love. 201 Love, how gotten and preserved. 205 Lukewarm temper
abominable. 161
M
Magistrates must put on Justice as a robe. 218 Masters to be good at home, as
well as at Church. 224 Ministers must sweat in Gods Vineyard. 218 Ministers
ought to be zealous. 219 Mischieving of Souls three ways. 267 Misery of a
natural estate. 275 Moral Righteousness to be observed. 243 Mystical union
sweet. 343
O
Obedience to God must be universal. 238 How a godly man obeys all Gods
commands. 249 Object. Touching hardness of heart answered. 327 Object. Touching
smoking flax answered. 339 Offices of Christ, precious. 55 Opposites to
patience. 166
P
Patience in waiting. 164 Patience in bearing. 165 Patience, what it is. ib.
Patience how attained. 177 Persecution for Christ. 248 Perseverance in the
profession of godliness. 299 Means to perseverance. 301 Motives to
perseverance. 309 Persons of the godly, precious. 280 Praise, a God-exalting
work. 181 Prayer the badge of a godly man. 117 Prayer spiritual, what it is.
119 A persuasive to Prayer. 128 Pretenders to godliness. 8 Pride an horrid sin.
114 Persons who do not prize Christ. 60 Whether we are prizers of Christ. 62 A
persuasive to all, to prize Christ. 67 Promises to persevering Christians. 310
Proud men unmasked. 110
R
Relative holiness. 218 Motives to be good in our relation. 228 Reproof to them
who pray not at all. 126 Reproofs, when loved. 87 Religion to be entered upon,
out of choice. 305
S
Secret sins. 207 Self-denial needful. 307 Servant of God described. 43 Service
of God excellent. 47 Serving of men when sinful. 51 Servants how to carry
themselves to their Masters. 226 Sincere Christian deciphered. 131 Sincerity
the ingredient into all the graces. 134 Sincerity a jewel of incomparable
worth. 135 Sins of a justified person odious. 73 Smoking flax, what it
signifies. 328 Why smoking flax shall not be quenched. 331 Spirit of God known
by its motions. 89 Spirits motions, how distinguished from the impulse of a
natural conscience. 90 Spirit known by its virtues. 91 How the spirit of God
comforts. 94 Spirit deriders far from Godly. 99 Spirits in-dwelling to be
labored after. 100 Such as have the spirit, how they are to carry themselves.
101 Spiritualness in duty what. 230 How we may grow more spiritual in the
service of God. 236 Superstitions persons seldom converted. 41 Support in the
death of godly relations. 168 Sympathy with Sion. 246
T
Thankfulness a work proper for a Saint. 179 Thankfulness in adversity as well
as prosperity. 183 How we may know whether we are rightly thankful. 185
Motives to thankfulness. 189 How to get a thankful heart. 194 Thanksgiving a
more noble part of Gods worship. 181 Time to be redeemed. 297 Trial of our love
to God. 33
V
Unbeleif a God-dishonouring sin. 323 Unworthiness ought not to discourage. 325
W
What it is to walk with God. 251 Walking after the flesh, what it imports. 253
How we may know whether we walk with God. 255 Walking with God excellent. 257
How we may come to walk with God. 262 Weeper for sin 70 Why weeping after
conversion. 71 Weeping, how qualified. 75 Go often into the weeping has. 76
Works of Mercy. 248 World an hindrance to godliness. 295 Worldly things
contemptible. 148 Worship of God, better in purity than pomp. 39
Z
Zeal, the flame that ascends from an holy heart. 155 Zeal fictitious. 156 Zeal
rightly tempered. 157 Zeal to be pursued after. 162
FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 76. line 23. For sangui serat, read, sanguit erat. page 64. marg. for
(...), read (...). page 131. line 20. for front positus, read front politus.
page 278. marg. for (...) read (...) page 342. marg. for 2 Conclusion, read, 2
Consolation.

These Books following are Printed for, and sold by Thomas Parkhurst, at the
three Crowns at the lower end of Cheapside, over against the great Conduit.

A Divine Cordial; Or, the Transcendent Privilege of those that love God, and
are savingly Called; By Tho. Watson.

The Holy Eucharist, or, the Mystery of the Lords Supper, briefly explained; By
Tho. Watson.

Paramythion, or a Word of Comfort for the Church of God; By Tho. Watson.


