MEMENTO MORI border with skull and crossbones and other emblems of Death AN
ELEGY ON That Grand Example of Loyalty, Valor, and Conduct, Sir Edward Spragg.
Unfortunately Drowned (after Incomparable proof of H^ro^ck Gallantry) in the
late ENGAGEMENT, WITH THE DUTCH. August the 11th. 1673.

LONDON. Printed for Phillip Brooksby at the Hospital-gate in West-Smit field
1673.



AN ELEGY ON Sir Edward Spragg.
TO Scenes, where Death does with most horror look,
And Cowa^ds a^e by safety q^ite fo^s^ok,
Where Valor is most nak^d, and where ha^ms
Know no Resistance, nor defensive A^ms
Where Heaven's Masked, and the Suns gli^'ri^g Rays
Are Choked in Fogs, which Sulphurous Vapors ta^^e,
My fluttering Muse, addressed her humble flight,
Through the resembling shades of dolesome Night:
Where meeting FAME, upon that path of way.
With flagging Wings, I courted her short stay;
Unto a lovely Bank we both retired,
With expectation beyond patience fired:
Whom with a Breast big as a Billow swelled
To these sad Accents, I at length comp^l'd.
BRAVE SPRAGG IS GON^, (quoth she) which ha^i^g s^^d,
Down dropped the Wreath which over his Valiant Head
She long, as his just me^it, hove^ing held:
His Head, whose matchless Valor so excelled:
Whose mighty deeds were Echoed heretofore,
From Lybian Sands, to the Batavian Shore:
His dreadful Name striking with equal fears,
The Infidels of Holland, and Algiers:
Those Barbarous Mid-land Rovers he made bow,
As suddenly as with commanding Brow
Old Neptune's wont to still the unruly Waves,
And having Charmed at Bugia those Slaves:
With full-blown Sails does as in Triumph come,
To Quell Mighty Usurpers nearer Home:
Tell me Audacious Dutch, did ye ere know,
An Earthquake shake your Quagmire before now:
Like to his fatal strokes, or that dire Thunder,
That made of late your Hogan Mogans wonder.
And think the dreadful day of Doom was come,
When Thetys opened her too too Loveing Womb:
To Receive this her dear and best bred Son:
E're half the wonders of his days were done;
It Was kind, yet at that Kindness we must weep,
To make her Darling, in her bosom sleep,
But Narrow-Seas, hold not him, whose great mind
Was like the spreading Ocean, unconfined:
For the loud Thunder of his Cannons Roar,
Wakned his Fate, and made him rise once more.
So great a Soul could not but Conqueror dye,
And when he fall, bequeath us VICTORY.
How will thou, Fate! Excuse this great mistake,
That thou do still thy vow with merit Break?
Did Clouds of Smoke so darken thy dim Eye,
That for D' Ruyter Valiant Spragg must die:
Should thou now offer Him it were but Vain.
And still there is cause against thee to complain:
But let us not Eclipse so brave a Fate,
By whining Language, rather Celebrate:
Sprage's Glorious fall, whose valor being Tried
To a full Height in, Honors Be^ he Died:
If Advocates gain Honor in a Cause,
Of paltry Trespass (...) the Common Laws:
What merrits He (...) pleads with dint of Sword,
And Dares be Killed, or Kill at every word;
By whose s^cc^ss or Kingdoms (...) or stand
The Fate of Empires (...) on his Hand:
Such, such, was Valiant Spragg, whose Fate being heard,
A general sadness through the Fleet appea^'d:
The Loving Seamen grown de^^^ct^^, ^ore
The Tattered Bitts of Sails and did deplore:
More than their wounds, His (...) Lamented Death,
Whilst their Eyes Bled, and Brea^^^ (...) sighs want Breath,
Amongst whom, one less tongue tied than the Rest,
Thus passionately his kind Respects Expressed:
"Thus far we are beholding to that Wave,
"which gives the Earth, the honor of his Grave,
"And since salt Waters did his life surprise,
"We Will leave no moisture in our Briny Eyes:
"Though his Loved Life, our Prayers could not save:
"Weel make with Tears an Island of his Grave.
S. W.

FINIS.

