THE Original of the Dominion OF PRINCES, Founded upon Gods Sovereignty over
the whole EARTH.

OR, The Kingly Prerogative, INSTITUTED by GOD, And proved from the holy
Scriptures to be JURE DIVINO.

By R. W. D. D.

PROVERBS XXIV. 21, 22. My Son fear thou the Lord and the King: and meddle not
with them that are given to change.

For their Calamity shall rise suddenly, and who knows the ruin of them both.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Eversden, and are to be sold at his Shop, at the
Greyhound in S. Paul's Churchyard, 1660.

A Collection of the Contents of the ensuing CHAPTERS.
CHAP. I. A Discovery of the four causes of Man and his Dominion, from Genesis 1.
26. The Exposition of the words thereof. Of Elohim, the sole Efficient of all
that is Sovereignty, and perpetual Proprietary thereof. The Sacrilege of
arrogating the Originality of the least particle of Power; and the method of
the ensuing Discourse.

CHAP. II. No man may presume further then Christ. Christ's eight titles to the
Dominion of the World. His Titles and Kingdom destroyed, if the People have
Power over Kings. The second Psalm explained. The modesty of Christ insisteth
only upon the Formal Donation of God. The Devil himself adventureth not
upon the claim of Originality. The Exposition of S. John 18. 36. My kingdom
is not of this world, etc. Of S. Peter 1. 2. 13. Submit your selves to every
Ordinance of men. Of the kingdom of Heaven in the Gospels. And the Sum of
Christian Liberty.

CHAP. III. A brief Digression, that the Power entrusted to Kings cannot but
be Divine, by the unquestionablenesse thereof. Job 34. 16. expounded, and the
Exposition justified by parallel texts. The Question answered, What if the King
turn Tyrant? An Answer to a Scotch Topic.

CHAP. IIII. Both the Regal and Sacerdotall Powers, were (in the Beginning)
the Inheritance of the Firstborn. The Colloquy between God and Cain, (Genesis 4.
7.) explained. Also that of God with Evah, (Genesis 3. 16. by the Commentary of S.
Paul, 1 Timothy 2. 12. and 1 Cor. 14. 34. No Co-ordination in the Family, the
Model and Nursery of Kingdom. The seed of the Commandment for Kingdom and
Priesthood, sown in the Family from the very Beginning of the World, in the
perpetual Law of Nature*

CHAP. V. A Recapitulation of what had been formerly proved. Kingship, while we
are on Earth, Superior to Priesthood. Exodus 4. 16. expounded. The Name of
Elohim communicated, has relation to Inferiors; Angel to Superiors. The
High Priest honored with the appellation of Elohim. Exodus 22. 28. expounded,
by Acts 23. 5. The acknowledgemen of Constantine thereupon. And the judgment
of S. Cyprian. All Kings indifferently dignified with the name of Elohim.
Inferior Magistrates receive both Title and Power from their Kings. Unction an
evidence of Divine Power. Christ himself not Anointed, but in the Persons of
his predecessors and Successors. Korah's Rebellion and Doom; How far it did
go, and does reach. Aaron's Priesthood not dead but changed.

CHAP. VI. Monarchical Power, Instituted under Theocraty it self. Upon Gods
recesse from the immediate exercise of Kingship, he never was the Author of
Popular Election. The exemplification of Gods mind herein; in and by the
particulars of his appointing of Saul to the Kingdom of Israel. Wherein
consisted the sinfulness of the Israelites petition, for a King. The Law of
Kingdom, 1 Samuel 10. 25. The word Mishpat, and diverse its great Importances*
Unction, Gods Demonstration, for the Communication of Divine Power, 1 Samuel 8.
11. etc. The Authors gleanings from the story of King Saul. All summed up in
the conclusion of this Chapter.

CHAP. VII. Sect. 1. A Digression in answer to the question, How a man may know
whether his Prince be (indeed the Lords Anointed. Certain Praecognoscenda for
the manifestation thereof* The threefold Acts and Donations of the three
Persons of the Trinity, conveighing several rights to man. Of title to, title
in, and help from the Creature. Considerations from man's inability to command
that which is his own, to nourish him. No evidence produced from him who is the
Heir of all things, for the People to Assise men's Severalties. Adam in his
Innocence had not Original right so much as to Herbs and Fruits; much less
can his sinful children have natural propriety (without Donation) in the
other things which God (not they) created.

Sect. 2. The forementioned question answered. Every man's assurance from God,
of his own title to his own Estate; asserteth the Kings. The Subjects Right
depends on the Kings. Humane Laws (as Humane) cannot give away Gods title to
any man. Humane Laws, as enlivened by the divine Power of the King, can
dispense propriety unto each man. None but the King has Gods warranty (in his
revealed Will) as his Steward, to set forth man's severalties.

Sect. 3. Disobedience to the King, forfeiteth the Subjects titles. Sovereignty
established in both the Tables, before the naming the sins punishable by it.
Obedience to the Supreme Earthly Powers, to be preferred before Life, Honor,
and Livelihood. The fifth Cammandement the Guardian of all the rest. The
public Father-hood of the King, proved from Genesis 9. 5. A repetition of some
passages elsewhere justified.

Sect. 4. The seven first Verses of Romans 13. expounded. Obedience not due to
the Lower in Power, when the Higher contradicts. Aquinas his definition of
Order. God the Invisible; the King the Visible Head thereof. Hell it self not
without an one Head. No man to presume out of the station, wherein the God of
Order has set him. They (be they never so great or many) who do so, encamp
themselves with Apollyon, against God. Inferior Magistrates receive not their
Power from God, but from the King. The King Gods Deacon, not only to dispense
Necessaries for our Livelihood; but also the Lord of Hosts Commissary general
for his Gold and Steel. But one Sword in one Kingdom. The hard condition of
Kings from hence. Popular Flattery most pestilentiall; robs them of all they
have, while it strokes them into a Fancy for their robbing of God. Eccles. 10.
4. expounded.

Sect. 5. The 1 Timothy 2. 12. (I permit not a Woman, etc.) explained. The
Apostles Argument for Monarchical Dominion, from Adam formed alone. The Case
of Zelophehad's Daughters, Number. 27. Their Plea considerable for these times.
Gods determination thereupon.

CHAP. VIII. Sect. 1, An Introduction to the ensuing Chapter. The Adversaries
Principles unjustly taken up, but more foully deserted. The Peoples Liberty, the
Word of God, and the Kingdom of Christ, find no such enemies, as the pretenders
for them. The written Word of God, the best Commentary upon the unwritten Law
of Nature. Genesis 49. 10. and 1 Samuel 13. 13. reconciled. The exemplification of
Gods mind in the Institution of King Saul; an Argument unanswerable by the
Adversaries. The acknowledger of the Scriptures, must acknowledge, that in the
Patent of King David, all Christian Kings have a joint Commission. Some
conveniences through the settlement of Gods Power in one Man, pointed at. Prove.
21. 1. paraphrased.

Sect. 2. The grounds of Gods preferring David and his Seed to the Kingdom of
Israel: expressed in the 13^. Psalm. Its first part contains David's
solicitous care for the building of a material Temple for God. The second
David's Petition: first, for Gods Inhabitancy therein: secondly, for the
Support and Glory of the Priests thereof: thirdly, for the performance of Gods
Leiturgie: fourthly, for the Honor of Christ, in and by these. The last
expresses Gods Oath, in answer to David's Vow, for the perpetuity of the
several petitioned for particulars. Gods Oath fulfilled to a title in the
typified, though not in the Type.

Sect. 3. A Paraphrase upon the 89. Psalm; which celebrateth the Promise of the
Worlds Administration by Kings; as the gloriousest of all Gods earthly favors;
and the faithfulness of Gods performance herein. Gods Covenants with Jewish
and Christian Kings; One and Two; as are the Stock and the Graffe. Kings only
the Sons of Gnelion, or the most High* Christian Kings taken in into a better
Covenant then the natural Line of David. They the ultimate Object of the
Merciful and Faithful Oath of God. No misdemeanors in them, or their Seed can
Dethrone either. Mischiefs attending the contrary Doctrine. Former Proofs
abated, enough here asserted. The Sun and Moon Gods Witnesses of the
perpetuity of both the Powers Regal and Sacerdotall.

Sect. 4. A recollection of certain Proofs: that as well Temporal earthly
Kingship over the whole Creature, as Spiritual (properly Priesthood) was, and
is Christ's, unto the end of the world: then he must resign. Christ the primary
Object of Gods sworn Covenant with David; Christian Kings the secondary.
Antichrists by Saint John 1. 2. 22. described. What is denying of the Father
and the Son. The people may be Antichrists. Saint John's marks of
Antichristianisme. Perpetuity* sworn (together with the other two) unto the
Temple, which could not sin; manifests that the performance of that Oath of
God must be expected in the typified, which cannot be in the Type. The change
of the Priesthood before the Temple might be built, attesteth the same.

Sect. 5. Evidences from the words Melech and Moshel. David, the most
irrefragable of all Witnesses; and the most liberal of all Acknowledgers. That
the Temporal Kingships of all the world, are Elohim's own. The name of Melech
or King, primarily Gods and his Christ's. Twenty places out of the one Book of
Psalms, produced to prove this. Others concerning the title of Moshel. David
had Arbitrary Prerogative, beyond the bounds of Gods own described Sanctions.
Salus populi, suprema Lex esto, understood. The Sons of David, heirs of his
Prerogative.

Sect. 6. Intervenient Considerables between this and the ensuing Chapter. A
brief Answer to the chief Arguments of the Millenarians. The difference
between Kings Pagan, Jewish, and Christian, truly stated. No gap in the Series
of Christ's Kingdom, during the times of Infidelity; fore-prophesied and
Typified. Usurpations against the Rule of Natures Law, protested against.

CHAP. IX. The Law of Nature, and its Proviso in this particular Controversy;
This the proper Act of; That only subject to the God of Nature. Princes Rights
from these, better then other men's. God the sole Eelector of Kings, when the
People seem most to choose them. Four Maxims in this behalf. The cause of
the preferring of Solomon before his elder Brother expressed, and justified to
be so, by Gods semblable Acts in Ishmael and Esau; not reprobated. Solomon's
Throne demolishable, as he was King of the Jews; not demolishable in the
Typified Gentiles. Solomon not the Type of Christ, but of Christian Kings:
David was the Type of Christ. The Material Temples of God ought to be the
solicitous care of Solomon's Successors. God's not dwelling in temples made
with hands, how to be understood. Christ's zeal, for what Temples. The Kings
Throne Gods. Why we uncover and bow before the Chair of State. Regal Power
above man's Limitations or Censures.

CHAP. X. Kings are Gods chief Debtors for the sins of the People; not the
High Court, or High Priest. The King to command others, what he may not execute
himself. Kings the Protectors of Religion; and Religion, of them. The
celebrated precedents of good Jewish Kings, the best Commentary upon the
Precepts of God for Kingship. This was accounted Argument enough, while we had
to do but with the Faction of Rome. Reverence to the incomparable Works of
Bishop Andrews, restraines the needless pressing of this invincible Argument.
His irrefragable Exemplification of Jehoshaphat's severalizing the matters of
Ecclesiastical and Political Cognizance: And his constitution of the
High Priest, his chief Commissioner in Ecclesiasticals.

CHAP. XI. No new Light after the New Testament. What was both before and under
the Law, dyed not with the Law, but was confirmed by the Gospel. Evangelicall
Rules and Examples in this particular, followed by Primitive Doctrine and
Practice, abundantly justified by others. The Divine Power of Kings, (Saint
John 10. 34.) not sequestrable away (by distinction) from their persons, but to
the prejudice of the Deity of Christ. The Text of Psalm. 82. 6. [I my self have
said, You, your selves are Gods, and all of you the sons of Gnelion] further
cleared. Our Saviors own Argument from that Text. Further manifestations
amply performed elsewhere, not needed here. Christ's own Assertion, that
Tributes and Customs were paid unto God in Caesar. Neither Livelihood nor
Life it self, can countenance Selfe-preservation by Resistance of lawful
Princes, in those who assume the name of Christians; if the Doctrine and
Example of Christ, be only that which can denominate Christians.

CHAP. XIII. The Authors Reason for not beginning with the End of Dominion. The
Reason why God himself retroceded from the immediate exercise of his just
Monarchy; that Man might not by his Justice be consumed. The Reason why
Priesthood is not administered by the Angels. God (by thus doing) does not only
accommodate our Persons, but dignifie our whole Nature. The Fundamental Axioms
(in this Tract) recollected. The unalterablenesse of Gods Ground, for the
unalterablenesse of these Constitutions. This great vouchsafing of God, does
display unto us the Blemishes of our proud frailty, as do our clothes, and the
written Word of God. Saint Peter's cautions against wresting of Scriptures. What
remains to be hereafter treated upon.

Errata.
Page 7. line 7. read Elohims Parent. p. 12. l. 22. r. (...). l. 26. r. (...).
p 88. li. 2 for the the r. the fight. Other mistakes the intelligent and
ingenuous Reader will easily see and restore: As (...) for (...). Simili for
Simily. ^vexilla for vexillae. (...) for (...) for (...), etc.

The preface to the Reader.
To the Honoring Acknowledger of the sacred Word of God, comprised in the just
Volume of his Book, (by way of excellency) called the Scriptures; The Author
wishes the promised Blessings, in the saving Covenant of (otherwise
unfordable) Grace, therein by God secured to his humility; and indented with
his obedience.
HE knows, that Epitome's have been the bane of Arts and Sciences, and
injurious to the Professors thereof; useful rather for the memories of those
who have learned, then for the understandings of those who are to learn:
necessitating the Compilers to make use of words of the largest capacity,
which, not coming within the reach of presumers, (Qui continuo se putant in
Helicona pervenisse,) they embrace the empty cloud of their own easy and
hasty misprisions, in stead of truth's substance; and the Encyclopaedeia, which
(full of fancy) they arrogate to have attained. Others, (whose modesty is more
fit for learning) are thrust upon despair, while they are not willing to
think, they know more then they do; and are intelligent of what they do not
know. And a third sort, despise for ever, what they comprehend not at the first.

Yet the Author, deprived of the means of his subsistency, (and therefore of
the encouraging accommodations of books and friends) having (as he could)
passed through the difficulties of the labor; and (at last) not finding the
like aid which was afforded to the Hebrew women in bondage, by their Egyptian
Midwives: is notwithstanding contented, (in zeal to God and his native
country) to adventure the breviary of the first part of his works, concerning
the grand external cause ofs Dominion, (to wit, the Efficient) hoping for
better times for the bringing forth of that, which he intended for the general
benefit. But confesses, that it cannot be thus done for the good of many, in
this greatest of Gods controversies with earth, it being concerning his
Sovereignty over the earth; which being set upon the right basis, the rock of
Gods Word, will stand against the oppositions of all encroaching intrenchments,
built upon the sard of humane machinations; and requires for the salvation of
all that Christ has bought, compass, as well as strength. But in all
broth^^ly concertations, there must be a set rule of decisions.

In his Preface to the Reader, he supposed (as a principle between him and
those with whom he would dispute.) That a man may be assured by an infallibly
divine faith, that the received Scriptures, are the dictates of Gods Spirit;
this he attempted not to prove afresh, it being already done (in our Church)
even unto astonishment, and in ever living cedar, written in the Book of
Jasher; wherein the great Author (though dead, yet) speaks.

The Conclusions which he proved, and which there (as here) he desired to have
admitted, were,

First, that the Canonical Scriptures of the Old and New Testament,
(acknowledged by the Church of England) as dictated by the Spirit of God, are
to be held the Magisterial rule of all controversies and doubts in points of
Religion, for so long as the world shall endure, containing all things
necessary to salvation: so as all those, who with humility and sobriety, will
make use of the means therein expressed; may attain unto sufficient direction
for the same, through the Vrim and thunnus, covenanted in them to be left unto
Gods Church for ever. And that other revelations are not now to be expected,
and different revelations to be abhorred.

Secondly, that every good translation is according to the Word of God; but no
translation is the Word of God.

Thirdly, that the Spirit of God has not throughout the Book of God, one word
or tittle, which has not its own, proper, and beneficial weight: neither is
there in any particle thereof, any thing savoring of humane frailty; either in
deficiency, or superfluity, for the just expression of the matter therein
proposed.

Fourthly, that the great Creator of Names has not himself given a name to any
thing, but so, that his name is a complete character of the nature of the thing
it self; which humane ability, joined with modesty and industry, may in a
competent measure discern. There be, who with great probability affirm thus
much of the names, which Adam gave the beasts in Paradise.

Fifthly, that where the Spirit of God makes use of a word of different
significations; they were all intended by God, and are applicable to man, as
useful for some conditions and times.

Sixthly, that no place of Scripture, being of private interpretation; the
obscure Texts are (according to the analogy of faith) to be expounded by those
which are clear: and those which seem to go alone, by those which are more.
And that according to that of Psalm. 119. 130. it is Pethach Devarecha, apertio
ver^orum tuorum, (...)
the opening, anatomising, and looking into the entrals, and vital principles
of his mysterious words, which give light and learning unto (otherwise ignorant
or) simple mankind.

These things he justified from several plates of Scripture, and all of them
from that particular Text of Deuteronomy. 29. 29. Secret things (belong) unto the Lord
our God, and revealed things to us and our children for ever; that we might do
[all the words] of this Law. Which will be evident unto every man who shall
look understandingly and seriously into the words in the original of that Text.

To these were added the ensuing Cautions.

First, that unto him, who in points of difference adventures alone to expound
Scripture, no caution, no modesty can be too much; one side or the other of us
having run upon the rock of perdition, in the Exposition of Romans 13. and 1 Pet.
2. 13.

Secondly, that in matters of moment, (such are the controversies which have
drawn so much blood amongst us) great heed is to be taken, how we depart from
the interpretations recorded by the ancient Fathers, and received by the whole
Catholic Church: That thus to do, is an argument of an evil cause, or of an
evil man; in as much, as they who were the Scholars of the inspired Apostles,
(who were careful dispensers of all saving truths;) or the scholars of them
who were so, cannot but be surer masters of the Apostles meanings, then we of
the last age. And they cannot but (with serious men) disgrace themselves, (what
ever they may fasten upon weak and wilful capacities) who deny the uniforme
practice of all ages, to be the best Expositor of what was decreed at first.

Thirdly, that the Plea used by many, (but most of all by those who least
reverence the Fathers) that a dwarf set upon the shoulders of a giant, sees
further then the giant himself, may be dangerously fallacious; it holds not, if
the dwarf be pur-blind, and cannot see what is afar off, if his sight cannot
reach to the giant whom he tramples on, if of his own or other men's prejudicial
choosing, he wears false spectacles, which make that look blew which is white:
If he have an evil heart, which will not give him leave to see what he does,
and report what be sees, he cannot be a just witness.

Concerning the judgment of the one Catholic Church, (to wit, which has been
in all ages and places, and which none can contemn, but to the infamy of the
age and nation, which does or suffers it) what honorable esteem soever he
has of it, accounting it the best of all Topical arguments; yet he is
contented to wave all affiance therein, and that this controversy should be
magisterially determined, only by demonstrative arguments, from scientifical
divine authority, in the sacred Scripture, relying only upon that light (in
the present case) which Scripture shall bring to Scripture.

Their predecessors, who (in this our age) first stirred up the people in this
controversy, powerfully wrought upon the unjudicious many; by calling for
express Scripture, for the warranty of all merely humane actions, and
constitutions: but now the successors (in these days) having reaped the
benefit of i^, desert the former principle, so far forth, that man's prudential
rules are advanced into that place of Scripture, in the acts of religious
Worship. And in the highest of humane concernments (even against the divine
sovereignty of the GOD of nature, indeed) arguments are pretended from the
laws of nature unwritten; and those against the written, both rules and
exemplifications in Scripture: in this point which he has evidently and
frequently therein declared, to be his own Prerogative Royal.

As concerning the pretenders to the Spirit, and new Light; we read, that the
Spirit of GOD searches all things, in the deep mysteries of the Word of GOD, 1
Cor. 2. 10. Let it be the first trial of their spirits, to give us a clear and
uncontrollable Commentary in the first place, upon that word of Light which GOD
has revealed unto us, before we trust them in things unrevealed, which GOD
has reserved in his cloud and unaccessible darkness: and particularly, upon
the eight last Chapters of the Prophecy of Ezekiel; which, (if it prove not
against themselves) is like to make a Proselyte of this Author; otherwise, they
may pardon us, if we be apt to esteem of them, but as of vainly proud idle
children, ambitious of new lessons, before they have taken out their former.
Whilst we acknowledge the Scriptures absolute perfection, and the execrations
therein expressed upon all, who shall expect a further light from GOD, (much
more a contrary) for the whole for ever of this world. And that GOD almighty
(having sealed the Canon) has therein most graciously provided (in plain
language) as fitting entertainment, sufficient for the salvation of all humble
souls; and directions, whereby they may try the spirits of pretenders: so has
he for the manifestation of his glory, intermixed inexplicable mysteries also,
becoming the high majesty of his own wisdom, to teach proud men, humble
reverence; or to befool the spirit of bold pretenders.

Now concerning the servants of GOD, our Worthies, who have written in this
controversy; diverse of them have for this long time labored with Christian
meekness and patience, (by degrees) to make that straight which is distorted:
and for the hardness of men's hearts, have pressed chiefly, the honesty of
Obedience, from the paction between the King and the Subject; according, either
to the general law of nature, (out of which, for that it is unwritten, men
easily take what they please, not what they should) or the particular laws of
particular Nations, which men, that have gotten the mastery over, trample upon
as they list; so that many conceive the strength of GODS Precepts by them
alleged, to be founded, either upon the heaps of dust imposed by men's hands
upon the law of nature, or the sand of municipal constitutions.

These Arguments being rejected, though not indeed answered; we are enforced to
tell the world, That, non sic fuit ab initio, from the beginning it was not so:
that they who created not themselves, must be contented to be governed, both
as, and by whom, he that made them has appointed: and, that in terminis, he
has set down his form, and designed the men, by which and whom, he (without
whom the whole creature can have no power at all) has covenanted to rule them,
for so long as the Sun and Moon shall endure. And also, to be the peoples
remembrancers of their duty in this case, the very same with the obligations of
the former Israel of God, unto those by him entrusted with the administration
of his powers: and, that the sin of disobedience is in Christians more heinous,
then in them, who are recorded to have smarted under the fierce anger of
Almighty GOD, for their rebellions against him indeed, in the persons of those,
whom he had honored with his commissions.

Concerning the answrs, that have been given to such arguments, as have been
urged against us, there is no need of further trouble, were there no more said,
then by the one Author of that most Christian Tract, (able to make Christian,
any age but this) against Resistance of the lawful Magistrate under color of
Religion, and its Appendents: so that without arrogance, it may be here
accounted below the answering.

That nature should teach that defense, which the law of God forbids.

That, while we render to the King those immunities, which the Scripture has
given him; we release him of those obligations, which God has laid upon him.

That we make the King to be masterlesse, when we submit him only to his own
Master.

That we injure the people, while we desire to keep them out of the fire of
GODS wrath.

That we take away their liberty, when we teach them to serve God.

That we condemn other Nations, when we first desire to propagate the dismayed
truth in our own; so that we may be a light unto them, and not only our
miseries, their monitions.

Herein, if the Author be in an error, he resolves with the like candor that
he proposes his own, to submit to better Arguments; by like mindedness,
dearbought truth, is like to be the greatest gainer: and they the least losers,
who hitherto have had the least acquaintance with it.

These things premised, he addresseth himself to set down, and to prove, what
is the true original of Dominion; briefly handling it, in its causes: The
Efficient, God: the subjective Matter, man created: the differential Form, Gods
image, and his likeness, authorized by the recorded donation of GOD in his
Word: The End, that GOD may be glorified in the model of earthly kingdom,
according to the honor which he has in the Forma exemplaris, or pattern
thereof in heaven. And prays to the GOD of heaven, to bless it unto us all.

Amen.
THE DOCTRINE OF THE SCRIPTURES, CONCERNING The Original of Dominion.
The state of the Question.

THat the power of Dominion upon earth, (which I shall crave leave, without
prejudice to its Fountain, for distinction sake, to call [ earthly Dominion])
is originally and primarily in the people, has passed from many men's tongues
and pens, into the general practice, and is now used as if it were so indeed.
Notice also may be taken, how some (but it seems) to the same end, laid the
foundation in more moderate terms (but from the same source, (i) the
derivation of the power of the people to the King,) pretending (at first, but)
Co-ordination, which brought forth Subordination, which is the mother of
nonordination of Regal Supremacy, by the GOD of Order. The first expression is
downright; the second more covert: but both deny, that Kings were immediately
constituted administrators of the divine power over the people, all and
singular, by GOD, from the beginning, for so long as the world shall continue.

That which I endeavor to prove, is,

That all power is originally GODS, according to his name of Elohim; the first
that he expressed himself by unto man. That in particular, the power of earthly
Dominion, was, and continues the divine power of GOD. That not all or any of
mankind, may assume any particle of divine power, but according to the donation
of GOD, warranted upon record, in the Covenant of Grace, contained in the holy
Scriptures. That the divine power of earthly Dominion, is in the Scriptures, by
the express donation of GOD, conferred upon Kings, (as his immediate deputies)
and not upon the people, (as by, or with them) but over them: and this by
constitution, to continue unto the worlds end, which had its beginning, from
the beginning of the world.

These things, and the consequences thereof, to wit, Supremacy,
irresistibility, and all other the jura Majestatis, or rights of Majesty, at
this day controverted: I doubt not, but (by the assistance of Elohim) I shall
make proof of in the ensuing discourse, following, that method, which I shall
be forthwith engaged in,

CHAP. I.
The Contents.
A discovery of the four causes of Man and his Dominion, from Genesis 1. 26. The
exposition of the words thereof. Of Elohim, the sole Efficient of all that is
Sovereignty, and perpetual proprietary thereof. The Sacrilege of arrogating the
Originality of the least particle of Power; And the method of the ensuing
discourse.

THe truth of the Scriptures being out of all question; and particularly, in
the point of the Creation of the world, and all therein, by GOD: In mine haste
unto the maine of the controversy, I shall pretermit the establishing of this
foundation, (which I shall do in the second part of this Tract,) That, that
which was once nothing, cannot have original power over any thing, (not so much
as over its very self) but by the charter of him, who made it something: so
likewise, intending to speak of all the four causes of man, and man's Dominion,
I shall here but point at the final cause of both; reserving that likewise for
its opportunity. And this it appears to be, When GOD had built the world in
such absolute sort, that there was no degree of possible perfection wanting to
the beauty of the Universe, but it had a seat in some creature or other; save
only, that to make the Earth a resemblance of Heaven, (which I shall justify
when I come to speak of the Lords Prayer) there was not a creature to represent
him, for the managing of the earth, to make it a representation of this
glorious kingdom in heaven; where the multitudes of celestial Angels account
it their Joy and Freedom, to promote the Majesty, and to do the Royal will of
him, that intends thus to be Glorified on Earth, which was the End of man's
Creation.

2. Wherefore, my first Record shall be Gen 1. 26. where all the Four Causes
are included; and it shall prescribe my Method, and have its Influence upon the
whole Series of this Discourse: It is GODS Consultatien about man's Creation,
and is early enough to warrant a Prescription, from time out of mind; Beginning
from before the beginning of the first man. The words are, And GOD said, Let us
make man, in our Image, after our Likeness; and let them have dominion, etc.
The times (as well as the Printer, calling for brevity) require the Political
and Practical, rather then the Physical, and speculative Divinity herein
included.

3. And therefore, I will not stand upon the powerful extent of that Operative
(...)
word Amar, [he said] used, as the only Matter of the whole Creation,
throughout the whole Chapter. Nor will I so much as name (because I may not
determine) the Controversies emergent from it; I press to the next.

4. [ Elohim] it is one of the ten names of the Deity; but, which alone is (...)
used, throughout the whole Narration of the Creation, above thirty times in
this Chapter: and is generally set forth in holy Writ, as his Judiciary name of
managing and preserving, by Justice and Judgment, that world, which under that
style he created: so Deuteronomy. 1. 17. Mishpat, (to wit, Judgment) is GODS, (...)
under this name of Elohim; which is the reason assigned by the Learned, why,
our Savior being upon the Cross, in point of satisfaction of his Fathers
Justice, calls out unto him, Eli, Eli; not Jehovah, the style of his mercy.
Elohim, here is the Plural number of El, or Eloah, which signifies the Strong
or Powerful: it is here placed between two Verbs, one of the Singular, the
other of the Plural number: one of the two Reasons whereof, is to declare the
Mystery of Unity in the Trinity, and of the Trinity in unity. The Unity of
three, with relation to [ Said;] the Trinity of the same One, in reference to [
Let us make.]

5. The word for [ Let us make] is [ Naghnase,] which also signifies,
Adornemus, (...)
Adaptemus, Exaltemus; to make comely, to make fit for its place, and to make
glorious over others. This word is also further paraphrased by GOD himself;
first, in the next Verse, where Adam is actually made, and that is by the word
[ Bara] to express his virtual creation, whereas his body was formed (...)
out of that late new-nothing, Earth: The second is Vajitsar, Chap. 2. 7. where
his making is recounted. Paraeus says, the learned Hebrews affirm that word to
be [ there] written with a double Jod, in evidence of his composure of dust,
and of the breath of GOD; of Earth and Heaven, to ennoble and allay his
thoughts: since by his makers indulgence, he had good title to both; though by
his pride or unworthiness, he might come to enjoy neither.

6. The Monarch (for whom all of the inferior world was intended) is next
called by his name, Adam: and we read of the two single Adams, both looked (...)
upon in this consultation; the first Adam, was from Adama the Earth; the
second was Adam from Dam, which signifies Blood. From the first, (as from the
conduit) we had an inconsistent being: from the second, and from the fountain
of his blood, we have the reparation of our escheated being: both were alone,
and singulars, to make happy our Spiritual and Political* union, in, and under
one. The Spirit of GOD himself having declared, that his making but of one man
at the first, (whereas he did otherwise, in the other parts of his creation)
was the demonstration of his mind for all times; that where the power of
Government, should (from him) be established, it should be invested but in one;
as is justified, Chap. 7.

The next word is Betsalmenu, [in the image of us,] Tselem, signifies also, a
(...)
shadow and darkness; whence we learn, that the image of God may be obscured,
but not lost, as it fell out, as shall be made clear: whereas, of Chidmuthenu,
[after the likeness of us,] the root is Dama, signifying (as to be like, so)
to be destroyed. The likeness of GOD in man, having worse fate, but foretold
likewise in the name, which the wisdom of GOD himself made for it; it was
indeed quite extinguished, and that irreparably, but for him, who to make our
atonement, was made in the likeness of sinful flesh.

8. That the image, and the likeness of God in us, are not both one, but
specifically distinct, shall be proved in its due time; also, that the throne
of GODS image, is in the gubernative part, where ever it is placed: and that
there be several degrees of it, or portions, shall be proved out of express
Scripture. In private persons, it is seated in the regal faculty of the will:
In the family, (consisting of diverse incorporated into one body,) it is in the
master thereof: In the kingdom, (composed of many families, into one household)
it is in the King; the representer of Elohim therein. And that while we are
upon earth, it is superior to the likeness which is placed in the
deliberative part; and is proportionably, the receptacle of Priesthood: so as
it also is dispensed by the second Adam. For there is something of Priesthood
in every private man, to wit, for his private self: and something in the family
for it, which is in the master thereof. In the public persons of the sons of
Levi, there are some who have the double portion of it, in respect of the
others; and by it, have Ecclestastical Dominion over them: as in things
appertaining unto GOD they should have (under the Christian Prince) over all
others.

9. The last word is Vejerdu, [And let them have dominion,] the root is Rada,
which with dominari, to bear rule, signifies also, accipere idque ab alto, to
receive, (...)
and to receive from above: expressing, that no man can have the least particle
of Dominion, by virtue of the image of GOD; but, he must have the warranty also
of express donation from Elohim, whose image he bears: be it, as here, but
over birds, beasts, and fishes; much more, over men's proprieties, liberties,
and lives. This word is again used, Psalm. 72. 8. to declare the amplitude of
the Charter, Territories, Power, and Glory of Christian Kings, far beyond that
of the son and sons of David: as shall be made evident from the 17. Verse.
Chapt. 10.

10. Having thus briefly set forth the signification of the words, I re-begin
with Elohim, the Creator, and the efficient cause of Dominion; and here, that
the Potter has power over his clay, I shall not need to prove: only, I shall
give a second reason for the use of the Plural number (in this name) frequently
in holy Scripture. And the Masters of the language unanimously teach, that it
is in honor of the plurality of his Powers; yea, the most prudent Rabbi,
Aben-Esra (though he discovered, and acknowledged the mystery of the Trinity,
yet he) R. Aben-Esra in Locum. R. Bechai in princip. Genesis
avoucheth the same, with others. And Rabbi Bechai in plain terms, that it is
here and elsewhere set down Elohim, not El, or Eloah; for, that all the Powers
that are, are in him, and of him: and, that whosoever has any just title to
any manner of Jurisdiction, has it of him, the only fountain of all
Authority. And here it may be opportune to observe the difference between
Regular and Robustuous Powers, those of which GOD is both the Causa Causantis,
and the Causa Causati: the sole and entire cause, both of the cause causing,
and the thing caused; and this he is of Monarchical Power. Of other forms, he
is not the solitary, and thorough cause. Of these I shall speak Chap. 7. and
Chap. 8.

11. This great name of Regal Prerogative over the works of his creation,
(which seems more incommunicable, then his most reverend name of Jehovab) he
has imparted to all those, unto whom he has entrusted his Power, for the
government and preservation of what (under the same) he did create; yet so, as
no man has any interest in this (neither in the Power of GODS image and
likeness) but from and under (not against) any who are superiors to them, in
the order which GOD has established: as shall be proved, Chap. 5. and Chap.
11. And this name (as an attestation, whose their Power over the people is,)
with this relation, was the grand Additament of honor to Kings; until the
visible establishment of his Power amongst his former people, received from him
a visible Character of the Divinity of that Power they were entrusted with:
afterward, with this style of Elohim, Kings had promiscuously the title of
Messiah, Christ, or the Anointed of the Lord.

12. My first Quaere is amongst such as deny not the Creation.

What tolerable color can be invented by humane modesty, or sobriety, for the
terms [Originally and Primarily?] And which most desperately rob GOD of his
universal, and perpetual, peculiar, or Prerogative? Mine Argument forbears the
first Part, and insists but upon the second. Whosoever challenge unto
themselves that Power, which is universally, and perpetually peculiar to the
GOD of all Power; are of all the earthly robbers of God, the most fond,
desperate, and irreconcilable. But the people that challenge unto themselves
the Original Power of earthly Dominion, challenge unto themselves, that Power,
which is universally, and perpetually peculiar to the GOD of all Power.
Therefore the people, that challenge unto themselves the Original Power of
earthly Dominion; are of all the earthly robbers of GOD, the most Fond,
Desperate, and Irreconcilable.
13. And so proportionably, they, who Arrogate unto themselves, or ascribe unto
others, this great Name of Elohim, or the Royalty thereof, (otherwise then
himself has communicated it) are Violators of Elohim's high Majesty.

14. For the Major, or first Proposition, it it clear in it self; for
evidently, it is the fondest of all Attempts, to go about to rob the strong GOD
before they have bound him, who cannot be bound: it is the desperatest of all
Fool-hardinesss, to go about to rob him of his Power. It is the proudest of
all Desperatenesses, to rob him of his Peculiar or Prerogative: Certainly, if
he hate any with a perfect Hatred, it must be these Proud ones. And, that GOD
in his own Acceptance, may be robbed in smaller matters, then this his
Peculiar, (to wit, Tithes and Offerings,) is plain, Mal. 3. 8. ( i) In his
general Prerogative, which is that which sacreth unto his Peculiarity, these
his particular Severalites.

15. For the Assumption, or second Proposition: First, to affirm that any
Creature, has in it self the Original of any just Dominion over his fellow
Creatures, is not to acknowledge the Dispensation in that of Genesis 1. 26. [Let
them have Dominion]: without whose Commission, Adam himself could not have had
any Power over that which Adam created not: Or to deny, that Adam was a
Creature, and all Mankind to be created in him. For of Created things, there
can be but one Original; and the reasonable Creature must needs acknowledge the
Original of his Power to be from him, from whom he had the Original of his
Being. In whom Originally, from and for ever (according to his Name) were all
the Powers that are, and from whom (by a Peculiar and second Act, in time) are
derived all the Powers that are Just: For there cannot be two Originals, no
more then two Creators.

16. Secondly, that the Power of Earthly Dominion, being Originally GODS, when
it is in Actu exercito, produced to External use; then it is immediately by
GOD, derived to the King, (as it has been ever) and not unto the People:
notwithstanding which Derivation, it remains ( for ever, and every where) GODS
Regal Peculiar, or Prerogative. This is the Subject of this Discourse, and
appears in multitudes of Texts, not as yet produced, (for that diverse of them,
shall by the help of GOD, in the following Tract, be explained in their own
order;) wherein, all Power, all Dominion, in and over all the Men and Kingdoms
of the World, is by him, as sole Monarch, challenged; and to him alone as due,
Ascribed for ever and ever.

17. And here, I do not wilsully and captiously make present advantage of of
the Terms [Originally and Primarily,] which would presently be lost when the
Authors of them come to express themselves; for I cannot perceive, but, that
(to avoid the making and pleading of a Charter from GOD, no wherein his Book to
be found,) they are necessitated to make this short work, pretending natural
Inherency, or title from the Law of Nature: which is greater boldness, then
Christ himself used, as follows in the next Chapter; he being the first in
Elohims Parent, for all the Dominion that is Elohims.

18. In the succeeding Chapters, I shall first speak of the Power of earthly
Dominion, entrusted by Elohim to Monarchs, exempt from being accountable to
any, but himself. And how Dominion has been derived from the Beginning. Then
of the Name of Power, to wit, Elohim; its Descent unto the Officers of GOD, for
the Order and Preservation of the Creature: First, while GOD was pleased to
exercise his Regal Office himself, using but the Temporary and Occasional
Service of men employed extraordinarily, though with the ordinary Power (or
part thereof) of a Just Monarch; such were Moses and the Judges, while, amongst
his own People, he sat King himself. Afterward I shall speak of Dominion,
settled and entailed upon GODS further Recesse, (he being wearied from this
Helm) and the Magisterial Orders which he has constituted for the Continuance
thereof, so long as the World shall endure.

CHAP. II.
The Contents.
No man may presume further then Christ. Christ's eight Titles to the Dominion
of the World. His Titles and Kingdom destroyed, if the People have Power over
Kings. The second Psalm explained. The modesty of Christ insisteth only upon
the Formal Donation of God. The Devil himself adventureth not upon the claim
of Originality. The Exposition of St John 18. 36. My Kingdom is not of this
World, etc. of St Pet. 1. 2. 13. Submit your selves to every Ordinance of men.
Of the Kingdom of Heaven in the Gospels. And the Sum of Christian liberty.

1. NOw that it may appear, how desperate, the Presumption of any mere Creature
is, in taking to it self any part of that which is Elohims Prerogative; (which
is, to be the Original or Fountam of all Power) or otherwise ventilating the
Glory thereof, then by Elohims express Patent of Donation, recorded in his
Revealed will: mine exemplification shall be, the act of him who is Elohim from
everlasting, and world without end. The Divine, and Original, the Supreme, and
Invisible Administrator of all Power, both Spiritual and Temporal, proceeding
secundarily to earthly Elohim, (yet more then merely humane) his Deputed,
Immediate, and Visible Assigns, for the Administration of these his Powers,
for the preservation of what under that Name he Created; arranged by himself in
that order, which his wisdom thought most sit for the effecting of his own
ends: to wit, The making of Earth aresemblance of Heaven, and the Governors
thereof, of himself.

2. For these Ends, Christ is furnished with Semblable Power, for Dominion in
both kinds; and has his two Names, of Jesus and Christ, answerable, both to
the Image and Likeness which he came to restore; for the which, he has eight
several Titles: If any Man, or all the People, have more, or better; let their
Advocates produce them, as we will his, and the Proofs thereof, or otherwise
disclaim for him and his, all Dominion. The first shall be that of Heb. 1. 2.
(where they are all expressly set down together) (...), etc. Quem constituit,
Whom he appointed Heir of all things; by whom also he made the worlds; who
being the Brightness (or Morning-light) of his Glory; and the Character (or
Image) of his Person; and bearing up all things by the Word of his Power: has
himself purged our sins, and is set down at the right hand of Majesty, in the
high Places.

3. In this Text, the Apostle being (in behalf of the Church, and against the
Jews or Judaizing Christians) to Clear and Vindicate both the Kingship and
Priesthood of Christ; sets forth his Titles to them both, promiscuously
together, (for that they neither are, nor ought to be reputed Strangers, at
that distance, which the Fancifull world imagines.) The first, (in Honor of his
despised Humility) is his Fathers Donation; he arrogated them not to himself,
Heb. 5. 4. No man (alas! it is otherwise in these days) takes this honor to
himself, but he that is called (externally) of GOD; as was Aaron. So likewise
(in the next Verse) Christ (who externally called Aaron) glorified not himself,
to be made an High Priest, (or a Consecrator of inferior Priests) But He (did
it) that said unto him, Thou artmy Son, this day have I begotten thee; (where
appears by the way, that under the rule of Nature, the Priesthood, as well as
the Regality, was the Prerogative of the Firstborn: and if this inferior
Dignity be not takeable, but by the evidence of GODS Donation, then certainly,
not the Superior of King-ship; for) It follows (Verse 6.) Thou art a Priest
for ever, after the Order of Melchisedec: who also was King of Salem. Him then,
the only Son of GOD, the Firstborn of every Creature; in honor of whose
Primogeniture, (indeed for his sake) the Firstborn amongst Men, are still (to
this day) preferred: and according to the most upright Law of Nature, the
Father [appointed him.]

4. Heir of all things; this is his second Title; and just Heir he (by whom,
and for whom, are all things) is, not only of the Chief of things, ( Regal and
Sacerdotal Power) but also, of all other things whatsoever; even unto Sheep,
and Oxen, and other the Beasts of the field. And under the same word, of that
of Genesis 1. 26. is set forth the Inheritance of his Dominion, till after the
(...)
Sun and Moon shall fail, Psalm. 72. 8. (to wit, Vejerde) He shall have
Dominion (...)
from the one sea to the other, and from the Flood unto the Worlds end. Thus
Psalm. 110. 2. He shall send the rod of thy Power out of Sion, (the place of
GODS, and the Kings palaces Royal) [ Read be-kerev] Dominare in interiori, Have
thou (...)
Dominion in the Privy Council of thine Enemies: to wit, of those, who will not
not submit unto the Order of thy just Power, but will disorderly erect other
forms; or not acknowledge Thee in Thine.

5. In the third place is set down the third of his Titles, and the
Justification of his Fathers impartiality, in these words, [ By whom he made
the worlds,] thus John 1. 1. In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was
with GOD, and that Word was GOD: (yea, the very self same Word it is, which was
heretofore Humbled in his Incarnation, and Magnified in his Ascension, which
was in the Beginning with GOD,) all things were made by it; and without it, was
made nothing that was made. Of all Titles to all things, he must needs have the
Best, who made them all: and it is Worlds (in the Plural number) not World,
this Inferior or Earthly, as well as that Superior and Heavenly.

6. Next is expressed the particular Causa causata, or Immediate cause of
Priestly Power; (...), etc. Who being the bright easterly Beams of GODS
glorious Perfection, etc. to wit, that which is indeed the [ Likeness of
Elohim] employed in the word Demuch, Genesis 1. 26. (according to which all
sanctified men are,) which Likeness was destroyed in the first Adam, looking
for New Light, and revived by the second, the perfection of whose Love, was his
Death; consisting (as has been said, and shall be proved) in the Rays of
enlightened understanding, and in the warmth (or life thereof) in Cha^itative
accomplishment, which is that expressed John 1. 4. In it (to wit, the Word) was
Life, and the Life was the Light of men. He being the Loving and Quickening
Spirit, and the true Light, that lights every man into either of the Worlds:
for which cause, (the Object of Priesthood, being the enlivening of GODS
Likeness in man, in order unto Spiritual Peace and Prudence) the High Priest
had engraven in his Breast Plate, [ Vrim and Thummim,] which signify, Light
and Perfection.

7. Fifthly, is set forth the particular Causa causata, or Secundary Cause of
his earthly Dominion, in that he was (...), The express and substantial Form
of his Personal Essence: and this is GODS own Paraphrase of his first word
Tselem, (in that of Gen.) as shall in its own place be justified. As also, that
this Image of GOD is the Fountain, and Foundation of man's Dominion here,
consisting (as has been said) in Private men, in the Sovereignty of the
reasonable appetite or will, over the rude and unruly multitudes of Lusts and
Passions; and in theindue Subjection unto those, who, either in the Family or
Kingdom, are more public Representations of Elohim, according to their
distinct degrees of Command; but all under Christ: of whom says S. Augustine,
Omnes homines facti sunt ad imaginem Dei, solus Christus est ipsa Imago, All
men whatsoever are according to the Image of GOD, or made in his Image; but
only Christ is the very Image of him. And therefore only he has universal
Dominion, whereof they have different and proportionable shares, who are
employed by, and under him, for the exercise of his Dominion.

8. The Object of earthly Government, being the advancement of GODS Image in
Mankind, for the establishing of the Throne of Reason and Law, in, and amongst
men, according to the Rules prescribed by GOD and Nature: the End of both the
Likeness and Image conjoined, being the universal Conforming of the Government
of Earth, unto the Pattern, by GOD set and intended for it in Heaven; that in
Light and Integrity, his (now understood) Name may be hallowed here, as there.
That answerably unto each Kingdom of his, in the Greater or Lesser World, the
exemplary Form of his most just Kingdom in Heaven, may thence come in, to the
Assistance of the Sacerdotal part; that here on Earth, his Supreme and Regal
will may be so done, as it is by his Children and Subjects in Heaven: Of which
more fully in its own place. Where will also appear, that the now Despised
Church is (what ever the world thinks of it) of the Elder House.

9. His sixth Title, is his [ Supporting all things by the Word of his Power,]
it being an act, no less Noble, nor of less Might to sustain the World, then
to Create it; for other Pillars then the Word of his Power, it has not to
underprop it: Elohim, it had for its Maker, and requires no less then Elohim
for its Preserver. And therefore, whom he takes in unto himself for the
managing of earthly Dominion, he invests with this most honorable style of his
Majesty; to wit, Elohim: and that in the Plural number, which is the reason of
their writing of themselves [ We] and [ Us,] in as much as GOD has assumed
them into a Subordinate Society with himself; and so their Sovereign Commands
go forth in a joint Conjunction of Heavenly and Earthly Elohim. And also more
particularly, Christ has also taken them into the fellowship of that his Name
of Christ, Messiah, or Anointed; yea, into a certain kind of Jesu-ship, as
countenancing them for Terrestrial Saviors, and disavowing those for sons of
Belial, who say of a Saul, (whom he has Anointed) How shall this man save us?
Who despise him, and bring him no Presents. 1 Samuel 10. 27. Eccles. 8. 3.
As also, he that bears up all things by the Word of his Power, has by a
Royal Pen set it down, That where the Word of a King is, there is Power; which
is the divine Power of Christ, which he has left for the preservation of the
world, and which for emergent Reasons he could not execute by himself, unless
the world were better; but in his wisdom, has taken the most just order, and
constituted the fittest Deputies, for the several conditions of mankind, for
all times; and has not left them destitute of suffioient Divine Power for the
production of his Ends, whether of Mercy or Justice, for the direct good of
those who are Good; and to make good those who make any care not to be Bad.

10. His seventh Title is, of Purchase; viz. of that which was sufficiently his
own before: and that dearly Bought over again, with the inestimable value of
his own most precious blood. [ Having by himself purged our sins,] he has
bought our whole Selves, Souls and Bodies; and that too, if we have any thing
of our own which we may justly call ours. And though this may seem (as the
Apostle has here set it down) chiefly, if not solely, to concern his
Priesthood, yet (if we mind it with Saint Augustine's, Vis scire quid emerit?
vide quanti emerit: If you would know what he Bought, consider what he Paid,)
he laid down in the Grave, (taking Possession of what he Earnested in his
Incarnation, Paid for in his Passion) his whole Earthly Part: and the whole
Price will tell us, that in case he had no other Claim, he has laid out upon
the Purchase, more then the value of innumerable worlds. The Sovereignty of
this One, (both Spiritual and Temporal) is the Price of Blood: Put it not then
[Oh man] (with more then Judaical Irreligion) into thine own Treasury.

11. An eighth Title, is of present Possession; he is actually Seized, and is
Sitten down as Bishop for ever and at the right hand of Majesty, as King: both
a King and a Priest, to Reign and Intercede, till time shall be no more. Where
(...), Of necessity he must be King, until he has put all his Enemies under
his feet, 1 Cor. 15. 25. and until he has gathered all his Friends from the
Four Corners of the World. And certainly, those are not his most inconsiderable
Enemies, who not only use amiss the undeserved good things, which he has
freely Indulged to them, but also violate him, not barely by invading his
Prerogative, but most odiously making Religion to give them Title to it: And
Fondly affecting, what only the Almighty can wield, who having possessed
himself of the higher Ground, is Inaccessible and Impregnable. [ He is set down
at the right hand of Majesty, [on high,] where his name is Ghnelion, the [most
High.]

12. Which his Style imports, that there is a direct Line of Subordination of
high Ones under him, and of Inferiors under them; and that he (in Inaccessible
Majesty) is the Governor of those, who govern them in the lower Rooms the
Miscarriage of whom, he is bound in Justice, and also by particular Promises to
Vindicate. Who is able and willing to be responsible for any Injury done by
such, whose higher Place makes (answerably) Inaccessible to their Inferiors.
His Almighty Immensity sitting in so high a Prospect, that he can at once see
all that is done upon the Earth; reach the Doers, and punish the evil Doers.

13. These are Christ's just Titles to Universal Sovereignty, asserted by holy
Scripture; if the People have more, it is more then yet appears, but better
they cannot have. Then his Right of Primogeniture; they are too young for that.
Then his Right of Efficiency; they can mar, not make worlds. Then his Right of
Similitude; their Light is too new; a late exhaled Meteor, which leads men not
to Perfection, but into the Pit. Then his Right of Image; they have Rebellious
Lusts. Then his Right by Verbal Sustentation; the words of their Tongues can
set the whole course of Nature on Fire. Then his Right by Possession; they
spend their Blood too wantonly. Then his Right by Possession, they are at a
wrong Door, and go out of Gods House to take Possession of it. They seek first
the Kingdom of Earth, and so begin their work at the wrong End, and lose both.

14. So then in the first place it appears, that the Original of all
Sovereignty, (whether Spiritual or Temporal) is in the Deity. In the Second,
that the grand Charter thereof, is unto Immanuel, the second Person of the
Trinity: now most Meritoriously, and more Eminently conferred upon his Person
(both God and Man) since his Incarnation, Passion, and Asoension; which is
avowed by the Prophets, (some of whose Prophesies shall be produced in due
time) and attested by the holy Apostles in the New Testament.

15. Thus Rev. 1. 5. He is (...) the first Begotten of the Dead, and the Chief
Prince, or King of the kings of the Eearth. So Rev. 19. 16. And he has on his
Vesture, and on his Thigh a Name written, King of kings, and Lord of lords.
Thus also Saint Paul, 1 Timothy 6. 15. He is (...), the Blessed and only
Potentate; the King of kings, and Lord of lords. So that if he be the [ Onely]
King of kings, certainly the People have no Joynt-Commission with him in any
Power over them; and if they have, then is he no King; for he is not King, who
is not alone in Power. And if Christ's Power be diffused amongst the People, (as
is pretended; for they who strive to pull down the King, cry alond for the
establishing of Christ's Kingdom, but they mean it to themselves) an
Impossibility is affirmed. For then Christ's Power must be Democratical, which
is a contrary distinct Member to Monarchical: and so Christ must be robbed of
his Kingdom: while he has it, his Subjects Kings must be responsible only to
him Let them try what fair sense it could carry, should they send their
Ordinances (of Excise, if they please) to the Subjects but of a King, much
inferior unto the King of kings, it were easily guessed what kind of Answer
would be returned.

16. That, this is the Prerogative of Christ; to be the sole Visitor of Kings,
and Propriet or of their Kingdoms, is clear from the second Psalm: and that it
was [ of a truth] meant of Christ, is as clear, Acts 4. 27. The first therein
is a Derisive Execration of Popular Tumults, (which will condemn Christ
himself) and the Vanity of the multitude, whether profane Pagans, or Jewish
Pretenders to Religion, that oppose it. The second, is the more advised Fury,
and proud Policy of Semi-pagan Kings, and their Achitophels or Rabsheka's, who
design the engrasping of it from Christ: The one, GOD will Laugh into the Pit,
the other, he will send Broken or Bruised into it; yet shall the Kingship of
Christ, and his Throne, be established over them, do what they can, Ver. 6.
And in the 7. his Prerogative; [ I will Preach, Declare, or Celebrate,
[El-ch^k] (says Christ) The very Law itself of Prerogative, or the Fundamental
(...)
Law thereof, contained in these words, Thou art my Son, (by eternal
Generation, and also to bebrought forth into the world in time,) Ask of me,
and I will give thee (viz. into that Prerogative Royal) all the Nations of the
World, and the Dominion of the whole Earth for thy peculiarity. And those who
will not acknowledge this, shall Dash themselves upon the Rock; and these who
Mat. 22. 44.
shall Oppose it, shall thou grind to Powder.

17. The Learned know and acknowledge, that whereas Thorah, implies all the
whole Doctrine of GOD, whether Law or Gospel, Imposition or Exposition, of all
Prophetical, Political, Ethical, Historical Divinity, which (to be Enjoined or
Explained) was to come into the Temple of God, which was to be built upon the
Holy Hill; which (from the same Root) was called (...)
Mount Moriah. And whereas Mishmereth signifies the Penal Sanctions, and
Mishpat, GODS general Law of Equity for mankind: chok signifies the peculiar
Laws of Prerogative, issuing from Power, not Accountable to them, to whom it*
prescribes. Thus the Municipal and Religious Laws of the Jewish Nation were
(...)
called by this Name; so likewise the Sacerdotal Portion, Genesis 47. 22. Only,
he bought not the Lands of the Priests, (who there are called Princes) for this
cause, That it was Chok to the Priests, theirs from Prerogative; thus Mic. 7.
11. it implies the Kings Tribute, etc.

18. The Conclusion of the Psalm is Monitory advice to those who shall succeed
Administrators of this Prerogative, Ver. 10. viz. And now, O you Kings, (...)
[ Haschilu] understand you this, (to wit, that this Power and Prerogative is
Christ's and not yours: And you that be earthly Judges, [Havasru] Chastise, or
Restrain your selves herein; serve the Lord with Fear, and let your very
Exaltations tremble, when you consider the beight of your Place. And you who
have received his Kiss of Consecration at your Anointing (according to the
Mysterious custom) from the Commissioner of Christ; Understand whence it
comes, and Return it thither (when you find that you have gone out of the way)
in the beginning of his Anger, lest you perish therein. But Oh their
Blessednesses, [Ashre-col-chose] whom his displeasure (for (...)
a while) removes not from their Confidence in him their Rock, as it did not
the afflicted Author of this Psulm; (Christ himself thus emering into his
Glory,) for there never was (and therefore never shall be) a good King, in
(this or) any good Cause, finally by GOD Deserted. Though Nations and their
Kings should Swel, and proud popular Waves come in, even into their souls; if
they Steer a a constans course, according to the Compass set before them, they
shall not fail, it being a wicked Vanity for the Creature to affect to turn
Creators; especially, (since they cannot Create so much as one Comefor the
bodily Sustenance, nor Color for one Hair of their Heads) to Arrogate to
create Power, and to rob Elohim the Creator, of his Prerogative.

19. Now the Assumption of the precedent Argument in the former Chapter being
Asserted, and the whole Stock of Elohims Power established on the Man Christ
Jesus, by such Titles, as none can have the like; it remains to be showed,
which of these had the Right of Primogeniture over the rest. And evident it is,
that it was the first, to wit, The Donation of GOD the Father, which our
Savior wholly Apprised and Insisted upon, accounting the rest but as Aptitudes
^^ Dominion; wherefore, Mat. 28. 18. laying aside all the Glories of the other,
he Triumphs only in his Fathers Gift, (...). All Power is given me in Heaven
and in Earth. All Power, Inclusively, the Power of all Powers, the Power of
Dominion. It is Given, Conclusively, not Originally in his Person, nor Assumed.
It is Given to me, Exclusively of thee, who art to be Governed by this Power*
and this, in Terminis Terminantibus, Butted, and Bounded, in Heaven and in
Earth, as well as that.

20. If thou hopest for a Blessing in either, consider this; and that there is
a third Place, to take heed of that: and that there is in Scripture, a Prince
thereof, and he is a Pretender to part of this Empire; the Inferior and
Earthly part. But with more manners then to say, that the Power thereof is
Originally his, Luke 4. 6. The Devil took Christ into an high mountain, and
showed him all the Kingdoms of the World in a moment of time, and the Devil
said unto him, All this Power will I give thee, and the Glory of those
Kingdoms; (...), For that this [(i) Power and Glory] is given or delivered
into me.

21. In which Parley, the Father himself of Falsehood and Impudence, with some
indifferent outside of modesty, mentions no Originality, but makes Donation
his Plea; which, with more sobriety, he goes not about to prove: he had
Scripture perfect, but finds no color throughout the whole Bible; and
therefore in wise Civility, in this manifest Particular, he Abuses no Text,
Counterfeits no Constantine, Falsifies no Charter; but he nimbly slides over
his shamefaced Lie, never avouching this Power to be absolutely his own; nor
daring impudently to adventure on the words [ Originally or Primarily,] only
he runs away (at the most) with an unproved Concession or Permission for the
Disposal thereof, as a Trustee, pretending only to the Advowsion; not
Sacrileglous^ to the Impropriation; or Simoniaeally to the Fruits. He but gives
it to whom he thinks fit; he knows it so much another, that he dares not
challenge it to his own use, so as he might seem to reflect upon himself,
thereby to make himself either the Greater or the Better: all the Propriety he
aims at, is to pleasure others not himself.

These Considerations, produce my second Quaere. How the People may without
high Sacrilege challenge that without Book, which Christ waved so many just
Titles unto? And the Devil himself durst not adventure on?

Mine Arguments hence are these. First, Those, in whom there is an
impossibility in Nature, that they should be qualigied with such or better
Titles, then the Universal Lord of Nature, (viz. Christ) who pretended not to
the Originality of Dominion, (either Spiritual or Temporal) but to the Donation
of his Father: may not Arrogate to have those Powers Originally in themselves.
But the People are such, that in them there is an impossibility in Nature, that
they should be Qualified with such or better Titles, then the Universal Lord of
Nature, (viz. Christ) who pretended not to the Originality of Dominion, (either
Spiritual or Temporal) but to the Donation of his Father. Therefore, the People
may not Arrogate to have those Powers Originally in themselves. Secondly, They
who take unto themselves more of that which belongs to God and his Christ, then
it appears the Devil did; are in that point more Sacrilegious then the Devil
appears therein to be. But they that take unto themselves the Originality of
Dominions; take unto themselves more of that which belongs to God and his
Christ, then it appears the Devil did. Therefore, they that take unto
themselves the Originality of Dominions; are in that point more Sacrilegious,
then the Devil appears therein to be.

22. The Premises are evident from that which has been already said, and need
no further proof. GOD grant, that we may see the danger of the Consequences,
both alike desperate; to make the People better then Christ, or worse then the
Devil. But this is not all that is affirmed in that their Principle; It takes
away the Kingly Title of Christ, as will appear in this third Argument.

That Power which is absolutely Regal or Monarchical, cannot be in a collective
Body of the People, (for that which is in that, is Democratical) but is over
them. But the Power of Christ for the Government of the World, is most
absolutely Regal or Monarchical. Therefore, the Power of Christ for the
Government of the World, cannot be in a collective Body of the People, but is
over them; (which Doctrine by consequence Affirms, that Christ is no King.)
23. From whence (briefly, for the present) appears, That by the Doctrine of
the Scriptures, no Power of Dominion is Originally in the People, but, that all
such Power is absolutely in Christ; and this in Relative Opposition to them.
Now, though my chief aim be not to be an Answerer of particular Objections,
(especially those not grounded upon my Principle, the Word of God) but to take
them away in general, by dissolving that Principle whereupon they are built:
And though this that follows, properly belongs to the eleventh Chapter, yet
for a timely and fair Compliance with those, to whom this Brotherly
Concertation is directed, I shall (here) endeavor to prevent the
misunderstanding of that Text of Saint John 18. 36. My Kingdom is not of this
World; if it were, then would my Servants surely fight, etc. First, it cannot
be meant against the Analogy of Scripture, that Christ has no Kingdom in this
World; for in the next Verse it is expressed, That for this End, viz. that he
might be a King, (to wit, in this world) he came into the World.

24. Secondly, the Words cannot be so understood; as if they employed, that
there are in this world Kingdoms, which are Originally of this World; though
that which belongs unto Christ should not prove so: For (consonant to the
Scripture Doctrine every where, in this point) the Faithful and True Witness,
replied unto the Roman General, (in the next Chapter Verse 11.) (...), etc.
Thou could not have any Power at all against me, unless it were given thee
from above. Now, there is in this World no Just and Legal Power of Dominion
over others; the Name whereof in the New Testament, is (...), (which one Word
rightly understood, would put an end to this Controversy; in as much as the
very Name tells us, it is derived from him who is (...), to wit, Jehovah, who is
not the People.) But this Power must be Originally and Alone in the Deity, and
such as cannot be taken without Gods especial Donation; which no Record has
derived to any, but to his Anointed, and from him to his Anointeds. And to them
it is Communicated (far be it here from any, whose breath is in his Nostrels,
to talk of Co-ordination) in a direct Line of Subordination to Christ; unto
whom (of themselves) none can be Coordinate: and from him, none are with those
whom he has set over them, who (for themselves and of themselves) claim
Co-ordination in that Power which is from Above, not from amongst them.

25. Thirdly, the words themselves (as shall appear by some few of the
multitudes of Texts which might be produced) cannot bear out this Construction;
That any Just Power should be Originally of this World. The Words are these,
(...), That Kingdom which is mine, is not of this world. Answerably hereunto,
read S. Joh. 15. 19. If you were (...), of this World, the World would love its
own; but because you are not (...), of the World, in as much as I have chosen
you (...), out of the World; therefore the World hates you. My choice being
that which differenceth you from those who could not be of the World
Originally, which was not Originally of it self, but yet so think and live, as
if they knew of no other Original: so are now the Christian Kingdoms of this
World, severed and sacred through, to, and for Him; though before, they might
more congruously have been said to have been of the World, though indeed in
exact Propriety they never were.

26. Thus 1 Cor. 15. 47. The first Adam (who also was of Celestial Descent;
The Son of God, Luke 3. 38. And of the Breath of God, Genesis 2. 7.) was said to
be (...), Of the Earth, earthy; as the Second was (...), the Lord of, and from
Heaven, notwithstanding that he had taken Flesh from the first Adam. And it
follows in the next Verse, And as is the Earthy, such are they that are
Earthly; and as the Heavenly, such are they that are Heavenly; which I hope
Christians pretend to be: so that it is the Suchnesse that here Denominates.
But I forbear further Proofs in a point so plain.

27. So then it appears, that it is (now especially) an unchristian Speech, to
say that Kingdom in Abstracto, considered in it self (as it is false and
Traitorous to say that the Kings Person is Filius Populi, or begotten by the
Multitude) is of the World; to wit, of the Men thereof, or People, if GOD and
his Christ have or ever had the Regiment of this round World, and all therein.
The Disciples were not of this World, after that by Christ's Commission from
Above it, they were Called out of its Community, not Compass; and differenced
thereby from such who held of the common Usages of the World, whether Legal or
Illegal: and yet before, were not (themselves) Absolutely and Originally of the
World, in as much, as they were the sons of Adam, who was the son of God; who
in regard of his Biass (shortly after his Origination) deserved justly the
Personal Diminution and Motto of (...), Of the Earth, earthly, notwithstanding
that from the Original of his Being, (and therefore of his (...) or Power,) and
that in his principal Part, he was of the Breath or Spirit of God; so that
since Kings have now their Calling and Commission from GOD and his Christ, that
which was always Improper, is here Unchristian; to wit, to Affirm, that any
Christian Kingdom is held of the World or People.

28. And now to look back to the Text of Saint John; since no Power of Dominion
could ever properly and truly be said to be of the World, in re ipsu, it must
be understood of the Modus; and that it is either of the Worlds Usage, or
Misusage: it is too narrow for Christ to restrain it to the latter, as if
there were no more (therein) said for him, then that his Kingdom should (only)
not be according to the Corrupt thinkings of the World, founded upon that false
Principle, that Men were the Makers of Kings; mankind being then generally gone
astray from that first Truth, (which cooled but by degrees) looking down only
to the Fruit on the Ground, and not to the Tree that bare it; rather magnifying
of, and rendering their Thanks to the unruly Wind that blew it down amongst
them, then to the Branch that brought it forth.

29. That it must be meant also of the lawful Usage of this World, is plain
by that Note of Distinction, which himself (in the next words) set upon that
which was his own several, wherein he stands not upon the Amplitude and Bounds
of his Dominion, nor upon the Celsitude and Glory thereof, but differenceth it
from those of the best usage of the World, by the contracted Humility and
Peaceablenesse of it: If my Kingdom were of this World, then would my Servants
surely fight, that I should not be delivered up into Jewish hands: From whence
it follows, that it is the duty of all Subjects who will not (for company)
turn Jews unto the Kings of this World, to fight for them in this Case. And
also, that no man may fight for that which is Christ's Kingdom, disparate from
that which is his Deputies, with, and under him; which is the Chief false
color of these days, for our present Wars. In this great Point, Christ will
magnify himself by his Patience, in that which his Vicegerents may not suffer,
nor their Subjects ought to endure; for that which is only his, those who are
his, must Suffer, not Fight; for that which concerns his Deputies (according
to the Doctrine of the Scriptures) they shall surely fight or suffer from him.

30. And it cannot be doubted of, but that in due time, he will in his own
Cause make trial of that his Power, which in the plenitude of his Justice he
denied not to the Devil, Judge. 6. 31. Let Baal plead his own Cause, will you
save him? If he be a God, let him plead for himself. GOD is dishonored, if
there be pleading by the Sword for that Power, which he has not communicated
to Man; He is dishonored, if there be not pleading by the Sword for that
Power, which he has imparted to his Vicegerent. The Material Sword is too
Material, to cut out Spiritualties; it is made to protect Temporalties, and
especially the Protectors thereof. In this particular, for what he has
constituted in Man, amongst Men, and for Mankind, he has declared that he will
be helped by all Men; and those (in this case) who come not out to help the
Lord, are children of the Curse: Those, to a man, (of what condition soever)
who upon the setting up of the Standard and Proclamation Royal, Array not
themselves with their best abilities to aid the Lords Anointed (as shall be
proved, Chap. 6. Par. 31. etc.) the Spirit of GOD brandeth with the Style of
sons of Belial, and gives it forth as a mark of Religion, upon those who come
forth to Assist him; they that Resist him being the Authors of their own
Damnation: as has been proved to mine hands.

31. But for the Propagation of his Religion, the true GOD never yet raised a
War, if the Scriptures be all of his mind that we may presume to know, and his
mind now immutably that which was his former; accordingly for the Instauration
of the new Covenant, not the Mighty men of this World were by Christ employed
for that End, but he chose the weak things to confound the strong: So that
evidently, War for Religion (for any thing that GOD has manifested) is
Irreligious, yea himself ( A Lamb without blemish) would not have his own
Person blemished, by having it defended by the Sword; though he could have
commanded more then twelve Legions of Angels for his guard: but he left us his
example, and bequeathed us men, that should do it by Suffering, whose Precepts
and Examples have been hitherto precious unto all those, who have made the Word
of GOD their Guide, and Heaven their Goal.

32. GOD grant that we who are now (by him) thought worthy to suffer, for and
like our Master and his Scholars, may not pusillanimously distaine the
glorious Patience, and Self-denial, whereby our (One) Religion has formerly,
and for ever Out-shined and Extinguished the Gayest and Activest, of all the
Creations of humane Fancy, or diabolical Chemistry. And that in this Agony, we
may be strengthened and comforted, for the parting with All, rather then with
our Allegiance, without which, there never was, nor can be Religion; as shall
be proved. That in this Cause, we may be accomplished with Courage, not only
to be willing to dye more gloriously then some can be willing we should; but
also, to dare to live more miserable, then many dare to look upon: Looking unto
Jesus, the Captain and Finisher of our Salvation, made Perfect through his
sufferings: And into his [ Father forgive them, for they know not what they
do.] Unto the glorious company of the Apostles and Bishops, -- Animaeque
magnae -- Prodigum Paulum: And into his, [ I could wish my self to be an
Anathema for my Brethren.] Unto the goodly Fellowship of the Prophets and
Doctors; and into their sundry Teaching Deaths, and Living Writings. Unto the
noble Army of Martyrs and Confessors; and into the Protomartyrs, [ Lord lay not
this sin to their charge.] Unto the numerous Primitive Legionaries; and into
their [ Steterunt Torti, Torquentibus Fortiores.] Unto our own most Reverend
Heads; -- Abscidit vultus ensis uterque sacros -- Hoc tibi, etc. And into their
Cygneae cantiones, -- dolorque fessus, -- Quicquid fleverat ante, nunc adoret.
And lastly, unto unto the greatest of all Confessors, our Living Martyr, the
likest of all Mortals, to him who was Dead, and is alive; -- Vt solus stat
puppe magister -- Pervigil, angustaque Deus qui navigat alno! -- Meruitque
timeri -- Nil metuens! and into his two great Faults, Innocence, and
Over-merit. And then, let us repent our abhorring of this present evil World,
if we can, and let fall our most Christian scorn of enjoying our Possessions,
before he does his, if we be able: and think of securing of our lives, before
his, whom the Spirit of GOD has taught us to account the Breath of our
nostrils, if we mean to lose them, and more.

33. But the chief, and most hopeful of our Endeavors in this case, must be
regulated according to the advice of Saint Paul, 1 Timothy 2. 1. And that, (...),
Before all things is to be done; to wit, in order to the Peace of mankind, That
Supplications, Prayers, Intercessions, be made for Kings, and all that be in
place above us; yea, Thankesgivings also: And if for such as lived in those
days, how great is our Debt! for the most incomparable Virtues of our most
happy King! whose very Unhappinesses shall Bless and Renown him for ever! But
principally those which are most Christianly Royal, his Courageous Patience,
and his most Humble Constancy. And (here) the Weapons of this Warfare being not
Carnal, cannot be ineffectuall, but mighty through God, to the casting down
of strong holds, etc. 2. Cor. 10. 4. from whence the Comforts of my soul (in
all extremities) have ever been renewed; now as ever to prosesse the same,
that since I never read of a good King, and a good Cause conjoined, (though
severed, diverse have miscarried) that ever were deserted by GOD; I dare not
think him but to be the same immutably for evermore.

34. From this that has been here delivered, appears also the Misprision of
diverse in these days, upon that of Saint Peter, 1. 2. 13. Submit your selves
unto every Ordinance of man: and that according to the Original (for
Adjectives in [ inos] do not Connotate Efficiency in the Subject, but its
Passivity,) that it is not meant of any Ordinance created by man, but
established in, or amongst men; to wit, (in this particular) by the
Constitution of GOD And this is the constant Doctrine of the Scriptures,
answerable to that of Saint Paul, Romans 13. 1. (...) For there is nothing that
is (...), or just Power, but it proceeds from GOD, (who is not the People)
and all that is (...), or just Power, is set in Order by GOD, and no other.

35. Saint Peter's words are, (...), Be subordinate unto every Constitution
amongst men, for, or according to the Lord; for so the Praeposition (...) (with
an Accusative Case) signifies in the Scripture; to wit, the Lords orderly
Disposition of Superior and Inferior: (...), whether it be to the King as to
the Supreme; to wit, in this Substitution: (...), etc. or unto those by whom
his mind is declared, as unto men that have his, viz. the Kings Commission;
Which cannot be understood of their immediate Mission from GOD; for then the
GOD of Order, must be the Author of Confusion necessarily attending many
Supremes ad idem, for the same Act; for whosoever is sent by the most High, is
quoad hoc, Supreme, in relation to that Commission where with he is sent. The
Conjecturals of the Opposers of this manifest truth, are inferior to a serious
Answer; and neither the present times, normy Genius are for the Disport which
such Leaps would make, from out of every Book that is written.

36. Concerning those many places in the Evangelists, wherein the Kingdom of
Heaven, or the Kingdom of GOD are mentioned; it appears in part (but shall be
made clear hereafter) that as sometimes they are to be understood of that his
Kingdom, which is in the highest Heavens; so most frequently are they to be
construed of the Dominion in private men, which the Repaired Image of GOD
(seated in the reasonable Appetite, enlightened by the Sacerdotal Vrim and
Thum^in, of GODS infused Likeness) exercises over the seventeen Provinces of
the unruly Lusts and Passions; the Aborigenes and native Inhabiters in every
particular man. Notwithstanding which Kingship and Priesthood, they are and
remain but private men with Relation to the public Regality and
Sacerdotality, whereon Christ's public Soveraignties are enthroned in external
Power and Glory. As it was amongst the former Israel, Exodus 19. 6. You shall be
unto me a Kingdom of Priests, an holy Nation: and yet they had over them Kings
and Priests, unto whom, they were to be obedient, or dye for it.

37. So those whom Saint Peter had honored (in the forecited Chapter, Ver. 9.)
with the Appellation of (...), A Royal Priesthood: (as Saint John had called
them Kings and Priests unto GOD, Rev. 1. 6.) he enjoyneth from the Preceptive
example of him, who is the only King of kings, to veil their Honor unto
those who are that over all other men, which they are or should be over their
rebellious Passions. So Saint Paul to Bishop Titus, 3. 1. as also concerning
those entrusted with the Priesthood of the Gospel, Heb. 13. 17. Obey them that
have the Rule over you, and submit your selves, for they watch for your souls,
as they who must give an account for you. So that the Kingship and Priesthood
of private Christians is so far from exempting them from their Bonds unto the
Public, that they impose a greater Obligation upon them, to be Obedient for
Conscience sake; which Beam was undiscerned, till Christianity unclouded it. So
that no such injury can be done unto it, as to make it a Stale for
Disobedience, which (as will appear) is the greatest breach of true Christian
Liberty and the strongest Gives and Fetters for the wicked ones Tyranny: who
(as most Rebels) pretends for the King, that may un-king him with applause; or
for Liberty, that he may be sole King, and exclude Christ. But I will herein
forbear to Charge, till I come to Prove.

38. And for those places which concern the Liberty which Christ has
purchased for us, they cannot be understood of wild Freedom, to do what evil
we please; nor of phreneticall Immunity from the Law of Reason, Nature, and
Morality. For the Law of the Gospel has in the particulars thereof, (as
appears by our Saviors Sermon in the Mount, and elsewhere) laid severer Bonds
upon us, then those which are expressed in the former Covenant, for the Nonage
of the Children thereof; but they are to be understood as of universal
Freedom, (yet conditional, viz. upon performance of the Articles of the
Covenant of Grace) from the Sentence of Adam; so from the painful and
chargeable Services of the first Testament, and of the Impediments which lie in
the way of the sons of Obedience, in order to Heaven; which ought to be the
Earth's pattern for the accomplishing of the will of both, that after our
probation of Subjection here, we may be Monarchs hereafter. There Free, as
himself and his blessed Angels are; all Power of Rebellion being taken away,
which is the greatest Freedom which now we want.

39. Free, according to Saint Bernards three-sold Freedom; 1. At Liberty from
the Liberty of Sin; which is the Liberty of liberties. 2. From Misery, where
every one shall have all, yet none shall want what another has; where none
shall envy another Greatness, but the greatness of any ones Glory shall
increase the greatness of every one. 3. From Coaction, where though Gods will
shall be our Law; yet it shall be as to himself who is most Free: though he be
our King, yet it shall be our greatest Honor, to serve for his Honor. And
therefore, it should be so here, to promote the Glory of his Representer on
earth, and not to lessen his Prerogative; for fear of him who can discern,
whether it be Himself or his Deputy that is diminished. And hence also appears
the Excellency of Monarchy, in that, it alone is to continue, in that which is
our true Country. But I proceed.

CHAP. III.
The Contents.
A brief Digression, that the Power entrusted to Kings cannot but be Divine,
by the unquestionablenesse thereof. Job 34. 16. Expounded, and the Exposition
justified by parallel Texts. The Question answered, What if the King turn
Tyrant? An Answer to a Scotch Topic.

1. BEfore I proceed in the Sacred Story, the general Importunity of the times
calls for a short Digression, for the Justification of GOD, when he shall set up
in that Place and Power which is his Christ's, a Tyrannous violator of his
People and Religion: who loves both better then we deserve; but will not have
us to teach him. Whereas the People should be taught, that if he could do
(that which he cannot) against the rule of Justice, they have no authority to
lay their hand upon his neck; and to bring and hold him to that Rule; but that
whatsoever he does, he does always that which is either best or fittest for
the Generality; upto which, particular men's cases and humors must stoop; all
Religious men's, will. Where I shall lay down this Principle, That the Power
which is by mankind Unquestionable and Irresistible, must needs be Divine. Et e
converso.

2. The place which I shall chiefly (herein) insist upon, was (before the Law
given by Moses) uttered as a Truth, which no understanding man was then
ignorant of, Job 34. 16, 17, 18. If thou have understanding, hear this; (...)
and hearken to the voice of my words: [Shall he that hates Judgment,
Govern?] (or Irresistibly oblige?) And will thou make him wicked who is most
Just? Will thou say unto a King, thou art wicked? or to Princes, you are
ungodly?] Were such a Prince the peoples Deputy, the People might question
their own; but in as much as he is the Viceroy of the only Potentate, ( The
King of kings, and Lord of lords) he is only Questionable by him. Did they
confer his Power, and that upon Articles between them, before a competent
Superior Power, they might Implead him, and peradventure Divest him: but in as
much as His is his Power, who is all Power, it must be only he that must
Dispower him, or give bounds to it.

3. Man may be well content to hear that GOD is not unjust, if he give his
just Title to the Best of things unto the Worst of men, and the Worst unto the
Best; unto whom he knows very well how to make amends: and knows as well, that
the Best of the world deserve not the worlds Worst things. This (in this
particular case) has the Prophet Jeremy from the Lord, asserted for the Lord,
Jer. 27. 5. Thus says the Lord, I have made the Earth, the Man and the Beast,
that are upon the ground; and have given it to whom it seemed meet to me. And
now, I have given all these Lands into the bands of Nebuchadnezzar my Servant,
(though both a Tyrannical and Idolatrous one) and the Beasts of the field have
I given him to serve him. This is GODS Prerogative, and man must submit; his
Betters have ever (in all Ages which knew what belonged to Religion) done so;
yea the Son himself.

4. But to come nearer unto this place of Job under our hands; This, Isa. 45.
9. the Prophet celebrateth for one of the Lords Glories; Woe be to him that
striveth with his Maker, (or) The Potsheard (when he but striveth) with the
Potsheards of the Earth. (Or as our last Translation, Let the Potsheard strive
with the Potsheards of the Earth,) Shall the Clay say to him that forms it,
[Ma Taghnase] (...)
What do thou? This (when GOD was upon the Thoughts of setting up the
Heathen Cyrus, for the Monarch of the World) was the Prophets Vindication of
the Lords Prerogative. And that it may be known (by his God-like exemption)
whose Minister the King is; the Spirit of GOD says the like of the King,
Eccles. 8. 4. Where the Word of a King is, there is Power; (which belongs
only to Elohim) and who may say unto [Him] in the self same letters and
syllables, wherein the heavenly Elohims Prerogative is asserted, [ Ma Taghnase]
What do thou?

5. But is a Question to him unlawful? Suppose he be doing weakly! Suppose
wickedly! He stands or falls to his own Master; who knows (if man will
let him alone) what he has to do with him, and has given Commission to some
to Inform him, but to none to Resist him; or to Restrain him against his
will: This is the Prerogative of the most High; as, Psalm. 76. 12. He shall
Restrain the Spirit of Princes, and is wonderful amongst (or dreadful to)
the Kings of the Earth; but has given liberty to none to dishonor them before
the People, though they will not be Informed, but persist in their destructive
ways, even to the Blood of GODS Anointed Priests, and the profaning of
Religion: Profaned, Injured Religion cries out against prophaner Hands which
touch its Anointed Persecuter; and GOD will have the Glory to be the
Recompenser of those who persist in their Obedience, while they suffer unjustly.

6. Heaven is not grown elder and worse, then it was heretofore, nor we better,
then he that led, and they that followed thus the way to Heaven; neither can we
(for my part, I sincerely believe it) excuse our selves to GOD, or them (at the
last day) if we flatter the People, (though but through our silence) in not
accounting to them, that these and the like places of GODS Word, have ever
carried this sense, throughout the whole Christian Church ever since they were
uttered and received, until these Antichristian Times. That Christ laid down
his life in this Profession, has been followed by many thousands of Martyrs;
unto whose Blood (as to the Efficient and Instruments) we owe the Religion that
we have.

7. Our experience may teach us, that there have been some evil Princes, whom
GOD and time have amended; none that have been ill, that have been Immortal;
nor any that have been very ill, that have lived very long; and none so ill and
long, but the World has deserved worse. But from the evils that such have done
to particular men, GOD has extracted good; the greatest good that might be
unto the Church in general: and has given the Injured parties such
Compensation, that they would not for the whole world have been without their
Sufferings.

8. But suppose so wretched a Tyrant as yet never has been, worse then the
Roman Nero, the worst that Story can produce; of whom yet we can hardly
imagine, that he hated that which was good, because it was good; which if he
did not, we will readily imagine that none ever did: Yet Saint Peter and Saint
Paul who suffered under him, in this Point, pleaded his Cause to the whole
world, and to all posterity; and enjoined the (then) present world to plead in
Heaven for him, unto the Lord of Heaven; and in them, all generations (though
for the like Princes) to send up the like Prayers.

9. But (as I said) many Tyrants have done wickedly, yet we may conceive,
rather for Inordinate love of wicked Ends, then for the Hatred of Justice, as
it is Justice; so far forth, that they should hate it in the Root and Law that
enjoyneth it. Yet grant we, that GOD should permit to a wicked people, a wicked
King, who should openly and ex Professo, hate that which is right, because it
is right; yea, the very Law of common Equity, (for so Mishpat signifies in
this place used) yet says that Text, [ Shall such a one Govern?] and the word
for Governing signifies Irresistible to Oblige or Bind. Is it fit to say to
such a King, (that hates Mishpat, the very Head and Fountain of Justice) Thou
art wicked? And to such Princes, you are ungodly?

10. The Reason is after assigned (if we can with Christian Patience wait till
GOD see his time) in the 24. Verse; GOD shall break in pieces mighty men
without number, and set others, in their stead. And concerning GODS permittance
of such Kings, Ver. 23. [ He has laid no more upon man then is right, to wit,
then man has deserved, whenever he sets up such) [ That man should enter
into Judgment with GOD,] that is (as much as in man lies) to appeal from his
Justice, and to try an Action with GOD before his betters, as with an
Oppressor; which is done by man's casting off of the yoke of those who Sit in
the place of GOD yea, by casting aspersions upon their Persons and Actions,
even when they do wickedly, to the dishonor of GOD, who is able to defend his
own* Cause, where he will not be defended but by himself.

11. Who, when he has effected the work of his own secret Counsel, the Ends
for which he raised them up; then (as in the 20. Verse) They shall in a moment
be taken away without hands, whom no humane hands may so much as touch. Upon
whom (by reason of the holy Oil in their Anointing) no man whatsoever may lay
his hands, and be Guiltless: against whom no tongue may bark; but is
Blasphemous: and whom no man in his secret imaginations may vilify, but his
winged* Thoughts shall make haste to Him whose Dignity he sustaineth. It being
a part of GODS Prerogative, to be the Searcher of hearts, and to see into the
darkest Cells of the secretest places thereof; for this cause he will not
endure, that any to whom he has imparted any portion of his Prerogative,
should be violated in man's secretest mis-thoughts; for the Reverence due unto
him whose Throne he possesses; and who has undertaken, that he will turn his
Deputies heart which way himself shall judge most fit. These particulars will
further appear in the ensuing Discourse, upon this that has been proved.

My third Quaere is, How any Acknowledger of the holy Scriptures can justify,
that the Power of Kings is Originally in the People?

My Argument shall be concerning Elihu's Principle; justifying a minori, ad
majus, the unquestionablenesse of GODS Power. That, which (as a known Principle
from the Beginning, before any written Law of GOD) was Opposed against the
wisest of the sons of the East; and which such a respondent, could not, or did
not contradict; and which has been received into the written Word of GOD, and
has received no contradiction therein, throughout the whole Series thereof,
but is according to the Analogy of the Doctrine of the Scriptures every where
in the same Point: May not now the Canon of the Book of GOD is sealed, be
called in Question, but must stand as a Principle for ever. But (as a Proof of
the Vnquestionablenesse and Irresistibility of GOD) the Vnquestionablenesse and
Irresistibility of all Kings, the Deputies of GOD, (because the worst of all
Kings) was Opposed (as a known Principle from the Beginning, before any
written Law of GOD) against Job, the wisest of the sons of the East, which he
could not, or did not contradict; and which is Recorded in the written Word of
GOD, and has received no Contradiction therein (through the whole Series
thereof) and is according to the Analogy of the Scripture Doctrine everywhere
in the same Point. Therefore, the Vnquestionablenesse and Irresistibility of
all Kings whatsoever, (whereby the Vnquestionablenesse and Irresistibility of
GOD is proved) may not (now the Canon of the Book of GOD is sealed) be called
in Question; but must stand as a Principle for ever.
Secondly, concerning the condition of Regal Power. That Power on Earth, over
the People thereof, which (according to the Doctrine of the Scriptures) is
responsible only to GOD, and is by man unquestionable; (is and continues the
very Power of GOD, derived Only and Immediately from the Deity) the Fountain
of all Power, according to the said Doctrine. But the Regal Power of Kings on
Earth over the People thereof, (according to the Doctrine of holy Scriptures)
is Responsible only to GOD, and by man unquestionable. Therefore, the Regal
Power of Kings on Earth over the People thereof, is, and continues the very
Power of GOD; Derived immediately and only from the Deity, the Fountain of
all Power, according to the Doctrine of holy Scriptures.
Thirdly, concerning the Derivation of the Power of Kings. That Power which
cannot be made unjust, by being unjustly used; is not Derived from man, but
from GOD. But the Power of Kings cannot be made unjust by being unjustly used.
Therefore, the Power of Kings is not Derived from man, but from GOD.
Fourthly, concerning GODS disposal of his Power of earthly Dominion. That
Power, which (from man's Beginning) was by an everlasting Law otherwise disposed
of, then to the People; and is so disposed of, that the People must submit unto
it though it be exercised by wicked men: is over, not in, or from the People.
But the Power and Dominion, by an everlasting Law from man's Beginning, was
otherwise disposed of then to the People; and so disposed of, that the People
must submit unto it, though exercised by wicked men. Therefore, the Power of
Dominion, is over, not in, or from the People.

12. For that Pretext heretofore much spoken of, concerning Co-ordination, and
Radical mixture with the King in the Power of Dominion; I find (as has been
said) neither ground nor foot-step thereof in holy Scripture: and therefore I
shall not bend my self against it severally on purpose, but as twisted with
the other, and occasionally, as it shall fall in my way. Indeed, in the
Evidence of Reason, Kingdom and Co-ordination in the Subjects cannot stand
together; where there is Co-ordination, there can be neither under nor over,
King nor Subject: And with Gods Power, over (and with relation to) them, they
cannot mix; for it is they that are under Elohim; and it is Elohims Power,
which the King exercises over them. And no Power of his is to be arrogated by
man, without his special Grant; and no Record of any such Patent, can we find
in his revealed will; but the contrary.

13. By this Digression appears the Answer to the usual Question, What if
the King turn Tyrant? It might be answered by another Question; But, can God
turn Tyrant too? And it is easily returned, that he cannot. He has promised
to turn the Kings heart which way is pleasing to him; he has declared, that
if the King do turn Tyrant, the People do deserve it; and when they turn
good, acknowledging the Rod of his wrath: (as Isa. 10. 5. Nebuchadnezzar was)
He (to whose Prerogative it belongs) will himself turn the Tyrant out of
[His] Throne, which men must bow before; as Verse the 15. Shall the Axe boast
it self against him that heweth therewith? Shall the Saw magnify it self
against him that shakes it? As if the Rod should shake it self against them
that lift it up! Or, as if the staff should lift up (it self, as if it were)
not wood! But while they are (being so long his Instruments, and in his Place
over all others) he has commanded all men to be Obedient unto such, as unto
the Lord, or, for the Lords sake. For that their Power (suppose in the hands of
a Nero, or one worse; an hater of Mishpat, or the Law it self of Nature, and
common Equity) is Divine.

14. And for any that are oppressed thereby, he has promised to take their
matter into his own hands; or to requite it with his hand, Psalm. 10. 14. For
that he is King for ever and ever, Ver. 16. So that if he be as good as his
Royal Word, they who are restrained from making Resistance themselves, are in
never the worse case, while his Might is used to do them Justice, in stead of
their own weakness. Thus (if his word may be taken) Psalm. 22. 6. I will up
(says the Lord) and will help: whom? Every one without exemption: From whom?
From every him, (be he, or swell he, never so big) that swells against him.
And if it be Elohims Prerogative, as (...), Romans 12. 19.
Vengeance belongs to me, and I will repay it, says the Lord: If it be his
peculiar Royal to get up, all others had best keep down: If Vengeance be his
Regal Exemption, they who take the Sword, must know, that his Crown lies at the
stake; and if they be not able to hold up the Sword against him, must make sure
of perishing by it. And if any man in obedience to this Doctrine (the
touchstone of true Christian Religion) shall lose life or any thing else, he
shall gain an hundred fold in the Kingdom of Heaven, Mat. 19. 29.

15. Concerning the Scottish Topic, a Simily; That the Soldiery may lawfully
hold the hands of that General, who will turn his Cannon against his Army on
purpose to destroy them; (But where can he get a new one then?) And the Seamen,
the hands of that Pilot, who wilfully runs his ship against the Rock:
therefore, the Proceedings of that Nation against the King, are lawful.

16. Supposing even Impossibilities probable, yet would the Inference fail.
And were the Argument put into Form, it would sufficiently display it self. But
I do not love to urge any man's Arguments except mine own; I fear to prejudice
my friends, and dare not wrong mine adversaries: therefore, I take it as it is;
whereof were the Antecedent true, yet the Consequence is foul. For, first,
there is Disproportion between the King and the General of an Army, or
Commander of a Ship; their Commissions are not so large as his. Secondly, there
is in it a manifest Petitio Principii: for the Question is, Whether the cases
be like? We deny, they affirm. Thirdly, therein, is Fallacia dictionis; for
holding of hands, is all that in the Antecedent is presumed against the said
General or Pilot; but it is not all that is practiced against the King in the
Consequence. Fourthly, bring all into practice which is done against the King,
under the Allegation of holding his hands, and the Antecedent will be false, of
the General or Pilot. Fifthly, were there no deceit in the Argument, yet the
peremptory Command of GOD the Creator, exempts the Case of Kings.

17. For the first; the Commission of the General, and so of the Pilot, are
given and limited by man, and so publicly Triable before man, in Foro
Exteriori: The Commission of the King is immediately given by GOD, and so far
as concerns the Cognizance of the Subject, unlimited by God himself, who
gives Laws unto his Deputies Conscience, and will Try him in his proper Court,
before Himself and his holy Angels, which man may not presume to do. The King
(for ought that any external Law of God holds his hands in) can (without any
Process) put to death his General; the General, for the life of every of his
Soldiers, is responsible to the King, to be openly Tried, or as the King shall
appoint. But, put the case that a King should issue forth a Commission to his
General, which should limit his Consultations and Actions to the pleasure of
his Soldiers; it were too evident, that he had as good have given him no
Commission: for amongst' the many, there will ever be too many, Qui mallent
Jussa Ducum interpretari, Tat. An.
quam Exequi, who will put in Execution, rather their own Paraphrase, then the
Generals Text. And who had rather be paid for sitting still, then laboring;
and for doing their own wicked work, then any others. And certainly the Wisdom
of God is not less, then of a mortal King.

18. For the second, (the Charge of Petitio Principii) it should have been
first proved before the Production of this Argument, that the Kings purpose was
to destroy his Subjects; which is a conjecture (if possible, yet) less
probable then the Generals intention against his Army. Purposes we leave to the
Judge of hearts, but we are able to justify for matter of Fact, that the
Scriptures have justified the King in those particulars wherein he has excused
Pap. Stat. Silv.
himself; which Benignity of his ( -- Mulcentem radios, submittentemque
modesta, -- Fortunae vexillae suae) should rather have Endeared his Subjects,
with amazed Gratitude to acknowledge the goodness of GOD in him, then embolden
them to Plunder the Power of GOD from him.

19. For the third; holding of the Generals or Pilots hands, seems but to keep
them from doing hurt to others; and (if the Sacramentum Militare will permit
this) this is all that may be done by the Army, until they bring him to Trial
(where he ought to be judged) before his Prince, whose Commission he has. But,
they hold the Kings hands against their sworn Allegiance, that they may
despoile him of all, that both the Laws of God and man have invested him with;
and say he is doing hurt, that they might do him hurt: never thinking of the
great Kings Bench, who is his only Superior* and who is robbed of the Power
of his just Prerogative, by the Peoples meddling with his Commissions; who will
himself come (for them) soon enough, to Judge both him and them. As Saint Peter
2. 3. 8. Beloved, be not ignorant of this one thing, that one day with the
Lord, is as a thousand years, and a thousand years as one day. The Lord is not
slack concerning his Promise (as some men count slacknesse) but is
long-suffering to usward; not willing that any should perish, but that all
should come to repentance. But the day of the Lord will come as a Thief in the
night, etc. In the mean time he has given warning unto all, (which all men
are bound upon [once] speaking, to take notice of at their perils; though for
their sakes who are not Refractary, that which Peremptorily he once spoke, is
twice heard; as Psalm. 62. 11.) Elohim has spoken [Once] Twice I have heard
this, that (whatsoever is) Power belongs to Elohim.

20. For the fourth; if the English of holding his hands, be as Matthew. 26. 45.
(for Money) to deliver him into the hands (...), (from the Hebrew word Marad)
and (...), as Ver. 47. In English Lay Elders, which I conceive, as a
Prophetical Brand upon Ours, was in that place so expressed; nor do I ever
find this expression (of Lay Elders) but I find there Christ in Persecution. If
it be before he be Convicted in Foro Proprio, to take away (not only the Power
which He has from [Above,] witness that of General Pilate, John 19. 11. but
also) the Right of Inheritance, which as he is a Freeborn man, is his
Birthright: if to Divest him of the Liberty of a Subject, and to put him into
a Condition below the more free Birds of the Air, and the noisome Foxes of the
Earth, not leaving him an House of his own to put his head in: If to Crown him
with Thorns, and to put a Reed in his hand, in stead of his (Scepter, or)
Staff of Command, and to Spit (Blasphemies) in his Face, be the holding of the
hands of a General or Pilot; this is against the Laws of God and man; and the
Antecedent is false. (...), Luke 22. 53.

21. For the fifth; God, who has promised to do Right to all that suffer
Wrong, has by the Signal of his holy Oil, laid a peremptory Command upon all
men, not so much as (harmfully) to touch the Person of any whom he has
separated unto himself by Anointing, Psalm. 105. 15. which some will understand
of the Community of the Religious: but it is evident by the Context, that what
was principally meant of Abraham, took in no more then Isaak and Jacob into the
Letter thereof, who were all three Invested with Regal and Sacerdotal Power,
yea, Prophetical; and who has declared, That no man can lay hands upon the
Lords Anointed and be guiltless, 1 Samuel Vide Bishop Andrews Sermon on those
words.
26. 9. That no Religious man, may (without Remorse) Violate the skirt of his
Royal Garments, 1 Samuel 24. 5. then not his Wardrobe; not his Exchequer; not his
Divine Power; given unto him (as shall be proved) under the Names of Elohim,
Melech, Moshell, Messiah, Christ, or Anointed. Who has commanded to obey a
Nero, (who is his Deacon) and a Nebuchadnezzar, who serves him, while he
thinks, he is serving his own Proud, Avaricious, and Cruel Ends, Isa. 10. 7.
Who has promised unto Christians, Isa. 49. 23. that Christian Kings shall be
their nursing Fathers, and Queens their nursing Mothers. Yea, if the People
will be his People, Ezekiel. 45. 8. That his Princes shall no more Oppress them:
which, I am sure (if God as certainly he has, has any meaning in his words)
must be understood of Christian Kings and People; as the whole Vision for eight
Chapters cannot be justified of any other, then the Christian Kingship,
Priesthood, Religion, and Temple.

22. That the Cannon has been turned against the People, and the Vessel has
been split upon the Rock (to the shipwreck even of Conscience it self) is most
apparent; but the People (most vainly intending to create their own Power) were
they who have done this, while they presumed they were doing it against the
Powers Established (indeed) by God himself. But let it be seriously considered,
1. Whether those things which were cried out against (as Invasions of the
Peoples Liberties and Proprieties) be any where prohibited unto the King (in
case of his necessity) throughout the whole Law of God? 2. Wherein has the
King been accused of any thing, whereunto the Pride and Avarice of others have
not necessitated him? 3. What has necessity enforced him to, which causeless
wantonness in them has not exceeded, as far as Pelion heaped upon Ossa (for
the storming of Heaven) does a Wart? 4. What have they exceeded him in, which
they do not celebrate, as most just in themselves? Who have not proved
themselves to have Gods Charten, for any Power over him ^ whom we shall prove
to have Gods Patent for more Power then he has made use of, over them. 5.
Whether there be in Scripture any Toleration for People, who desire Heaven and
fear Hell, to Resist the worst of Kings? 6. Whether there be any color in
Reason, that God should not most heavily Vindicate the Violations of such a
King, whose Virtues are scarce inferior to his Divine Authority?

23. But there will come a time when the holy One of Israel, shall at length
Consult for the doubling of his Dear Dread Servants Honor, as well as of his
Bliss. And when the Story of these days shall be impartially Recounted and
Received, when the only harm his Chronicle shall do, must be to tell
succeeding Princes, how dangerous a thing it is, in evil times to be too good;
when (for the future) our Annals shall justify the Justice, and vindicate the
Providence and Goodness of the great King and Governor of Heaven and Earth; if
hereafter (upon his Terrestrial Throne) he shall place sharp Governors, whose
Acrimony shall cure those, whom Sweetness (though as an inordinate cause)
would have corrupted. And such, whose very Faults should make them Good, whom
Goodness would make Bad.

CHAP. IIII.
The Contents.
Both the Regal and Sacerdotal Powers, were (in the Beginning) the Inheritance
of the Firstborn. The Colloquy between God and Cain, (Genesis 4. 7.) Explained.
Also, that of God with Evah, (Genesis 3. 16.) by the Commentary of Saint Paul, 1 Timothy 2. 12. and 1 Cor. 14. 34. No Co-ordination in the Family, the Model and
Nursery of Kingdom. The seed of the Commandment for Kingdom and Priesthood,
sown in the Family from the very Beginning of the World, in the perpetual Law
of Nature.

1. COncerning the Government of the World, before in his revealed Law, God
described and set the Copy of Just Monarchy, I shall not need to say much;
briefly, it is without Contradiction, that in the Beginning of time, both the
Regal and Sacerdotal Powers were Conjunctively the Inheritance of the
First-bonr: as by the Colloquy between God and Cain may appear, Genesis 4. 7. And
here let it in the first place be observed and remembered, that this Conference,
and the Preeminence therein afforded to Cain, was after God had manifested his
dislike of Cain's Offering, and his acceptance of Hebels Sacrifice;
notwithstanding which (in right of his Primogeniture) he declares for him.

2. First, [ Unto thee his desire shall be subject] indeed the faculty of his
reasonable (...)
Appetite or Will: the word is [ Teshukatho] which so signifies: the Root is
Shuk, from whence also comes [ Shok] a Thigh, under which, Obedience, Fealty,
and Allegiance, used to be sworn. As afterward, Upon, or Before Gods Altar,
(as his Throne or Seat) was the Solemnity of Religious Oaths, Vows, and
Leagues, (as under the Thigh of the Universal King) Performed and Ratified: of
which hereafter, (if God permit) when I come to speak of the Altar,
Jehovah-Nissi.

3. The Verb signifies Concupiscere, to Will or Desire: also Convertere, to
Convert, or cause to Return: importing that Hebel was to make his addresses to
his elder Brother, as to his Priest; and that for the Regulating of the supreme
Faculty of his Soul, (to wit, his reasonable Appetite or Will) he was to
repair to the others Understanding: from it to light his Candle, to direct him
in his ways; and upon his Direction, to Convert and Turn from his going
astray; whose Lips were to preserve his knowledge, he being to seek the Law of
his God at the others mouth.

4. This is the effect of the double Portion of Gods [Likenesse] with which (as
in right of his Primogeniture) after the death of his Father he was to be
honored. Semblable unto which Duplicity is the Power of Order, and (...)
the Power of Jurisdiction in the Christian Church. And that there is [ Pi
Shenaim] a double Portion in the Likeness (as shall be further manifested) as
well as in the Image, appears by Elisha's request to Elijah, 2 King. 2. 9. [I
pray thee let thy Spirit be double upon me] viz. (says one) Vt fiam
Primogenitus: id est Haeres: Duplicata (scilicet) Portione Spiritus [tui] prae
caeteris tuis in Scholis Prophetarum Filiis. It is in no wise (immodestly)
said, Let me have in comparison of Thee, a double Portion of the Spirit of [
God] which is in thee; for it was Elijahs Spirit that he asks for, that he
might have the double Portion (as in right of the Firstborn) from the rest of
his Brethren, in Jurisdiction; being left in his stead as Bishop or Rector, of
the Church or College of the Prophets. Of which hereafter.

5. In that Text is set forth (in the second place) the Temporal or Regal
Power, to be conterred upon Kain over Hebel; [And thou shall rule over him,]
the word is [ Timshal] the root is [ Mashal] which signifies, 1. Praeesse, (...)
2. Dominari, 3. Parabolice loqui: so that, 1. Hebel must acknowledge Kain's
Superiority of Order, and do him Reverence. 2. His Superiority of Power, and
do his Commands. 3. His Superiority of Judgment, in great or dark Cases, not
making his own Interpretation of Edicts or Laws given by him, but applying
himself unto him, for the meaning of all his Injunctions, whom God had
Invested with this Prerogative over him. All this is confirmable by sundry
places where the Spirit of God makes use of this word; word; some of which will
occasionally be produced hereafter, Chap. 8.

6. This is the Effect of the double Portion of the Image of God, to have been
Imprinted upon Kain in stead of the other Mark which God set upon him, after
the Murder of his Brother and fellow Subject. And both these two meanings, Kain
acknowledged in his second Conference with God, Ver. 14. Thou have cast me this
day from the Face (or Headship) of the Earth; and from thy Face (which the
Learned know to be that Church, which is the Material, Consecrated Meeting
place of God and his People) shall I be hidden or separated. The word is [
Esathar] which is a word of Gods Prerogative, which (...)
signisieth a Just and Full Deprivation of him (as with relation to the Sacred
Power of Kingship, so) of both Priesthood and Sanctuary; which was the Reason
of his fear, that whosoever should meet him, would kill him.

7. For fuller satisfaction concerning this Interpretation of the foresaid
words, be pleased to look back unto the doom of Evah, Genesis 3. 16. where (...)
the very self same words are used, for the Woman's Subjection unto her
Husband: and then look forward unto Saint Paul's Exposition of them (who very
well understood them) 1 Timothy 2. 12. [I permit not a Woman to Teach, nor to
Vsurp Authority over the man, but to be in silence.] And he gives these
Reasons; The man was first Formed; and the Woman was first in the
Transgression: from which, the Transgression, she may seem to be made incapable
of Priesthood. From her last Forming, of the Sovereignty of the Family, where
she has an Husband: otherwise, the ruled Case of Zelophehads daughters, Number.
27. (of which hereafter Chap. 7.) which (in defect of Issue Male) permits her
to inherit; gives her Power to Govern in her own Inheritance: but from the
Priesthood she is utterly debarred.

8. The Sentence against her (in Genesis) is [Her Will shall be to her
Husband,] the Construction of Saint Paul, is [she shall not Teach,] this he
fullier explaineth, 1 Cor. 14. 34. Let your Women keep silence in the Churches;
for it is not permitted to them to speak. And in the 35. Verse, If they will
learn any thing, Let them ask their own Husbands at home, etc.

9. Secondly, in Genesis, [He shall bear rule over thee;] Answerably hereunto
says Saint Paul, [She shall not Vsurp Authority over the Man, but be in
Silence,] at his command. And for both, he quotes the Law under the Notion of
Thorah, (as has been showed) meaning the place of Genesis afore-cited.

10. Thirdly, that we may be sure the Apostle relates to this place of
Genesis, it is evident by the third part of her Sentence, [ In sorrow shall
thou bring forth,] to which he returns, though she be excluded from
Priesthood (absolutely) and from Dominion on Earth, (where she has an Husband)
yet (continuing in the Faith of the Covenant of God) she is not excluded from
Salvation in Heaven: (...). Notwithstanding, she shall be saved [in] (that is,
through, or by) Childbearing: which words are to be understood, as those of
Gal. 3. 16. He speaks not of Seeds as of many, but as of one, thy Seed; which
is Christ: that by the Childbearing of One of that Sex, (without the help of
Man, as mankind was lost by the Insinuation of One Woman) womankind shall be
restored into a Capacity of Heavenly Bliss.

11. Whence appears also, that (for the Government of the Family) the double
Portion both of [ Elohims Likeness and Image] is wholly without Radical
mixture or Co-ordination in the Master of that his Family: where if the Wife be
debarred those Powers, much more the Children and Servants, (as shall be proved
Chap. 7.) and where (to wit, in the Family) the Rudiments are laid, both for
the Order and Weal of the Public: Which is an Union of diverse Persons under
one Head, (or Petite Monarch therein) as that is of diverse Families, under the
most Powerful and Glorious of Elohims earthly Representers; unto whom the
Fathers of Families are Sons; and Sons therein are Servants. Both of which in
their several places, are (proportionably to them) Invested with Divine Power;
for whosoever has ( lawful) Power, that Power is Elohims; and not the others,
but by Donation, and according to the Patent Recorded in the sole Covenant,
that GOD has made with Man; to wit, his revealed Word.

12. In Private Families men are Made; in Public Kingdoms they are Tried: in
the former, Honesty, Justice, and Religion are, as in their Nursery; in the
Public Kingdom they are to be planted: upon their bearing Fruit, or the
contrary, they are [thence to be Transplanted, either into the Kingdom of
Heaven, or the contrary place. The Families Virtues or Vices, are they that
Invegitate or Empoyson a Kingdom, which must fall upon them if they undermine
it; wherefore, in the Family (where men are not to wonder at the Disobedience
of those under them, while they are Rebellious against those over them) prime
care is to be taken, as of maintaining the Honor of the Divine Power they are
entrusted with over others, (which without Profaneness cannot be submitted)
so to be most fearful of Exacting the Reverence due unto them from their
Inferiors, if they be conscious of their not performance of their Duty toward
their Superiors, God or Man; however the Obliquity of any Above them, is not
any warranty for Disobedience, or Disrespect from any under them.

13. For this cause, is the Dignity of the Husband, Father, or Master of the
Family, by him to be stood upon; (for it is evidently Intolerable there, that
they who are more wiser, or better then he, should invade his estate, because
they are better, wiser, or more then he) that by the nurture of them in this
petty School, to do their just Homage unto him, that bears the place of God
therein, how ever they may think him unfit for it: they may gradually be
entrusted to honor him, that is, his Enthroned in the University, that so they
may (by Degrees) be Indoctrinated to serve at distance, him whose Throne is
over the Universe, not only when he seems to do them good, but also when to
strike and ruin them: and not only are the Virtues and Vices therein, the
Obedience and Disobedience thereof, Diffusive in Latitude over all; but
Extensive unto Posterity after all. The third and fourth Generation smart for
the Aberrations of One man; and upon the Uprightness of One, is Blessing
promised unto Many.

14. For these Reasons, the fifth Commandment (which as the greater good, and
more concernent of the Glory of GOD, must respect the Public in the highest
Place) in Order to the Kingdom, is directed to the Family, where Nature began;
and whence Nurture is to be derived, for the weal of the Generality; where
there is hope of, or endeavor for happiness, present or future: So that as
well for Political as Theological Ends, care is to be taken for Order to be
conveyed from the Cradle to the Chariot; according to the approved Axiom,
Minima sunt minime negligenda, The Least of all things, are of all things Least
to be neglected.

15. That no Inferior can have any Power from GOD against his Superior, in
the Subordination of GOD, shall be justified in its own place. From that which
hence appears,

My fourth Quaere is. How either of the two grand Powers (Regal or Sacerdotal)
may be asserted to be in the People; either by Originality, or by Radical
mixture and Co-ordination? Or so used as if they were? Since, in the Beginning
it was not so: in the first Model of Kingdom (to wit, the Family) it may not
be so. And since the Commanding Powers in both, have direct and immediate
influence upon the soul, in its prime Faculty.
Mine Arguments are, First, Those Powers which flow from GOD and his Christ, as
from their Efficient, by particular, distinct, and immediate formal Causes,
which the People, can neither give nor hinder: Are not in the People, either
Originally, or by Radical mixture and Co-ordination, nor ought to be used, as
if they were. But the Regal and Sacerdotal Power, do flow from GOD and his
Christ, as from their Efficient, by particular, distinct, and immediate formal
Causes; viz. the double Portion of the Image and Likeness of Elohim, which the
People can neither give nor hinder. Therefore, the Regal and Sacerdotal Powers,
are not in the People, either Originally, or by Radical mixture and
Co-ordination; nor ought to be so used as if they were.
The second Argument comes from Home, from the Administration of GODS Power in
our private Houses. That which in point of Dominion is unsufferable in the
Family, where the Power for the Government thereof, is Divine, in the one Head
of that House, by reason of the Glory of the Image of GOD in him Impressed: Is
more unsufferable in the Kingdom, where the greater Power is proportionably
Divine; for the same Reason; and the Glory thereof more nearly concerning the
Glory of GOD. But, in the point of Dominion, that the Power of Governing should
be in the Community, or held to be so, either Originally or by Co-ordination:
Is unsufferable in the Family, where the Power for the Government thereof is
Divine, and in the one Head of that House; by reason of the Glory of the Image
of GOD in him Impressed. Therefore, in the point of Dominion, That the Power of
Governing should be in the Community, or held to be so, either Originally or by
Co-ordination, is more unsufferable in the Kingdom (then in the Family) where
the Power of a King is greater; (viz. then of the Head of the Family) and
proportionably Divine by reason of the Image of GOD; and the Glory thereof more
nearly concerning the Glory of GOD.
Thirdly, that all the aforesaid Powers are Divine. Those Powers which have
direct and immediate influence upon the Soul of Man, are not Humane, but
Divine. But all the Powers abovesaid, viz. Regal, Sacerdotal, Oeconomical, have
direct and immediate influence upon the Soul of man. Therefore, all the Powers
abovesaid, viz. the Regal, Sacerdotal, and Oeconomical Powers, are not Humane,
but Divine.

16. By the foresaid [ Law] (as Saint Paul calls it) was Dominion at first
derived both into the Kingdom and Family from the Deity, directly contrary to
the Originality and Co-ordination (but of yesterday) pretended. And this I have
briefly set down, pretermitting many Proofs which are obvious in the Word of
GOD, in mine haste unto the clearer exemplifications of what GOD had more
darkly expressed in his first given Rules for Dominion. GODS recorded Examples
being the surest Commentaries for the certain meaning of his own Precepts.

17. And therefore, I shall not here trouble my self nor my Reader to prove,
that upon the Deduction of Colonies for the peopling of the World by degrees,
the Transferring of the Supreme Power from the Firstborn of the several
Families (if at the first any such conjunction was) unto the undertaker of the
Plantations, was by the certain direction of GOD. Enough shall be said in this
particular, Chap. 9. and by the way (in the mean while) will appear the Act of
GOD, dispensing his Divine Name of Power, (to wit, Elohim) even unto Pagan
Princes.

18. This for the present I shall content my self to say, That it is clear,
that Heathen Light acknowledged the two grand Powers, Regal and Sacerdotal, to
be Divine; if not otherwise, yet by their Superstitious over-doings herein; and
particularly the (...) of several of their Princes, who in aftertimes proved to
be all the GODS they knew of.

19. But now (alas) the World is run upon the other Extreme, so far from making
of false GODS, that they will despoile the true GOD. Those whom he appointed to
be Ruled, will Rule. The People whom GOD made to be the Material Object of
Dominion Passive, make themselves Active, to be Efficients of that which GOD
made before hand, to make them Subject unto: Efficients, said I? Alas,
Destroyers of that which GOD intended for their Preservation. Their
Preservation: which being an Act no less Divine then that of their Creation,
they are no more able to perform to themselves, then they were when they were
nothing, to Create themselves: and may as well endeavor to appoint them new
GODS, as to appoint GOD new Deputies; who only has Power to appoint those,
who shall Execute his Power; and only has Title to give them Laws for the
Execution of that Power which is only His; and whose care is not the Least,
for that which is on Earth the Greatest.

20. These his Laws, his own Reports most justly and truly will Expound. The
first of my Particulars shall be the Case of Moses and Aaron; the first that
appeared, with GODS Authorities, by his Commission diverted from the Firstborn.

CHAP. V.
The Contents.
A Recapitulation of what had been formerly proved. Kingship, while we are on
Earth, Superior to Priesthood. Exodus 4. 16. Expounded. The Name of Elohim
communicated, has relation to Inferiors, Angel to Superiors. The High Priest
honored with the Appellation of Elohim. Exodus 22. 28. Expounded, by Act. 23.
5. The acknowledgement of Constantine thereupon. And the judgment of St
Cyprian. All Kings indifferently dignified with the Name of Elohim. Inferior
Magistrates receive both Title and Power from their Kings. Unction an evidence
of Divine Power. Christ himself not Anointed, but in the Persons of his
Predecessors and Successors. Korah's Rebellion and Doom. How far it did go, and
does reach. Aarons Priesthood not Dead but Changed.

1. FRom what is before set down, appears; that all Power is Gods, especially
the Power of Dominion; it being his Prerogative Royal; in which, all Powers of
the same Alloy, Originally are; and from which all that are Legal, are by his
Grant (upon Record) dispensed.

That no Titles thereunto can be sufficient, without Gods particular Donation:
which way that is already passed, by that God, who is not doubletongued, I have
proved.

Also [by the largeness of his Patent] whose very immediate Power the King
has. That, that must be Divine; which is by man unquestionable; which cannot
be made unjust, though unjustly used: unto which man must submit, though it be
unjustly used.

That in the Beginning, both the High Powers ( Regal and Sacerdotal) descended
(not by Virtue or Election, but) by Right of Primogeniture; which Descent, the
Spirit of GOD calls Mishpat, or the General and Just Law. The mean of
Conveighance (to be further manifested hereafter) I pointed at, to wit, the
Likeness of Elohim and his Image; and the different Proportions of their
Communication. Also, the signification of the words Shuk and Mashal; in which,
by the Law of God (as the Apostle calls it) attested in the unalterable Gospel,
both the said Powers were decyphered, and mine Interpretation asserted.

That in the Epitome both of the Church and Kingdom, (to wit, Family) other
Forms of Government are intolerable; much more in that wherein the Glory of
Gods Image is more highly concerned.

That both the Powers abovesaid, are Gods, and not Man's, by the Impression
which they make upon the Soul, which (upon Earth) has neither Father nor
Lord; but descends immediately from the Breath of God; to whose sole Regiment
it appertains, and can receive Laws from none but Him.

2. I proceed to this Name of Power, (to wit, Elohim) which also is untakable
by any, without Gods Donation; without his operative word [Amar] Elohim has
said, they are Elohim; then forthwith, so said, so done: (...)
they to whom he imparteth it, are to be honored, as taken in, into the
communion of Elohim; for the distribution of Gods Justice amongst other men,
who were virtually Created by God under this Name of Elohim.

3. My first Record shall be (as I said, of) Moses and Aaron. When Reuben was
abdicated from the Benefit and Privilege of this universal Law, by God (the
absolute Father of Mankind, who (only) has no Superior to Account unto for
this Disherison) inspiring to this end his Father Jacob: and the Dividing and
Scattering of Simeon and Levi, in Jacob and Israel, was by the same
unquestionable Justice decreed: yet so, that Levi (for Causes not apparent) was
designed (for both the Privileges for a while, but) to the Priesthood for ever.
God first resolves the Regal Power to Moses, to show, that he will have that
esteemed the greater, by the said Firstnesse: and afterward the Sacerdotal to
Aaron, who was the elder Brother; to signify, that indeed the Priesthood is of
the Elder House; but while we are here on Earth (where that is not first which
is Spiritual, but that which is Natural) where Dominion was not designed for
GODS Likeness, but for his Image, (as shall be proved) it is to be in
subjection to the more proper Power; in as much as it is Earth (and not Heaven)
where (as yet) we enjoy an (unfixed) abode.

3. Therefore, Exodus 4. 16. Thou (to wit, Moses) shall be to him (to wit, (...)
Aaron) Elohim, or GOD. And in the beginning of the Verse, He (to wit, Aaron)
shall be thine Angel unto the People; which is expressed, Exodus 7. 1. See I have
made thee Elohim (or GOD) unto Pharaoh; and Aaron thy Brother shall be thine
Angel (or Prophet.) That the holy Angels are dignified with this Name of
Elohim, (though not absolutely, yet relatively) is plain by the attestation of
Saint Paul, Heb. 1. 16. And let all the Angels of GOD worship him. Which words
have relation to that of Psalm. 97. 7. [ Worship him (Col-Elohim) all (...)
that are called by this Name of Elohim or GODS:] which (as concerning the
Rational Angels) is as much as to say; Perform your Reasonable Service to him,
who is the Original Elohim, you Spirits who are under him, adopted into that
Name of Power; as Administrators of his Power and Justice, over those, above
whom you are by him designed.

4. Yet so, that whosoever is so named or compared to an Angel, with reference
to those who have GODS Power above them, is notwithstanding Elohim, to all
those whom GOD has constituted under him. As the woman (though Created after
the Image of GOD also) in respect of, and comparatively to her Husband, has
not the honor of being the Image of Elohim; but must be in subjection as unto
him, Ephesians. 5. 22. and is likened to the Angels, (in that she exercises
Authority only by her Husbands Commission) as 1 Cor. 11. 7, 8, 9, 10. So Aaron
was the Head of a distinct Order; and over his Clergy Invested with the Name
and Power of Elohim; yet when he spoke against Moses (unto whom he was Angel,
that is, as Saint Peter calls Inferior Magistrates, [ Sent] of him, from whom
he received his Commission) though Moses had done against the Law of GOD in
marrying an Ethiopian: yet was Aaron feign to confess his sin (for censuring
of the Marriage of his Prince) and to beseech the Sinner Moses his
Intercession, to stand between him and the wrath of GOD, Numb. 12. For Moses
was entrusted with the whole house of Israel; Aaron but with one Tribe, Verse
7. Thus the native and proper Angels (when they usurped upon him who was their
Elohim) became that which still they are, Devils.

5. That Aaron had particular Commission from GOD for the exercise of Elohims
Temporary and Judiciary Power, is evident by multitudes of plain Texts; and
that Aarons Posterity were for ever to enjoy it by Aarons Patent. Concerning
which, how the [for Ever] thereof is to be understood (to wit, of the Typified,
though it fail in the Type) shall be justified in its own Chap. 8.
place. And that the name of Elohim is also communicated to the Priest,
appears, Exodus 22. 28. so construed, Acts 23. 5. [Elohim lo-tekallel, Nasi
lotaor] (...)
are the words in Exodus; Thou shall not revile (the word signifies Blaspheme,
and it is known at whom Blasphemy points, to wit) those who are Elohim or
GODS; those who fit in the place of GOD, Invested with Divine Power, for the
Administration of Judgment, which is the Prerogative of GOD. In the next
words, Thou shall not curse, (the word signifies to Vilify, in Deed, Word, or
Thought,) Nasi, him that is exalted into the highest place, above whom, under
GOD, there is no other. So the meaning is, Reviling of a Judge (at the least,
as well Ecclesiastical as Civil) is Blaspheming of God, in whose stead he
sits; and bare Incivility toward him who Commands in Chief, is as bad
(at the least) as appears by the order of the words.

6. To this in the place above cited, Saint Paul has relation; it is written,
(...), Thou shall not Vilify the chief Ruler of Acts 23. 5.
thy People; speaking it of the High Priest, who in such cases was then the
chief Judge of the Nation; whence appears (by the way) that there appertains a
more honorable Portion of that Name to the Priest, then unto many, to whom
also it is imparted; though not so great as the Christian Solomon, (Constantine
the Great) once in humble modesty (though afterward, understandingly, he took
more to himself) did ascribe unto the Priestly Office.

7. I Record it not, that (in my secret thoughts) I would have it now pass
into Example. It is Registered by Saint Gregory the Great, in an Epistle Greg.
Mag. Lib. 2. Jud. 13. 6. 75.
of his (far from Papal pride) to the Emperor Mauritius. Constantine having
received scandalous Accusations against some of his Bishops, called all
together, and sent them to judge amongst themselves the Accused. Ite, and inter
vos causas vestras discutite, quia dignum non est ut nos judicemus Deos, etc.
Go, and amongst your selves judge those things, for it is not fitting that we
should judge those, whom GOD has twice in the one 22. Chapter of Exodus called
Elohim: choosing for that time to depart from his own just Power, rather then
to hazard into Contempt their sacred Order.

8. If this be indeed too much: yet bring with you the worst of your thoughts
against the late Prelates of this Church; and with those thoughts consider of
the Answer of Saint Paul, now under our hands; which (Oh be it not the worse
thought of) I express by the Spirit of that holy Bishop and Martyr Saint
Cyprian; who, for Opposing the Bishop of Rome, was by him Excommunicated, and
so dyed for ought that to me appears. When Saint Paul (says he) might have
bearded the High Priest, and that most justly, with his Injustice and Tyranny,
for cruelly putting to death the most Just One; and might have taken the more
liberty, in that it was not so much his own as his Masters cause, when he might
have replied that he was no High Priest; yet for the manners due to the
Spritelesse Trunk of his Priesthood, Quando p^tuerit constanter exerere,
adversus eos qui Dominum Crucifixissent, and qui jam Deum, and Christum, and
Templum, and Sacerdotium perdidissent. Et quamvis spoli^tis Sacerdotiotumbram
tamen ipsam inanem Sacerdotalis nominis cogitans; dixerit, nesciebam Fratres
etc. Contra Pontificem nihil dixit; sed Innocentiam suam purgans, etc. Ep. 96.
ad Pupianum.
that was, he returned not; but Nesciebam Fratres, I wist not Brethren, that he
was the High Priest: for it is written, Thou shall not Blaspheme those who are
Elohim; nor Dedignifie him that is the Chief Prince of thy Nation; which the
High Priest was at that time. So says the same Father (in the same Epistle)
our Savior likewise himself, when he was wronged by the High Priest, (who sat
but in Moses his Chair) was content with the bare Purgation of his own
Innocence, without Retribution of any Calumny. Before this, against his enemies
(who continually laid snares for his life, and set traps in his way, Mat. 23.
3.) he charge all the People as well as his Disciples, All things whatsoever
(leaving no excuse for disobedience) they (who sit in Moses Chair) shall bid
you observe: observe and do them; but do not after their works. And Luke 17.
14. when he saw the Lepers (that petitioned him for his help) he said unto
them, Go show your selves unto the Priests, and as they went they were
cleansed. Which certainly is not the Religion of these days.

9. But to proceed: That the King (by the Spirit of GOD) is honored with the
name of Elohim, none can deny. That he is not the Supreme on Earth, who is
endowed with this Title, none can justify. That none on Earth has it against
him; and that all on Earth, that have any Temporal share thereof, if they have
any, must have it from, or under him, shall be more fully proved, Chap. 11.
Par. 11. That this Style is not given to the King, by reason of required
Sanctity in him (which is the effect of GODS Likeness; not of his Image, by
which Dominion comes) is evident by the Spirit of GOD his applying of it to
Heathen Kings (enemies to the Church of GOD) as well as Moses; who not as
Moses, but as King in Jesurun, had this high Privilege.

10. Moses was Isreal's Lawgiver, Numb. 21. 18. So were all the Kings of Judah,
Genesis 49. 10. Moses, in all Civil cases (for the Priest was to judge between
things Holy and Unholy, Blood and Blood, Deuteronomy. 17. 8. accordingly Zech. 3. 7.)
was the Ordinary Supreme, and Judge of the Judges; to reserve Cases, and to
receive Appeals; in whom was the final determination of all Controversies
arising from the Judicial Law. So were all the Kings of Judah, with whom GOD
reckoned for the Oppressions, and Injustice, done by others; as throughout the
sacred story appears. Moses, as he had the Power to lead the People in, and in
times of Peace to judge them at home; so had he the Power of the Militia, to
go out before them, or to send them to Battle: and as of imposing Taxes; so
the Power of Life and Death was in his hands. So had Joshua, Josh. 1. 16. All
that thou command we will do; and whither thou sendest us we will go; as
we obeyed Moses [in all things] so will we obey thee: whosoever will not obey
thy [Words] in all that thou command him, [Let him dye the death.] And this
had Saul, and all the Kings of Judah: this Name of Elohims Ordinary Power,
belonging indifferently to them all; as to all lawful Kings, though Heathen
Idolaters. So Psalm. 135. 5. Our Lord is above all Elohim; and for example,
particularly names afterward, Pharaoh, Sehon and Hogh, who (by consequence)
had the Power of the Name; for it is injurious to him, to think, that GOD can
deal deceitfully as man does.

11. I deny not (here) that this Name may be ascribed to Elohims Inferior Vid.
Cap. 11. Par. 6. etc. (...)
Judges; his Privy Council; yea, and to those who are employed as Actors of the
Kings Councels, so long as they go along with the Kings Authority, and
continue under his Command. But (as shall be proved) He judges in the secret
chamber of Elohim, or the Kings. (...)
not out of the 82. Psalm, (the ordinary mistake of men) otherwise then they
are assumed into the [ Kerev] the secret Closet or Privy Council of him that is
their earthly Elohim: according to that of the first Verse of the Psalm, where
the word [ Kerev] so signifies. As also Psalm. 110. 2. Jehovah shall send the
Rod of thy strength out of Sion; [Rede be-kerev] Dominare in Interiori: Rule
thou in the Secretie of thine Enemies: to wit, of those Kings, whom GOD himself
shall destroy, who will not embrace the Doctrine which should come forth of
Sion, and raise up such as should do it in all Nations.

12. That none upon earth can partake of this Power of Elohim, but such as are
endowed with it from the Spirit of GODS Prince; the Spirit of GOD endeavored
to make plain for all succeeding Generations, from the Vid. Exo. 18 25. Insuper
Deuteronomy. 1. 13, 14, 15, 16, etc.
first Recorded Commission that ever was granted in this kind, Number. 11. 17.
when the Solemnity was of substituting of Assistents for Moses, I will come
down (said GOD) and talk with thee, and will take of the [Spirit] which is
upon [Thee,] and put it upon [Them.] And his Witness was the Cloud, (from
whence evident Testimony was afterward called, a Cloud of Witness) that it is
thy Spirit and Power, not immediately mine, by which they are separated from
the common Inferiority of other men; that they might ever own, and never
disobey thee, from whom they have all the Power they have: and from Thee will I
look for an Account of any thing that they shall do under Thee.

13. And thus was Joshua inaugurated for Moses his Successor, though he was
accomplished with the private Spirit of GOD before hand, Numb. 27. 18. And the
Lord said unto Moses, (petitioning that, after him, the People might not be
left to their casual selves, as sheep without a Shepherd) Take unto thee
Joshua, in whom [is the Spirit] and put thine hands upon him, and give him of
thy Glory, that all the Congregation of Israel may obey him. And he shall stand
before Eleazar the Priest, and he shall ask counsel for him by the judgment of
Vrim, before the Lord: at his Word they shall go out, and at his Word they
shall come in; both he and all the Children of Israel with him.

14. In after times, the Spirit of this Power was conveyed by the holy Oil,
which published them (upon whom it was powered) for the Lords Commissioners unto
all men: Consecrating the Anointeds Person to Inviolability, and Sacring from
profane Rust and Worms, their Swords, Scepters, and Crosier Staves. And so,
that the Father was Anointed for his Firstborn for ever; and the Children were
reputed the Lords Anointed, though the Ceremony was not renewed upon them,
otherwise then upon failing of Succession by Primogeniture: Thus was Solomon
afresh Anointed, and Joash after Athaliah's Usurpation, and the slaughter of
his Brethren. Thus the Lord Christ for his Kingship and Priesthood, was not
otherwise solemnly Anointed, (though by way of Eminency he has that Name above
his Fellows; as being Anointed in the Persons of all those, who are Anointed
for and under him) then as before in his Predecessors, in both his Offices, and
as at this day he is in his Successors, or present Substitutes.

15. And his merits have obtained a new Additament of Honor to them, annexing
to that of Elohim; this his name of Christ or Anointed: they being now to be
esteemed the Lords Christ's, as he the Lord Christ. By whom only, publicly,
and visibly, he administreth his Powers for the External Government of the
world; himself being Sitten down at the right hand of Majesty in the Heavens,
where (...), He must Reign as King, and Sit as Bishop of Souls, until he has
put down all his Enemies under his feet; who will not have him thus to Reign
over them. And their Proscription ( Jude 4. (...)) unto Destruction, was
Legibly written out of old; and their Crime (in the general) described to be
their denying GOD to be (...), the only Proprietary, Original, and Fountain of
Dominion; and the establishment and Lordship thereof to be Christ Jesus.

16. In describing the particular Violations, is quoted the Vindication of GOD,
against the first of all Recorded Rebellions against his Regal and Sacerdotal
Powers in Moses and Aaron, Numb. 16. And Saint Jude plainly tells us, That they
who despise Dominions, (Verse 8.) and speak evil of Dignities, (...), Verse
11. have already perished in the gain-sayings of Korah. So sure makes of their
Destruction, as if they who were then (in their like) condemned, were also
executed in Korah.

17. But now to survay this now Lasting Crime, and its for Everlasting
Judgment. The Sons of Reuben, in hope (it seems) to regaine their Birthright,
and Korah with his Accomplices grieved to see Aaron overlook them, combine
together against those whom GOD had set over them; to Make the People, (as all
Innovators use) they pretend their Liberty, that the might bring them to
Servitude. To this End, are provided to Dispute the Case, and to incense the
Multitude. 250. Captains, famous Assembly men. Korah undertakes Moses and
Aaron; he pretends against Arbitrary Government; saying, You take too much upon
you, to Moses and Aaron. Their color was Independency; they need no Governors
but GOD. Their Words are, (Ver. 3.) Seeing all the Congregation (every one of
them) are Holy, and the Lord is amongst them: Wherefore then lift you up your
selves against the Congregation of the Lord? Moses sees further into them, that
Korah's aim was at a Presbytery, or certain Priesthood, which he (as
Superintendent) would Marshall. And therefore replies (Ver. 10.) Seek you
(without being called of GOD as was Aaron) the Priests Office also? And Ver. 9.
Seems it a small thing to you, that the GOD of Israel has separated you from
the multitude of Israel, to take you to himself, to do the service of the
Tabernacle of the Lord, and to stand before the Congregation to minister unto
them? He has also taken thee to him, and all thy Brethren the sons of Levi
with thee; and seek you the Priests Office also? For the which cause, both thou
and all thy Company are gathered together [against the Lord:] and what is Aaron
that you murmur against him! And let it be observed, that all this was done
after Aaron had made the golden Calf, which Korah durst not Object; nor against
Moses his Marriage against the Law.

18. From whence appears that GOD Almighty is violated (of which he is sensible
eveu unto Jealousy) when any Power of his Constitution is touched but for
Alteration; and however the People may be easily deluded to believe, that
Changing, is bettering, yet GOD justly abhors the putting of this dishonor
upon his Wisdom. That GOD was the Author of the Distinction of Clergy and
Laity, is assured from hence; and shall be made more manifest when I come to
speak of the Likeness of GOD. And that he was the distinguisher of the Power
of Order, and the Power of Jurisdiction, first between the Priest and the
Levite; secondly, between the Priests and the Chief Priests; thirdly, between
the High Priest, and the Chief Priests. Answerable whereunto (unto which
Perpetuity was Promised, and Sworn to, as shall be proved, Chap. 8.) was the
Priesthood of the unalterable Evangelical Covenant, Constituted, By, and From
Christ, and his Apostles, in the Primitive Church.

19. Now when Dominion is any where Established (as shall be made more clear
hereafter) according to the Heavenly Platform (which is copied out in GODS
Word, as man's perpetual Rule) man ought to tremble at each thought against it;
as they did who ran away when the Earth (in this Story) opened her mouth. GODS
Approbation, being to be presumed to be no Iesse inviolable, where his
direction is followed, then if himself, for the Constituting of Regal Power,
had come amongst us; whose Precept and Example are come into the several
Kingdoms of the one Catholic Church. For Saint Jude has told us, that they
do no better now, then Korah did at that time, who ever do against the
present Powers; what ever they shall do against us. And the Power that then
was supreme, (to wit, of the Heathen Roman Emperor) had not the
Circumstantials of that which was conferred upon Moses and David: in whose
Person our Christian Kings were more perfectly Established, then himself; as
shall be proved, Chap. 8.

20. But to give the Narrative of their whole apparent guilt; Moses sent (Verse
12.) to call unto him and Aaron, their Competitors; they resuse, with, Is it a
small thing, that thou have brought us out of a Land, that flows with milk
and honey, to kill us in the Wilderness? Except thou make thy self Lord and
Ruler over us also! Will thou put out the eyes of these men? We will not come
up. We see here no act of Hostility; we hear only words; and they are here
Recorded; that the like upon the like peril, should never more be presumed.
See what follows; Elohim was constrained to stir up agaome his Almightinesse,
for the (...)
swallowing up of those open Sepulchers: which himself (reassuming his old word
[ Bara]) calls Creation. Verse 30. But if the Lord Create a new Creation, and
the Earth open her mouth, and swallow them up, and they go down alive into
Sheol; then you shall understand, that these men (however they pretend to clash
only against us) have violated the Lord.

21. And certainly, the Government Established amongst us, has as certainly
GOD for the Author of it, as he was of this under Moses and Aaron: and no less
certainly, they, who with no less violence impugn the present Constitution of
GOD, shall (if they persist therein) with no less seriousness be punished,
then Korah was; if later, then heavier. For no man can think it probable, that
if Korah had had another Korah to have entered the same Lists before him; this
Korah would have been his Second in this Quarrel. And most assuredly, we may
conceive, that the greatness of our warning (which Korah wanted) must
Aggravate the greatness of our sin, who would not take warning by him. And
they that adventure to go further in the same way that he went, must look to
fall deeper into the same Pit, then he fell. GOD grant that they who pretend to
Clear all eyes, do not indeed put out ours.

22. For my part, (in the sincerity of a charitable soul, I say it) I do not
see how any man can distinguish any (who go on that way) into any hopes of
comfort, while they so do; but, that amongst Professors of Christianity,
Resistance of, and Rebellion against the lawful Prince and Priest, are far
more flagitious, then was that against Moses and Aaron. For, that their Power,
although extraordinarily given; yet when given, it was ordinary: it being the
Divine Power of the same GOD, for the same ends with ours. Thus in Aaron, the
same Power that was in him, was afterward in Eledzar; and is (at the least) no
less in the Christian Priest. 2 Cor. 3. 10. For even that which was made
glorious, viz. the ministration of Death, Ver. 7. and the Ministration of
Condemnation, Ver. 9. had no Glory in this relation; by reason (or with
relation to) of the Glory (viz. of the ministration of the Spirit, Ver. 8.)
that excels. For if that which is done away was glorious, much more that
which remains is glorious. So in Moses, the Power of Dominion was no less in
Joshua then in him; and indeed larger in the Jewish Kings then either; whose
Patent is exceeded rather then otherwise, in the Commission of Christian Kings;
as shall be proved, Chap. 8.

23. Now, since the dreadful Condemnation of Korah does indeed reach down unto
these days; and since those Powers which are Divine (though Executed by
mortal men) are themselves immortal. And since the Application of GODS
everlasting Name of Elohim, and his adding thereunto of his great Seal of
Unction, to both the Orders (Regal and Sacerdotal) does attest the
everlastingnesse of both the Powers, though the Persons die. And since they
were both before the Law, which might Conclude them no partakers of the Laws
reputed frailty; but that they must end, as (indeed) they did begin, with the
world. Yet since a multitude of men (led on by those who with most applause,
subtily strike at Moses through Aarons sides) who are in themselves more equal
to the Regal Power, do not at all take into their thoughts the poor despised
Priesthood; or if they do, they think it rotten together with Aarons in the
same grave. Let me have leave, only to lay down few Grounds, for that, whose
fuller proof belongs unto another place.

24. That the Platform of that Government which should be in the Church on
Earth, is set us in the Church in Heaven; and the only Exemplification thereof
in the Book of GOD, is the formal Rule, which all Ages must apply themselves
unto: of which, the Legal Institutes were the transitory Shadow; the
Evangelical, the more substantial Image; the Celestial, the eternal Verity; as
Heb. 10. 1. Of which hereafter.

25. That the Priesthood of Aaron is not Dead but Changed; as these our bodies,
and the Corn, to multiply the same Grain: since it was honored with the Name
of Elohim, and Unction, and withal, with the Promise of Perpetuity, in sundry
places of Scriptures. Particularly these two last conjoined together, Number. 18.
8. And again the Lord spoke unto Aaron, Behold, I have given thee the keeping
of my Offerings, of all the Hallowed things of the Children of Israel; I have
given them unto thee [for the Anointings sake,] and to thy Sons, by an
[everlasting Ordinance.] Since also Priesthood was a Twin of the same womb with
Regality; Born with the World it self; and went along with the Firstborn in
all Successions; until GOD thought sit to separate them, by selecting a
peculiar Tribe in stead of the Firstborn, Number. 3. 45. before which time, it is
apparent unto all that is Understanding, that they were united; as in the
Person of Melchisedec.

26. In whose Priesthood, briefly and only, was the Precellency of the
Christian Deputy of Christ therein, but pointed at; in its perpetual Patrimony
(to wit, Tithes) in his Benediction of him, who was the Father of (...)
Levi: In the Antiquity of our grand Sacrament, preceding Levi's birth, 14. 18.
He brought forth Bread and Wine, for (for Vau is causal there, as necessarily
elsewhere in Scripture) he was a Priest of Ghnelion, the most High God: Genesis
30-27.
who is called by that Name, with relation to those in Subordination under him.

27. The Preceptive Exemplification of personal Order for the Church of God on
Earth, (derived from the Constitution of his Church in Heaven) is no where
described, but in the three Orders of Aarons Priesthood: according to these,
did our Savior and his Apostles most exactly Form the Christian Triplicity of
Bishop, Priest, and Deacon, under the Gospel; which coming from the Law, and
being ratified in the Gospel, (as shall be fully manifested) is an evident
Argument of its (for ever) Inalterability. And especially, since it was done
without further precept; it is easily visible, that there needed none: it being
a point of most high concernment. For, at the Churches Foundation (the
Materials being provided) nothing could be so necessary, as the choice of
Builders, and the Application of them to their several Taskes; the Master
Builder being the eternal God, one and the same for ever; whose Ends were the
same when he built the private Synagogue, which now are for the Catholic
Church; whose Wisdom is no elder now then it was at that time: whose
Workmanship (in this particular of these three Orders) has stood till this Age
throughout all Christendom, without either Renovation or Innovation. Nor did
the Primitive Church (arriving at a flourishing Subsistency) design a new
Order, when answerable to Aaron, who Typified Christ before he came; they
decreed semblably to represent him being come, by Archbishops or Patriarchs:
which was only to keep in Order what the Apostles had ordered.

Whereupon my fifth Quaere is. How (without the danger of Korah's Punishment)
the People, or Inferior Magistrates, or Ministers, may assume unto themselves,
or Violate, the Power of the Name of Elohm; given away from them, to the
Ordinary, Supreme, Gods immediate Deputy overy them, in relative Opposition to
them?

I confess that the Power which Moses had, with relation to Pharaoh, was
indeed Extraordinary; and that in respect of the Power it self: for, that God
had given the Name of Elohim (and by consequence the Ordinary Supreme Power
thereof unto Pharaoh.) I confess secondly, that the Power of Dominion which
Moses had over Aaron, and all the rest of Jesurun his Subjects, was
extraordinarily given; for he had it not by the Ordinary Title of Primogeniture
but by the Donation of Him, who only has Power to transfer those Powers which
are his, and to create Titles. But so far as concerns our Question, in
consideration of the Power it self, it was ordinary.

Which I thus prove. That Power which Moses (by the virtue of Gods Donation,
and the Name of Elohim) had over Aaron, over his seventy and two Inferior
Judges, and all the People of Israel, in commune with all other Kings, who have
indifferently that Name of Power communicated unto them, by the Donation of
God, over all their Liege Subjects: Was in regard of the Power it self,
Ordinary and not Extraordinary. But the Power of not to be Invaded, or Resisted
Jurisdiction, and all other the Rights of Majesty now in Question amongst us;
Moses (by virtue of Gods Donation, and the Name of Elohim) had over Aaron, over
his seventy and two Inferior Judges, and all the People of Israel; in commune,
with all other Kings who have indifferently that Name of Power communicated
unto them, by the Donation of God, over all their Liege Subjects. Therefore,
the Power of not to be Invaded, or Resisted Jurisdiction, with all other the
Rights of Majesty, now in Question amongst us, which Moses had, etc. was in
regard of the Power it self, Ordinary, and not Extraordinary.
Secondly, from the Inferiority of the High Priests Power and Title. That Power
and Title which the High Priest, the next under the Prince, though Head of a
distinct Order, had from God, with relation to those under his Jurisdiction;
but never had it, with relation to his Prince, under (though not from) whom he
had his Power and Title; but had an Inferior Power and Title (to wit, of Angel)
in relative Opposition to him: No man, or men (in relation to such a One) may
presume to challenge. But the Power and Title of Elohim, the High Priest (viz.
Aaron) the next under the Prince, though Head of a distinct Order, had from
God, with relation to those under his Jurisdiction; but had not with reference
to his Prince, under, though not from whom, he had his Power and Title, but had
an Inferior Power and Title in relative Opposition to him. Therefore, the Power
and Title of Elohim (in relation to the Prince) no man, or men, may presume to
challenge.
Thirdly, concerning the dangerous heinousness of deserting our station, etc.
That kind of sin which made Angels Devils; no man, though never so high, may
attempt. But aspiring to parity with their immediate Elohim, was that kind of
sin which made Angels Devils. Therefore, aspiring to parity with his immediate
Elohim, is a kind of sin which no man (be he never so great) may attempt.
Fourthly, that no Inferior may intermeddle with, or censure the Marriage of
Princes as unlawful, though against the Law; which all others are obnoxious
to: and so in other the like cases. That which was sinful Boldness in the
High Priest against his Prince, though offending against the Law of God; had
been a worse sin in any other Magistrate or Subject, and is proportionably
sinful in the like case at this day. But, censuring of the Marriage of the
Prince, (to wit, Moses) when he had indeed offended against the Law of God; (
viz. by his Marriage of a Ethiopian woman) was sinful boldness in the High
Priest. Therefore, censuring of the Marriage of the Prince, (and sic in
similibus) when indeed he offends against the Law of God therein, which had
been a worse sin in any other Subject or Magistrate, then in the High Priest:
Is proportionably sinful in the like case at this day, in any man whatsoever.
Fifthly, concerning the Kings Political Marriage, and the Economy of the
Kingdom. That Obedience, which in the Family is due unto him whom God has
placed in the highest room thereof, (though he be not honored with the Name
of Elohim, or Anointing) from all that appertain unto it; yea, from her that
is next in Dignity to him, (i. e.) the Wife of his bosom, who is one Flesh
with him: Is much more due in the Kingdom to him, whom God has honored with
both, (viz. the Name of Elohim, and the Character thereof, Unction) from all
the People; yea, from those who are next in Dignity to him. But Obedience, as
unto Christ: Is in the Family due unto him whom God has placed in the highest
room thereof, (though not honored with the Name of Elohim, or Unction) from
all that appeartains unto it; yea, from the wife of his bosom, who is one
flesh with him. Therefore, Obedience, as unto Christ, is much more due unto
him, whom God has placed in the highest room in the Kingdom, and has
honored, etc. from all that appertain unto it; yea those that are next in
Dignity to him.
Sixthly. Those who have all the Power which they have from any One; have no
Power against him. But Inferior Magistrates have all the Power of Dominion,
which they have; from him who is their mediate Elohim. Therefore, Inferior
Magistrates have no Power of Dominion, against their mediate Elohim.
Seventhly. They who violate either of those Orders of men, in whom only
Christ (who Sits in Heaven, as the great Bishop of souls, at the right hand
of Majesty; as King of all the Kings and Kingdoms of the world) was, or is
Anointed: Had need be sure of a new Christ. But they who violate the two Orders
of Kings and Priests, do violate those Orders of men, in whom only Christ
(who Sits, etc.) was, and is Anointed. Therefore, they who violate the two
Orders of Kings and Priests; had need be sure of a new Christ.
Eighthly. Those who sin as Korah did: Are sure to find as sore punishment as
Korah found. But -- But, I tremble to make up this Argument. Therefore -- I
beseech the God of the Spirits of all flesh, that the Minor may be false, of
all those who but love truth.



CHAP. VI.
The Contents.
Monarchical Power, Instituted under Theocraty it self. Upon Gods Recesse from
the immediate Exercise of Kingship, he never was the Author of Popular
Election. The Exemplification of Gods mind herein; in and by the particulars of
his appointing of Saul to the Kingdom of Israel. Wherein consisted the
sinfulfulnesse of the Israelites Petition, for a King. The Law of Kingdom, 1 Samuel 10. 25. The word Mishpat, and diverse its great Importances. Unction, Gods
Demonstration, for the Communication of Divine Power, 1 Samuel 8. 11. etc. The
Authors gleanings from the Story of King Saul. All summed up in the Conclusion
of this Chapter.

1. THat Moses had Regal Power, the Scripture attesteth; though not so large
(while God immediately exercised his own Power, by his own self; issuing from
himself, his Imperial Edicts, and receiving Appeals) as upon the withdrawing
of himself, he made over to Kings, for avoiding the violations of his own
Sanctimony; and giving ungovernable man respite of bethinking himself; till
Himself should come to Judge both King and Them. In the mean time, while he
performed that Royal part himself, (as prudent Monarchs do from his Example)
he gave no Commissions, but during Life or Pleasure; and never entrusted the
Multitude, but ever one man with the Charge of his Authority; and perpetually (
as a King) had the choice of his own Officers. Thus it was during the time of
the Judges; whose Government (though Monarchical, God never enstamping his
Image upon a Plate of many pieces) yet being but for term of life,
appertains not properly to this Dispute in this place.

2. This Pattern he set unto Kings, for the aftertimes of his Receding from
the immediate Administration of his Regality; as he was forthwith enforced even
from the Beginning of the World, in merciful Compassion of the general
unfitness of mankind, to endure the Purity of his Sovereignty over them in all
the rest of the Nations: yet so, as when he should Divolve and Entail his
Authority, (which he never left Elective) he would himself make choice of the
Stock, upon which he would Engraffe his perpetual Authority; to teach all
those (for ever) who will call themselves by his Name, or be accounted his
People, that Primogeniture is his Ordinary way of Election, which he has
promised under Christianity shall not fail, (as will appear, Chapters 8. and
9.) Thus it was Constituted from the Beginning, and Mankind was not to disturb
it, unless he sent his Extraordinary Commission. It was at the first placed in
Adam, designed unto Kain, (as the extent of the words before handled, do
demonstrate) and afterward (in the Ordinary course) to descend to the
Firstborn, by the Eternal and Universal Law of Nature, (to wit, Mishpat) as
Deuteronomy. 21. 17. For he is the first of his strength, (as having the Tide of the
strong God,) and therefore, the Right of the Firstborn is his.

3. This is the Doctrine of the Scriptures, in this great Point: they that will
do otherwise, must look otherwise to Justify it, then by the Word of God;
which, I dare not admit a thought, that all Mankind may presume. I shall
therefore pass over the time of the Judges, who were as high Stewards unto him
the King; while for about four hundred years he was in teaching Kings, and
also all those, who for ever will be his People, that the Kingship, which in
Mercy he would afterward settle, in, and over Mankind, should be and remain
for ever his own; notwithstanding, that for the Ends displayed in the last
Chapter, he was content to recede from the immediate Exercise of that which was
his, and no ones else; and of our own Bone and Flesh, to establish in his own
place, those who might most conveniently Administer his Power.

4. So that now I come to Treat of that settled Form of Government, which God
(who only has Right to dispose of that which is so peculiarly his own)
Established for ever amongst his own People; and that was Just, and perfect
Monarchy. Of which only (and of no other Form any where, or at any time) he
was Author; (the Reason will come to our hands hereafter) Chap. 12.
and this, when by Lot he chose out Saul from all the Families of Israel, upon
the Petition of the People unto Samuel, 1 Samuel 8. 5.

5. The sinfulness of which Petition, men much mistake: it lay not in the
Quid, or Matter of it, (according to that of Deuteronomy. 18. 17. The Lord said, They
have well spoken, in all that they have spoken:) but it lay first in the
Quando, the circumstance of time, when it was desired; which since the times of
Moses and Joshua, could never have been so wretched: for during the mean
space, no man had done, or could administer the place of God, with greater
Prudence, Uprightness, and Success, then Samuel had done it. But their grave
Pretexts of their foolish Fears and Jealousies, when they had such a Prince
whom Envy it self could not distaine; when they ought rather to have gone
beside themselves with Dutiful Gratitude, then with Scandalous Providence; was
that, which was a prime part of the sin of their Petition.

6. Secondly, add unto this Circumstance the personal Frowardness (more or
less) of each of mankind, against being Governed; which at that time
Epidemically possessed the whole multitude of Israel. They thought, (which is
ever the Wisdom of Fools, and of the Multitude) that to be Changed, was to be
Bettered: and pity it was they should have found it otherwise, then ordinarily
befalls such; it was (indeed) Government, which their Impatience would cast
off, while their transparent Subtilty would be seen, but against the Governors:
Which God saw, and answered, It is not Thee but Me, that they have Rejected.
They shall have what they Pretend, though not what they Intend.

7. For to cast off Elohims Government, so long as Elohims Creation stands, is
a thing impossible; there can be in his Worlds by him Created, no Dominion but
His; where ever there is any Power of any Government, in Heaven or Earth, in
Kingdom or Church, it must be Divine. And therefore, God says, Hearken unto
them, in all that they say unto thee: but withal, show them [Mishpat
Hammelech,] or the Eternal and Just Law of Monarchical Dominion: (...)
My farewell Favor, and the last that (upon my further Recesse from them) I
will in this kind vouchsafe unto Man for ever. This we may undoubtedly
conclude, that since the Power of Government is Absolutely and Only Gods; and
that since he has ever from the Beginning, disposed of it after this manner*
and has ratified this his Constitution in his Eternal and Unalterable Gospel:
that this is the unchangeable way of the Immutable God, which they that are
weary of, may turn out of, and take a fall in their own.

8. Otherwise, then with the Circumstances and Considerations abovesaid; the
Petition for this glorious Favor of God (to give them a King) had not been
sinful. It was one of the Highest of Gods Promises to Abraham, Genesis 17. when
he changed his Name, and renewed his Covenant with him; to wit, that of Genesis
12. 2. I will make thee a great Nation; and thou shall be for a Blessing. I
will Bless* them that Bless thee; and Curse them that Curse thee: and in thee
shall all the Families of the Earth be Blessed. To this (here) God adds, That
he shall be a Father of many Nations, and (as the Glory hereof) Kings shall
come of thee: (and the Top of all is, the Perpetuity of this Covenant,)
Moreever, I will Establish this my Covenant between Me and Thee, and thy Seed
after thee* in their Generations, for an everlasting Covenant.

9. Of which Promise, this is the Crown; that Kings (to wit, of the Converted
Gentiles unto the Christian Faith) should spring out of him; employed in the
change of his Name to Abraham: and those eminent in Religion and Piety, as the
Embellishment of this Crown. Amongst* whom, ours is not the least Glorious,
whose Gold has been now seven years in the Furnace; and his precious Luster so
long under the Polishers. The Riches of Medals consists not in the Bulk
(which those, who look not seriously into the mirror of Gods Word, can hardly
distinguish from ordinary Statures, being viewed by the old eyes of this World)
but in the Impresse of Gods Image in them.

10. That which makes every particular man a little World, containing (in a
more precious Cabinet) all the perfections of the (less Artificial) greater,
is Elohims private Image. And so, that which ennobles the King above all
others, is the public Character of the Image of God in him; which ought of us,
for that Reason, to be more sacredly valued, then all the Lives and Livelihoods
in the lesser Worlds of a whole Kingdom. Man himself being as a thing of
naught, in himself not worth the preserving, (much less that for him the
Inanimate World, or that of Vegetables and Sensibles, should be preserved only
for him) but only for the Preservation of the Creators Image in man: which is
that which gives Aptitude unto Dominion. Let that be preserved (as it should)
and man has title to the World, and the benefits thereof; that being lost, he
loses it and them. Of so great Concernment is the King unto the People; as
will follow in the next Chapter.

11. In this, the Evangelical Prophet ( Isa. 60.) exulteth, that Christ should
have a Seed or Race of Christian Princes, who should bring in to Him Vide Isa.
49. 18. etc.
the Riches of the Gentiles; and in those of their Kings, erect his Throne.
Thus the dying Patriarch Jacob solaced himself with joy, in his Spirit to see
the days, when out of his Judah should issue a Royal Line to reach unto Genesis
49. 10.
Shiloh: it had been then no wicked Petition, if Circumstances had been right,
and Honesty had managed it; but the failings in these particulars, made it to
be blamed by God, and his ill rewarded Deputy.

12. And this is further manifest, Deuteronomy. 17. 14. whence may be concluded, more
then a bare Permission for the asking of a King; for therein is employed a
Prediction, that they should be so governed: and Rules are set down for the
same, containing all the Limitations, which his only King (the Lord of Hosts)
is pleased to lay upon him. And if it be madness and folly to attempt after a
Prince, (as Eccles. 2. 12.) For what can the man do that comes after the
King? Certainly, it is more desperate to do it after God: to dare to bound him
that holds the place of God, further then his God has bounded him. So
likewise are their directions, concerning the Election of Him, which the People
of Israel well remembered; and therefore, they went not about to make a King
themselves, but came unto the Lords Prophet, with a, Give thou us a King to
Judge us, like all the Nations about us, 1 Samuel 8. 5, 6. As also there is a
particular Injunction laid upon him concerning this Book of Deuteronomy; to
write it out, and to meditate in it all the days of his life, Verse 18.

13. Which gives me the boldness to conjecture, that if that which was
delivered, 1 Samuel ^. 11. etc. (was not it or the brief of it, as might with
great probability be asserted out of the words) This particular Book of
Deuteronomy, was that which was mentioned, 1 Samuel 10. 25. which Samuel wrote
out, and happily finding the King respectlesse of it, laid it up ad facies
Domini, before the Faces of Jehovah; to wit, in the Sanctuary. But if it were
of that purport, which a man of this last Olympiad pretends, (who never saw it,
says it is lost, and yet can tell what was in it) probability would
difficultly admit that God should suffer it to perish, unless he meant the
perishing of the Peoples Liberty with it. At least wise we cannot imagine, but
that recourse would have been had to it, or mention made of it, upon
differences between the Prince and the Subject; and particularly in Rehoboams
case with the ten Tribes: for in all that time between Samuel and Rehoboam, the
Sanctuary had not been violated. But without all doubt, the Book that (...)
etc. And it shall be that when he shall sit upon the Throne of his Kingdom, he
shall write [this Deuteronomy] into a Book, etc. Chap. 17. 18.
the King was required to Transcribe and Study, was no other then this: for the
words are [ Mishne Hatorah azzoth,] which the Septuagint renders, he shall
write [ this Deuteronomy] into a Book. And without all question, this was it,
which Joshua read in the ears of all the People, Josh. 8. 32. for it is
expressly so by Name set down in that Text.

14. From whence it is abundantly evident, where the sin of the Israelites lay,
in asking of a King. The Kings Power is set down from Gods own mouth, 1 Samuel
8. 9. etc. Hearken unto the voice of this Prophet; howbeit, show (...)
them [Mishpat Ha-melech,] The manner of the King, say you? [ Mishpat comes
from Shaphat, which signifies to Decree, or Pronounce a righteous Law or
Sentence: and is in its Latitude, the universal Law of Just Reason, for the
regulating of all men and their actions. Of this, only God is the Adequate
Lawgiver, as Deuteronomy. 1. 17. and the only high Dispenser of, and with it; which
(whosoever have to do with it) is and remains Gods, and not man's for ever. And
thus it is applied in multitudes of places in holy Scripture; so Psalm. 50. 6.
Elohim Shophet His: Elohim is Judge himself, or alone. And Genesis (...)
18. 35. Shall not the Judge of all the world do Mishpat? And certainly, if
there were a word of greater Exactness for the Expressing of true Justice, by
Divine or Humane Wisdom to be found out; Gods Title to the Judicature of the
World would deserve it. And Mishpatav, his Judgments are in all the (...)
World, Psalm. 105. 7.

15. Here then it comes out of Gods own mouth; Show them my just and eternal
Decree* concerning the Power* of the King. Some (as if it were here, only set
down for fashion sake) will have it to import only Manner; but wherever in
Scripture it signifies Manner or Custom, it ever signifies at the least such
good Manners or Customs, as have passed into the Nature of Laws; it is still
according to its own nature, Actus rationalis, rite judicantis: and in such
indifferent cases as Custom has Power to determine about, wherein pettish
singularity is sinful. Thus 2 King. 1. 7. the Prophets using to wear rough or
hairy Garments, Custom transferred it into the condition of a Law; and by this
their Garb, their Profession was Externally and Reverentially differenced from
other men's: which was the Reason why Ahaziah (in that Text) enquired of his
Messengers concerning the Garb (which he calls Mishpat) of the Man they met
with: and upon their Answer to that his Question, he knew that it was Elijah.
And in this signification also, this has been the Garb of the Supreme Power
ever since the World began. The word (as used in diverse places) imports
diverse particulars, but all flowing from Legal and Rational Power. He that
desires the truth, let him (with me) take them all into his consideration; and
the Result will be the Truth, and the whole Truth.

16. Sometimes, the thing that it directly points at, is (...) and so it is
in this place; as the Septuagint (whose Translation Christ and his Apostles
honored, by their most frequent use thereof) here render it. Sometimes it is
(...), Justification, or Absolution, given by the Law, or by Him whose Word is
Law. Sometimes (...), Righteousness, the Requisite of this Law. Sometimes
(...), the Ordination, or Composure according to Law. Sometimes (...), the
advised Prudence of Law. Sometimes (...), the Operation of Law. Sometimes
(...), the Execution of Law, or Punishment issuing therefrom. Which
(neglecting all the rest) diverse snatch at in this place, as if there were
nothing else in it, but the Execution of Gods Curse upon the People for thus
desiring a King. I deny not, but that God did look into, and intend (with
other the Importances of this word) this particular Judgment; but (according
to the rule of his own Wisdom) he took in all the rest also.

17. That which here in the place is aimed at, (with the most Authoritative
Septuagint) is (...), which the ancient Latins rendered by Jus, which in
English imports Just Right. And Just Right he (and no man else) must needs
have, who is assumed by the righteous Lord, into Communication and Communion of
that Power which is Gods, and not any man's, or all men's.

18. In a Secundary way also, it designeth Manner or Custom; but it was not
Manner or Custom which made this a Law: but it was Law that made it a Custom.
It was a Custom as old as the world; Sic fuit ab initio, Thus it (...)
was from the Beginning: witness all Humane and Divine Records thereof. All
Nations having so much of the Ancient Religion in them, as to embrace this
Mishpat. So in the 20. Verse, We will be like all other Nations, and our King
shall Judge us. Vshpatanu, the Word is. (...)


19. So likewise, here is (...), and it is God that Justifies, and ever will
his own Donation. It is Gods Power, and therefore must be unlimited, but by
God: and the King himself cannot be justified from Profaneness, if (with
Esau) for the necessity of Pottage, he part from his (for ever by GOD
justified) Birthright: of his own, he may and should indulge; but of that
which is GODS, man may not Sacrilegiously take, nor he Pusillanimously give.

20. In the next place, there is in it (...), Righteousness; and the greatest
Righteousness that may be, that this Power should be (as here) Unbounded: for
that Power which is (otherwise then by GOD) tied up from doing evil, must also
of necessity (upon accessory emergencies) be straightned from doing of good,
when there is most need of good; then will a narrow Commission spoil all: as
is easily seen by such a one, given to a General at War, who must deserve
Death for doing good beyond his Patent.

21. Here is also (...) the most exact Form of Government that may be,
answerable unto the Pattern of Celestial Governance; where only indeed is
the Beauty of Perfect Monarchy: unto which, Earth ought to conform, as man unto
GOD, whose Private Image he bears; as the King unto him whose double
Representer he is; as he is GOD, and the King of the World: whose Power, the
Angels his Magistrates desire to Obey, not to Limit: whose Glory, they account
it their Glory to Increase, not to Diminish; and rejoice to see us like
themselves: doing his Regal will on Earth, as they do it in Heaven.

22. Apparently also here is (...), the Prudence of this Law; for it is
inconsistent with the high condition of Divine Power to be in many: by which
means (to the dishonor of the GOD of Unity) it must be subject to Bandies and
Divisions, and be imbased by communicating it to many. Many Counselors, as
many Angels, may do well; but One King as one GOD, must command all; and
freely dispense the Spirit of his Power, to whom, and as he pleases* whose
Angels none can be, but as they are sent by him.

23. Here likewise is (...), the Judiciary Power of this Law; as in the place
of GOD to give Being unto Laws for man, and finally to decide the Decisions of
others, delegated by and under him: to decree every one to his station, and to
make use of them and theirs, for the Preservation of what GOD Created for
himself, and entrusted to him: as Magisterially to lead the People in, and in
Peace to Judge them; so to denounce War, and to enjoyne them to Assist him.

24. In Mishpat also is (...), the Power of Execution, for all this, by the
punishment of Neglecters, Contemners, or Resisters; and He (be he a Saul or
Nero) bears not the Sword in vain. These are GODS Prerogatives, and cannot
be in a fellow Creature, but by GODS Donation; and if he gives these away from
himself, he leaves himself no Subjects; and if he keep them in his own
hands, he must for more then forty years ^e grieved with our manners; and
enforced to swear in his wrath, that none of us shall enter into his rest: or
else by holding his Peace, be esteemed like one of us; and an approver of our
wickednesses. But whether he will execute his Dominion, by good or bad Princes,
he is not bound to account: the World is not great enough* to question him; nor
good enough to incline him; nor wise enough to suffer what they cannot hinder:
only, knowing enough to pull down ruin upon their own heads, and bold enough
to put it into practice.

25. Now, concerning that which has been herein delivered, the right
understanding of the word Mishpat is of wonderful importance, Psalm. 36. 6.
Mishpatecha Tehom Rabba, Thy Judgments are Abyssus multa, a great Deep, (...)
for the preservation both of Man and Beast. And the observance thereof is
accordingly, of high concernment; and the Spirit of GOD has set a brand upon
those who will not give heed thereunto, Prove. 28. 5. Wicked men will not, shall
not understand Mishpat: to wit, those who are evil men in Saint Peter's (...)
two Acceptations, (both prepared for destruction) either out of the evil of
busy Ignorance, or the evil of careless Instability. But much more then,
they who out of prepossessed wilfulness, are resolved either so to understand
it as will serve their turns; or else all GODS Cautions shall not serve its
turn: but a witness of Belial [will scorne] Mishpat, Pro. 19. 28. (...)


26. Secondly, concerning the Latitude thereof; all the Acceptations abovesaid,
are known significations of the Word; and by these has the Learned Septuagint
occasionally expressed it, according to the prime and particular Aspect and
Interest of the several Texts, wherein the Spirit of GOD has made choice of
it. But in this particular I shall spare my Reader, unless Particulars be
called for; then to the advantage of this Cause it shall be seen in fifteen
more.

27. Thirdly, Mishpat is the peculiar and Honourary Law of Elohim, the Creator
of all things, for the reasonable Ordering of the world: for the manifestation
whereof, enough has been said; but might further be evidenced by the
production of above an hundred several places of holy Scripture; Whereof some
few will necessarily appear in the progress of this Discourse. And as the
thing it self, so the (...), or setting in order, of one over another; of
those, by whom this his own Power is under him to be executed, is also of his
Prerogative: the Positive part whereof, is properly called Chok.

28. Fourthly, he (who may choose his own Officers) has in this particular
disposed of this his Prerogative over the People, unto Kings; and has
communicated unto them of his Spirit, and unto Inferior Magistrates of their
Regal Spirits: as, Isa. 28. 5, 6. In that day shall the Lord of Hosts be for a
Crown of Glory, and a Diadem of Beauty, unto the residue of his People; and
for a Spirit of Mishpat unto [Him] that sits in Judgment: and for Strength
unto them that drive the Battle unto the gate. So that Mishpat is no
particular design for the rigorous Execution of GODS Judgments upon a sinful
people, (as they say in the case of Saul) but the General and Natural Right
of all Gods Deputies, over all his People.

29. So it was Prophesied of before hand, for good Hezekiah and his Princes,
Isa. 32. 1. So in the Benedictive Prayer of King David for his Son Solomon;
whom (by GODS direction) he designed his Successor, Psalm. 72. 1. Give thy
Mishpats, Oh Elohim, unto the King; and thy Justice unto the Kings Son: and so
in Justice he shall judge thy People, and deliver the Afflicted in Mishpat.
Then the Mountains shall bring down Peace unto the People, and the Hills in
Righteousness. He shall give Justice unto the afflicted People; he shall be a
Savior to the sons of the Poor, and shall break in pieces the Oppressor. And
so, all shall fear thee so long as there is a Sun; and the Generation of
generations, so long as the Moon shall show her face. And this (in this Point)
is GODS only Eternal, and Perpetual Constitution, for the Government, Peace,
and Prosperity of the World.

30. And this his Prerogative is visibly derived unto Kings, in their being
made the Lords Christ's in their Anointing; as Saul, 1 Samuel 15. 7. When thou
wast little in thine own eyes, wast not thou made the Head of the Tribes of
Israel? For (it is causally set down) the Lord Anointed thee King over Israel.
And this was it, which when he turned Tyrant, kept all his Subjects hands in
awe of him. And this Name of Anointed, (as an addition to the Name of Elohim)
was (in honor of him) communicated to all the Administrators of the Dominion,
of the second Person of the Trinity, then declared (in due time) to be made
man, who are called his Fellows, Psalm. 45. 8.

31. So were all they, who came in, in former times by GODS Extraordinary
Donation: so are all they who come in now by the Ordinary way of Legal
Descent. Since the Heathen Cyrus was by GOD himself declared to be of this
Society; though it be known, that amongst the Persians there was no such
Custom at all, as Anointing their Kings; the Royal Dignity, (without the
visible Ceremony) enrolled him into the Name and Fellowship of Christ* Messiah
in Hebrew, (...) in the Greek, Christ in English; all signifying but Anointed.
Neither need I to enlarge my self (here) to prove, that what was (here)
extended to King Saul, was Royal Power, indifferently on all Kings conferred.
Thus says one who well knew, Prove. 8. 15, 16. By the second Person in Trinity;
the Eternal Wisdom and Word of the Father, Kings (...)
indefinitely, (and therefore all Kings) shall Reign; and Princes [Shophte]
shall be Judiciarily set over the Earth.

32. But to proceed in the Story of King Saul; concerning his Arbitrary,
Occasional, Irresistible Power, delivered in the eleventh and the succeeding
Verses of the 1 Samuel 8. I desire not to recount, but rather that others would
use their own eyes, and sadly examine by those which are there expressed, the
pretended Usurpations, which have cost so much Blood among us. But here mistake
me not, as if I went about to make a color, that what the Prince may do in
case of Necessity, he may do at pleasure: where the King only against the
People, not against GOD, is made Judge of his own Necessities, when to make use
of his Subjects Persons and Estates; which they may not withold or withdraw,
when he calls for them. As upon peril of Elohims high displeasure, he may not
call for them, but when indeed he has need of them; nor make use of them, but
as he will be accountable to his King; who has Power over him, as he has over
the People. As appears in the case of Jehojachin, Jer. 22. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 13,
14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19.

33. So is here set down, not what Saul may do by GOD unpunished; but what he
may do, by man unresisted: for GOD, who will not endure his own Power in the
King to be Questioned, because it is His; will (because it is His) much less
endure, that his Power (as unjustly used) should deserve to be Questioned. And
GOD (who is never unjust, when his Deputy may be) will be sharper in his
Returns unto the King, then the King can be in his Oppressions over his
People; but he will in no case abide the People to Judge his Power: of whose
Arcana Imperii, his secret Prerogative it is to discern, when to do good, by
good or bad Princes. For People may be so bad, that good Kings (whom they
deserve not) may make them worse, which he desires not; they can never be so
good, but wicked Kings may burn out their dross, and make them better: which
is the chief aim of him who is Goodit self.

34. Most ordinarily, the worse men are, the more impatient they are of
Pessimus quisque asperrime rectorem patitur* Salust*
Government; and Princes are not the less hated of those who are mischievously
minded, for their being good. And the People who are good and taught of Christ,
can make benefit from, and rejoice under the worst: so that, unless
Wickedness it self cause Hatred against Wickedness, only good Kings are
like by this Ostracisme to suffer, while none can be secure But granting
Resistance of any, it is inevitably clear, that GODS Prerogative is invaded;
and he not left at liberty when to make happy a good People, by a good King:
and to punish a wicked People by setting a wicked man over them; as it is,
Psalm. 109. 6.

35. Neither need I, neither will I put him that differs from me, to prove,
that this of 1 Samuel 8. 18. viz. And you shall cry out at that day, because of
your King; and the Lord will not hear you, (which was the last remedy that was
left unto the People, and certainly needed not, if they might have made
Resistance) was GODS requital of their (Circumstantiall) wickedness, in
asking a King (at that time) as if there lay no Appleale from the King, since
it lies only unto GOD, who will in no case permit Resistance of that Power
which is His. Who will give us leave to pray against the Temptation of
Persecution; but so, that he strictly requires us (as to submit in our Bodies
and Estates, so in our Souls) to pray for our Persecuters: against whom (out
of his Justice) he will Vindicate us. Who delights most in his Children (and
then with speediest effect, will answer them in what they need, but may not
presume to ask) when with absolute Obedience, they pray according to his
Direction, though it be against his Resolution.

36. Thus for the Life and Prosperity of the Pagan Tyrant Nebuchadnezzar; and
of his Lascivious Profane Son Baltasar, (whom GOD was resolved to destroy)
his People were directed to pray. Thus when Saul was (indeed) in GODS Decree
cast off from the Kingdom, for invading the Function of the Priest, (where
observe that Intrusion upon the Office was more notoriously censured by GOD,
then killing of the innocent Priests) 1 Samuel 13. 13. and afterward positively
Abdicated, for his sparing of the Amalokites, 1 Samuel 15. 26. Samuel continued
his Mourning sor him, until the Lord restrained him, and sent him to Anoint
another.

37. Nor do I see how man may make trial, either with his own, or other men's
Money or Blood, (since GOD has given us his revealed will, for the Decision of
all our Controversies) what is the secret will of GOD, (who dwells in the
Cloud, whither no eye can reach, nor ought to attempt it) whether (when he
sets up, or permits any unjust Prince) he would have the Tyrant to take
down the People? or the People the Tyrant? The Spirit of Prophecy I can
discern in former times; but I think it the Spirit of Presumption in these.
But I hasten.

38. But in the History of Saul (the two grand Businesses being by others, with
exact Wisdom and Piety transacted) there remains nothing for me but the
gleanings. My first place thereof shall be, 1 Samuel 9. 16, 17. To morrow; I will
send thee a man out of the Land of Benjamin: Him shall thou Anoint to Govern
over my People Israel: He shall [Save] them out of the hands of the Philistims:
for I have looked upon my People, and their Cry is come up unto me. When (...)
Samuel therefore saw Saul, the Lord said unto him, See this is the Man,
concerning whom I spoke unto thee; He shall [Rule] my People. Whence it is
evident, First, (...)
that their sin in demanding a King was but Circumstantial; the cry of their
Miseries was louder then the cry of this, and all other their sins; they were
still his People. Secondly, that to have a King is a Blessing, and not a Curse.
Thirdly, that by his Office, the King is Assumed into part of the Commission of
Jesus, as the Peoples Earthly Jesus; so the word signifies, [ He shall
Coercebit Legibus subditos, ne quid agant sine permissione. Shindler in
Ghnatsar.
Save:] into the Society of Christ, him shall thou Anoint. Fourthly, that his
Office is to Rule the People; not to be Ruled by them. The word is Jaghnitsor,
and Gnatsar signifies, Clausit, Cohibuit, Coercuit, Detinuit: Ne quid pro
volutate sua ageret: to wit, so to shut up, and detain a man; so to bridle and
restrain him, that he may not do what himself wills; but must in all
things submit unto the others Commands.

39. Secondly, when Saul was chosen by the Lords Lot; the People were of three
conditions. The Generality (for they were called All the People) shouted for
Joy; and cried, GOD save the King; or let GOD be his Savior, that he may be
ours, he being over us, that which GOD is over him. The Few were of two sorts,
and contrary minded; as being touched by two contrary Magnetic Attractives,
they moved toward the two Opposite Poles: the one to the right hand, the calm
South; the other to the left, the unruly North; in the sides whereof, their
Lucifer sits.

40. Those who immediately upon the designation of Saul to the Kingdom; and
before his Investiture therein, went to the Right; are recorded Verse 26. And
Saul (as yet a private man) went home to his (private) house at Gibeah; and
there followed him a Band of men whose heart GOD had touched. Those who moved
to the left, are described Ver. 27. First, by their Father the Devil, [ But the
Children of Belial.] Secondly, by their Filial Conformity, unto that their
Father: Herein, first, by their verbal Declarations, of Fears and Jealousies;
How shall this Man be a Jesus unto us, or save us? Secondly, they stood upon,
first, their Liberty; they despised to be his Homagers: Secondly, their
Propriety; all was their own, they would part with no Coat and Conduct Money,
to appoint him, as became a King. That which my soul desires to have observed
hence; is a serious consideration of what begets for Satan and Hell; and what
are differentiall Notes of Heavens Generation; whose hearts GOD touches here,
that he may Glorify them hereafter.

41. Thirdly, when (as Chap 11.) Nahash the King of Ammon besieged Jabesh
Gilead, and it went sore with them; upon the tidings (as he was bringing home
his Cattle) like a private man, without the thoughts which the Holy Oil might
have infused into him; and without the Habiliments of Majesty, which the
Peoples Allegiance should have Tributed to GODS Elect, Verse 6. The Spirit of
GOD came upon him, and (with an Internal Commission of Array) mustered up the
Forces of his Royal Zeal: and he took a yoke of Oxen, and hewed them in
pieces, and sent them throughout all the Coasts of Israel, by the hands of his
Messengers; and Proclaimed, Whosoever comes not out after Saul and Samuel, so
shall his Oxen be served. And this was no more (...)
then he might justify; for GOD did it for him in the very next words: And the
fear of Jehovah fell upon all the People; and they came out as one man.

42. The Spirit of GOD (here) says, it was the Fear of Jehovah, not Elohim;
lest it might be construed of King Saul: or else to be the proper act of GODS
Prerogative and Power; not the influence of Religion and Piety. And further, it
was an holy Fear of GOD, not a thrifty Fear for their Oxen; that made all the
People come in, to the setting up of the Kings Standard. And here, may it pass
into observation, what are the effects of true Religion, and the Fear of
Jehovah in this kind; and what the contrary must be: also, what are the Jura
Majestatis herein asserted; Power of the Militia, and over the Subjects goods.
As further, Imposition of Taxes, and Power of granting free Charter, 17. 25.
Power of commanding in the duties of Religion; 28, 14. 33. Power of requiring
Arbitrary Covenants, and Religious Oaths, as in the same Chapter.

43. But I forbear to urge this Argument, (as I said) for that it is already,
and Invincibly done by my betters: only thus much I recount; That if it were
true (which is not proved) that the People had put on a resolution, with Armed
violence, to pursue the Rescue of Jonathan; whom GOD himself (notwithstanding
that the matter of his Fathers Vow was unadvised) picked out for his Fathers
condemnation; and whom GOD did (in the end) find out for the Philistims Bows;
though no other Fault was found of him Recorded in the Book of GOD, but
Virtues so gloriously eminent, as amongst all the celebrated Princes therein,
there is scarce one to be compared with him. Yet since this is but an
inconcludent singular example, and that Diametrically contrary, both to evident
Precept, and approved Practice, throughout the whole current of holy Scripture:
and until the Peoples Warrant, for so doing, be produced and justified, I
cannot but wonder at that Logic, which can quiet Conscience in this so
dangerous a case.

44. Fourthly, concerning neglect of Office toward Him, 1 Samuel 26. 15. When
David had (as an Argument that from his soul, he abhorred an Irreligious
thought against his Persecuter) found Saul asleep, and all his Guard; and but
took from him (to restore immediately) his Spear and Cruse of Water; He
forthwith called out to Abner, Art not thou a man? And who is comparable to
thee in Israel? Wherefore then have thou not kept thy Lord the King? [As the
Lord liveth] you (of his Guard, all of you) deserve (for this) to die; because
you have not kept your Master, the [Lords Anointed.] And here, let no man be so
unrighteous, as to protect in his heart against that holy Patriarch; that in
this high Asseveration (the usual Expression of GOD himself) loosely or
unseriously he took the Name of GOD in vain: but that knowingly, considering
the greatness of the Fault, he presumed (what otherwise he durst not have
done) with this grand Attestation to unload his soul herein: charging home the
Neglecters of the Holy Oil of GOD, and of their own Military Station. Yet so
did he acquit himself, that by a tacit Insinuation he acknowledges, that
Himself had been Eternally the Child of a far worse Death, if he had waged War
against his Lord.

45. Notwithstanding, that he knew as well as others, that Saul was 1 Samuel 21.
11. and 22. 8, and 24. 20. and 25. 28. and 26. 25.
justly abandoned, and that he Himself had GOD Almighty's Title to the Throne.
He being herein an accomplished Type of Christ, who entered not upon his own,
either Kingdom or Priesthood, till Death gave him absolute Possession thereof;
notwithstanding the wickedness of those who held them from him. And this I
dare boldly affirm, that neither the Type, nor the Typified, were in these
Relations, either unwilling Agents or Patients.

46. Neither dare I think, that the Inspired Penman of that Funeral Song
(concerning Saul and Jonathan) called Keshath, or the Bow, 2 Samuel 1. 18. (...)
( which he commanded to be taught to the Children of Judah, as a memorial for
ever) did court therein, either man or men, and least of all himself. Not
reflecting at all upon himself with Politic consideration, that the case
might be his own in after times; though some have not so much Religion, as to
bury in more godly silence such unadvised thoughts of him, whom the Spirit of
GOD (who is no flatterer) made choice of, thus to celebrate their virtues,
whose Aberrations he (to whom such Cogniscences solely do belong) himself did
severely punish.

47. In which Hymn, out of truth of heart (otherwise the Spirit of GOD would
never have owned it) David wept his passionate Raptures; Execrating the very
Mountains of Gilboa, from ever receiving either Rain or Dew from Heaven, which
should (in any Oblation, as a Perfume and Savor of rest) be returned thither
again. His Reason is, For there the Shield of the Mighty was cast down; the
Shield of Saul, as if he had not been [Anointed with Oil,] Verse 21. And in
the 24. Ver. You Daughters of [Israel] weep you for Saul, who clothed you in
Scarlet, with other Delights; and adorned you with Habiliments of Gold. So that
it is not probable, that the forecited words of the 1 Samuel 8. from the 10.
Verse to the 19. did contain the particular Excesses of King Saul; but were
indeed, the general Irresistible Prerogative of all Monarchs.

48. Since it is Truth (not Poetical Fancy) which the Spirit of GOD vouchsafed
to authorize: Since it is set down in general, for the Daughters of Israel,
not the Daughters of his own Tribe of Benjamin; or of his own, or his Fathers
house; Since the Scripture has expressed more of his Faults, then those for
which he was (in his Posterity) Dethroned.

49. But I desire not to build upon Conjecturals; this I may with confidence
affirm, that David was no Hypocrite, either in this Song; or in the
forementioned Oath; or in his Professions, against an oblique Thought, against
his Sovereign, when he cut off the skirt of Saul's Robe. I am sure the Holy
Ghost was none; and he it was that testified of David, (not David that bore
witness of Himself) that his heart smote him for it, (1 Samuel 24. 6.) And the
Spirit of GOD it was, who recorded this Expression for us.

50. And this I may be bold to conceive, that David knew the causes why Saul
was Repudiated; and other his Miscarriages, which were not done in a corner:
but David had so much Religion, (I might say Christianity) as not to discover,
though in his Persecuter, the spots of that Skin, whereupon the Lords Oil had
been powered; much less durst he cast dirt upon that Oil. Whereas (with
willing Piety) he recorded his Virtues for all Generations, and left GOD (his
King) to do the other. And Oh, may Christians, (who have Christ's more precious
example) for ever, do no otherwise.

51. Lastly, Concerning the act of David, in taking up Arms without Commission
from Saul; and particularly about the business of Keilah: as also of others,
endowed with Extraordinary Commissions from GOD; who only has Power to
dispose of Dominion; and in whom alone, all Extraordinaries are Ordinary; so
much has been said, that it were a general wrong to say any more. Only give
me leave (with due acknowledgements of Honor, and particularly toward the
Author of that most Christian Tract against Resistance of the Lawful
Magistrate,) briefly to interpose this my Levis Armatura, before ever the
matter come, either ad Triarios, or ad Principes. By whom it has been
Invincibly Established, that if the Resistance in Question had been tolerable
in former times; yet now by Christ (under Christianity) it is declared damnable.

52. It is well known, that David from the Lord, was by the Lords Prophet
Anointed sor that Kingdom; and so had GODS Title (if that be worth any thing)
unto the same: as also, that Saul was from the mouth of GOD rejected, and so
had it not. And yet David presumed not to go about his Deposition, or to take
away his life, when it was in his power. Whereas Jehu (with the approbation of
GOD) so soon as he was Anointed, made have, and marched fiercely to the
Deposition and Death of Joram, 2 King 9. 13. So that evidently, there is
(concerning the present Case) no more Analogy in this (which I forbear to
dissect) then in the one former Scottish Fallacies.

53. But (alas) nothing now Extraordinary will be seen in David; whereas he was
evidently Extraordinary in his Unction: yea, it was Extraordinary in him, that
being Anointed, he did no more then he did. But it being GODS Prerogative to
Plant and Pluck up Kingdoms; he that will go as far as David did, must be
sure of as good Commission as David had: and they who will go further, must
show better; or else abide the Doom of Christ the Universal King. If in the
mean time (however they may escape others) they Judge not themselves before the
Great and Terrible Day of the Lord.

54. For Answer to that Question, how it appears that Christian Kings (of these
times) are the Lord Christ's? It is the Task of the ensuing Chapter.

The Conclusion.
Now (for Conclusion hereof) to sum up what has been delivered in this
larger Discourse; wherein is set forth GODS fair Impression, of what was in
his short written Copy from the Beginning of the World, concerning his Power of
Dominion: whereof, this (constituted by himself amongst the former Israel of
GOD) was but an Exemplification, not an Alteraion of what was in the Beginning;
and therefore, (without his own Interposition) must continue unto the End.

Wherein is Declared:

First, that the Petition of his People Israel, for a King, was not sinful in
its Nature, but Circumstance; in as much as the Prayer of the Petition, was by
GODS Providence predetermined: and the Rules thereof described, Deuteronomy. 17. 54.
When thou art come into the Land, which the Lord thy God has given thee; and
wilt (that is, thou may if thou will) set a King over thee, [like all the
Nations that are about thee.] Which is, though thou be my peculiar People, yet
in this particular, (I having thus Constituted from the Beginning, and Bowed
all the Nations of the World to Submit unto this Law of Nature and Reason
derived from Above) there shall be no difference between them and thee; only,
thou (who have reason to know whose the Power of Dominion is, better then they)
Shall in no wise presume to choose my Deputy; as it is, Verse. 15. And
accordingly, they bespoke Samuel to make them a King, like all the Nations.

2. That in this Apogaeum, or Retreat of GOD, from the more immediate Exercise
of his own Dominion, to have a King (as his Public Image) to Sustain his
Power and Represent his Glory; is on Earth the most Heavenly Gift, which GOD
can give, or Man receive: promised unto Abraham (before the Law) as his grand
Blessing, and in Him to all the Heirs of Blessing. Whence, and in regard of
the Represented, The King is Vniversis Major, and of more value then all the
People, and all theirs.

3. That the Universal and Eternal; High and Holy; Prudent and Just
Prerogative of GOD, is over all, whom Christ has Redeemed, or Elohim Created.
Whether conversant above Laws, and their Enacting, their Interpreting, or
Suspending; Continuing or Abrogating: or concerning Persons and their
Functions; whether Ecclesiastical or Civil; Superior, or Inferior: and the
Regulating of them in their several Orders and Employments; for Peace, or War;
for Life, or Death: or in relation to things, Holy, or Common; Public, or
Private; in Heaven, or Earth: or concerning Seasons; when to go the ordinary
way, when to use his Prerogative; when this is convenient; when necessary; when
neither: for all times, and time it self: for Continuing or Shortning;
Hallowing, or leaving Free thereof for ever. All these are included for GOD, in
the Longitude and Latitude of the great Globe of the word Mishpat, aforesaid.

4. That (for the Regulating of this World) in the Communication of this word
of Prerogative to Kings, is imparted (proportionably) the Supreme Power on
Earth, in all Causes; and the only Power in all Temporal Causes. In which
Power, no man, or men have share; but as it is derived from the King; as the
Kings is from GOD: who never gave Authority to the People to intermeddle with
any thing that is his Peculiar; which if it belong to any but One, cannot be
Prerogative Royal. If it belong to the People, then has GOD on Earth no
Subjects.

5. That the true understanding of the word Mishpat, must be fetched from the
Scriptures, and the several places wherein it is used. That Error about it is
dangerous; and the frequent Interpretations given of it in these Days, are
Erroneous.

6. That the Names of Elohim and Christ, Communicated indifferently to all
Christian Kings, (they having also the Title of the Lords Anointed, upon whom
the Ceremony is not used) do Attest together with the word Mishpat, whose
Power they have; both for Perpetuity and Intangibility, both betokened in the
Holy Oil.

7. That it is most just, that he that is most Just, should be at Liberty for
the Exercise of his Justice; and that he that is most Wise, should not have his
Wisdom bounded by fond Man: and He who is altogether Good, by those who are
altogether Evil; but that he should be left free to Glorify himself, by
bringing Good out of Evil: and when in his Wisdom he thinks good, to do good
by good means: or to punish a wicked People by a wicked King, when it
concerns his Justice. Since to those who are his, he can do as great good,
by the bad, as by the good; and the bad are ordinarily made worse by the
goodness of their Princes; and as ordinarily the best Kings are the worst
used. Therefore, he neither will, nor may trust man to Question any; for then
either from the Good or from the Bad, none would be endured. But in Conclusion,
he will make all to find, that he has been most Just; and them in the first
place, who have Abused the Power he gave them; or Usurped the Power he gave
them not.

8. That it is one of GODS Secrets, (above humane Inquisition) for what Ends he
sets up him that will be a Tyrant, in his own place: it is of his Revealed
Will, that none in that place should be Resisted; for whose Lives and
Happiness, all are bound (for ever) to pray, though they be their particular
Persecuters.

9. That unto the King belongs the Power of the Militia; Power over the
Subjects goods, in case of necessity, whereof the King (with relation to the
People) is sole Judge. Power of Imposition of Taxes, and granting of Free
Charter: Power of Commanding in the Duties of Religion: Power of enjoining
Public Covenants and Oaths Obligatory for all the People, even him that is
Heir of the Crown. And inclusively, in or with these, all other the Points in
Question now amongst us, concerning Regality.

10. That to undervalue Life and Livelihood, that we may follow and serve Him,
whom GOD has Constituted over us, is an Act of Religious Obligation: and is an
evidence that we are the Sons of God; whereas valuing our Oxen, and despising
the King, is a token of the Children of Satan.

11. That neglect of Office and Trust reposed by the King, much more
Disobedience (when GOD his only Supreme, commands not the contrary,) and
Resistance, (which God has commanded against) and Opposition, which God has
professed himself to abhor; deserves death though in the greatest of
Subjects. The least of those: therefore certainly the greatest.

12. That the Spirit of God has ascribed the Prosperity of his People, and the
Plenty which they enjoyed, to him who was a Tyrant; whom himself justly
destroyed, to show that Gods Power cannot but be beneficial; and has recorded
this acknowledgement by Him, who of all men living was most injured by the
Tyrant; to teach us, that all men are bound to Celebrate the Virtues (though)
of such; and that no man may so much as Libell their Vices.

Whereupon my sixth Quaere is founded. How, since this Exemplification of Gods
mind in this particular, Man may presume to challenge contrary to this Express
of God?

Mine Arguments in Form are these. First, that the sin of the Israelitish
People, in asking for a King, was not Substantial, but Circumstantiall. That,
which God in his Secret Will had fore-appointed and promised in his Revealed
Will, and had (in this) given directions how it should be done: Circumstances
abated was no sin to ask. But, that the People of Israel should have a King,
was that which God had fore-appointed in his Secret Will, had promised in his
Revealed Will; and had therein given directions how it should be done.
Therefore, that the People of Israel should have a King: Circumstances abated,
was no sin to ask.
Secondly, that to have a King, neither was, nor is a Curse, (as if he were
only an Executioner of Gods wrath) but the contrary: as Chap. last. That which
was the promised Glory of Abraham, when his Name was changed; which was the
promised Glory of Christ also, Abraham's Seed: Neither was, nor is a Curse upon
any People, but the highest of all earthly Blessings. But, to have Kings (to
succeed as out of him) was the Glory of Abraham, when his Name was changed: And
that the Kings of the Gentiles as his adopted Seed should administer the Power
of his Throne, so long as the Sun should endure; was the promised Glory of
Christ. Therefore, to have Kings that should succeed out of Abraham, and as the
adopted Seed of Christ to administer the Power of his Throne, neither was, nor
is* a Curse, but the highest of all earthly Blessings.
Thirdly, that the King is in Power greater, and in value more considerable,
then all the People. He that has the Power of God over the People, their Lives
and Livelihoods; is (in respect of Power) greater then all the People; And he
that has (in respect of them) the double Portion of Gods Image, is of more
value then all they and theirs. But the King, as King, has the Power of God
over the People, their Lives and Livelihoods: And the double Portion of Gods
Image, in respect of them. Therefore, the King, as King, is in respect of Gods
Power and Image, greater, and of more value, then all the People, and all
theirs.
Fourthly, concerning the Procession of Regal Power, from the Beginning,
until, and since the times of Saul. That only Form of Government, which the
only Wise, Powerful, and Immutable God, Constituted from the Beginning; which
was received by all Nations; which was petitioned for by his own People; and by
God assented unto in all that they asked; which in no particular from the
Beginning of* Genesis, to the latter end of the Revelation, He (without whom,
none can) has Reversed, but in many places of both the Testaments has
Ratified and Confirmed: Is that Form, which for the Administration of Gods
own Power, all Nations and Men ought for ever to, submit unto. But, the
Irresistible Regal* Supremacy of the King over all the People, and next under
God: Is that only Form which God has constituted from the Beginning, which
all Nations, etc. and which Himself never reversed; but; etc. Therefore, the
Irresistible Regal Supremacy of the King over all the People, and next under
God: Is that Form, which for the Administration of Gods own Power, all
Nations and Men ought for ever to submit unto.
Fifthly, That the Interests of the word Mishpat, are indifferent to all Kings.
That Power, which out of the General Prerogative of God (the Original of all
Prerogatives) over the whole world, (viz. for giving of Laws for the
Regulating of all Persons and Personals, at all times, in all places, and over
the Laws themselves) which is included in the Word Mishpat; which is
communicated indifferently unto all Kings, and Exemplified in King Saul: Is (or
ought to be) the just Right of all Kings of the Earth, for the Regulating
thereof in Gods stead. But the Irresistible Supremacy of Kings: Is that Power
which out of the General Prerogative of God, etc. for the said Intents and
Purposes, etc. which is Included in the Word Mishpat; which is Communicated
indifferently to all Kings, and Exemplified in King Saul. Therefore, the
Irresistible Supremacy of Kings, (as is here specified) Is (or ought to be for
ever) their Just Right, for the Regulating of the Earth in Gods stead.
Sixthly, concerning the Commentary which God has given upon the Word Mishpat;
in, and by which we may discover the Importances contained in the Latitude
thereof. Those Orders which God has Expressed in the Exemplifications of his
mind, concerning the several Acts of his Power of Dominion, contained under
the word Mishpat, upon the putting thereof first into Practice: Are (against
the contrary thereof) to be presumed to be Gods perpetual Rules for Man's
submission to that Power of Government which is Gods. But, that the Prince
should be Judge of his own Necessities; that he should Rule the People, not the
People Him; that he should not be Resisted, should he turn a Profane Violater
of Religion; an Exhauster of Innocent Blond; an Invader of Men's Proprieties:
Are those Orders which God has Expressed in the Exemplifications of his mind,
concerning the several Acts of his Power of Dominion (contained under the Word
Mishpat) and upon the putting thereof first into practice. Therefore, that the
Prince should be Judge of his own Necessities, that he should Rule the People,
not the People him; that he should not be resisted, should he turn a profane
Violater of Religion; an Exhauster of Innocent Blood; an Invader of men's
Proprieties: Are (against the contrary thereof) to be presumed to be Gods
perpetual Rules, for man's submission unto that Power of Government which is
Gods.
Seventhly, that God herein is not unjust, nor man hurt. That God who has
reserved Exacting, Cruel, Irreligious Princes, only for his own Judgment;
and has restrained his People in such Cases from being their own Justiciaries:
Has thereby bound himself in Justice to be a severe Revenger upon the one,
and a bountiful Recompencer of the other. But, he that is Justice it self: Is
that God who has reserved Exacting, Cruel, Irreligious Princes, only for his
own Judgment, and has restrained his People in such cases from being their
own Justiciaries. Therefore, he that is Justice it self, has bound himself
to be a severe Revenger upon the Oppressor, and a bountiful recompencer of the
Oppressed.
Eighthly, that the pretended liberty of the Subject desperately takes away the
liberty of the King of kings. That Doctrine which restrains the liberty of
the King of kings; and which tends to the subversion of Gods only
Constitution, for the Government of mankind: Is a Doctrine most unjust and
desperate. But, that Doctrine which (under pretext of the Liberty of the
Subject) teaches the Resistibility of Earthly Kings, restrains the Liberty
of the King of kings; (viz* to try the good and punish the bad, when he thinks
fit by wicked Kings to Refine or Scourge a Nation) and also it tends to the
subversion of Gods only Constitution for the Government of mankind: viz*
Kingdom Therefore, that Doctrine, which (under pretext of the Liberty of the
Subject) teaches the Resistibility of Earthly Kings: Is a Doctrine most unjust
and desperate.
Ninthly, what is a mark (indeed) of true Religion. That which God has
published for a mark of his Sons; and the contrary, as a note of the Devils
Children: Is of all those who hope to see the Face of God with comfort,
Religiously to be performed; and the contrary to be seriously detested. But to
come in, to honor and serve the King, with Life and Livelihood: God has
published for a mark of his Sons; and the contrary thereof, as a note of the
Devils Children. Therefore, to come in with Life and Livelihood, to honor and
serve the King: Is of all those, who hope to see the Face of God with comfort,
Religiously to be performed; and the contrary, seriously to be detested.
Tenthly, from Gods Character of Religious Fear. That Fear which God in any
Exemplification of his mind has expressed by the Fear of Jehovah, (not of
Elohim) or any other particular: Is an Act of Religious duty, equally and
perpetually obliging all men in the like case, to the like performance. But in
the Exemplification of setting up the Kings Standard, and Proclamation for all
Subjects to repair unto him upon pain of losing all their Oxen: It is by God
expressed, that the Fear which made them all Obedient as one man, was the
Fear of Jehovah, not of Elohim, or their Oxen, or any other particular.
Therefore, in like cases; viz. of setting up of the Kings Standard, and
Proclamation for all Subjects to repair unto him, etc. It is an Act of
Religious duty, perpetually obliging all men to perform the same.
Eleventhly, concerning Remissness in those entrusted by the Prince. That
which, As the Lord lives; deserved Death at any time: Deserves death at all
times, while the Lord lives, (and much more that which is worse.) But neglect
of Allegiance, and Trust toward a Prince while he was in unjust ways: As the
Lord lives, deserved death at some time. Therefore, neglect of Allegiance and
Trust, toward a Prince, though he be in unjust ways: Deserves death at all
times while the Lord lives. And therefore, much more, Disobedience,
Resistance, and armed Opposition.
Twelftly; concerning the Beneficiality of Gods Dominion, though in the hands
of a Tyrant; and what thoughts thereof Religion requires. That which the
Spirit of God directed David to do, and put it into the Canon of the
Scripture, with a Command that it should he taught to the Children of God: by
the Record thereof, the same Spirit directs every man after Gods heart, in
the like case to do the like. But, to pass over in silence the Vices of a
Tyrant* and to celebrate the Virtues of ones own Tyrannous Persecuter; and to
ascribe the Peoples Plenty and Prosperity to their common Tyrant: was that
which the Spirit of God directed David to do, and put it into the Canon of the
Scripture, with a Command that it should be taught the Children of God.
Therefore, to pass over in silence the Vices of a Tyrant; and to celebrate the
Virtues of ones own Tyrannous Persecuter; and to ascribe the Plenty and
Prosperity of the People to the common Tyrant: Is that which the Spirit of God,
by Recording that of David, directs every man after Gods heart in the like
case to do.

CHAP. VII.
SECT. 1.
The Contents.
A Digression in Answer to the Question, How a man may know whether his Prince
be (indeed) the Lords Anointed. Certain Praecognoscenda for the manifestation
thereof. The threefold Acts and Donation of the three Persons of the Trinity,
conveighing several Rights to man. Of Title to, Title in, and Help from the
Creature. Considerations from Man's inability to command that which is his own,
to nourish him. No Evidence produced from him who is the Heir of all things,
for the People to Assise men's Severalties. Adam in Innocence had not Original
Right so much as to Herbs and Fruits; much less can his sinful Children have
natural Propriety (without Donation) in other the things which God (not they)
Created.

1. THe next particular in my proposed Method, is, the Entaile of the Name and
Power of the Creator, for the Government and Preservation of the Creature;
wherein Elohim (in his furthest Recesse from the immediate Administration of
his own unacquittable Dominion) loses nothing of his for ever Just
Sovereignty; but gains the establishment of it from false Christ's, whom he
has not Anointed: and therefore, man may not go out to seek Here or There in
the Wilderness of Pretending Spirits, when (once for all) he has settled his
own.

2. This he did (exemplarily for his greater Church of the Gentiles) when he
settled his Title in David and his Seed for ever, according to the Law of
Nature or Nations: yet (as the sequel will make evident) transferred nothing
from himself. And for this cause (of which, till further manifestation, I
bespeake your patience) he resolves (at first) not to go the ordinary way,
according to the Rule of Primogeniture; but to let all Ages know, that the
Royalty still remained His, though given to David by a Covenant of Salt: he
will rather break his own Universal Law (though by himself fortified with
strong Reasons, Deuteronomy. 21. 17. and founded upon greater, elsewhere Expressed)
for the Inheritance of the Firstborn; then that it should not be understood,
that he gave away nothing from himself, when (from all others) he gave the
Kingdom to David and his Posterity. That Law must (therefore) once more suffer
violence; and the Younger (to wit, Solomon) must inherit: and then for ever, he
intends the Ordinary way, leaving no warranty for Humane boldness to adventure
otherwise.

3. But (not taking in more into this particular, then I shall prove to have
been in David and his Line) I shall here make my promised Digression; which is
but to bring it a little before its time, for the more hasty satisfaction of
those, who desire to know, How they may be assured, that the present Prince is
invested with the Right of Gods Power; and (as the Lords Christ) by Gods
effectual Unction taken from amongst all other men, and Dignified with the
Lords Supreme Earthly Sovereignty, for the managing of his Irresistible Sword
and Scepter.

4. And (here) I first premise, that in all places of Elohims Creation,
himself has unquestionable and Irresistible Dominion; and does whatsoever he
pleases in Heaven, in Earth, in the Sea, and in all deep places; that is, in
Hell in self, and in all other places of Hels conformity: but requires more
regular and perfect Obedience from Christians. (the sons of Light and Order)
then from others the Children of Darkness and Confusion: amongst whom, without
any Covenant of Grace, all things are disposed by their Lusts, and against
their intentions; yet ever according to his will, though not of his good
pleasure, yet of his just anger: and they do him service, and are in his
subjection, though not as in his House, yet as in his Prison. From those that
will be of his household, he expects their Order, as well as their Work; and
Obedience in both, or else no Sacrifice.

5. Concerning the Question, I answer, That it behooves them who *make such
Questions, That we can prove the Kings Title from God; otherwise they shall
never be able to prove their own, for those Estates which confidently they
call their own. For (after the Kings and Priests Patrimonies were described,
Ezekiel. 45. 8.) God had (certainly) some meaning in those words; And the rest of
the Land, shall they (viz. the Princes) give unto the House of Israel. So that
first ( ad Hominem) I return, that by the same way, (though otherwise also,
and with Magisterial demonstration) a man may know the Royal Rights of
Unquestionable, and Irresistible Supremacy, to be his particular Princes; by
which he knows, his justly descended Fstate to be his own.

6. In which particular, it concerns him to be well assured, that he is not an
Usurper of that, which (here) for a moment sustaines him; but to condemn him
(otherwise) eternally: and that without Gods Secondary Donation (added to his
first and general Grant of the Dominion of the whole Earth to mankind) the
Estate (he says) he is Master of, is no more his, then it is other men's. This
he has performed to all those who are Children of his House, and Subjects of
his Kingdom; though by himself he has measured out no man's Specialties, nor
given him leave to take what he can get. Nor (in the third place) is any man so
the Dominus, that he has the Dominion of any part of Elohims Creation, by his
first and general Grant; or by his Secondary Gift, that without his third, of
singular Application, he can with due and comfortable security make use of, and
take benefit by (so much as of) one morsel of his own bread.

7. These three Acts of God, answering unto the three Persons of the Trinity,
(operating more nobly about our Spiritualties) in the habitude which man
receives from them, may not inconveniently be expressed by that of the
Schools; Jus ad rem, Jus in re, and Jus (or rather Adjus, or Adjumentum) rei.
The first contains Man's Right from God: the second, his Right from other men:
the third, his Right for himself. The first was of the general Indulgent
Father (both of our Bodies and Souls) the general Gift of Right unto the
Earth and the Emoluments thereof, immediately from the Creation and Flood. The
second is from Christ, (the Heir of all things in Heaven and Earth) by whom
our Personal Conditions are severalized; and by whose Deputies, our Personal
Estates are mounded from all others the men of the world: this is daily
administered through the Government by him on Earth Established, which gives and
protects unto us, Right in the Creature. The third, is his most particular or
singular Gift of Sustentation from his other Gifts; the Act of the Holy Ghost;
by whose operation we have our Nutritive and Consolatory Preservation (being
supported Temporally here, as a pledge of Eternity hereafter.) And this may be
called the Right of Use and Help from the Creature: without which, neither can
our own Bread feed us, nor our clothes keep us warm.

8. The second is, that wherein the Controversy lies; and therefore, I choose
to speak last of that. The last is that, which (duly considered) would make
smooth the Lords way before us for the other; and erect in us, not only
Christian content therewith, but also excite our most thankful acknowledgement
of Gods most gracious Providence therein; which should be as often as our hand
goes to our mouths with any of his blessings in this kind. And therefore, I
shall first speak briefly of the last.

9. The evidence of this, is best learnt from that which our Savior
constituted (apparently) for our daily Prayer and Meditation, in that he framed
it for that which we have daily need of; to wit, our daily Bread: Give us this
day our daily Bread. First, Give thou it to us, or else it can never be Ours.
Secondly, Give it us, although it be already Ours: though it be so Ours, that
no man else can have Title to it; yet it can never be so Ours, but he shall
have daily Interest (which he will have daily acknowledged) in the least Crum
thereof. Though he has given it us into our Barnes and Storehouses, yet there
are Chaldeans, there are Sabeans, and there is the Fire of God. Though he has
given it us into our Dish: yet Multa cadunt, many things fall our between the
Cup and the Lip: though into our Stomachs, yet it may be vomited up again:
though into the Liver, yet even there (to our destruction) it may nourish a
disease in stead of us: yea, the very strength it affords us, may be unto us
an occasion of falling.

10. So that every man has need, and business enough, to make sure of his
own Title unto that which he desires so to enjoy, that he may reap benefit and
not ruin by it; and not be inquisitive about his Brothers: remembering that
which he who (certainly) was Vniversis major, said in that case, Who made me a
Judge? And upon the remembrance hereof to look into the Book of God, what
ways he expects man's substance and strength should be employed. And especially
to take heed of such Questions, as cast God out from Reigning over us; from
whose Dominion constituted amongst us, our Secondary Titles are derived, as our
First was of his Donation.

11. By our Inability then of making comfortable use of those things which are
come under our hands, (if we would not have them accursed to us) we are
necessitated sadly to consider, that we cannot enjoy any thing against God, but
must under him: and nothing under him, but by his more particular (added to his
general) Donation; and nothing otherwise, then under the Government of his
Vicegerent, by any express Donation of his; he has left that to his Steward;
whom (or none) he has made Judge and Almoner in his room for this end. So
that without he should come himself, no Evidence can be made of this his Gift
in several, from the Interests of other men: and no man may invade this his
Prerogative, wherein he never did otherwise dispose, (this therefore mankind
may not presume) whose Prerogative only, can make and question his own
Deputies; whom to unmake, is to make God none of our God; and whom to question,
is indeed to forfeit our Secondary Title.

12. For if we have any such Right to any thing on Earth, we have it by and
under him, from whom we have our First and Third Title: of the Second, we can
have no other assurance, then through him, whom Elohim in Heaven, has made
Elohim on Earth. Of whom God has said, That it is he who cloatheth the Rich
with their own Scarlet; from whom the Glorious have their Ornaments of Gold;
and those that are well Fed, their Delicacies, Which is the Reason of our
Commemoration of the King, when we say Grace for our Meat; and of the
Catholic Church, which cannot but teach us thankful Obedience for it; and
(...) to serve God and Him in the strength of it.
which in the Family is evident. That which is due to the Servant, is due unto
him by his Masters dispensation; he may not take what, and as he will. Luke 17.
7. He has right unto his hire, but neither he nor the Son may be their own
carvers.

13. For the first of these Titles; nothing is ours but nothing: which from
man's beginning was, and is evident, Genesis 9. 3. Every living thing that moves,
shall be for Meat for you; even as the green herb, [have I given you all
things,] but Flesh (with the life thereof) which is Blood, you shall not eat.
Man had not Original Power for his very eating, but by the Donation of God;
who to put him daily in mind thereof, with the Gift, gives him also a
memorative restraint: thus far you shall go, and no further; be sure you eat
no Blood. And he sends them back to the greater restraint of Adam, (Innocent
in Paradise) to whom was not dispensed so large an Indulgence: As the green
herb have I given it you, that was Genesis 1. 29. And there it is set down with
an Ecce, of Consideration; that even this was not to be beheld in Adams (...)
Original Right: and therefore God says unto him, Behold, and presume no
further: Behold, and be thankful for that which I have given you: to wit,
Every Herb bearing Seed; and every Tree bearing Fruit: and herein also, Behold
a restraint, recorded under pain of death: yea, death eternal (of such
necessary circumspection is this Behold) but of the Tree Knowledge, you may not
eat.

14. Now if unto these things (of less moment then the world's Government) man
had had Natural Right, without Gods respective Donation; God had been in these
several Restraints unjust; and superfluous in reporting his gifts. But such
after this was the neglect of Gods Sovereignty herein, that he was constrained
when he gave his Law by Moses, to add a multitude of more Memorandums to these
first given Cautions. Well, Christ is come into the world; and by his coming,
these Restraints are taken off: but yet by the liberality of God we are tied to
more Gratitude, and to no less acknowledgement of Gods high Interest, in all
that he has trusted us with; who cannot so trust any, as to exclude himself
from being for ever the Chief Proprietor of all that he has Created; and from
being so Paramount, that without his Donation, no mean Lords Deed of
Conveighance, can give us sufficient warranty, for so much as Bread, Flesh,
Fruits, or Herbs: but if with Conscience and Comfort, we will enjoy them; we
must have his Demonstrative Ecce, Behold, I have given them you.

SECT. 2.
The Contents.
The forementioned Question Answered. Every man's assurance from God, of his
own Title to his own Estate; asserteth the Kings. The Subjects Right
depends on the Kings. Humane Laws (as Humane) cannot give away Gods Title to
any man. Humane Laws, as enlivened by the Divine Power of the King, can
dispense Propriety unto each man. None but the King has Gods warranty (in his
revealed Will) as his Steward, to set forth man's Severalties.

1. NOw concerning the Kings Title in Question; every conscientious Subject, in
Justifying of his own, must also Assert his. The Question being put to him,
How he can maintain the Estate he holds, to be his own? He makes no doubt
but to satisfy any rational man, that it came to him thus, and thus derived;
either by just Descent, or else by Gift, or Purchase, from those who had that
Right thereunto: and if it has quietly and happily passed the third and fourth
Generation, he that has read the second Commandment, will be ready to yield
him Gods approbation for it. But if it be made evident, that no good Title can
be produced against it, or that it has so continued time out of mind without
apparent Usurpation; the Religious man will go along with him in his
Conclusion, that he has indeed Gods Title to it; and that Elohim's Donation is
violated by any that molests him in it. And hitherto, the Kings Title stands
upon as firm a Foundation, as any of his Subjects.

2. But if we trace the Subjects Title up to the height, we may (peradventure)
find it the Donation of such or such a King: and here the King has the
better, his Subjects Rights depending upon his. But if any man will be
contentious, the Final Determination is conceived to be in the Law.

3. But again, it is clear, that the Laws of Man cannot oblige God, nor give
away his Title; they may tie other men's hands from meddling, but they cannot
satisfy Conscience: That what is bound on Earth, is bound in Heaven; without
warranty descended thence, they can neither make God to impart his Title; nor
hinder him from disposing of it otherwise: it must rather be the Law and
Covenant of God, that must Determine and Assure this. But here it cannot be
expected, that the case of every particular man should be set down in
Scripture; for then the world could not contain the Books: nor can it be
deserved, that the Fabric of every particular Kingdom, should with several
Punctilio's be described by Elohim. He who has Power over his Clay, has
constituted his Form of Government, which all men may take notice of; and but
one throughout the whole world; which if men will not take notice of, they may
at their own perils, miscarry by their own dangerous Wisdoms.

4. For those, who make Heaven their aim, (as shall be made evident when I
come to speak of the Lords Prayer) he has decyphered that Form, by which
Himself administreth Heaven; and expressed it in his heavenly Word, which he
has left for man's venerable and perpetual Rule, till he come from Earth to
Heaven. And since man cannot expect, that particular Men's, or Kingdoms, Rights
and Homages, should be expressly in it; he may not but understand, that God
expects, they should be according to it; and as indulged, so paid. In this
Point therefore, concerning the Conveighance of Gods Title to private men, How
read thou? Are the People in Gods Throne? or the King? Is his Scepter
committed to them? Or is he the Lawgiver? Herein the King has the Better also.

5. Again, since Adam during his Innocence (in whom alone was all Humane
Power; and more then all his Posterity now have) had not in himself Originally,
the Dominion over Herbs and Fruits, which God made purposely to serve him;
though from the same womb whence he was taken: How come Humane Laws to have
the disposal, not only over these, but greater matters? Yea, of Man himself!
His Liberty or Restraint! His life or Death! This Power is evidently Divine.
And as evident it is, that no Divine Power can be taken by man, but if he have
it, it must be given him from Above. And no less it is, that Elohim has
Dominion in all parts and places of his Creation: and where he has not Regular
and Voluntary, he will have Correptive and Irresistible Sovereignty. Direction
and Correction, every where are his, and only his.

6. How come we then to have this confidence, that our National Laws should
have this his Power amongst us? May we expect? Do we deserve? Or dare we
endure? That GOD should at all turns come down amongst us! (as he did in
Sinai, which caused Moses himself to quake and tremble) to animate our
Consultations! and give being to our Devices! Look we again into the Book of
GOD, and there we shall find, that the Prince is left in GODS stead to do
this; lest the terrors of GOS Majesty (as shall be showed) should in this case
confound his People. And that a Divine Sentence is in the lips of the Kings,
GOD having promised (doubtless for such People as desire to deserve it) That
his mouth (in the Future Tense) lo-jimgnal, shall not err in Pro. 16. 10. (...)
Mishpat, or Judgment. But if throughout the whole Book of GOD, the Lord has
given this Power to any but Kings; vouchsafe you that can discover it, to let
others hear from you.

7. In the mean time, you who willingly suppose, that you have GODS Right to
his Earthly Bequests in this world, under the Laws of the Land; be willing
also to understand, that the Laws themselves have this Power from the King:
otherwise, without an immediate Patent from Heaven, they could not warrant you
so much as Sallets, in several from other men; He being Elohims Steward (no
other having ever been Constituted by GOD) Judicially to assure and dispense to
every one their Portion, out of the Lords Basket and Storehouse.

SECT. 3.
The Contents.
Disobedience to the King, forfeiteth the Subjects Titles. Sovereignty
Established in both the Tables, before the naming the Sins punishable by it.
Obedience to the Supreme Earthly Powers, to be preferred before Life, Honor,
and Livelihood. The fifth Commandment the Guardian of all the rest. The
Public Father hood of the King, proved from Genesis 9. 5. A Repetition of some
Passages elsewhere Justified.

1. WEll, through the King, and by your Obedience to him, you have GODS Right
to your Temporal Estates: Question not that Title, whose very Questioning
extinguisheth yours. You must know that yours are forfeitable; and Disobedience
is the thing, which GOD from the Beginning has forewarned would do it. And
not only that Title, which by reason of GOD'S Image you have to the Earth; but
also that, which in regard of his Likeness, you have to Heaven. The first and
greatest Considerables in GODS Law, demonstrate the same. In either of the
Tables, the first thing that GOD provided for, was the establishment of
Sovereignty, for the Praise and Blessing of those that do well, and the
Punishment of Offenders; before he nominated the Offenses, decreed for
Punishment.

2. In the first Table, (whose Principal Object is the Restoration of GODS
Likeness) He first declares for his own Authority: I am Jehovah, Elohim the
Eternal Beginning of thine Eternity; thy Creator in the Beginning of time, who
only have Power to give thee Laws, to Govern thee all thy time. Thou shall
acknowledge no other Elohim (or Supreme Power, for the Governance of that which
I Created) but Me: and then descends to the particulars of his Worship and
Service.

3. In the second Table, first, Honor thy Father and thy Mother; and then,
Thou shall not Kill: Thou shall not commit Adultery, etc. To teach all
Generations, that Obedience, is to be preferred before Life, Honor, and
Livelihood: and that in the Paternity, which is the Object of this
Commandment, was Established the security of Life, Honor, and Livelihood.
And, that lest there should be Killing, GOD has given Power to Kill, unto the
earthly Exerciser of his most just and true Paternity, over all his Children;
with which Power, he that is but man's, Brother, may not for ever intermeddle.
And he that is in GODS Place the General Father, must (for the Ends, for which
GOD has placed him there) have Divine Power, semblable to those Ends; to wit,
the Scepter and Sword of Elohim.

4. But without the Power of the Sword, the Scepter of GOD himself, barely
Commanding, would be but coldly Obeyed: and for this cause, He being to secure
unto GOD the Worship of the first Table, GOD will be the more severe exactor of
the Homages of the second Table for him. And therefore, particular and sundry
inconveniences may fall out, and must be endured: but for the general, GOD is
our Father, (and besides Him and His, none ought to be so called) whilst his
Prerogative, and our Allegiance is in this unshaken. But if that whereon our
Obedience to all the rest is founded, come to be ruined; the other cannot stand
(on high-lone) in the Air.

5. And for this cause (though GOD has barely told him his duty to him in his
Word, particularly what he expects from him, Deuteronomy. 17.) the Lord has not
tied up his hands (as has been showed, and particularly for what concerns
the Subject, is legible, 1 Samuel 8. 11. etc.) with a Niggardly and Resistible
Commission, for then they could not be at liberty to do that good, which
particular and daily Exigencies will require. But he is by GOD left unto the
general good Nature of the word Father; whose Children, all other Fathers are:
other Magistrates being his Lievtenants, He immediately GODS: they Execute his
Power; He the Lord of Hosts: they account unto Him; He unto GOD.

6. And here, I could wish from my soul, that we loved our Temporal Estates,
Better, that is, more prudently then we do: for as by our disunion with Christ
from Heaven, we forfeit our Interest in Heaven; so by our disunion with our
Earthly Christ's, (however we may speed here for a time) we extinguish (at the
least) our just Title to the Earth. For it is, Honor thy Father and thy
Mother, that thy days may be long in the Land, which Jehovah Elohim has given
thee. Whilst we are under the Covert but of our private Parents, who in
comparison of the King bear not the Image of Elohim over us, (as has bin
showed, and will more fully appear) by our Disobedience unto them; that which
we were borne unto, looks back again unto them, for their better disposal
of it: so by our Disobedience unto him, whom GOD has stated in the Right of
his Paternity, our Estates return unto the Father of our Country. Which Sin,
from the place that the Commandment holds amongst the rest, may be concluded
worse then the sin of Murder, and its fellows; as on the contrary, that
Obedience is to be preferred before Livelihood, Honor, and Life it self: that
we are bound to lose all, that we may keep it; which (by Divines) is justly
celebrated for the most noble of all Moral Virtues; Inferior only, and next
unto the three Theological; Faith, Hope, and Charity* in as much as it sacreth
and secureth all the rest of the Commandments of GOD, being the Arsenall, and
middle Tower thereof.

7. And here, I shall not mis-spend any ones time against those, who finding
not the Kings Prerogative in this Commandment, make but nine; for the tenth
and most considerable part of mankind, who have on Earth no other Parents; or
spuriously make the People their own Fathers. Give me leave to look back
unto the forecited, Genesis 9. 5, 6. At the hand of every Man's Brother, will I
require the Life of Man: whosoever sheddeth Man's Blood, by Man shall his Blood
be shed: for in the Image of Elohim, made he Man. Wherein is set forth a
discovery of the premised Prerogative of Elohims Vicegerent, that he has the
foresaid Title and Power over men's Livelihoods, by an Affirmative Argument, a
Majori ad Minus, from the Greater to the Less: in as much as the height of
earthly Power, (to wit, Power over men's Lives, by virtue of Elohims Sword) is
clearly there recommended to him, and none else. For he must be more then Man's
Brother, who may take away the Life of Man; and Life must be taken away from
every Brother, that takes away his Brothers Life. The reason is, for that all
men whatsoever (accidentally good or bad) are substantially and equally
ennobled (for ought that man can take unto himself, without GODS differentiall
Note upon them) with the Image of GOD. And according to the Communication of
that Image, they have the particular Dominions, which by GOD are dispensed in
the several proportions thereof, by its different Communication. All men have
portion in it, and therefore, is the Life of all men sacred; not to be taken
away, but by him, whose the Image is* all have it not equally, for some have
Dominion by it, to take away the life of some, who also have it.

8. And this high proportion of it (warranted by the Spirit of GOD in sundry
places of holy Scripture) I call, Pi shenaim, Os duorum, (signifying the Face
or mouth of two, it may be in regard of their Negative and Affirmative Powers;
but as we ordinarily translate it in English) the [ double Portion] of this
Image. In respect of the Inferior Creatures, all mankind, Male and Female,
have this Image of Elohim; and by it, have a general Dominion to dispose of
them at their pleasure, not being contradicted by any who have the double
Portion thereof, in respect of them. But this double Portion none have in
relation to those whom God has ranked over them; it descends from Above, it
ascends not. Though all men have in them an Impression of the Image of GOD,
yet none have it under the Notion of Elohim (which is his name of Dominion) but
in respect of those who are subordinate unto them: in reference unto the King,
the chief of his Magistrates are but as private men, undignified with it; yea,
the Chief Priest himself, (as has been showed.) But as the Female sex, who
are unto Man, as unto GOD the Angels are, (who veil their Faces before him)
though in themselves they bear GODS Image, yet with reference to their
Husbands, they are not so accounted, 1 Cor. 11. 10. So all others, who have
Commission from the King, are under him in the like condition of Angels; which
Name of theirs, is a Name of Office and Employment, in as much, as they are
employed, and sent of GOD upon his Affairs. So 1 Pet. 2. Submit your selves, 1
Pet. 2. 14.
etc. to the King, as to the Supreme: to Rulers, as being sent of him; or as
being his Angels: who exclusively of all others, is indeed Elohims Image, This
is He to whom the Power of Life and Death, is immediately, and only by GOD
himself imparted; and all others under him must know, that He bears not the
Sword in vain, Romans 13. 4. in which Sentence virtually, as in the adjoined
passages formerly, the truth is pertinently to these Times, and to the Point in
hand set forth.

SECT. 4.
The seven first Verses of Romans 13. Expounded. Obedience not due to the Lower
in Power, when the Higher contradicts. Aquinas his Definition of Order. God the
Invisible; the King the Visible Head thereof. Hell it self not without an one
Head. No man to presume out of the Station, wherein the God of Order has set
him. They (be they never so great or many) who do so, encamp themselves with
Apollyon, against God. Inferior Magistrates receive not their Power from God,
but from the King. The King Gods Deacon, not only dispense Necessaries for our
Livelihood; but also the Lord of Hosts Commissary General for his Gold and
Steel. But one Sword in one Kingdom. The hard condition of Kings from hence.
Popular Flattery most pestilentiall: Robs them of all they have, while it
strokes them into a Fancy for their Robbing of God. Eccles. 10. 4. Expounded.

1. THe place of Saint Paul I account to be most sufficiently (by the dexterity
of abler Pens) cleared from the Exceptions and Acceptations, which our
Yesterday has put upon it: and therefore, I shall not spend my time to
Vindicate it to that Sense, which the Christian World, till now, have ever
acknowledged. The maine Concernments of the Apostle his aim in this
particular, are chiefly transacted in three words; (...), rendered Romans 13. 1.
etc.
Power, it is derived from (...), which signifies Essence or Being, and (...)
or (...), which signifies of or from: so that all Power comes from Jehovah,
(...), who only has Being. So that if the King has the Original of his
Being from the People; He has from them the Original of his Power. If that
from the only Fountain of Being, (i) Jehovah, the People must unsoule
themselves, or deny their Creation; or else acknowledge him Allegiance. The
second is (...), five times used in this passage; it signifies to set in order,
one over another. The third is (...), signifies to establish contrary to a
thing otherwise ordered.

2. The Apostles Monition then in the first Verse, Let every soul (which
carries something more in it, then if he had barely said, Let every man, (...))
be subordinate unto the Highers Powers, in the Plural number; which if it does
not signify the diverse Kings which Christians shall live under, (the which if
it were affirmed, would hardly be refuted) but does signify the several
Administrators thereof in one Kingdom; It is then evident, that it is a Rule
purposely set downn for our case, when such as are differently entrusted with
the One Power of the One GOD, shall disagree, and command contrary to one
another: then to regulate our Obedience (ever) by the Higher. To honor and
obey the Angel, if his commands be not against his Lords; if so, then to
account the Angel himself an Anathema.

3. And this is (apparently) the Order, of the GOD of Order. Now, Order is the
Constitution of Superior and Inferior, under* one Head, or from one
Beginning. The Universal Head of the Order, established for the Government of
the whole World, by God, is He himself: His Visible Image, the Visible Head in
the particular Kingdoms thereof, over all others Subordinated by him (from
God) in Superiority and Inferiority, left to his disposal. And other Order
then this, Elohim has Established none; nor do I yet understand, how in a
matter so highly concerning his Creator, man may presume to do it.

4. Disorder also, had both a Beginning, and has an Head; and he also is
expressed by the Name of King (so solicitous an Imitator of God, is the Devil
himself; and so cautious a Provider against the Divisions, which (even) in
Hell, Aristocraty or Democraty might produce to the ruin of that Kingdom.)
Rev. 9. 1^. They have a King over them, which is the Angel of the bottomless
Pit; (the Executioner of GODS just wrath therein) his Name in the Hebrew tongue
is Abaddon, in Greek Apollyon, (i.) the Destroyer. And Saint Jude has roundly
told us (as has been said) who are ranked and filed in his Legions; Those who
(but) despise Dominions, and (but) speak evil of Dignities; and plainly says
of them (...), (i.) they came long ago into the Bands of (...), then
perishing, when against the Lords Prince, and the Lords Priest, (Moses and
Aaron) Korah was Apollyons General. And Mat. 26. 52. All they that take the
Sword, (...), In taking of the Sword belong to Apollyon.

5. But to go on with the Apostles Injunction, (...), Let every soul (with
Reverence and Obedience) keep distance, and his own station in his Rank and
Order; rectifying himself (in case of doubt) by the Commands of him, who is in
this Subordination, (instituted by GOD) the Higher in Power. For that no man is
so great, no men so many, as to create a Power; or to set those, which are by
the Creator himself Constituted in better Order, then he has disposed them.

6. In the next words; For there is no Power, but it is of God: (i.) flowing
from him, and re-established by him: and the (very same) Powers that are, are
(...), (i.) Set in this Order of Superior and Inferior, by God himself. Now,
here is altogether Subordination; and in no part of Scripture else, any visible
semblance of Co-ordination at all. This is legibly the meaning of Saint Paul's
words; and his practice shows, whom he accounts Supreme in the Terrestrial
Power; when he directly told the Magistrate, Acts 25. 11. That neither He, nor
any else, had power to hinder his Appeal unto Caesar. And this, while the Race
of the Caesar's was (in man's eye) scarce well settled in the Dominion; at every
change, the Senate (of whose Aristocraticall claim, the Spirit of GOD never
once expressed any notice taken) endeavoring to re-establish their former
Government: the Caesar's but lately (and that by force) ascending to that
Imperial Dignity; whom GOD called Kings, though no man so durst.

7. But I proceed, in Saint Paul's Doctrinall part, Verse 2. (...), (i.)
Whosoever is the He (be he never so great, Magistrate, or whosoever else) that
is an Opposer of this Subordination of the [Power,] (now in Singular number)
(...), (i.) has presumed to establish contrary (...), (i.) to the Order of
Gods own Constitution: and thereby has put himself under Apollyons Colors.
And as he (be he never so great) in these words; so (in the next) they, be they
never so many; (...), all that are under this Model, Resisters of that
Suhordination of Gods Composure; receive (what themselves pull upon themselves)
(...), eternal Damnation: as to mine hand is proved most powerfully, I could
wish no less effectually, for the Instruction of others.

8. But lest any man should suppose, that they who are appointed by GODS
earthly Vicegerent, Subordinates in the Administration of this Power, should
have the Power which they have, immediately from GOD; on otherwise, then by and
from the King: in that the Plural number was there necessarily used: to
reclaim them from that (in this Verse) where he speaks of the Power that is
absolutely Irresistible, (because there is none amongst men that is Higher) he
uses the Singular number; as Verse 3. Would thou not fear the (Ono) Power?
(where indeed, thou ought to be judged, should Rulers (...), not (...),
prove unjust;) Do well, and thou shall have creditable Vindication by it; in
the Singular number.

9. So the fourth Verse; He (not they) is (...), the Minister, or Deacon of
God: and it is known what in Ecclesiasticals, the proportionable Office of the
Deacon is; viz. to receive and dispense the Churches maintenance. Answerable
thereunto, the meanest of the employments of GODS Deputy, is to be the
Distributer of GODS Titles, in men's several Portions of the Revenues of the
Earth. And in the next place, He is (in the Singular number) the (only) Deacon
of the (One) Lord of Hosta: the Lowest that he trusts (as relying upon his
only Account) with the balancing of his Justice, and the custody of his One
earthly Sword.

10. And it is in the Singular number too; He bears (but bears) not that
One Sword in vain. For it is not (...), (barely) the Sword; but has the
Character of Singularity, (...), annexed to it: to instruct the World, how the
God of Peace abhors Unnatural Civil Wars; since He, the Lord of Hosts (to
necessitate men not to think of them) will have in one Kingdom, but one
Sword; and that he has girt upon the Thigh of his Lieutenant General. For he,
that in the foregoing Chapter, had declared, Vengeance to be his peculiar
Prerogative; here (presently) with the word (...) the Avenger, gives it to a
Nero, though he knew he would use the Power thereof against his Saints; and
particularly against his Secretary, by whom he wrote this. So that it is not
now to be wondered at, that he should be GODS Dispenser for men's Estates, whom
he has entrusted with Power over their Lives; who is of all men, rather to be
Pitied and Prayed for, then Envyed of any; who is to account for this his
Stewardship, unto the All seeing, most upright Judge.

11. And whereas it is now accounted flattery, to tell Princes that their Power
is Irresistible, and their actions by men Unquestionable; it is (being rightly
considered) the dreadfullest Truth, that can enter into their ears, and which
ought to awe them most, that their Miscarriages are greater then men may deal
with; as requiring an Almighty Vindicator. Whereas (on the other hand) it is of
all Flatteries the most desperate for the entertainment of any man, and (of all
others) the most pestilentiall amongst the crowd of men, to swell the credulous
many, by possessing them; That (without the revealed dispensation of GOD, as in
the case of Jeroboam, where the Dominion of GOD had no injury, in as much as he
so disposed of it himself) they or any for them, have in them Natural Power
for the Resistance, and forcible Restraint, of the One Supreme Power on Earth,
by the GOD of Heaven, placed in One: which to defend and put into practice,
incurs the Apostles Sentence, for the forfeiture of Heaven.

12. As also (in regard of their earthly Estates, to the loss of that) to blow
them up with fancied Propriety; as if they could have any, in any part of his
Creation, against him, or his disposal, or otherwise then under him and it, as
Usu-fructuaries thereof: so, as to make them trust rather to their own
Arrogant Vain Providence, then to his most Prudent and Unquestionable Justice;
for the Governing of the Heart, and Restraining the Hand of his Deputy; who
shall most strictly account unto GOD, for Unjustice or Oppression: if without
necessity (approveable to the All-commiserating most impartial GOD) he take
away what GOD has given them; he being not (Himself) the proper Owner, and
Lord, of either the Gold or Steel, which Elohim Created. But (as has been
showed) (...), only, the only Entrusted Superintendent, and Dispenser
thereof; and that (...), for thy beneficial Propriety in thy goods: not only
in things Spiritual, in order to thy Celestial good, but in relation also to
earthly Emoluments in thy Temporal goods; for so (...) signifies, Gal. 6. 6.
Let him that is Gal. 6. 6.
taught in the Word, communicate unto him that teaches him, (...), in all his
goods; as appears, 1 Cor. 9. 11. Romans 15. 27. 1 Cor. 9. 11. Romans 15. 27. Romans
14. 4.


13. But it is evident, that in that wherein he is GODS Steward, he is
responsible only to his own Master, Romans 14. 4. Who art thou (Oh man) that
judge an other man's Servant? Who then art thou, Dust and Ashes, who (as an
Invader of the high Prerogative of the most High) judge thy Lords Lord? whose
Power over thee is evidently Divine, (as has been showed) by Verse 5. (and
Verse 6. They are (...), Gods Workmen for the Peoples avail,) in as much as
the Honor of his Scepter, the Fear of his Sword, his Customs, for his
ordinary Support; his Tribute for his extraordinary Supplies, have influence
upon the Conscience. And (as 1 Pet. 2. 13.) 1 Pet. 2. 13.
our Allegiance is to be paid, (...), for the Lords sake, (in the former word
of the Divine Subordination, (...), Submit your selves) and not, as herein
serving men, but as the Servants of GOD; who is the Father and Lord of this
Order, wherein the King (for the expression of Saint Paul's meaning) is declared
to be (...), the Supreme on Earth: all others that are entrusted for the
exercise of his Dominion, having their Power from his Commission, as being sent
of Him; above whom none have Power; nor under whom, any, but from him; and
therefore, not one or all against him.

14. So that it is an unprosperous Question (with a Recusant stomach) to
demand, what Evidence we have for his Title, under, and from whom, we have the
Severalty and Security of all the whole Interest which we have in the good
things of the Earth; unto which, while we keep our selves in the due
Subordination that GOD has fixed, we have good claim: but by our forwardness
in passing our Line, we list our selves under the Enemy; and are deserters of
GOD.

15. So Eccles. 10. 4. If the anger Hamoshel (from Mashal, as before) of him
(...)
that has Dominion, rise up against thee, leave not thy place. The word is
Mekomcha, and Doctores Hebraei, cognominant nomen Domini, sive Dominum, Makom;
eo quod est locus mundi, nec mundus est locus ejus: quemadmodum vocatur Makom
Habitaculum, Deuteronomy. 33. 27. Et sunt qui putant illud, Hest. 4. 14. Mimakom
achir, indicate Dominum; and hoc factum esse, ne nomen Domini esset scriptum in
libris Medorum and Persarum. Pagn. in (...).
Makom, which signifies Place of Station, or Possession, also does signify
the Lord God himself. So, that here is expressed the mysterious Vbiquity of
GOD; who is rather to be said to be ipsum ubique, quam ubique: to be the every
where it self, then barely to be every where: all Vbi and Place (with
whatsoever Space is imaginable, beyond all Place) being in him, he not being
comprehended in any, or all of them. And together* herewith, that he that
presumes out of his place of Order, forfeits his place of Inheritance,
departing from the Fortifications of GOD, into the Tents of the Destroyer; by
his bold advancing beyond that Title, wherein, he who marshalleth every one in
his true place, is the strong place of his place while he continues in it.

16. And that which Solomon observes (in the following Verses) to be the cause
of Peoples Apostasy from GOD, and the Order by him circumscribed them, is
their Curiosity and Prying into the Sovereigns Cabinets; where finding or
pretending Errors, or such things (perhaps their Virtues and Excellencies)
which they make to look like Errors; the world comes to this pass, That
Vassals ride, and Princes walk: but mark the sequel, He that opens this Pit
(with Korab) shall fall into it: and he that pulls up this Hedge, a Serpent
shall bite him; as it did Adam, presuming proudly beyond his Order.

17. Such our unrulinesse, constrains GOD (many times) to Rule us by such
Princes who will not be Ruled by him; whilst those that be his, and in
possession of their own souls through Christian Patience, shall in him be so
secured and sustained; that those things, which are by others esteemed the
greatest of their heart-rending Evils, shall prove the highest Improvements of
their soul-dilating Bliss: when they who will carve out their own Liberties
(if the Truth of GODS Word continue the same it was; and if the Practice of the
Son of GOD, and of his Saints, be the true and unchangeable Expositor of that
Word,) shall (if they be not) wish they had been here Bruised with a Rod of
Iron; and Broken in pieces like a Potters vessel.

SECT. 5.
The Contents.
The 1 Timothy 2* 12. (I permit not a Woman, etc.) Explained. The Apostles
Argument for Monarchical Dominion, from Adam formed alone. The Case of
Zelophehad's Daughters, Number. 27. Their Plea considerable for these times. Gods
Determination thereupon.

1. COncerning Supremacy in all the Jura Majestatis, or Rights of Majesty, that
from the Beginning, Kings have had the Power thereof, none can deny. That by
Divine Constitution (in the Revealed Word of God) only Monarchs have had this
Supreme Power, is as undeniable. That God, ever specified his Approbation of
any other way of Administration of it, is more then any man (for ought I know)
has demonstrated. And that GOD only has right to dispose of this high
Prerogative of Elohim, is as evident, as that GOD is. But that from the first
hour of the first Man, it was thus positively, by a perpetual Rule,
Constituted by Elohim, is evident: in which Point, if you conceive the Apostle
knew how to frame a Didacticall Conclusive Argument; accept of one (in stead of
many) from him. Which Argument of his, must have stronger influence upon the
Kingdom, then the Family; as the Sword of the one is stronger then the Wand of
the other.

2. It is in the forecited, 1 Timothy 2. 12. I permit not a Woman (...), to have
Dominion over the Man: the Cause or Medium is, For Adam was first formed, and
then Eve. So that if GOD had made all men at once, or (as in other parts of his
Creation) a select number of men; there had been from that act of GOD, some
color for Democraty, or Aristocraty: yet if GODS Will ought to be so done in
Earth as it is in Heaven, (wherein the Angels of God, the Sons Job 38. 7.
of the Morning were all Created together; and together immediately shouted for
joy, yet) there the Will of one GOD is the sole Governor, and the absolute
Monarch. So that if this had been, there had not been from this Act of GOD, a
sufficient Ground for a Major, or Universal Proposition, to found the
Assumption and Conclusion upon, for Democraty or Aristocraty, in earthly
Administrations.

3. But I shall first give the meaning of the word (...), and then Form the
Apostles Syllogism: (...) comes from (...), and properly signifies Arma quae
corpus tegunt, Defensive Arms, that cover a man's body for the the. As (...),
is he that wears Armor (as Breast Plate, Target, etc.) made of Brass; so
Suidas, so the most exact Athenaeus, and others. It is also sometimes borrowed
from its Propriety, to signify Arms Offensive; thus (...), is a
selfe-murtherer. And more diffusedly yet; it comes to (...) to notify such a
one, who by his own Authority (without control) does what soever he pleases.
The Latitude of the Power in this word (consisting in the Right of Arms,
Defensive, Offensive, and the Free guidance by ones own will) is here denied to
Womanhood. The Minor Proposition is expressed; the Didacticall Universal, is
necessarily this that follows.

That which God did at the first making of Man, was his general and perpetual
Rule, for the disposal of his Dominion over mankind, for all times and places,
according to that Act. But, the making of one man alone, was that which God
did, at the first making of Man. Therefore, the making of one Man alone, was
Gods general and perpetual Rule for the disposal of his Dominion over
munkind, for all times and places, according to that Act: viz. to one man.
4. Now, that it was no Natural Inferiority in that Sex, but only her
lastnesse in the order of GODS Creation, that excluded Woman (for ever) from
these Prerogatives, it is evident: for where she is First and Alone in any
Title, there undoubtedly she has proportionable Dominion; as upon the decease
of her Husband, and where (until she has engaged her self to an Husband) she
is sole Inheritrix of GODS Title; and so has answerable Privileges there
unto. This appears in a case by GOD himself Adjudged and Reported, (for it
was too hard for Moses) it was the (forementioned) Case of Zelophehads
Daughters, petitioning for an Inheritance in Right of their Father deceased
without issue Male.

5. Their Plea is very considerable for these times, Verse 3. Our Father dyed
in the Wilderness, and was not of Council with those who gathered themselves
together in the Company of Korah; but dyed in his own sin. Such sin as the
nature of man is daily liable unto, (which the Fathers call Peccata quotidianae
Incursionis) of Natural Humane Frailty; not of Foreign Diabolical Arrogance:
as not being in Covenant with the Usurpers of Elohims Sovereignty; in the
Society of those, who had given their Names unto Apollyon, the King of that
Order, established by him against the Subordination by the Almighty God
arranged no Antichristian despiser of Gods Anointing, upon the Heads of those,
whom Elohim had thereby confecrated to himself, for the Administration of his
Authority: and therefore, had not committed that Sin, which (without a new
Stipulation, Covenant of Pardon) had forfeited his particular or Secondary
Title, to that Inheritance which by the First and General Grant of GOD, he had
interest in: for a share in the Promised Land.

6. The Lord himself gives the Answer, Verse 7. The Daughters of Zelophehad
have spoken right; to wit, concerning their Father: it is true that he was no
Rebel, and therefore, they shall have their Petition: The name of their Father
shall not be put away from amongst his Family. And where ever any one dies
without Issue Male, his Daughters shall enjoy the same Privilege by a Statute
of Mishpat for ever, Ver. 11.

7. The Creating then of Adam alone, was the Apostles invincible Argument for
Monarchical Government, where GODS Ordinance prevails; if in the Family,
much more in the great Household of God, where Gods Glory is more highly
concerned, (as has been said Cap. 4. Par. 4.) and where the words (of Gods,
and his choice, to wit) Mashal, and (...), are indeed containable: in which
words, all the Jura Majestatis, the Rights of Prerogative Royal, are included,
which in the Family are not exercible: particularly, not the Power of the
Sword; which is a Member of Mashad and (...).

The Sum of the Chapter.
1. The brief hereof is, That no man has Original Right to any thing by God
Created; but the Capability thereof he has by reason of the Image of God; and
the Actuality from the formal Donations of the Trinity, according to the Word
of God revealed.

2. That no man can have Jus ad rem, Jus in re, Jus rei, without Gods Primary
and General, Particular and Secondary, Singular and Applicatory Donations: and
therefore, cannot make comfortable use thereof, but upon the payment of his
Allegiance to Christ; and under, and for him, to his earthly Deputy, by whom
his Propriety is secured in all Gods earthly gifts.

3. That Man in the estate of Innocence, had not that Native Dominion over
Herbs and Fruits, which now is claimed for the People, in that which is the
Height of Gods earthly Prerogative; to wit, the Government of the World.

4. That Just Descent, which is an undoubted evidence of Gods Secondary and
Particular Donation, of the benefits of the Earth, by every several man
enjoyed in several; is no less for Kings: which in them from the Beginning of
the World, by God and Man, has been accounted good unto this day.

5. That the Subjects Titles depend upon the Kings; and that God who has
declared his general Gift of the Earth to mankind in general; and has
designed by Just Descent his Secondary Donation, to particular men, of the
Particulars thereof; has also declared, that he has left in his place his
Viceroy, to actuate his Demises: by whom (by his Laws or otherwise) are to be
Adjudged and Applied, Every man's Just Property and Portion; out of that, which
(notwithstanding the Titles and Surmises) still remains Gods; for that
without this third Donation, they cannot command the benefit of the least
crumme thereof.

6. That Humane Laws cannot give, nor assure Gods Title (which who so wants,
had better want the Inheritance) otherwise then they are of his making, who
has Gods Authority upon Earth.

7. That Disobedience to the King is a sin against that Commandment, which is
the visible Fortress and Security of Gods whole Law; and forfeiteth more then
Life and Estate, though it come only to, and under the Cognizance of the King
of Heaven.

8. That the Power of the Sword (carrying with it all Gods Earthly
Prerogatives) is a dangerous charge to him that has it; but most Deadly to him
that takes it.

9. That for Earths Government, there is but one Irresistible Power in one
Kingdom, (as but one Sword, to cut off Civil Wars for ever) and that Power is
Eternally in God and his Christ; Perpetually derived to the King; Arbitrarily
dispensed by the King to all that have any Power; without whom, against whom,
none have any at all. And this (for all those who desire so to enjoy Earth, as
there to be fitted for Heaven) is the scale of Subordination which God has
constituted; which whosoever violateth, puts himself out of all his Earthly
Rights, and Heavenly Hopes, into the Camp of Apollyon; and is by the Doctrine
of the Scripture censured, as a deserter of God.

10. That in case of Difference, our Obedience is to be rectified by the Higher
in Power, who (and not the People) is to Judge of the Inferiors; if the
Magistrate offend, he is only liable to the King, or to such as he shall
authorize, and not to any, or all their Inferiors: if the King offend, he is
only responsible to his only Superior, the King of kings. For not one nor
all, have Power against any their Superiors, all Power descending from Above;
none ascending from the People. This Order, Elohim the Powerful has set; who
has Power, and Will, to see that it shall not be Evil to any that are Good:
since by this, or no (ordinary Revealed) way, he dispenses and secureth both
to the good and bad, the things of the World, in Order unto those of the World
to come.

11. That there is owing unto God from Christians, a more Regulative Dominion,
with a more Free entertainment, and a more Ingenuous acknowledgement thereof,
then he has or had amongst Heathens; where the Form of his Celestial
Government (exemplified for us in his Word) was and is followed, though not
understood: then in Hell, where it is understood and followed, but repined at.

12. That in this Subordination, though the diverse and different, subalternate
Administrators of the Power of the One God, (it may be to honor them, while
they honor the Superior) as they are dignified (also) with the Name of Elohim
(as has been granted) so they are here styled Powers; yet it is evident, that
the Apostle (to rectify mistakes herein) reduces the whole integrall Power of
Dominion to its genuine Singularity; in that number speaking of the Power that
is indeed Irresistible: and this Singular He, is the Deacon of God over men's
Proprieties, and Gods Assignations: this Individual He, bears not the Sword
in vain: to Him in the Singular number, the Honor of Gods Scepter; the Fear
of the Lords Sword; the Imposts of Gods Rents, are vindicated, as Acts of
Religion, and Parts of Divine Worship; in as much as they work for the People
in stead of God; from whom alone descends all Power, having its Original in
the Unity of the Divine Nature, as the Name thereof (...) imports: unless the
King have his Being from the People, and they from themselves. Since He, who
only is, and is altogether One; has never given this his One Sovereignty
(which, with the Dignity thereof cannot be given in common to many, or) to more
then to One.

13. And this the One God specified from the first man's Beginning, in his
Creation but of One Man at the first; in whom were all men, and all humane
Powers; and from whom are all, and all that they have; though all they, have
not all that he had. He was (if the Apostle knew how to argue) Gods
demonstration for Monarchical Dominion, to be erected over all those who
should for ever come out of him, which primarily relates to Gods great
Household, the Kingdom; in as much as there only, and not in the Family. The
Latitude of Gods first word Mashal, and the Apostles Paraphrase thereupon, in
the word (...), is only extensible in the Kingdom, and not in the (...)
Family.

Whereupon my seventh Quaere is. Since without Gods first Donation, mankind (in
specie) could have had no Title at all: without his third Donation, man (in
Individuo) can have no benefit at all, from the daily Bread he eats. How it
may stand with Humane Wisdom to Question: Whether the Secondary Donation
(without a Title whereunto Man in particular, can have no distinct Propriety in
that Bread he eats) appertains to God? which the Scriptures clearly affirm,
and particularly the Lords Prayer: And that this is done by questioning the
only Authorized Deputy of God; who will not descend to Judge, or Severalize
men's particulars. The Questioning of whose Title, forfeiteth ours; and makes us
liable to Gods Temporal Sword here, and eternal Death hereafter.


My first Argument is concerning the Primary Donation of God the Father, above
specified; and the Consequents thereof, pertinent to this Point. That which
denies the lesser Power, viz. of Free Dominion over Herbs and Fruits, to make
use of them at pleasure, to have been Originally in Man in Innocence; evidently
denies the greater Power, in eodem genere, viz. Dominion of general Community,
or particular Demeanes in the Soil it self; and (which is yet greater) over
other men's Lives and Livelihoods) to be Originally in Man sinful. But the
Donation of God for Herbs and Fruits, and the Restraint of God from the Tree of
Knowledge: Denies the lesser Power, viz. Free Dominion over Herbs and Fruits,
to make use of them at pleasure, to have been Originally in Man in Innocence.
Therefore, the Donation of God for Herbs and Fruits, and the Restraint of God
from the Tree of Knowledge: Evidently denies the greater Power in eodem genere,
viz. Dominion of general Community, or particular Demeans in the Soil it
self; and (which is yet greater) Dominion over other men's Lives and
Livelihoods, to be Originally in Man sinful.
Secondly, concerning the third Donation of Beneficial use, effected by the
Spirit of God, upon the Word of God and Prayer; from the Word of God conferring
the Title thereunto; viz. Ecce dedi, Behold, I have given you; our Prayer; viz.
Give us this day our daily Bread: That which shall be so ours, that none else
against us have Propriety in, let us have sustentation from; wherein are
visible the three Acts, of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost. That Power,
which only can administer the Beneficial use, so much as of a morsel of
Bread (for the preservation of each Individual Man) which mankind had not so
much as Right in commune unto, but by the Donation of God, the general Father
of mankind: Only can give the Propriety thereof, against the common Interest
of mankind. But only the Divine Power of God: can administer the Beneficial
use, so much as of a morsel of Bread (for the preservation of each Individual
man) which whole mankind had not so much as Right in Commune unto, but by the
Donation of the general Father of mankind. Therefore, only the Divine Power
of God: Can give the Propriety (so much as of one morsel of Bread) against the
common Interest of mankind.
Thirdly, concerning the middle Power of Distribution, in relation unto its
proper Seat, in the middle Person of the Trinity; now justly constituted King
of kings, and the universal Judge of the whole World. All the middle, and
peculiar Acts of the second Person (both for Commutative, and Distributive
Justice, over and amongst whole mankind) giving Propriety in the Blessings of
Heaven and Earth: Are no less Divine, and untakeable by Man, without
Commission from him, then the Act of paternall Indulgence (giving man Title to
the Earth, and the Fruits thereof) in the Father; then the Act of the Holy
Ghost, giving the Blessing of Help and Sustentation from the same. But (as King
of kings) to appoint such Deputies for the Administration of that his Power,
for the giving every one his Portion; which it is not convenient that Himself
should (at each turn) come down from Heaven to divid; (as Prove. 8. 15.) is a
peculiar Act of the middle Person in Trinity, (both for Commutative and
Distributive Justice, over and amongst whole mankind) giving Propriety in the
Blessings of Heaven and Earth. Therefore, (as King of kings) to appoint such
Deputies for the Administration of that his Power, for the giving every one his
Portion; which it is not convenient that Himself should (at each turn) come
down from Heaven to divide: Is no less Divine, and untakeable by Man, without
Commission from Him, then the Act of paternall Indulgence (giving Man Title to
the Earth and the Fruits thereof) in the Father; then the Act of the Holy
Ghost, giving the Blessing of Help, and Sustentation from the same.
Fourthly, concerning the general Duty of mankind, issuing from these
Donations. They, who have Right unto the Creature, Propriety in the Creature,
and Sustentation from the Creature, only by the Donation of the Creator: Ought
to use the things they so have, so (and no otherwise, then) as the Creator
requires; viz. as to their own, so to the service of Him, and his Christ's;
and not contrary to them. But the People: Have Right unto the Creature,
Propriety in the Creature, and Sustentation from the Creature; only by the
Donation of the Creator. Therefore the People: Ought to use the things they so
have, so (and no otherwise, then) as the Creator requires; viz. as to their
own, so to the Service of Him and his Christ's; and not contrary to them.
Fifthly, concerning the Specification in the Word of God, (who only has
Power and Right, to nominate his own Deputies) of those whom he has chosen
Administrators of his Power. They only, whom Christ (from God the Father, by
the Holy Ghost; in, or according to the Revealed Will of God, contained in the
Scriptures) has (in token of Superiority) Dignified with the Name of Christ's,
and entrusted (for the Honor and Safety of Mankind) with that his Earthly
Power, which they dare not desire, that he Himself should Administer: Can have
Just Right to Exercise the Royal Authority of Christ, both God and Man; in the
Throne of the God of Heaven, over Man on Earth. But Kings: Are only they (and
not the People) whom Christ (from God the Father, by the Holy Ghost; in, or
according to the Revealed Will of God, contained in the Scriptures) has
Dignified (in token of Superiority) with the Name of Christ's; and entrusted
(for the Honor and Safety of Mankind) with that his Earthly Power, which they
dare not desire, that Himself should Administer. Therefore Kings: Are only
they (and not the People) who can have Just Right to Exercise the Royal
Authority of Christ, both God and Man; in the Throne of the God of Heaven, over
Man on Earth.
Sixthly, concerning the general Claim unto Gods Title, through the Law of
Nature, by Descent. That which is esteemed (as a branch of the Law of Nature)
an undoubted Evidence of the conveighance of Gods Title to the Subjects, for
the enjoyment of their Rights and Properties: Neither can, nor ought to be
esteemed a less warranty to the King, for his enjoyment of the Rights and
Properties of Kings. But Just Descent: Is (as a branch of the general Law of
Nature) esteemed an undoubted Evidence, of the conveighance of Gods Title to
the Subjects, for the enjoyment of their Rights and Properties. Therefore, Just
Descent: Neither can, nor ought to be esteemed a less warranty to the King;
(viz. then to the Subject) for his enjoyment of the Rights and Properties of
Kings.
Seventhly, concerning Humane Positive Laws, and the acknowledged Power
thereof. They who affirm, that they hold their Estates by the Laws of the
Land: May not but acknowledge therewith, that they hold them from him, from
whom the said Laws have their being; viz. the King. But the People: Affirm
that they hold their Estates by the Laws of the Land. Therefore, the People:
May not but acknowledge, that they hold their Estates from the King.
Eighthly, concerning the proper Efficient of such Laws, as can dispense Gods
Title over the Creature unto man. That Power (according to the Doctrine of holy
Scriptures) which can be the proper Efficient (Administering the Formal Cause)
of such Laws, as can dispose of Gods Rights to Man, from Herbs and Fruits, to
the Life and Death of Man: Is evidently Divine, such as cannot be taken, nor
taken away by man, nor administered without the Donation of God, revealed in his
Word. But (according to the Doctrine of holy Scripture) the Kings Power only
(or none on Earth, and so man can have no assurance on Earth, and God no
Kingdom there) is that Power which can be the proper Efficient of such Laws,
as can dispose of Gods Rights to Man, from Herbs and Fruits, to the Life and
Death of Man. Therefore (according to the Doctrine of the Scriptures) the Kings
Power only (or none on Earth, and so man can have no assurance on Earth, and
God no Kingdom there) is Divine; such as cannot be taken, nor taken away by
Man, nor administered, but according to Gods Donation, recorded in his word.
Ninthly, concerning the guilt of Disobedience to the King, and what it
forfeiteth. That sin, which forfeiteth man's Temporal Estate; and is (moreover)
a violation of that Commandment, which God has left as a Guardian for all the
rest, in order to Earth's Peace, and Heaven's Glory: Is most carefully to be
avoided of all those, who dare not be wiser then God, or suspect his Justice;
but with Obedient sobriety, expect Earth's Happiness, and Heaven's
Blessedness. But Disobedience to the King: Is that sin which forfeiteth Man's
Temporal Estate; and is (moreover) a violation of that Commandment, which God
has left as a Guardian for all the rest, in order to Earth's Peace, and
Heaven's Glory. Therefore, Disobedience to the King: Is most carefully to be
avoided of all those, who dare not be wiser then God, or suspect his Justice;
but with obedient sobriety, expect Earth's Happiness, and Heaven's
Blessedness.
Tenthly, concerning the Power of the Sword. Whosoever is entrusted by God with
the greatest of the Rights of Majesty; viz. the Power of the One Sword of the
One God: His Power is more then Humane, He is more then man's Brother; is
invested with the Divine Paternity of God; and by consequence, has all other
the lesser Rights of Majesty, now in Question amongst us. But the King only:
Is he that is entrusted by God, with the greatest of the Rights of Majesty;
viz. the Power of the One Sword of the One God. Therefore, the King only is
he: Whose Power is more then Humane; who is more then man's Brother; is invested
with the Divine Paternity of God; and by consequence, has all other the lesser
Rights of Majesty, now in Question amongst us.
Eleventhly, concerning the Order that God has established for the Government
of the World; the Disturbers thereof, and their danger. Whosoever violate that
Order, which the God of Order has constituted for the Government of mankind;
and put themselves into the Bands of Apollyon, who himself (though he
endeavors to bring Christians into this Antichristianism) dares not trust in
Hell it self any other Government, but Monarchical: They do (proportionably
to the Degrees of their several Enormities) incur the Apostles Sentence of
Damnation, Romans 13. But they who presume, beyond their rank in the
Subordination which God has fixed. They, who (in case there be difference
amongst those who are subalternate Administrators of this Divine Power) will
not rectify their Obedience, by submission unto Him, who is the higher in the
Subordination. They, who will not acknowledge the King, to be on Earth Supreme;
and his Power to be Irresistible; by any He, be he never so great; or by any
they, be they never so many. They, who make it not matter of conscience, for
Gods and Religions sake, to come out of their Rebellious courses, and submit
unto his Decisive Scepter; unto his Corrective Sword; unto his Ordinary
Customs; unto his Extraordinary Subsidies. They (as Transgressors of the
Magisteriall Law of God, in the highest of his earthly Concernments) do
violate that Order, which the God of Order has Constituted for the Government
of mankind; and (as deserters of God) have put themselves into the Bands of
Apollyon; who himself (though he endeavors to bring Christians to this
Antichristianisme) dares not in Hell it self, trust any other Government then
Monarchical. Therefore, they who presume beyond their rank in the
Subordination which God has fixed; they who, etc. All of them, do
(proportionably to the degrees of their several Enormities) incur the Apostles
Sentence of Damnation, Romans 13.
Twelfthly, concerning the Apostles Argument, Chap. 7. about the Foundation of
this Order, laid in the Creation of the first Man, alone. Wheresoever in any
Type, or Epitome (wherein God has no less Power and Propriety in the one,
then in the other) the Spirit of God makes choice of words, whose Latitude is
more exercible in the one, then in the other: There Gods Allseeing Spirit,
intended chiefly the Typified or Epitomized. But, in the Apostles Argument, 1 Timothy 2. 12. Family-Monarchicall Government: Is the Epitome of State-Monarchy,
wherein God has no less Power and Propriety, then in the Family; and the
Latitude of the words Mashal and (...), is more exercible in the Kingdom, then
in the Family; viz. they include the Power of the Sword, which the small
Monarch of the Family may not use therein. Therefore, in the Apostles Argument,
1 Timothy 2. 12. the All-seeing Spirit of God intended chiefly the Monarchical
Government of the Kingdom; viz. upon the Creation of one Man (at the first)
alone.
Lastly, concerning the Question it self, and Cautions to be used therein.
Such Questions, which bring into Question, the whole Title, which Man has from
God, to the Blessings of Heaven and Earth; and which resolved, according to the
Votes of natural Man, do tend to the disentitling of God, to that Dominion of
the Earth which He (the Creator of whatsoever has being) cannot any where
lose; which He will not immediately Exercise himself; and which He may not
endure to have taken (unless given) by any Creature; or which tend to the
making of God, not to have so Regular Sovereignty amongst Professing
Christians, as that he had, and has amongst Pagans; and little other, then
that he has in Hell it self; together, with all other the ill Consequences in
the foregoing Arguments: Are (in regard of the Devils Malice and Vigilance,
against the Supremacy of God, and the Weal of Man, promised unto his Humility
and Obedience; and in respect of the general Vanity, of Proud and Unruly
mankind, impatient of the Dominion of God committed to one Man) rather to be
avoided with the Reverence of Religious Fear, then entered into, with the
boldness of confident Weakness; then prosecuted with the dangerous strength
of Self-ended Wisdom; or otherwise, then by the justly Magisteriall; evidently
Infallible; and graciously provident Oracles of the Creator, and King of all.
But the particular Questioning of the Kings Title (who is the Only declared
Deputy of God, throughout the whole Scripture) out of a Spirit of Opposition:
Brings into Question the whole, etc. Therefore, the Questioning of the Kings
Title out of a Spirit of Opposition: Is rather to be avoided with the Reverence
of Religious Fear, then entered into, with the boldness of confident Weakness;
then prosecuted with the dangerous strength of Self-ended Wisdom; or
otherwise, then by the justly Magisteriall; evidently Infallible; and
graciously provident Oracles, of the Creator and King of all.

CHAP. VIII.
SECT. 1.
The Contents.
An Introduction to the ensuing Chapter. The Adversaries Principles unjustly
taken up, but more foully deserted. The Peoples Liberty, the Word of God, and
the Kingdom of Christ, find no such Enemies, as the Pretenders for them. The
written Word of God, the best Commentary upon the unwritten Law of Nature. Genesis
49. 10. and 1 Samuel 13. 13. reconciled. The Exemplification of Gods mind in the
Institution of King Saul; an Argument unanswerable by the Adversaries. The
acknowledger of the Scriptures, must acknowledge, that in the Patent of King
David, all Christian Kings have a joint Commission. Some conveniences through
the settlement of Gods Power in one Man, pointed at. Prove. 21. 1. Paraphrased.

1. BY this which has been said, it satisfactorily appears to every
conscientious man, who expects his Light from the Lamp of GODS revealed will,
how from the beginning, GOD has disposed of his Power of Dominion. In which
Point, since only He has Power to Constitute and Repeal; but has
Constituted and not Repealed, nor has given Dispensation to any others
whatsoever to do it: Religious Sobriety would abundantly rest contented with
his bare exemplification of his mind, if there were no more to be said in this
case, then these Argumenta ad rem. But ad Hominem, (to the Opposing party) they
ought to be esteemed of double force; since they, who have undone the People by
this plausible color, That all things whatsoever, whether to be believed or
done; are to receive the particular warrant of their Legality, from the precise
words of express Scripture; may least of all men be endured in the Point of
highest Concernment, to go against the only exemplifications of GOD in this
kind, contained in the Scripture.

2. In which particular (as appears by the horrible and amazing excesses,
wherewith the Disciples of the grand Enemy of the Word of God have openly
blasphemed it, to the infamy of the Age and Nation; what his aim is, even in
those, whom he cannot unto that Heretical height bewitch) it has in these
days fallen out, as in all former Stories, no great Evil has appeared in its
own colors at first, but with a seeming Zeal to correct evils, and advance
that, which most commonly rather seemed, then was good. So most ordinarily,
when the Pretenders for the Peoples Liberty have by that Pretext destroyed
their particular Adversaries, Liberty it self by the Pretenders for it, has
been most desperately destroyed. So here, when under pretense of Scripture
Zeal, the Disciples of the Angels of Darkness, have (with unwary men)
discountenanced (and thriven by) their private Adversaries; the Scriptures are
they who have received the greatest foil.

3. So in the case of setting up the (Aereall) Kingdom of Christ upon Earth;
when under the gay outside thereof, they have despoiled those that stand in
their way; it is evident the prize was to lift [Him] up on High, that they
might part his Garments amongst them, and to cast lots for his Coat. This is
most evident, that, that cannot be Kingdom, the Power whereof must be in more
then One, much less in every one. That, that cannot be Christ's, which seeks
its own. That, that cannot be Christ's Kingdom, which comes not to fulfill, but
to destroy any part of the Eternal and Universal Law of Nature, Reason, or
Nations; which came from Christ into the World before Christ came into the
World himself; who when he came, he came to accomplish, not to destroy that
which he sent before him, even to that of Moses, Mat. 5. 17.

4. But I take no delight in displaying the vanity of those, who divide what
cannot be divided, Christ's Kingdom from him, and it within, and against it
self, and so make many Nothings of it; who place it, lo here, and lo there,
and so put it in many No where is. That which I desire to commend from hence unto
the truly humble, and obediently unpertinacious Christian, is; that he would
not reject, as merely Topicall, the aforesaid exemplifications of GODS mind,
(whose Rules and Examples certainly are not at variance) but rather, that he
would look upon them, as upon GODS own Commentary upon his own Precepts; and
upon both together, as upon Gods Declaration in this behalf, against all
spurious false copies of man's lustful fancy; to learn, what indeed is the
true and genuine meaning, and obligation of his general and perpetual Law of
Nature, and Nations; which, as it was borne into the World with the World, so
must it not dye before it. For it was Mishpat Hameluchah, the Just and Right
Law of Kingdom (that, (...)
which was derived (at first) from the Breath of God, and thence received into
the Universal Law of Nations) which the People of Israel petitioned for in the
forecited 1 Samuel 8. 5, 20.

5. Concerning which, GODS Answer was, Hearken unto them in all that they say
unto thee; yet (lest they should not thoroughly understand for the present, or
for the future should imagine, that they might make what they pleased of that
unwritten Law) show them truly what is Mishpat Ha-melech, the Right of (...)
perpetual Prerogative, which Samuel from the mouth of GOD delivered unto
them. Unto the Power whereof, David (without any restriction from GOD) did
succeed: and Saul's Posterity for ever (which I forbear to draw any Arguments
from) might have been entertained into the same Rights; as appears, 1 Samuel 13.
13. For now would the Lord have established thy Kingdom for ever: (to wit)
that Royalty which at first was given thee, and described from the mouth of
GOD; whose Donation (since GOD never did it) Man may not limit. Which hence
appears not to have been such, as is now pretended.

6. If it be demanded, how then could Gods promise in Jacob's Prophetical
Benediction, concerning Judah and his Scepter, have been made good? I answer,
God Almighty plainly showed how this might have been: to wit, by the giving of
Michal Saul's Daughter in Marriage to the Son of Judah; the possibility of whose
hopes was afterward frustrated, by her despising that part of the
Sacerdotality, which was truly inherent in the Regal Power; her religiously
careful Husbands Humble Primacy, and Supreme Service, exhibited before the
visible Monument of Gods Royal and Spiritual residence amongst his People, (
viz.) the Ark of God. 2 Samuel 6. 23. For this cause, Michal Saul's Daughter
remained childlesse unto the day of her death.

7. And to give the more credit hereunto, it may seem (as it is recorded in
the next ensuing Chapter to the former story; viz. the 14.) that Jonathan 2 Samuel 14.
(the most gloriously virtuous of all the Princes which are Registered in the
Book of God) was decreed by God for a better Kingdom, when doomed by his own
Father for a Son of death: which God executed upon him (whom the People could
not then rescue) though his rash Father was at length willingly enforced to
forget his Oath. This, to teach all the irresistible Deputies of the faithful
God, how dangerous a thing to them and thei^s heady precipitancy is: and that
they may least of all men, vainly use the Power of the serious Jehovah Elohim.

8. So that if the Scriptures be left for man's perpetual and universal Rule,
(which now to deny, can in no wise become our Adversaries) were we destituted
of further Proofs, the only recorded Exemplification of the administration of
Gods Power by Him, who only has Power from Heaven, constituted amongst his
peculiar People upon Earth; for the reverence due to him, ought to be preferred
before the Institutes of all humane Politickwould-bees: to be esteemed the
wisest, justest, and safest model of Precepts, for the regulating of all
particular Dominions; to be had in honor, both as Gods own Commentary upon
his general Law of Nations, and also as his own Paraphrase upon his own
Divine Sanctions; plainly enough set down in Scriptures; but which (rather
then he will understand) the engaged, proud, busy Creature, Man, will forgo
his true and just Title to Heaven* and Earth, catching at earthly shadows:
whilst those who hope to find eternal life in the Scriptures of God, cannot
but with sacred reverence behold the Jewish Kingdom, as a branch straightened
by the hand of God himself, for the rectifying of what (in this particular) is
crooked throughout the whole circuit of the round world.

9. For that which follows, I profess no to dispute against those, who so
far deny the Providence of God, as if he had left the world after he had made
it, as the Ostrich does her eggs, without care to hatch them her self. And
therefore, I go not about to prove, that it concerned him to set for man
(frowardly impatient of his immediate Sovereignty, but much more proudly of his
delegated Power) a standing unalterable Rule, for the most considerable thing
in the world; ( viz.) the Government of the world, before he left him to
himself, and it: He himself, ( viz. GOD) being by degrees upon just grounds
(which have produced that which our unworthiness now finds and smarteth for)
to retire from that propinquity of converse, interchanged at first between
Himself and his Creature, (while mankind in some competency walked worthy of
it) either immediately by his own self, or mediately by his blessed Angels, or
else extraordinary Prophets. It is evident that this he has done, and this
Rule I here present.

10. It is done in the Covenant of GOD with David; and that was a Covenant of
Salt, to continue for ever: in which all Dominion, that is at this day Regular
and Religious, was then Established. So that if I should forgive mine Answerer
all that has been hitherto proved, (as granting it demonstrated only from
Authority in materia simili) I have here causall Demonstrations from the sole
powerful Efficiency of the Donation of God: which whosoever has, has right
unto Dominion: and which, whosoever has not, by pretending unto it, is an
Usurper against God.

11. That this was here in Terminis done unto Christian Kings, is the subject
of this Chapter: and that the Donation unto David and his Seed according to
Nature, was the least thing by GOD intended in that Charter, as being the
momentary and rudimentary Exemplification of that glorious Grace, which was
therein demised and sealed to Christ for the Princes of the convert Gentiles,
for so long as the admeasurers of time, the Sun and Moon shall endure; which
yet continue, and when they fail, Time it self must.

12. Secondly, that in this settlement, as (which in the former Chapter has
been showed) no man loses of his Propriety, but has it confirmed and
evidenced unto him, by the Royal Power of GODS Deputy: so Elohim has not lost
any thing of his Title to the Sovereignty of the Created World, by imparting it
to Christ and his Christ's; but retains still both the Name and Power of King
of the Earth, as well as of Heaven: and has glorified and secured to himself
this his Glory, by communicating it to select Tribes, chosen out from all
others by himself, to be so many visible Representers of his invisible Glory;
and so many commemorative Arguments to put unwilling understanders in mind of
him they see not; and to be a sacred mound interposed betwixt him and unruly
man, to keep off stubborn profaneness from immediate violation of his high
Majesty; to reward some above others, whom his Sun must indifferently shine
upon, and to punish some, that they might not be punished by Himself. Who is
likewise exalted (in our sight) by this constitution of being King of kings;
whose Glory under Him, as the Glory of those under Them, (which all men are
sensible of in their own families) ascends upwards (with Religion be it
spoken) to the engreatning of him, who is immensity it self.

13. Who also might very well be pardoned of his Creature, if merely for the
expression of the Divine Unity, he thought fit never to constitute other Form
of Government, then Monarchical; the Grace and Glory of One being best
dispensed and represented by One, and the inconveniences and mischiefs of
Disunion, best thereby prevented. Especially, since He alone, can as well
govern the heart of that One, as can many, or all govern all: of which All,
not any one nor all can so much as see into the heart of one, which this One
can govern; this being the Prerogative of his Power, and the promise of his
Goodness to govern the heart of him, by whom he governs others.

14. Thus Prove. 21. 1. Palgei maijm lev melech bejad Jehovah, Seas of (...)
waters are the heart of the King in the hand of* Jehovah. Gnal-col-asher
jachpots jattennu; upon all, whatsoever he wills, he will incline that heart.
This is the literal sense of the words, for his own and the Prerogative of
him on whom he has thus settled his own Power. Whereby mankind is taught,
that until the People can say unto their fellow in madness, the proud Ocean,
Hitherto shall thou come, and no further; and until they have arrived at this
point of Innocence, that they can say, that they have not deserved to be
punished by the overflowings of an unruly Prince; and until they can see into
the heart of Jehovah, and make demonstration thereof, that his secret Will is
contrary to his revealed Will, or to Justice; and they have power and skill to
dis-power him, and to mend themselves; against him, who takes no care to make
good his word: not to endeavor to snatch the Government of the Kings heart out
of the hands of Jehovah, who has thus disposed of the Dominion, which he can
prove to be his own. But I proceed; and will first show the Reasons of GODS
settlement of his Sovereignty in David, and his Posterity, following that Order
which the Spirit of GOD laid out, Psalm 132.

SECT. 2.
The Contents.
The Grounds of Gods preferring David and his Seed to the Kingdom of Israel.
Expressed in the 132. Psalm. Its first part contains David's solicitous care
for the building of a material Temple for God. The second David's Petition:
first, for Gods Inhibitancy therein: secondly, for the Support and Glory of the
Priests thereof: thirdly, for the performance of Gods Leiturgy: fourthly, for
the Honor of Christ, in and by these. The last expresses Gods Oath, in Answer
to David's Vow, for the perpetuity of the several petitioned for particulars.
Gods Oath fulfilled to a Title in the Typified, though not in the Type.

1. THe reason assigned in general Terms, 1 Samuel 13. 14. was. For that David
was a man after Gods own heart: particulars are expressed in the said 132.
Psalm. The first was his pious intention to build GOD the Temple, which he
expected from his People, when he should give time and ability to perform the
same in so glorious manner, as it might surpass in riches the Idols* Temples,
erected throughout the world unto the no-gods of the Nations; and as beseemed
his Tzijon, prove the glory of the whole world.

2. In the first Verse, Lord remember unto David all his affliction; how he
vowed unto the strong God of Jacob, I will not enter into mine house, and
until I find out a place answerable to Jehovah; according to that of S.
Matthew. 23. 21. Whosoever swears by the Temple, swears by it, and him that
dwells therein. For the words are, Makom la-Jevah, a place to Jehovah; and
Makom is (as has (...)
been showed) a word of large extent, no less then Immensity it self,
signifying as well the Lord of the House, as the House of the Lord. And in the
next word is [ Habitations] (in the Plural number, mystically including the
many (...)
Daughters of that Tzijon; the multitude of Christian Temples) for the mighty
GOD Jacob, the younger Son of Ishak, the Type of the Gentiles.

3. Which significant Temple, though Almighty God longed for, he patiently
waited the good time, (as Deuteronomy. 12. 11.) of his Peoples Plenty, Peace, Aquin.
1, 2. qu. 102. r. 4.
and orderly settlement under just Monarchical Government, (as Aquinas
expresses) for the space of 480. years. So that he never (all that time)
found fault with his ambulatory Tabernacle under Curtains. Yea, his goodness
took such pleasure in that his meaner Tent, that he loved (even unto
Jealousy) it, and the sacred Contents therein; so far forth, that what
profane hands soever, but touched, what (by Anointing them) he had secreted to
himself; sorely smarted, if they wholly perished not: as Documents, what he
expects under Christianity, so long as the perpetuity of it shall continue;
though during the tremblings and poverty of the Primitive Infancy, he thought
not ill to dwell in the tops of other men's houses. Yet Mr. J. Gregory his Notes
upon some passages of Scripture. Cap. 3.
(as is asserted by a man deserving the encouragements, and thankful
acknowledgement of the whole Nation) ever in the upper rooms, over them, who
under him were the owners thereof; which rooms, from the first of their
consecration, were sacred and severed for the most High, above and from the
profaneness and inferiority of secular uses, so much as to eat and drink in,
their Christian Love Feasts, 1 Cor. 11. 22. which for fear of (...), (I doubt)
damnation, the Apostle, Ver. 34. banisheth from these holy places.

4. The Religious and solicitous Vow of David was seconded (Verses the 6. and
7.) by the semblable expressions of the Sons of the Church, under the name of
Bethleem-Ephrathites, (the City of Christ's and David's birth) in their
remarkable Exultation Hinne, Behold, we heard the glad tidings thereof in
Bethleem; (...)
in their forward advancing the Service, preparing their timber for it,
forthwith we found it in the woods; in their due resolution for mannerly
Devotion therein, in the External, as well as Internal Worship of GOD, in
their approaches unto that dreadfully sacred place: We will enter into his
Tabernacle, (...)
and Nishtacave lahadom raglav, We will (bow, yea) prostrate our selves to the
stool of his feet. And this is the first part of the Psalm.

5. The second part contains his Petition to GOD in the 8, 9, 10. Verses.
First, that he would be pleased to arise and take possession of the House
(already in his designation, set apart from all humane Propriety) for his
Inhabitancy, and entailed Privacy for ever; and for ever to set up his rest in
that resting place. And also, that men's eyes may have some visible Testimony of
his not readily believed invisible Presence, and direction for their due
Incurvations, the Monument of the one, and the Point of the other, ( i.) the
Arc is thither invited, and it is the Arc of his strength; to wit, the pledge
of his strength, to afford them strength. Which Cynosure, while they reverently
attend unto, in their acts of Religious Worship, and obediently observe the Law
therein included, in the actions of Political, Oeconomicall, and Moral life;
they shall not fail of Heaven in the end, (the end of those, who begin with
seeking the Kingdom of GOD,) nor shall the Political atchievments of the
Public State be frustrated, nor shall the petite Government in* their several
Families be unblessed, nor strength be wanting in each private man, to subdue
the unruly multitude of passions and perturbations, unto the reasonable will.

6. The second part of David's Petition unto GOD (upon this VOW) was Ver. 9. for
those meniall Servants of GOD, who (for all Israel in stead of the Firstborn)
were (as Mediators between GOD and Man, his Ambassadors, and man's Proxies) by
GOD designed for the Worship of GOD; due from all that owe homage unto GOD; to
be in chief performed unto him, in his own house; whence both his Religion
and Blessing is to be derived and propagated into the Public house of the
Kingdom, the Private houses of the several Families, and the more private
closets of the breast of each particular man therein. First, for the Priests
reverentiall and glorious External port; Let thy Priests be clothed, (be
externally set off with honor.)

7. Secondly, for their Internal contentive support; Let them be clothed (...)
with Tzedek; that is, let their just Portion (from their Lord and Master)
supply them with this honorable port. For the learned know that the word
Tsedek, as in its first, it signifies Internal Righteousness, so does it in
its secondary sense, connotate GODS Eleemosynary allowance for means of
comfortable subsistency, which the Righteousness of man (if he mean himself
to be clothed with the Righteousness of GOD and his Christ) is bound (as GODS
Rent) to discharge.

8. Thirdly, for External and Internal performance of GODS Service in the
name of the People, properly and truly called GODS Liturgy; (for the Public
Worship of GOD was never trusted to the weakness or wickedness of uninspired
men; this very Psalm being a part of the set, solemn, and continual Liturgy,
wherewith GOD, according to his own directions from time to time, was from the
Constitution of his Church adored:) that they might perform this Service free
from the engagements of particular discontents, singing forth GODS Praise, with
a melodious voice sent forth from a cheerful heart: Let thy Sacred and Secret
ones sing their Public Service with joy. [ Jerannenu] let them triumphantly
shout, or externally sound (...)
themforth from an heart possessed with Internal Exultation.

9. And then fourthly, (as the upshot of that Petition, which had the same
beginning, intimating that the Public Worship of GOD must expect both its
Introduction, and its Coronis from the Regal Power) For thy Servant David's
Religious care, both of thy House and Housekeepers; let no face that is
Anointed (by thee, Regal or Sacerdotall) be ashamed. For the word is Penei,
(...)
faces, and chiefly designeth his, of whom David was the Type. And the meaning
is, for the sufferings sake of both the David's, (the heavenly and the earthly)
Let not the great King and Priest thy Christ, whenever he comes into the
world, (first or last) be ashamed of those who are entrusted with his Offices,
nor let them be ashamed (before him) of their demeanor in those his Offices.

10. The last part, is GODS Answer to David's Petition: and it is with a
Nishbagn Jehovah; David had first vowed and sworn to Jehovah, here Jehovah
(...)
swears to David. And that which he swear was, Emeth, unalterable truth, such
as nothing shall make him depart from; (who may dare to misdoubt all, or any of
this?) The substance of his Oath is, first, Of the fruit of thy body will I set
upon thy Throne; and if thy Children will walk worthy of it, their Children
shall enjoy it [Gnadignad] as long as perpetuity shall last. And the reason
(...)
is forthwith assigned, the very material Temple which David had now destined,
and he had a long time expected. The Vow pleased him, the Place delighted him;
it, he had long ago designed, and particularly pointed at, Vide Mr Gregory
cap. 25.
when Abraham was commanded there to Sacrifice his only Son; and before that,
it was the seat of the King and Priest of Gnelion, the most High GOD,
Melchisedec; whence our grand Christian Sacrament (as the Fathers unanimously
teach) is recorded to have been Celebrated, Genesis 14. 18. before there had gone
out any Decree for the Legal Circumcision. Concerning which place, more might
be said, but it is sufficient that it is here set down, Ver. 14. For Jehovah
has chosen Tsijon (from before this VOW) to be his Habitation; He longed to be
in possession of it, had resolved there to set up his rest, to inhabit,
Gnadignad, for ever. And again it is repeated, Ver. 15. He longed for it.

11. Now for the second part of David's Petition, He answers that also with
overflowing Bounty, and doubles his Blessing on the Provision of the Priests:
(...)
Tsedah barech averech, Blessing, I will bless her meat. The poorest Levite
shall have his fill of bread, (which in Scripture is a large word containing
all other necessary viands) and for her Priests, I will adorn them with more
then Tsedek, it is, Jeshangh, Salvation, or Jesu-ship: they shall put on the
(...)
Lord Jesus, both upon themselves and others. And for the latter clause, there
also his Bounty brings forth twins; those her Holy ones, (i.) her Priests,
Ranen jerannenu, cheerfully and triumphantly singing out, shall cheerfully (...)
and triumphantly sound out the Praises of God in the daily Liturgy, metrically
pricked out before their eyes. This was GODS Oath in answer unto David's; for a
perpetual Temple, a perpetual Priesthood, and a perpetual Kingship: which if
they failed in Judaisme, we are to seek for in Christianity, for Gods Oath
cannot fail; but in the Typified (if not in the Type) it has been and shall
faithfully be performed unto the end of the world.

12. And concerning the Conclusion of the Petition, the Commemoration of David's
solicitous care, God answers accordingly: That out of the material Temple
shall come the Blessing of the pious King, which by him shall descend upon all
his Subjects, according to multitudes of plain Texts: as, Psalm. 20. 2. Psalm.
48. 8. and 53. 6. and 68. 16. and 87. 2, 7. And Psalm. 76. 3. There (in that
numericall place) when he gives victory (howsoever it may seem to be
achieved on the ground where the battle is fought) does God break the
arrows and the bow. And so here in this present 18. Verse, There, in that very
place which David's piety had vowed for me, and the Arc of my strength to dwell
in, will I (says God) make the Horn of David's strength to bud. And further
God answers in pursuance of his zeal to his own peculiar Tribe, Gnarachti, I
have prepared, ordered, and trimmed a perpetual Lamp, (...)
( viz.) the Priests with Vrim and Thummim: Light for the Service of mine
Anointed, to be unto him and his for ever, as Aaron was to Moses, Eleazar to
Joshua, Jehoshuah to Zerubbabel, to enquire of GOD by, and to offer up his and
their Devotions.

13. And yet further it may imply, That when my Christ shall come to make his
entrance upon both his Offices, He the Typified David shall not want his Sons of
Oil to stand before him for ever: for so ( viz. Sons of Oil) the Prophet,
Zech. 4. 14. calls both Zerubbabel the Prince, and Jehoshuah the Highpriest,
(who but a little before, Chap. 3. 3. had his filthy garments changed, and (...)
was gloriously clad, contrary to that which our eyes have seen,) Then said the
Angel, these be the two Sons of Oil, (or as we ordinarily read it, the two
Anointed ones) that stand by the Lord of the whole earth: this is his due and
expectation, so long as the Earth and his Lordship over it stands. And this
is the due and honorable place of Prince and Priest, (however humane boldness
may presume to step in betwixt him and them, and they may be in dishonorable
Captivity, yet then, when he seems not so much as to stand by them) to stand
by Jehovah; and to stand by him as Administrators (with him) of both his Divine
Powers.

14. This is their Office, even when the exercise thereof is hindered; in his
eye (because he has appointed them thereunto, though man will not give way to
his appointment) they are honorable, as the two Olive branches, (Ver. 15.)
which through the two golden pipes empty out of themselves (not out of the
People) the golden Oil of Gods Spiritual and Political Directions and
Sanctions. And without these, we have no evidence out of the Word of God, that
God has a visible Church or Kingdom amongst us: for Aristocracy, or
Democracy, we read not that he constituted any. But lastly, however the clothes
of the Enemies of King and Kingdom, may by false Lights seem glorious for a
time, at a blush; yet in the end shall the Enemies of the King and Kingdom be
clothed with shame, but upon himself shall his Crown flourish. When I see the
period of this, either by popular Antichristianisme, or otherwise, supposing
the Judge to be at door, I expect the end of all.

15. This is the sum of Gods faithful Oath unto David the Type: for the
perpetuity of his Temple, his Priesthood, and (which is the Crown of both) his
Kingship^: and therefore God answers twice in his Declarative Responsary,
concerning the King, at the beginning, and at the end of it. Thus in the Vision
of Ezechiel, 45. 7. and 48. 21. the possession of the Prince is appointed, as
holy Mounds and Bulwarks on both sides of the holy Portion in the last of
Covenants, that man must expect for ever. But the Covenant of the Typified
(which certainly Ezekiels Vision did concern) is of larger extent then that
former: which died only as the corn is sowed into the earth, that it might
live and flourish again; and is therefore in sundry passages of Scripture
called perpetual, because it lives in a better condition by its death. So
Psalm. 89. (where both the Covenants are evidently set out) in the 3. Verse,
(where there is no doubt, but this former unto David the Successor of Saul is
meant) I have made a Covenant with my chosen one, I have sworn unto David my
Servant, thy Seed will I establish, Gnad-gnolam (in both (...)
the words of Eternity) for ever, for ever; lest the for ever of the Law,
should seem to be all that GOD bound himself for, even in his first and
Typical contract.

16. The tenor of GODS Obligation is precisely this. Thou O David intendedst
to build me an House, (of eternal Cedar) therefore will I establish thy Seed,
Gnal-gnolam, for eternities; Vvanithi, and will build thy Throne, in generation
and generation. Selah. First Legal, then Evangelicall. Notwithstanding (...)
which, of above 2000. years that have passed since, but 21. Kings for not
500. years have enjoyed that Throne; and now, if 2000. years could go back
again, or pass for an hour, or inconsiderable moment, yet possibility it
self seems lost, that either a way or an Heir should be found to make good
the Oath of GOD, for that measure of time which is yet in coming: otherwise
then has been said in the establishment of the Thrones of Christian Princes,
as in the general Evangelicall verity making good the Legal Type.

17. But if it be answered, that upon the words before cited, If thy Children
will keep my Covenant, etc. that the Promise of GOD was merely conditional,
and therefore, that man's failing disengaged GOD; I receive the answer so far
as concerns the Type, but dare not think, that the All-foreknowing GOD would
vainly put himself upon an Oath, which he foresaw would be utterly
ineffectuall; but that there was something (for Prince, Priest, and Temple)
worthy to be the Object of GODS Oath of perpetuity, shadowed in the transitory
Type of the first Covenant of GOD, concerning all those three particulars.

18. For the present, I shall speak chiefly of the King, upon whom it lies to
take care for the other two. And here I shall examine, whether the second
Covenant under Immanuel, be of no firmer alloy, then the first under Elohim:
And particularly, whether Christian Kings adopted (as has been showed) into
the Name and Promise of Abraham's Sons, into the Name and Power of Christ, (by
whom alone, if he have any such thing, he administreth his Temporal earthly
Dominion) and also into the Name and Covenant of David, (as appears, Jerem.
30. 9. Ezekiel. 34. 24. and 37. 24. Hos. 3. 5.) Be they unto whom perpetuity was
sworn under the Veil of the former Covenant of David, expressed, Psalm. 132.
and 2 Samuel 7. 16. upon his resolution of building unto GOD a material Temple?
For the proof of the Affirmative part, (desirous not to be unnecessarily
tedious) I make choice of the 89. Psalm, where both those Covenants are
apparently set down (one after the other) both in the same Psalm.

SECT. 3.
The Contents.
A Paraphrase upon the 89. Psalm; which Celebrateth the Promise of the World's
Administration by Kings; as the gloriousest of all Gods earthly Favors; and
the faithfulness of Gods Performance herein. Gods Covenants with Jewish and
Christian Kings; One and Two; as are the Stock and the Graffe. Kings only the
Sons of Gnelion, or the most High. Christian Kings taken in into a better
Covenant then the Natural Line of David. They the ultimate Object of the
Merciful and Faithful Oath of God. No misdemeanors in them, or their Seed*
can Dethrone either. Mischiefs attending the contrary Doctrine. Former Proofs
abated, enough here asserted. The Sun and Moon Gods Witnesses of the
Perpetuity of both the Powers Regal and Sacerdotall.

1. THe Prophet in his Proeme to this 89. Psalm, professes to sing, both the
eternal Mercies of Jehovah, in this particular, (the greatest and most
glorious of his earthly favors; viz. his vouchsafing to Administer his
Dominion of the World by Kings, as shall be showed) and to Celebrate GODS
effectual Truth, [Emunatheha] in the said particular, for generation and
generation: (...)
That established truth, which shall not at any time (whether under the former
Covenant of the Law, or the second of the Gospel) be frustrated of its due
intent: and therefore he begins the Narration of it in the Person of the
Merciful and faithful Jehovah.

2. In the second Verse, is GODS Proeme to this his Sanction, [ Amarti] (...)
(in my creative word) I have said, This Mercy shall be built up [Gnolam] for
perpetuity it self: and thou my Christ shall ratify this truth; in the
Heavens, (whither no Nimrod, nor popular Babel can reach) where thou shall sit
King of the Kings of the Earth, by whom thou shall govern it.

2. Then in the third Verse, as has been said in the former Section, I have
made a Covenant with my chosen One, I have sworn unto David, who intended and
prepared to serve me, by building unto me a House, and in taking order, that
with himself all others might serve me, in and by the Priesthood which I had
established; that I would establish [ Gnad gnolam] his Seed; (...)
that which is by nature, for that which shall be adopted: the first being as a
Stock whose head was to be cut off to receive an everlasting Graffe from the
Paradise which is above, the eternal Kingdom of GOD. In which construction
are legible, both the gnad and gnolam, the covenanted Perpetuities, and the
Generation and Generation, (for the building up of Church and Kingdom of Jews
and Gentiles together, under the one Throne of the one GOD) are interpreted
according to GODS faithful Promise, unto faithful Abraham; and (according to
the Apostle) the Union of both Nations, and Religions is accomplished: Romans 9*
Their Perfection coming from us, our Initiation from them. This the Prophet
concludes with a Selah, an interpunctory pause, to give our admiration leave
to breath, and descant upon.

3. Then in the fourteen next Verses, between the two Covenants, himself
teaches us Meditations upon the gracious vouchsafings of GOD in this
particular: that howsoever vain man think coldly hereof, yet Cherubim and
Seraphim do, and ever shall celebrate it with amused admiration, unto the glory
of his goodness. O Jehovah, (Ver. 5.) the Heavens shall glorify Thee for
these thy inscrutable wonders of most gracious favor: and the Church on Earth
of thy secret ones shall be made to understand (with joy) the (mystical) truth
of thy faithful performances herein. For who (in the next Verse) amongst the
Angels in Heaven could with such Justice and Wisdom, have so prudently invented
for the honor of lost mankind! And amongst the Potentates of Heaven and Earth,
could with such Providence have disposed for the security of mankind, liable to
fall continually? In the seventh Verse, The prudent and Religious Servants of
God throughout the whole world, shall understand and acknowledge with fear and
reverence, the wonderful Mercy of this dispensation: and that (as Ver. 8.)
none but He had Power to dispose thus, nor none but He the gracious Patience to
continue in the faithful performance of the favor* which he had so disposed
of.

4. In the ninth Verse, However the foaming madness of the People more
insolently presume, yet the outrage of the most tumultuous of inanimate things
(the boisterous Seas) by submitting unto his Dominion constituted over them,
teach us our duty. And in the tenth Verse, The obdurate morosity of his
Egyptian Enemies, (who used the ingenious activity, wherewith GOD above other
Nations had enriched them, and diabolical Arts to outvie both his Power and
Wisdom, which) he made to fail and gasp under him. To him (Ver. 11.) the
Heavens owe and pay Allegiance, dropping down fatness; and so does the sullen
earth sending upwards Increase and Plenty at his pleasure for others use. And
the reason is assigned, For God is the Founder* and Creator of them. This to
teach stubborn man, in reason to understand GODS Dominion over him, and in
Religion to obey it. For (in Ver. 12.) it it GOD that has created the unruly
North, and (to Religion) the more tractable South. The word for South (...)
is Jamin, which signifies the right hand; concerning which, and the Religious
Worship by GOD required, (if he shall supply life and livelihood) I shall
desire to speak in a particalar Tract.

5. In Ver. 13. That the Wisdom and Power of God Almighty are strong, but not
the only Arguments for man's submission to this Regal Constitution. For in
Ver. 14. Justice and Judgment (for the praise of those that do well, and for
the punishment of those that do ill) are in this model of his Dominion,
Mechon chisecha, the prepared receptacle of his Throne. And not only (...)
this, but also the unexplicable Mercy, and unalterable Truth of this
Constitution shall be made apparent to all those, who Religiously wait for
their Light and Directions from the face or mouth of God.

6. Then in Ver. 15. Oh the blessedness of the People [Jodgne] which can
comprehend (...)
or understand the Jubilee hereof. They shall walk in the light [Panecha] of
thy faces; that is, in the Religion Constituted in his Temple administered from
his, by the mouth of the lawful Priest by him appointed. And Ver. 16. (...)
They who continuing of the observance thereof do walk worthy of the
Religious name, that is called upon them, shall spend their lives in peace and
joy; enjoy the just propriety which they have from him, with honor. For Ver.
17. God is the Glory of such a Peoples Protector. And it is Jehovah, who is the
strength of him, that is the Peoples strength. And who this is, is expressed in
the next Verse; Chi la-jovah Maginninu: which indeed must be (...)
translated, To the Lord (we owe him that is) our shield, and to the holy One
of Israel (we owe him that is) our King. Or according to the Margin of our last
Translation, Of the Lord is our shield, and of the holy One of Israel is our
King. And the meaning is, the King in the place of GOD is the Ordinance of GOD,
to keep off evil from us, and to dispense the mentioned goods unto us. This
(contained in these fourteen Verses) is the interlocutory Context between the
two Covenants, equally concerning both.

7. In the next nineteen Verses (concluded also with a Selah) is the second,
manifestly in sundry circumstances distinguished from the former, (as will
appear) yet so as the former may be resembled to the blossom now fallen: the
second, to the fruit which succeeds to this flower. And that as the Religion
and Priesthood, so the manner of the Political Government ought to be esteemed
one, as the same Heir a Child and a Man are different and one.

8. This appears from the first syllable of the second Covenant, Ver. (...)
19. For it is (as our last Translation truly renders it) [ Then] thou spakest
in Vision to thine Holy or Merciful One; and [ Then] when thou did
discover unto thy Man of Mercy, (whether Abraham, Jacob, Moses or Nathan, I
will not dispute) that out of the Root of Jesse should spring a Legal Stock,
which for a time should bear Royal fruit, and afterward should have an
adopted or engraffed Cien inserted into it, (as Dan. 14. 14.) which should
afford fruit and shelter for all the Nations under Heaven, which would embrace
the Faith of Abraham. Not only Christ himself, but also every Christian King
being taken into the name of David, here found out (in this Verse) to be a
helpful Instrument of GOD, for the Administration of his earthly Dominion; and
Anointed in the Oil of GODS inviolable Holiness. For there is not one
particular in the Personation of David, but as it appertains Primarily to
Christ, so does it ( ad mensuram) Secondarily to every Christian King. I desire
not by mine Exegeticall Paraphrase to emblazon or aggravate the Diminutions and
Inustions of my Nation; but rather wish that every man would seriously consider
with himself (from the ensuing Verses) the express violations of Majesty,
which GOD has testified to be both highly provoking of the Lord, and deeply
implunging of man.

9. If it be objected that the 27. Verse wholly appertains unto Christ, and
so that may draw all the rest into Question: I answer, that the words (...)
which we translate, Higher then the Kings of the Earth, are Gnelion
le-malchearets, The High One to the Kings of the Earth; who is the medium
deferens, or communicator of GODS high Celsitude unto Kings, the Highest upon
Earth: as being the only Sons of GOD, under the notion of Gnelion, which is
one of GODS ten Names; and indeed is in the Superlative (which the Hebrew has
not) incommunicable absolutely unto man. But so far herein I dare only go,
as the Scripture warrants me, and no further. My Sea-mark in this particular
is, that (as has been said) which Christ himself has vouched for
unrepealable, Psalm. 82. 6. I have said it, You are Elohim, or Gods: Vbne (...)
Gnelion chulchem, and all of you are the Sons of Gnelion. And such Sons as sit
in the seat of his Firstborn (as in the precedent words of this Verse) for the
exercise of his Jurisdiction. Of which Primogeniture for all mankind, GOD has
said, Timshal, Thou shall have Dominion: and of the younger Teshukatho, (...)
He shall seek the Law at thy mouth: this Sonship is peculiar only to those
who sit in his Throne. All the Israel of GOD are truly by Adoption the Children
of GOD, but not one of all, but only the King has (in Scripture) the honor
of that Name. So that evidently the meaning of the words is, I have taken of
his height, and given to the Kings of the Earth; (who, the liker they are to
him whose Image they bear, the higher they shall be in esteem, and in their
own Order the more glorious.)

10. Now which way the Spirit of God looks in this particular, may appear by
the next Verse, (as before in the 24.) My mercy will I keep for him for
evermore. Which mercy to understand terminative in his Person, and not
communicative to those who represent his Person, (as if He should for ever
stand in need of mercy for himself) were no less then blasphemy. But what
this mercy is, is expressed in the next words; My Covenant shall be faithfully
performed to him. And this it is (in the next Verse) I will establish his Seed,
le-gnad for perpetuity, and his Throne (to wit, in their possession) for all
the days of Heaven; (which for fear of failing, is more then once expressed.)

11. But that it may appear, that the Covenants (with David the Type, and
Typified) were two, (so as has been said) the exception of the former David's
Posterity ( quamdiu se been gesserint) is plainly cut off, Ver. 30. For if the
second David's Children forsake the Law of God, etc. God himself will chasten
them with his fatherly rod; (which the Jews understood Sterility or Sickness)
and therefore they who take up Arms against them, (at their Joseph. Ant. 7. 4.
own perils) usurp upon God. But he himself will not disinherit them, and
therefore none else may: and they who go about it, endeavor (alas! they are
his own expressions) to make him a liar, a perjured liar, and a prophaner of
his Holiness both in Word and Oath, Ver. 35.

12. Once have I sworn by my holiness, that I will not lie unto David. Acath
(...)
nishbangti bekadshi. Once have I sworn, and that once for all and ever, by
mine Holiness. And all this upon the first David's holy resolution to build me
a Temple, and to provide for my Priests. Upon this holy resolution of his, then
(in answer to his) I swore by mine own Holiness (which I will not falsify by
mine Untruth, dishonor by my Perjury, nor profane my Holiness by either, but
so (observe all this) that his Seed shall continue for ever, and his Throne,
(which certainly was a Temporal Throne on Earth) Ver. 36. shall be as the Sun
before me, in the day of the honor thereof. And Ver. 37. It shall be
established for ever, [gnolam] as the Moon, and as the faithful witness in
Heaven.

13. Which clause, if it concern not Christ, (whose indeed that Name is) but
the Moon, I conceive it to imply the esteem which the Cimmerian part of the
world holds of this Ordinance of God; and especially to relate to the
Ecclesiastical Power (the Church being often pourtrayed by the Moon) the
Regal Power being before expressed by the greater Glory of the Sun. But
however, that these Ordinances are (both in Ecclesiasticals and Politicals) to
dispense the glory of Light, and Light for Darkness: by their Motion to be for
the Times and Seasons of humane Affairs: by their Influence, to enrich or
impoverish, to send abroad Gods Storms or Calmes, so long as those pledges
thereof (the Sun and Moon) shall stand fast in their seats, out of the reach of
bold humane fingers.

14. So that it appears, first, that the first and second Covenant were one and
the same, save only, that the Graces of the second (for the stability of
Christian Princes) are enlarged.

14. Secondly, whereas it is the Prophets scope in this Psalm to celebrate
both the Infinity of GODS Mercy, and the immutability of his Oath concerning
his Anointed, for the continuance of his Throne, and Kingship, for the for ever
of the Law and of the Gospel; for the generation and generation. And whereas
throughout the fourteen last Verses he passionately bewaileth or deprecateth,
(to wit, in the four last of all) the cutting off of David's Line, which
dereliction of GOD has now lasted about two thousand years, and the three
last parts thereof, ( viz. since the Incarnation of the Creator, Redeemer, and
true Heir of the world) being the most considerable part of the time, which the
world has lived: it is hence evident, that the Israelitish Throne and Kingship
was but the fidentiall and significant, not the formal and ultimate Object of
GODS Merciful, Faithful, and Eternal Oath unto David; and therefore, that
the Covenants were two, but as the Testaments are two, as the Stock and the
Graffe, the Fulfilled and the Fulfiller.

16. Thirdly, that this branch of the grand universal Covenant of GOD,
concerning the Temporal Dominion of the World by Kings, the Sons of Gnelion;
the adopted Seed of David, was the ultimate Object of the sacred One Oath of
God: and therefore, that to look for a new Form of Government (besides the
making GOD prejured) is in effect to look for a new Covenant or Gospel, and
for a new Savior; this part of the grand Covenant being by man as unalterable
as the whole, and by the contract of GOD to continue as long as the Sun and
Moon; so irreversibly, that they ( viz. Christian Kings) are declared (from the
mouth of GOD) altogether undisinheritable: neither for their dereliction of the
general Thorah, or Law of God, nor for their perverting of Mishpat, the
Judgments of God, wherewith for mankind they are entrusted: nor for their
profaning of [ Chok] or Lex Regia, the Law of Prerogative, (which is Gods) and
the municipall Privileges of man contained also therein: nor for their not
keeping others within the Mishmereth, the penal Sanctions, which God has
constituted. All this in the 30. and 31. Verses.

17. This, it may seem to avoid a greater mischief, (most incompatible with
truly Christian lowliness) in imitation of Christ's Example, and in honor of
his place, to suffer those above us, whom Christ suffers next unto him; who
himself chose rather to suffer under them, then that those who visibly bore
the place of Elohim (whose Dominion he came to establish) should be resisted.
For if the best of men might Resist the worst of Princes, the worst (who would
account themselves the best, and those the worst whom they could make a shift
to hate) would expect the same liberty to ruin the best: and so God should
never have any, whom his own place could secure.

18. And plain it, that in Terminis, the security of Christian Kings, was
here, that which was provided for, in the 21, 22, 23. Verses; upon whose
Prerogative whosoever grows or exacteth are declared enemies of God:
whosoever angustiateth or afflicts them are Children of Iniquity: whosoever
are their Enemies in the open field shall be broken in pieces: Vmishanav, and
whosoever (...)
are secret haters, or desirous of change of their Government, or causers of
intestine Divisions by Civil Wars (however they may as Absalom, prosper for a
time) shall be smitten with Plagues; in as much as in them despite is done
unto him, into whose Throne and Primogeniture (by the Oath of God) from
Eternity into Perpetuity, they are adopted.

19. So that (as has been said) abatement being made of the former Arguments
concerning Gods Exemplifications of the Administration of his own Power,
(which to each awful Christian heart, were there no Precept given, ought to be
in place of Obligatory Law; but most severe Bonds unto those, who beguiled the
People into a Belief, that the Scriptures only ought to regulate even the
things indifferent, which God ever left to the Kings and Priests occasional
disposal.) Here (in the first Patent that God from himself gave of a settled
Dominion, recorded in his Word) is an Eternal Law set down for all Christian
Kings, which until the Lights of the Sun and Moon be put out, all they who
take benefit, by or from their Light, must account Magisteriall and
unalterable. And the Sun and Moon (according to many places of holy Scripture,
where most ordinarily by the Light of the Sun the Regal Glory, as by the Moon,
the Sacerdotall is represented) ought by all that see them, or by them, to be
esteemed as Gods Witnesses herein, and man's Remembrances hereof.

20. Thus Jer. 31. 35. Thus says the Lord, who gives the Sun for a Light by
day, and the Ordinances of the Moon and Stars for a Light by night, etc. If
these Ordinances shall depart, etc. And that the drift hereof may be
understood, see the 33. 20. Thus says the Lord, if you can break my Covenant
of the day, and my Covenant of the night, so that there should not be day and
night in their seasons, then may my Covenant be broken with David my Servant:
[That He should not have a Son to reign upon his Throne, and with the Levites
the Priests my Ministars.] And before this, Ver. 17. Thus says the Lord, David
shall never want a man to sit upon the Throne of the House of Israel; neither
shall the Priests the Sons of Levi, want a man before me -- to do Sacrifice
continually. And this I doubt not, but that it was attested and exemplified by
the golden and silver Lamps, in the model of Heaven, the material Temple: the
God of Light taking pleasure in this glorious and diffusive Expression. Neither
do I doubt, but that herewith also was signified the two grand Covenants
themselves, the Law and the Gospel; yea, and the two Languages that contained
the Oil of Grace, the compacted riches of the Hebrew, and the copious graces
of the Greek tongue. And truly I cannot conceive, that our Seekers, and
boasters of new Lights could have displayed themselves in a more unhappy
Expression, then that affectation: whose turns, Moses and the Prophets now
brought to light, will not serve.

SECT. 4.
The Contents.
A Recollection of certain Proofs: That as well Temporal earthly Kingship
over the whole Creature, as Spiritual (properly Priesthood) was, and is
Christ's, unto the end of the World: then he must resign. Christ, the Primary
Object of Gods sworn Covenant with David; Christian Kings the Secondary.
Antichrists by Saint John, 1. 2, 22. described. What is denying of the Father,
and the Son. The People may be Antichrists. Saint John's marks of
Antichristianisme. Perpetuity sworn (together with the other two) unto the
Temple, which could not sin; manifests that the performance of that Oath of
God must be expected in the Typified, which cannot be in the Type. The change
of the Priesthood before the Temple might be built, attesteth the same.

1. IF need here be of recollecting a brief of the Evidence for Christ, who as
David's Son has here the whole Dominion of the World laid upon his shoulders,
it shall in this place in short be performed: this being hence most evident,
that it is He, that was in the first place designed (under the Person of David)
for the Temporal Dominion, and Visible Thrones of the Universe, over the
People; who never had Commission with, from, or under him.

2. To Him (upon the meritorious fulfilling of the Ends of his Incarnation) it
was, that Elohim put in subjection all things whatsoever by him, and for him
(who is his perfect Image and Likeness) he had made: who is able (being the
Word that made it) to sustain it; who bought it; and as King and Priest, is in
Possession of it; who had given him a Name above all names; upon whose Thigh
was written his Style of King of kings, in token of his Propriety in them, and
their Allegiance unto Him: who said truly, (...), All the Just Legal Power
over the Creature, for the regulating thereof, (...), is by his Donation
(without which none can have Power) transferred unto me, (...), which is or can
be in Heaven or Earth, for the management of either or both.

3. Of which, for Earth, Kingship is a part, where his Dominion cannot but be
either none, or Monarchical. The Apostle says, (...), He must be King; yea,
the only Potentate for Earth, King of kings, and Lord of lords: as Saint Paul
and Saint John also have attested. And Saint Peter in his first Epistle, 3. 22.
(...), there being given unto the subjection of his Throne.

First, the ordinary Angels, where his Dominion is purely and exemplarily
Monarchical.

Secondly, under the name of (...), those, who understand that all Power must
come from Him, from whom comes their being, (according to the signification of
the word) and therefore affect no other Form, then that only which is his only
Constitution; who hope in due time to bear the Angels company, and therefore
readily submit before hand to that Royal Platform; whose Prayer is, Thy
Kingdom come from their model to govern us by.

Thirdly, under the name of (...), Those, who by vain Humane strength
robustiously create their own Power without and against Him; over whom he
bears Rule, not through their reasonable Service, but his Almighty Power,
which extends it self even to Hell it self. These all must be abdicated, 1
Cor. 15. 24. at, not until the end of the World; and then the Dominion for the
for ever of the next World must be Paternall: When He shall have put down,
(...), Caelestiall, Homogeneous, and Heterogeneous: as before, 1 Pet. 3. 22.

4. Secondly, it is apparent, that in and through Christ, the name of David is
secondarily conferred upon all Christian Kings; as all Kings without the
consideration of their Religion, were, and are taken into the name of Elohim;
were, and are (ever since Christ's Ascension) Insessors upon his Throne, under
the notion of Elohim; though the Title of David be incommunicable unto them.

5. Otherwise, notwithstanding his Fathers Donation (which no man may be so
wicked, as to conceive that he would, or has refused) he who has All, had had
no Throne upon Earth, here by Oath confirmed unto him: Himself had been a
vain Ostentator of his Fathers Gift: His Apostles had been false Witnesses of
GOD, concerning his Title of King of kings: and there had not been compensation
made Him for the cutting off of the Line of his Ancestors from the Throne and
Scepter, which by just descent was His; but by this Donation fore-prophesied,
Psalm. 45. 16. In stead of thy Fathers thoushalt have (adopted) Children:
Tashithemo le-sharim, Thou shall make them (...)
Princes in the whole Earth. Which in that place is not set down Kings, but
Princes, (as Antiquity has observed) to take in also the other part of his
Sovereignty; viz. Sacerdotall.

9. For the latter whereof, though the Oath of God has passed unto his Christ
for a Temporal perpetual Priesthood, so long as the Sun and Moon shall last,
this our Age is too far from accounting them Princes, who only are of His
and his Apostles ordered with Power (to the end of the world) for the
administration of this his Divine Authority. God in his good time rectify this
also, and give to all men grace to consider that of the 1 John 2. 22.

7. For they who deny the Regal and Sacerdotall Powers, which are the Donation
in Terminis, of GOD the Father unto GOD the Son, do (quoad hoc) deny the
Father and the Son, the Donor and Possessor, which is the Apostles Character of
Antichrist, which name signifies an Opposer of the Anointed: (...); Who is the
liar, if not he, who makes God in his faithful Oath of Donation unto his
faithful Son, a Liar? The words are, (...), But he that denies, that Jesus is
the Anointed; viz. King of kings, and High Priest over the household of GOD.

8. The same is Antichrist (not who is an Opposer of the Deity, or Trinity; for
there is no mention made of the third Person, viz. the holy Spirit) but he who
denies the Father and the Son; not in their Essence or Godhead, for that
could not be without denial of the holy Ghost also, in and with the denial of
the other two Persons; not in the Trinity, for he that denies but either of the
Persons, denies thereby the Trinity of Persons. So that the formal Object of
Antichrists Opposition, is not the Deity, because the holy Ghost is untoucht;
not the Trinity, because two are named; not the Deity or generation of the
Father, for then his name should have been (...); not the Deity of Jesus; but
(according to the name of Antichrist) only the Office of Christ conferred upon
him by his Father: He denies not Jesus, but that Jesus was the Anointed or
Christ.

9. Now he that denies, that Jesus was formerly in his own Person Anointed,
cannot be proved to be the Liar: for the proof lies on the contrary part,
that Himself was never Anointed; but (as has been said) in those who for Him
manage his Offices, to whom he has communicated this name of Christ in stead
of their former Elohim. In the 18. Verse it is, (...), There are many
Antichrists; which without violence may be translated, The many are
Antichrists. And the marks (answerable to that of Saint James, 3. 15. The
wisdom of this world is earthly, sensual, devilish) which the Apostle has
given us for Antichristianisine, are as applicable to many as one.

10. The first is Ver. 15. The love of the world. Of which I could wish they
could acquit themselves. The second is the lusts of the flesh: concerning
which, I only ask the question of our Savior to the woman taken in Adultery,
Has no man condemned thee? neither do I. The third is the lust of the eyes:
wherein I desire not to be their excuser. And lastly, (...), which we construe
the pride of life. The word (...) signifies (...) viz. him who being
ambitiously too big for his own station, after him that compasses the world,
goes round in his erratick vagaries to possess himself of what ever he can
step into, accounting his own what ever he can catch, though it be from Christ
himself. This is the differentiall note (as the other are common accidents)
appertaining to Saint John's many Antichrists. Whose private Unction (whereby
they are made Heirs of the heavenly Kingdom, if through Luciferian
affectation they forfeit not their Title) should teach them to conform
themselves (as Ver. 17.) to the Supreme Royal will of God, making that their
Law in all humility, and patient expectation.

11. But so far and so subtly have they cast behind them the consideration
of this their Anointing, whereby the World, the Flesh, and the proud One are
abjured; that to the intent, they might step into the Royalty of GOD the Son,
unperceived by the most of men, they deny him not to be Jesus, nor the eternal
Son, nor do they deny his Father, nor Fatherhood, only that Jesus is the
Assign of GOD the Father, for the Thrones and Dominion of the world, attested
by his sacred name of Anointed, or Christ; which Name, he has taken only for
their sakes, who are Administrators of his Powers on Earth; to make visible
demonstration for them, that they only are the men, who are by Elohim
separated from the community of mankind, and assumed into the Society of the
Godhead, by the outward Symbol of their Anointing in the holy Oil of God.
For let any man prove, that the only begotten Son of GOD, was in his own
Person (as in the 45. Psalm. Ver. 7.) Anointed, [Shemen Sason] (...)
with the Oil of gladness, otherwise then (as in that Verse, Mechavarecha) a
sodalibus suis, from their Anointing, who are taken into the Fellowship of Him,
and I will yield him the cause for ever, and that he has unproved his
Antichristship.

12. Well, it is granted on all hands, that the Kingdom of Christ promised
unto Abraham, and Typified in David, was in these (as in other parallel places
of holy Scripture) designed. Which is here proved to be the Temporal Dominions
of the earth also; and that Kingship, Priesthood, and Temple, are here (under
their signal) for Christianity, by the faithful and immutable Oath of GOD,
constituted and ordered for perpetuity: so as the King is left GODS Curator and
Guardian, both of the Temple and Priesthood: both of them (mysteriously) to be
composed and disposed of by the younger Son of David, prefiguring the
succeeding and exceeding Glory of the Christian Throne, after and above that of
the elder House, and of the former Constitution: by whom, (to wit, Solomon) the
material Temple of God, (in evidence for our Christian Oratories) was in stead
of the Tabernacle composed by Moses, in surpassing Glory to be erected.

13. Concerning which (since the Temple could not offend) without this
interpretation, there cannot be showed a way for reconciliation unto truth,
(...)
of the Oath of God, according also to that of Psalm. 78. 70. Che-erots jesadah
legnolam, He has established it (viz. the Temple) for ever, as firmly as be
has done the earth, which stands still, that is gone 1400. years ago.

14. But before this Temple might be built, the Priesthood (unto which also
perpetuity was Promised and Sworn) must (in an Evangelicall Figure) be
transferred to another Line, from the Family of Abiathar, unto the House of
Zadok, celebrated by the Prophet Ezechiel, as a presignifiation of the Ez^k 44.
15 and 48. 11.
change (rather then abolition) of the former, into one, never to be abrogated,
or altered, Christian Priesthood. Which by GODS assistance shall be
demonstrated, when I come to treat of GODS Likeness; of which, by the
appointment of the GOD of all consolations, the Priesthood is designed for the
Diacatholicon or Catholic cure, as the Regal Power is constituted for the
rectifying of the Lords Image.

SECT. 5.
The Contents.
Evidences from the words Melech and Moshel. David, the most irrefragable of
all Witnesses; and the most liberal of all Acknowledgers. That the Temporal
Kingships of all the world, are Elohim's own. The name of Melech or King,
Primarily Gods and his Christ's. Twenty places out of the one Book of Psalms,
produced to prove this. Others, concerning the Title of Moshel. David had
Arbitrary Prerogative, beyond the bounds of Gods own described Sanctions. Salus
populi, Suprema Lex esto, understood. The Sons of David, Heirs of his
Prerogative.

1. NOw the Supremacy and Irresistibility of the Temporal Power of Christ in
the hands of his adopted Firstborn, the Kings of the earth; further appears
by the name of Melech, which GOD has honored them with. A name it is most
evidently implying earthly Dominion, as also the said Supremacy and
Irresistibility; for it belongs to GOD, whose just height and might are
undoubtedly such. And certain also it is, that by the settlement of GODS
Monarchical Power, by his Charter unto David derived unto his younger Son (the
Type and pledge of GODS more glorious and unalterable Covenant with Christian
Kings, as according to the Analogy of Scripture shall be showed in the next
Chapter) GOD gave away nothing from himself. GODS uncontrollable witness (in
this particular) is David himself, who well understood it, and is a most
liberal Acknowledger thereof. In evidence for the same,

2. I shall produce out of the Book of Psalms, twenty places; but first
premise this Maxim; That what attribute soever is (in Scripture) applied both
to God and man, if it contain in it matter of Excellency, it properly
belongs to God, and but Analogically, or by way of Indulgence to man; but if
it connotate infirmity, it is genuinely man's, and but for Expression sake (to
help our frail understandings) communicable to the Deity.

3. Of which former sort are those Names, of apparent Eminency, and evident
transcendency, Elohim, (one of the ten Names of GOD) Melech, Moshel. The last
whereof, [ Moshel] expressly declares, that the petite Dynasty or Sovereignty of
the Husband, Father, or Master of the Family, over the Wife, Children, or
Servants therein, is Originally (for the matter thereof) the Power of God, by
his gracious dispensation derived unto Him that sustaines the place of GOD in
that smaller Seigniory; against whom, none in the said Family may kick, but he
is a violator of GOD, and an infringer of the bonds of Religion. This at home,
by those who oppose it abroad, will easily be granted: which with greater
evidence of reason and strength (as has been showed) for the greater household
of GOD; ( viz. the Kingdom) rises up to vindicate the Power of Melech, the
King.

4. Which name of Sovereignty throughout the whole course of Scripture, is
either actually or implicitly declared to belong to the Almighty Creator, in
places without number; whereby appears, that the Dominion of Kingship is
Primarily Gods, and but Secondarily the Administrators thereof: as the Power of
the communicated name of Elohim, is unquestionably his. Both which names of
Elohim and Melech, are conversant about the same thing; viz. the Power and Act
of Government; so that the name of Melech (in its Originality) being Gods, the
Power contained in that name is Irresistible, and includes all the
Prerogatives of Majesty, at this day controverted amongst us. And so, I proceed
to the places in this one Book of David's Psalms, who in regard the Power of
the Name was settled upon him and his: had of all others most reason to
interpose for himself and them: if he or they had any severalty by virtue of
the said Donation. The Acknowledgements follow.

5. The first Record shall be, Psul. 95. 3. For Jehovah is the great God, and
Melech, gadol gnal-col-Elohim; the great King over (not by reason of might,
(...)
but order above) all Elohim. Upon which place, I look with astonished
reverence, In contemplation of the content, which God takes in his name of
Melech or King; by himself preferred to that of Elohim or God; and of his care
of humane preservation, advanced beyond the Glory of his Creation: wherein GOD
is Melech, and the King is Elohim. What man may attempt to lessen the Regal
Power? It is GODS, who is the King. What man can think himself made less? or
not honored by the communication of that Divine Power? It is the Kings, who is
man. This is the Ordinance of GOD (for man's good) who cannot be deceived about
his own ends; while we are deceived, thinking that evil, which is either good
in it self, or so disposed of to make us good.

6. Let every man look with an impartial eye into himself, and he shall see,
that the more Power his Democraticall passions have in him, the more vicious he
is; and the less Power the Monarchical part (his reasonable will) has; and
the less influence the Sacerdotall part of clarified understanding has upon
the Royalty of that will; the more miserable is his vassalage, though all other
men and things (besides his own lusts) stoop to him.

7. And let no man think (since Heaven is governed) that man may be trusted
farther then the Angels are; or that man can invent a more just and equal
Government then he, who made man and his inventive faculty, has constituted
for him. It being far better that he should rely upon GODS scientificall and
demonstrative Prescience and Providence; then that he should believe his too
late and sad experience, by trying other Forms of Government opposite unto the
Ordinance of GOD.

8. Which if he could consider, he would with gratitude acknowledge, that not
only his Safety and Dignity, but also his Liberty and Propriety, were in this
Constitution of GOD better provided for, then all the Sanbedrins of the sons
of men can devise. For if GOD have designed to himself the ordinary name,
which he has given to all Kings; and to all Kings his extraordinary first
recorded name of Elohim; then according to the capacity of the receiver, that
which the King is over every Subject, God is over every King; and such an
Elohim as Melech is to his Subject, such a King will GOD be to his Subject, the
King. Who when he comes to judge, will make it appear, that no man can receive
more wrong by any constitution of his, then he is able to make compensation
for; and that no man can do so wisely against his constitution, but he shall
find, that he has done to himself that wrong by his wisdom, which the God of
pity never intended to him.

9. But to proceed, Psalm 5. 2. God is by the King acknowledged to be both his
King and his God. And accordingly, Psalm. 9. 4. The Kings Throne is acknowledged
to be Gods. Psalm. 10. 18. Jehovah Melech gnolam vaghned, Jehovah is King (...)
for ever and eternity. Psalm. 20. 9. He is the King that receives the
Petitions of all that are oppressed; yea, of his own Anointed Kings. Psalm. 22.
28. Jehovahs grand Kingdom is declared to be Universal, and the Christian
Gentiles to be one of the Generations before mentioned. Psalm. 24. throughout,
the Kingship over the whole creature is asserted unto Jehovah by reason of his
Creation. Psalm. 29. 9. He is Melech le-gnolam, invested with the name and Power
of King (...)
for ever. Psalm. 44. 5. He himself (exclusively of all others, whom himself
has not taken into that honor) is Melech. Psalm. 45. 6. His Throne is for
ever, and perpetuity, and the Scepter of his Kingdom, is a Scepter of
rectitude Psalm. 47. 2. Jehovah Gnelion, is terrible, the great King over all
the earth. So V. 7. and Psalm. 68. 24. Elohim is the Kings King. So Psalm. 74.
12. Psalm. 93. 1. He has been King from the Creation: and then was his Throne
erected, Ver. 2. Psalm. 96. 10. He is the Universal King. Psalm. 97. 1. The
whole earth has cause of exultation by his Kingship. So also, Psalm. 98. 7. So
91. 1. Psalm. 103. 19. Psalm. 130. 4. Psalm. 146. 10. Jehovah is King for ever.
And thy God, O Zijon, in generation and generation (over Judaisme and
Christianity) Hallelujah.

10. By which places it is evident, that Temporal Thrones, and Earthly
Kingdoms still remain Gods and his Christ's; notwithstanding the Patent and
Great Seal of the Oath of God to the Christian sons of Gnelion; for Melech
certainly is a King on earth, and the Kings Throne is undoubtedly made of those
things which our eyes report unto us. The Power whereof, if it were
communicated unto the people, cannot be Kingdom (as has been showed) if it be
primarily in the People, it cannot at all be GODS. If it be Gods, there can be
no Co-ordination with him, and none will appear to be from him. If it were, it
puts the People under and over themselves, and into the place of God; whose
Prerogative it is to be sole Commander, and King of kings. Wherein, how
desperate a thing it is for man to rob God in this greatest of particulars, I
shall continually pray that mankind may effectually see.

11. Concerning the word Moshel, and that it may appear of what derivation the
Power therein is; it is that (as has been showed) by which God from the
Beginning expressed the Dominion of the Man over the Woman; of the Firstborn
over the others in the same Family; and is frequently used in holy Scriptures,
to declare the Royalty of God in his great household of Kingdom. By which
means, the Descent is evident, that the Power of the Head of the Family, is
not only of Divine extraction, but continues in it self to be divine, as has
been proved; so that whoever therein do carry themselves rebelliously, do
violate the very Power of God, from whom does flow all Power that is regular;
as all that is of opposite Constitution (or resistance of that which is set in
order, by and under the Universal Creator and Governor) proceeds from the
Prince that rules in the Air.

12. For the word Moshel; thus we read Psalm. 22. 28. For Jehovah is Kingdom,
(...)
Vmoshel bagoijm, and he [beareth Rule] over the Gentiles. Psalm. 66. 7. Moshel
gnolam, he [beareth Rule] for ever by his Power; his eyes shall look into the
Nations; let not the rebellious exalt themselves. Selah. Psalm. 89. 9. Ata
Moshel begeuth eajim, Thou rulest the raging of the Sea, when the waves thereof
lift up themselves, thou shall quiet them. Briefly, Psalm. 103. 19. The Lord
has prepared his Throne in Heaven, and his Kingdom Mashala [beareth Rule]
over all. Whereupon in the ensuing Verses, the Prophet David inviteth the
Angels, yea, all things which GOD made, in all places, Memshalto, of his
Dominion to bless the (...)
Lord. Whence appears the Divine Race of Dominion from the Family to the
Kingdom: which is the coalescency of many into one great household, where the
King is Husband, Father, and Master. As 2 Samuel 12. 8. I gave thee, (to wit, GOD
to his Anointed David) thy Masters house, and thy Masters wives, and gave thee
the house of Israel and Judah: that is, I made them up into one Family, and
made thee (by making thee King) to be Lord and Master thereof.

13. That David had also established in him (with the Kingdom) Power of
Prerogative, transcending the Sanctions of GODS own municipall Law; given
immediately from Heaven for the Government of that Nation, appears by the
preceding fifth Verse. The man that has done this thing (says David) shall
surely dye; which was not expressed in GODS Positive Law; And besides (which
was the provision which God had ordained) he shall restore the Lamb fourefold.

14. But I desire not by prosecution of this Argument to exasperate those for
whom I pray: only let me have leave (in answer to an Objection, which out of
the twelve Roman Tables has been as fiercely urged, as if it had come out of
the two Tables of GODS own writing; against Prerogative Royal, and all
Arbitrary Power in extraordinaries) to say to the misleaders, that they wanted
either understanding or ingenuity to construe, or give the true meaning of that
Law, Salus populi suprema Lex esto. For the plain English of those words is,
There must be Arbitrary Power; that no Positive Law must be so binding, but
that if the good of the People require it, it must be voyded. And this was the
ground of a Monarchical Government by a Dictatour in case of imminent danger;
that by no Law he should be precluded from doing the People that good, which
their exigency required, and the Laws restrained. And in the like case of the
Solution from the Laws, of such as Pompey and others; whom either their fear
or need made them to trust beyond their popular Plebiscita, or their no more
equal Senatus consulta.

15. Which is a luculent confession, that the Monarchical Constitution of God
is truly more wise, and helpful at need, then the together-laid Polity of the
whole aggregate body of the People, or the select number of so many
King-Senators: and designed one reason why the Power of Gods Deputy should not
be restrained by any but himself. But I will conclude this story with the
construction which the next Age made of this settlement of Gods Dominion in the
house of David; which I will do (without any Paraphrase) only in the words
which the Spirit of God has set down; referring it wholly to the powerful
working of Him who dictated it, for all.

14. It is the 2 Chronicles. 13. 4. And Abijah stood upon Mount Zemaraim, and said,
2 Chro. 13. 4
Hearken thou Jeroboam, and all Israel; Ought you not to know, that the Lord
God of Israel gave the Kingdom over Israel to David for ever, by a Covenant of
Salt? Yet Jeroboam the son of Nebat, the servant of Solomon the son of
David, is risen up and has rebelled against his Lord. And there be gathered
unto him vain men, the children of Belial, and have strengthened themselves
against Rehoboam, etc. And now you think to withstand the Kingdom of the Lord
in the hands of the sons of David; and you be a great multitude, and there be
with you golden Calves, which Jeroboam made you for gods. Have you not cast out
the Priests of Jehovah? the sons of Aaron, and the Levites; and have made you
Priests after the manner of the Nations of other Lands? So that whosoever
comes to fill his hand with a young bullok, and seven rams, may be a Priest
of them, that are no Gods. But as for us, Jehovah is our God, and we have not
forsaken him; and the Priests which minister unto the Lord are the sons of
Aaron, and the Levites wait upon their business. And they burn unto Jehovah,
every morning and every evening burnt Sacrifices, and sweet Incense: the
Shewbread also they set in order upon the pure Table, and the Candlestick of
pure gold, with the Lamps thereof to burn every evening: for we keep the
charge of Jehovah our God, but you have for saken him. And behold, God himself
is with us for our Captain, and his Priests with sounding Trumpets to cry
aloud against you; O children of Israel, fight not against the Lord God of your
Fathers, for you shall not prosper.

Whereupon mine eighth Quaere is.

Since God upon his first recorded settlement of his Earthly Dominion in a
particular Family, did in the Name and Person of him, ( viz. David) upon whom
he conferred it, together, in and with him, establish the Thrones of all
Christian Princes over all the People, for all the hours of the world's
continuance, from their entertainment of the Christian Faith; and to make sure
of the same, declared the Power thereof, to be the proper Right of his Christ,
and Christ to be the medium deferens, or mean of conveighance of it to
Christian Kings,

How without making them (who should be admirers and celebrators of the
incomprebensible favors done unto the People hereby) most Sacrilegious and
Antichrists, the Power thereof may be usurped by the People? much less the
Originality thereof challenged?
My first Argument shall be concerning the grand Precognitum of all Religious
Science, the sacred Scriptures:

That Doctrine, which lays an imputation upon the Scriptures, as if they did
not contain in them all things necessary unto Faith and good life, and
particularly in the greatest of all worldly concernments: Is in all sorts of
men graceless, but most desperate in those, who make a stale of the Profession
of them, and zeal for them, under the shadow of them, to overthrow their
adversaries, and the Scriptures themselves at last. But the Doctrine which
affirms: That the Power of Dominion is in the People Originally, or
Primarily, or otherwise, then by the Donation of God, recorded in the
Scripture, in the hands of such as have managed it, has been and is such; viz.
It is no where contained in Scripture, and by consequence lays an imputation
of deficiency upon them: It is in a Point of the greatest of worldly
concernments, for it is deficiency of an established Government in the world,
for the Peace and Order thereof in all Godliness and Honesty: It is in matters
of Faith, opposing the Article of Christ's Session at the right hand of God, as
King and Priest, dispensing both the Powers to his Deputies for the Regiment of
the World: It is in matters concerning good life, plucking up the chief hedges
which God has made against the breaking in of Impiety and Injustice: And the
other particulars are most evident: Scripture zeal has been pretended,
Scripture authority is deserted: the constituted Assertors of the Scriptures
are decryed; horrible blasphemies against the Scriptures have ensued.
Therefore, that Doctrine which affirms, that the Power of Dominion is in the
People, Originally, Primarily, or otherwise, then by the Donation of God
recorded in Scriptures: Is in all sorts of men graceless; but most desperate
in those, who make a stale of the Profession of them, and zeal for them, under
the shadow of them to overthrow their opposites, and at last the Scriptures
themselves.
The second Argument concerning two great Principles of Theology, contradicted
by this Doctrine.

That Doctrine, which gainsayeth the main Principles of the gracious Providence
of God, admired and celebrated by the Saints of Heaven, and Earth; and of the
unquestionable Prerogative of God (by them submitted unto) is (whatsoever is
pretended) in manifest opposition to the Word of God. But the said Doctrine,
(That the Power of Dominion is Originally, or otherwise in the People, then by
the Donation of God) is such: viz. It is one of the maine Principles in the
Science (or Prudence) of Divinity, That the merciful Providence of God, is
over all that he has created, the Preserver and Governor; which he that cannot
create, cannot guide and uphold: he that has not created, cannot have the
right unto; with which Providence it cannot consist, to leave the People to
their own governance, (as Numb. 27. 17.) like sheep without a shepherd; or as
the foolish, careless, unnatural Ostrich, her eggs, Job 39. 14. The
Administrator of this Providence (for the People) is declared to be the King:
and the Wisdom and Goodness of it, is celebrated and admired by the Angels
and Saints in Heaven and Earth, Psalm. 89. 5. This Doctrine also gainsayeth a
second Principle; viz. The Prerogative of God, Unquestionably and Irresistibly
to govern that which he made of nothing, by what Form and Persons himself
pleases, without giving an account to any created thing. And evident it is,
that he never constituted but Monarchy; unto which the Angels and Saints in
Heaven do submit, under the Man Christ: by whom he has promised to govern
the heart of the King; by whom he has appointed to govern the People. Not
any, nor all of whom, can so much as see into the heart of any one man, much
less govern it. Therefore the said Doctrine, (That the Power of Dominion is
in the People Originally, or otherwise then by the Donation of God) Is
(whatever is pretended) in manifest opposition to the Word of God.
Thirdly, that the Power of earthly Dominion (challenged for the People) is the
peculiar Right of Christ, by the Donation of his Father.

He that affirms an Universal upon any: Affirms unto the same every
particular contained within that Universal. But the holy Ghost, in the
Donation of all Power in Heaven and Earth to Christ, has affirmed to him the
Universal. Therefore the holy Ghost, in the Donation of all Power in Heaven
and Earth to Christ: Affirms unto him every particular, which is contained in
the Universal notion of all Power; and by consequence, that which is
challenged for the People, which without Donation from Heaven, is challenged
against the God of Heaven.
Fourthly, what (against all Pretenders) Christ is really seized of, by virtue
of the Donation of God the Father, the sole and proper Efficient of all
Dominion.

Whatsoever God the Father (whose gifts cannot be restrained or made
ineffectuall) has given to God the Son, (who cannot reject his Fathers
Bounty:) That God the Son (against all Opposers) is truly, actually, and
demonstratively possessed of. But all the Dominions of the Earth,
Ecclesiastical and Temporal, the Thrones and Scepters of the one, the Seats
and Shepheard-staves of the other, (according to his Style of King of kings,
and Lord of lords, and his Title of great High Priest and Bishop of our
Souls:) Are things, which God the Father (whose gifts cannot be restrained, or
made ineffectuall) has given to God the Son (who cannot reject his Fathers
bounty.) Therefore, all the Dominions of the Earth, Ecclestasticall and
Temporal; the Thrones and Scepters of the one, the Seats and Shepherd-staves
of the other, (according to his Style of King of kings, and Lord of lords; and
his Title of Great High Priest, and Bishoprof Souls:) God the Son is truly,
actually, and demonstratively, (against all Opposers) possessed of.
Fifthly, concerning Gods Donation of the one Power of Christ (in one Act under
the Person and Covenant of David, together with him) established upon his
adopted Seed, the Kings of Christendom; unto whom, he has sworn by his
Holiness, that by Them, this Power of his Christ shall be externally
Administered, so long as the world endures; notwithstanding all that, which did
actually cut off the former Typifying David's Entaile. This being done upon the
first recorded settlement of Gods Dominion in one Family, does teach us, that
from the beginning in the Covenants of Abraham and David, they were the chief
and ultimate part of Gods faithful Promises, for the external Glory of his
Christ.

Whatsoever God (the most powerful Efficient) has settled once for all, and
for ever, with express cautions (against State Antinomians) for [perpetuity
and perpetuity,] for [generation and generation] upon Christ (who must ratify
the truth hereof, sitting in the impregnable Heavens) for his adopted children,
(which, all of them are the Sons of Gnelion) who must in his stead sit upon the
Thrones of the Earth, while the Sun and Moon shall endure: That is so
established, that it must continue to the end of the world; and is not to
expire with the Type thereof. But the Regal Power of the Thrones of the Earth,
in the possession of legally succeeding Christian Kings, according the Law of
Nature, as is expressed in the Word of God: Is that which God the most
powerful Efficient, has thus settled, etc. Therefore, the Regal Power of the
Thrones of the Earth, in the just possession of legally succeeding Christian
Kings, according to the Law of Nature, exemplified in the Word of God, is so
established, that it must continue to the end of the world, and is not to
expire with the Type thereof.
Concerning this Argument (which I take to be an irrefragably concludent
Demonstration, deduced according to the exact rules of Logic, Ex veris,
primis, immediatis, necessariis, causis conclusionis:) I shall only
recapitulate, that the Throne often mentioned, and particularly, Psalm. 89. 29,
36. cannot be understood of the Jewish Kings, the Lineal Successors of the
former David in the former Covenant. For they, as the were Typical, so they
were Conditional, and upon breach of Articles, have now failed above two
thousand years; while the Sun and Moon (the admeasurers of the perpetuity
sworn by GOD) have lasted, and yet do continue. So that (if the Oath of GOD
have any truth in it) of necessity it must be meant of them, who were specified
in the Covenant with Abraham, when he was designed for the Father of all the
Nations of the world that should be blessed. Genesis 17. 6. I will make Nations of
Thee, and Kings shall spring out of thee, and I will establish this my Covenant
between Me and Thee, and thy Seed after thee for an everlasting Covenant. Which
must be understood of his more impossible Seed, then his generation of
Israelites, when he was an hundred years old. For it had been altogether
impossible, that he should have been the Father of (us) the Gentiles, if his
Natural, and not his Adopted Seed had been meant. For Jews and Gentiles, as
contradistinct members divide the world; whereof his issue according to Nature,
are but one, not many or all the Nations: which all are taken in to this his
Covenant. So must the Seed of David and Christ, (who never had other then these
before adopted, who were the Glory of the Covenant with Abraham) be understood.
And thus and no otherwise, have we the Perpetuity and Perpetuity, the
Generation and Generation (as has been said) plainly construed. But I forbear
further repetitions, referring (for them) the Reader to the precedent Proofs.

Sixthly, concerning the Oath of GOD for the perpetuity of Kingship,
Priesthood, and Temple.

Whosoever affirms, or does that, which endeavors to make God a liar,
perjured, and a profane neglecter of the sacredness, both of his Word and
Oath: Asserteth (by inevitable consequence) the most blasphemous Sacrilege
which humane holdnesse can on Earth attempt. But whosoever affirms, or does
against the perpetuity of those three Particulars, for which God has sworn in
Truth and Holiness, and has Anointed them for perpetuity and inviolability
(in specie, though not in individuo) in the Typified, though not in the Type,
(expressing thereby, that the Type and Typified are one in Honor and
Substance, though different in garb and circumstance;) viz. his first on Earth
established Kingship, Priesthood, and Temple: Affirms or does that which
tends to make God a liar, perjured, and a profane neglecter both of his Word
and Oath. Therefore, whosoever affirms, or does against the perpetuity of
those three particulars, for which God has sworn in Truth and Holiness, and
has Anointed them for perpetuity and inviolability, (in specie, though not in
individuo) in the Typified, though not in the Type: viz. His first on Earth
established Kingship, Priesthood, and Temple; (expressing thereby, that, what
was and is, are one in Honor and Substance; though different in garb, and
circumstance:) Asserteth (by inevitable consequence) the most blasphemous
Sacrilege, which humane boldness can on Earth attempt.
Seventhly, concerning S. John's proper passion of Antichrist, (or the visible
mark of the Beast) Man's taking to himself (without an external Calling from
God) those Honors, which God by Anointing, has made sensible demonstration
for them, that they are by him Sacrated and made Divine, by the accession of
that which is Divine. For the present, I forbear to speak of the Temple, and
Antichrists possessing himself of it, and sitting in it, as if he were Lord
and Master of that house, which is the propriety of God himself; His fixed
place of abode, and rest for ever; the place where his honor dwells; and
Makom la-jovah, which after a peculiar manner entertaineth Immensity it self;
which whosoever swears by, swears by it and Him that dwells therein. But
I intend to treat of this in a particular Discourse.

Those, who presume out of their own stations, without the external Calling
from God, to take unto themselves the Powers of those Honors which are
apparently Christ's, made known to be so by the Anointing (of Gods
appointment:) They visibly have the mark (or proper Passion) of Antichrist, in
Saint John, 1 Ep. 2 Chap. 16. Ver. But they who presume out of their own
stations, without the external Calling from God, to take unto themselves the
Powers of the Honors of Kingship and Priesthood, do take upon themselves
those Honors which are apparently Christ's, made known to be so by the
Anointing, of Gods appointment. Therefore, those who presume out of their own
stations, without the external Calling from God, to take unto themselves the
Powers of the Honors of Kingship and Priesthood, visibly have the mark or
proper passion of Antichrist, in Saint John's (...).
Eighthly, concerning the essential difference of Antichrist; the denying
Jesus to be the Anointed, according to the honorary Donation of his Father.

Whosoever (be it one or many, or many for one, or themselves, who) deny that
Jesus is the Messiah, Christ, or Anointed: They, or he, are the liars, or liar
(and not God who has made good his Oath, and has not lied unto David, Psalm
89. 35.) Do, or does contradict the Donation of God the Father to the Son, and
(as being in opposition to the Power of Anointing) he or they, is or are
Antichrist or Antichrists, or maintainers of Antichrist. But whosoever denies
that Jesus (who was otherwise never solemnly Anointed with the Oil of
gladness) is Anointed by proxy in the Persons of those who bear his high
Offices, and whom God has styled his Fellows; to deprive them of it, that the
Power and Honor thereof might be otherwise usurped: He or they does or do
deny, that Jesus is (at all) the Messiah, Christ, or Anointed. Therefore,
whosoever denies that Jesus (who otherwise was never solemnly Anointed with
the Oil of gladness) is Anointed by Proxy, in the Persons of those, who (by
the Commission of God) bear his high Offices, and whom God has styled his
Fellows; to deprive them of it, that the Power and Honor thereof might be
otherwise usurped: He or they are the liars or liar, and not God, who has made
good his Oath, and has not lied unto David; do, or does deny the Fathers
Donation to the Son, and as being in opposition to the Power of Anointing; He
or they, is or are Antichrist, Antichrists, or maintainers of Antichrist.
Ninthly, concerning the Dignity, and Immobility from their Thrones of those
upon whom God has (according to the Law of Nature) settled this Regal Power of
Him, and his Christ.

Those who are advanced into the same rank of Dignity that King David was, who
was set over the Positive Laws of God; and as being the adopted Sons of Christ,
David's Son, may not be disinherited for their for saking of the general
Thorah, or grand Law of God, which contains in it Mishpat, Gods great Right
of Judgments between himself and mankind; and Chok, the sacred Law of
Privileges, either Royal or Municipall; and Mishmereth, the custody of
mankind in Order, by Penal Sanctions: They cannot be under the Power of any
humane Law, nor forfeit by it the Right which they have to Gods Power, which is
over it. But Christian Kings are advanced into the same rank of Dignity that
King David was, and as being the adopted Sons of Christ, may not be
disinherited, etc. Therefore, Christian Kings cannot be under the Power of any
humane Law, nor forfeit by it the Right which they have to Gods Power, which is
over it.
Tenthly, it is evident by the former Arguments, and this, That the Power of
Kings is Divine; and therefore on earth Supreme, Irresistible, etc.

That Power which is Gods and his Christ's, is on earth Supreme, Irresistible,
and which ought not to be overtopped or lessened by humane Laws or Swords. But
the Power of the King is Gods and his Christ's. Therefore, the Power of the King
is on earth Supreme, Irresistible, and which ought not to be overtopped or
lessened by humane Laws or Swords.
Eleventhly, from the name of Melech in particular, which also is Primarily
GODS and his Christ's, the Power whereof is not given away from GOD, but trusted
to man.

All those Names of Powers (and by consequence the Power of the Names) which
(betokening Excellency) are (in Scripture) attributed both to God, and certain
select men: Do Primarily appertain unto God; are of perpetual propriety to
him, and are not assumable by men (professing Religion and Obedience to the
revealed will of God) but by the Donation of God, according to the Law of
Nature, exemplified in the Word of God; and being given, remain ever, not man's
Propriety, but Gods Depositum. But the names of Elohim, Melech, Messiah,
Christ, or Anointed for the administration of Kingdom; as that of Moshel, for
the Monarchical Government of the Family: Are names betokening Excellency, and
are attributed in Scripture both to God and certain select men. Therefore, the
Names of Power; viz. Elohim, or GOD, Melech, or King, Messiah, Christ, or
Anointed, for the Administration of Kingdom; as also that of Moshel, for the
Monarchical Government of the Family: Do primarily appertain unto God; are
of perpetual propriety to him; and are not* assumable by men, professing
Religion and Obedience to the revealed will of God, but according to the Law of
Nature, exemplified in the Word of God; and being communicated, remain for
ever not man's own propriety, but Gods entrusted Depositum.
Twelfthly, concerning the effectuality of those Names toward the Receivers.

All those Names of Divine Irresistible Power, which God, who cannot deceive
any man, has taken out of (though not from) his own just Prerogative, and
imparted to select men: Do carry with them unto those, to whom they are
imparted, all the forementioned Honors and Powers contained in the Names,
which are requisite unto the Ends, for which they were communicated by God; and
undeniably those, expressed in the Word of God. But the Names of Elohim,
Messiah, Christ, or Anointed, Melech, Moshel, are Names of Irresistible Divine
Power, which God, who cannot deceive any man, has taken out of (though not
from) his own just Prerogative, and has imparted unto select men. Therefore,
the Names of Elohim, Messiah, Christ, or Anointed, Melech, Moshel, do carry
with them to those, to whom they are imparted; (viz. to the King in the
Kingdom, to the Master in the Family) all the forementioned Honors and Powers
contained in the Names, which are requisite unto the Ends, for which they were
communicated by God, and undeniably all those which are expressed in the Word
of God.
Thirteenthly, concerning Gods Kingship over Kings, and the height of their
danger who are next under God.

He that is exactly Just, and the Founder of any Constitution, which himself
intends should be regulated by the example, which himself intends to set: Will
be most strict and severe in that part, which by himself he actuateth over
them, that he intends to keep close to the Rules of Justice. But the great
King above all Elohim or Kings: Is most exactly Just, and is the Founder of the
Constitution of Monarchical Government, which himself intends should be
regulated by the example which himself intends (as King over kings, his
Subjects) to set; viz. against their oppressing of those, who are Subjects to
them. Therefore, the great King above all Elohim: will be most strict and
severe in that part, which by himself he actuateth over them, whom He
intends to keep close to the Rules of Justice; viz. in punishing Kings for,
or withholding them from Oppression and Tyranny, if men would not deserve it
by trusting rather to themselves, then Him.
Lastly, concerning the Principal of the cares of Christian Princes.

Such things as produced the Oath of God unto David for the establishment of
his Kingdom for ever: Ought for ever to be the Royal care of all Religious
Kings. But the zeal of David for the material Temple of God, and his liberal
intentions to have it Makom la-jovah, a place answerable (ad mensuram) to him
that is Immensity it self, an adorned Mother for our Habitations (in the
mysterious Plural number) for the mighty God of Jacob; and the care of David
for the Domestical Chaplains of the Lord of this Cathedral, that no want of
allowance might enfeeble their performances of the Liturgy by God prescribed,
and required by him in the names and place of all his People: Were the things
that brought forth the Oath of God, for the establishment of David's Kingdom
for ever. Therefore, such Zeal for all, and principally for the Mother
Churches, and care for the allowance of God, to be exhibited to his once for
ever established Priesthood, that with venerable port, and cheerful hearts,
they may do him the most glorious part of his Service; Liturgically prescribed
for Christianity in the shadows of the Leviticall Office: Ought to be the
Royal care of all Religious Kings for ever.
The Materials of this Argument shall by GODS permission and assistance be
justified hereafter. And particularly, that there was nothing in the prescribed
Jewish Service of the Temple, but it designed unto us something, that is or
ought to be in the Christian Liturgy. That the Worship of GOD by Public
Solemn Liturgy, is the most Angelical Office, that can on earth be performed
to the GOD of Heaven; until we come into the same Quire with the Angels in
Heaven. And that the Liturgy of the Church of England, is of all others, that
are, or have been, the most accomplished; as freed from the frailties, that in
these latter times have crept into others, and containing the marrow and riches
of the absolute ones, which the Catholic Church in all Ages and Places, has
offered up to God Almighty.

SECT. 6.
The Contents.
Intervenient Considerables, between this and the ensuing Chapter. Abriefe
Answer to the chief Arguments of the Millenarians. The difference between
Kings Pagan, Jewish, and Christian, truly stated. No gap in the Series of
Christ's Kingdom, during the times of Infidelity; fore-prophesied and Typified.
Usurpations against the Rule of Natures Law, protested against.

1. IT is evidently manifest by this that has been proved; that Elohims whole
Sovereignty over the whole world, both Heavenly and Earthly, is justly and
actually conferred upon Immanuel, the Man Christ Jesus: for the whole Line of
time since, whether past, or to come: from the time of his Glorification and
Ascension. That the Covenant and Oath of GOD, has been faithfully performed,
let them make doubt of, who value neither this, nor the world to come; whilst
others are Demonstratively assured, that the Temporal Kingship over all Kings,
and the Spiritual Episcopacy over all Bishops, has been by Immanuel
universally enjoyed, ever since the first moment of his Glorification, and of
his Fathers Donation. It is likewise not doubted of, that Christ's Right to any
thing of his, can be suspended or sequestered: and it is apparent, that neither
of these his Powers, he has on Earth administered, except he has done it by
his Deputies; so that 1600. years experience must either avouch the truth of
this Position, or the falsehood of Gods Oath. It is further unquestionable, that
Immanuel must sit at the right hand of God, until he come to Judge both the
Quick and the Dead. Now, as the Millenarians cannot answer our Arguments,
without their denial of the Apostles Creed; yea, without the aspersion of
Perjury upon GOD; and the putting out of the eyes of his Witnesses (the Sun and
the Moon) by which mankind discernes the ways of poor natural life: so
cannot all the world answer the numerous places of Scripture brought by them,
to prove the Temporal Kingship, and Priesthood of Christ on Earth; but by this
Exposition, consonant to the Doctrine of the Church truly Catholic; which
being entertained, there remains nothing worthy of an Answer, in all that has
been by them Objected. And therefore I shall not mis-spend time about them.

2. But (here) let no man mistake me, as if I intended, either in this, or the
ensuing Chapter, that Christian Kings have a larger Right unto Dominion,
abstractively considered in it self [as Kingship,] then very Pagans, had, or
have, before the Ascension of Christ, or since; whilst I affirm, that the
Titles of Christian Princes are confirmed, explained, yea, dilated in their
circumstantials by Christ in the Evangelicall Covenant. Which thing, without
addition of stature (though with addition of health and strength) he has done
to the whole Moral Law, (as appears by his Sermon in the Mount;) and
therefore chiefly to this top-branch of Morality, borne with, and included in
the fifth Commandment. My meaning is, that in Immanuel, is unclouded,
irradiated, and invigorated, that which was before (from the beginning) more
obscurely under Elohim. As Christ having taken our nature upon him, is more
expressly, though not more justly, King of all, that was by him [the Word]
created. And that the hands of Subjects are with severer penalties now tied up,
from Resistance of that Power, which is, and was GODS, and from the beginning.
As the King does not create me new Right to mine Estate, when he declares for
it; and threatens further Mulcts upon the Invaders thereof; nor when he makes
a Covenant of Grace with me, that he will not take such Forfeitures hereafter,
as my Tenure has been formerly liable unto: which I conceive to be the
Difference between the Kings of the Gentiles, of the former Israel, and of
Christians.

3. Now, that which was every where in Scripture, foreshewed to be done
Gloriously, was no where promised to be done Suddenly, concerning the Kings of
the Gentiles acknowledgement of their Commissions from Christ: but the contrary
was foretold in sundry places. Particularly (as has been showed) it was
foreprophesied of, Psalm. 2. that they should struggle for a remarkable time, To
break his Bonds, and cast his Cords from them: and in the mean time (which we
read effected, in our and their Stories, in the manifold and prodigious deaths
of the Opposers) That they should be bruised with a rod of Iron, and broken in
pieces like a Potters vessel. However there should be no Interregnum of
Christ; He should be set upon his Throne in Tsijon. And that in the fullness of
the time of the Gentiles, their Kings should understand, their Judges be
endisciplinated; and bring in (for the setting up of Christ's) the Glory and
Riches of their Thrones and Scepters. And this was according to the Analogy of
GODS Acts amongst his former People, who for a long time were destitute of
their promised Glory in a Temporal King. All this, as it was foretold in
sundry Prophesies, so was it prefigured in diverse Types; of Ishak, of Jacob, of
David, etc. concerning which, (in the proper* place) there shall be full and
just proof made, when I come to handle that part of the Lords Prayer; Thy
Kingdom come. Now I address my self to my ninth Chapter.

4. Wherein I would not be so understood, whilst I assert the Donation and
Election of GOD himself for such Princes, as we find every where established
and rooted in their Soveraignties: as if my soul abhorred not with a most
perfect hatred, all Usurpations and Usurpers; whether by violent or fraudulent
Intrusion, however they may prosper like a green Bay Tree for a long time* and
as if I meant by a subtle assentatory connivence, that he who has the stronger
Sword, might have also the Title and Nomination of the strong GOD; when his Law
of Nature has apparently, or undoubtedly designed his Deputy. This is my
Profession, that unto such a one (being by him called thereunto) we all owe our
whole Livelihoods, and the last drop of our Bloods, for the assertion of him
who [thus] is the true Father of our Country; and who alone can assert unto us
Title, from his, and our GOD, in the Estates which under Him we justly hold, in
the Land which the Lord our God has given us. And so I proceed.

CHAP. IX.
The Contents.
The Law of Nature, and its Proviso in this particular Controversy; This the
proper Act of; That only subject to the God of Nature. Princes Rights from
these, better then other men's. God the sole Elector of Kings, when the People
seem most to choose them. Four Maxims in this behalf. The cause of the
preferring of Solomon before his elder Brother expressed, and justified to be
so, by Gods semblable Acts in Ishmael and Esau; not reprobated. Solomon's
Throne demolishable, as he was King of the Jews; not demolishable in the
Typified Gentiles. Solomon not the Type of Christ, but of Christian Kings:
David was the Type of Christ. The material Temples of God ought to be the
solicitous care of Solomon's Successors. Gods not dwelling in Temples made with
hands, how to be understood. Christ's zeal, for what Temples. The Kings Throne
Gods. Why we uncover and bow before the Chair of State. Regal Power above
man's Limitations or Censures.

1. THe brief remainder, will rather be Commentary then Text. The maine of the
business is transacted and proved. The Power and Thrones of the due Kingdom
of Christ, is for ever settled upon Christian Princes: and that according to the
general Law of Nature or Nations; as was petitioned for, and ratified, 1 Samuel
8. amongst the former Israel of GOD. Of which Law, the one Headship of one
Body, is a capital part: and (upon the solution of Individuals to the frailty
of Nature) the Proviso of this Law, is the immediate descent of this Headship
by Primogeniture, to avoid the unnaturalness of Non-Headship; and to prevent
the monstrousness of many Heads; if the Law of Nature had not thus provided
against innate arrogance in every man, desirous rather to create himself an
Head, then to continue that inferior part which the GOD of Nature made him;
these mischiefs had been inevitable.

2. That this was of the Law of Nature, from before the giving of the Positive
Law of GOD, is expressly attested (as has been showed) in the Word of GOD,
Deuteronomy. 21. 17. For the Right of the Firstborn [Is] his. The word for Right (...)
being Mishpat, signifying only in its Secondary sense, Right derived by Law,
but in its Primary, Law deriving Right. So that the meaning must be, by the
first of Laws, to wit, the Law of Nature, (for no other can be meant) this
Prerogative is already his.

3. Now, as all other Laws are (continually, but) only subject to him that
gives them their Esse Formale, their full and last perfection of being Laws:
so this Law of Nature is only liable to his Power, who is the GOD of Nature;
(who will not give his Power to any, to use unjustly) and cannot be dispensed
with, but by that Power which is Divine. From whence it is evident whose Power
(even) in the Family, the Father thereof holds: in whose behalf GOD has
declared, (that though in Thest, this Law be indispensable, yet) that in
Hypothest, (to wit, in case of Rebellion, Ver. 18*) it may be altered, and the
younger Son preferred. And in this reserved case it cannot be done, but by that
Power which is Divine; which GOD has entrusted of his own, unto him who
bears the Image of GOD for that Family: otherwise, the collective body of his
Brethren, nor of the Wife, Children, and Servants can despoile him of that
interest which he has by the Law of Nature. And himself must be sure, that he
can approve the cause of this extraordinary Act, before the Throne of him, by
whose Power he does it. That it be not done out of Hatred to the disinherited,
or Fancy to the preferred; but for that which is indeed Rebellion, as is there
to be read.

4. Concerning Princes (not disinheritable for their dereliction of the Thorah
of GOD, as in the last Chapter) their Right of Succession, must be more sacred
then other men's; for that they succeed, not only according to the Common Law
of Nature, but into the Right of the earthly Power of Christ, (for the
dispensing of the Rights of all others) as he is the Firstborn of every
creature; and for whose sake, the Firstlings of men* and other creatures were
hallowed. And whose, not only Right, but Power, is invaded by their opposers.

5. Which Right, what ever the visible means of Derivation were at the first,
upon the continuance thereof, the Establishment shall undoubtedly be reputed
valid for GOD; as if himself (who dwells in the Cloud, which no humane sight
can pierce into) had done immediately in the eyes of man, what he accepts
when it is done. This being the Law of GODS Prerogative for Vows, Numb. 30. If
one that is a Virgin, or a Wife, who has not authority to make a Vow, for
Consecrations Personal or Real, de Facto does it; if the Father or Husband
hears, and holds his peace, the Vow shall stand good unto God. Much more in
that which is his own Province, (he being the sole King of kings, and disposer
of Kingdoms) must those who have read the Scriptures, know and take notice,
that when they see a King set up, whose Root is fastened in the Earth, and whose
Branches have succeeded in growth; that it was only GOD who was the Efficient
and Author of his raising.

6. Supposing the Ancestor of Nebuchadnezzar not be the true heir of Shem, nor
Cyrus of Japhet; but by the hands of friends and adherents that they were
lifted up into their Thrones. When I read GOD to be the sole disposer of all
Sovereignty, and himself professing his own Act, that it was He himself that
did it; I dare not think that it was the others, but GOD alone by them who was
the advancer of them, and of all such, as he permits for a competent time, to
take Root in that Mount of his peculiarity; whither none can come while he is
asleep, to steal in a Plant of his own: which were it granted, yet its being
planted there, alters the Property: If it be Rooted in the Throne, it is of
GODS Planting. If he be a King, he is none of the Peoples choosing, when they
seem most to do it. He makes the King who communicates unto him Divine Power,
which is out of the Peoples reach; who gives him Divine Titles, Elohim, Melech,
Messiah, Christ, Moshel, The Lords Anointed: not the People, who cannot give
what was never given them. He that calls him before he is borne, which they
cannot, till they see him; nor foretell, that any such shall be. But when I see
a Christian Prince, against whose Title (according to the Law of Nature) for
generations and generations, there has not been one amongst all the sons of
men, who could pretend a color; I suppose his Right, in, and through David,
and Solomon, as firmly established by GOD, as ever (at the least) theirs were;
and more then all his Subjects.

7. I know whose voice it is, unto those who are lower then Kings, Psalm. 75. 4.
I said unto the Fools, Deal not madly; and to the wicked, Set not up your
horn on high; and speak not with stiff neck: for Promotion comes neither
from the East nor West: but God is the Judge himself, or alone; he puts
down one, and sets up another, amongst all sorts of men. Much more
solicitous is his Election about him, whom he sets up in his own Seat; by whom
he sets up, and pulls down others; by whom he dispenses his favors, or
scatters the coals of his wrath: as Dan. 5. 18. God gave Nebuchadnezzar a
Kingdom, etc. Ver. 19. And whom he would, he slew; and whom he pleased, he
kept alive; and whom he would, he set up, and whom he would, he put down. Ver.
20. But when his mind was lifted up, and his heart hardened in pride, etc. Ver.
21. He was driven from the sons of men, etc. until he knew, that the most high
God ruled in the Kingdoms Vide 2 Chro* 20. 6.
of men; and that he appoints over it whomsoever he will; and gives it to
the basest of men. As was set forth, Dan. 4. 14.

8. It is He, who in Kingdoms established according to the Law of Nature,
gives the Titles of his own Power, and the Power of his Titles, not the Law of
Nature; which neither advises, nor warreth; neither speaks nor writes in
the Cause of GOD: but is forced to cry out aloud in the cause of man, and for
private propriety; whereas indeed it can but present Aptitude, to the earthly
Benefits and Dignities of this world. It must be the living Deputy of the ever*
living GOD, who must in the place of GOD, actuate the votes, and secure the
well-wishes (yea, even from the Prerogative of God) unto those, who claim
aloud by it for themselves. It is the Law of the Enemy of Nature, which cries
out to pull down, or to lessen the Power which GOD has ratified; and in the
place thereof, to set up Anarchy, or something like it: which the Devil cannot
do without man's cooperation, whom he cannot force; whereas GOD can the other
without him, whom (most ordinarily) he will use. But if man will enjoy the
benefit of the Law of Nature, he must do the duty required by it; what, and to
whom, GOD has by it enacted, let him render; that he may receive from God what
he holds out by it. He that robs Christ under color of it, shall lose Christ
and the substance of it.

9. But I desire not to retard this Discourse, by intermixing of Metaphysicall
Speculations, concerning the glorious Singleness of the Divine Power in his
Operations, transcending the impurer Acts of created Man; working never by his
own, sometimes by the Power of Gods Enemy: nor to direct the Question, and
fall upon the differencing of the Acts of God, and of the Creature. And
therefore I shall draw no Arguments from hence, desirous only to have admitted,

First, That the Law of Nature is as equal unto the Succession and Rights of
Princes, as to the Descent and Propriety of other men.

Secondly, That the Providence of the God of Nature, operateth, as well, and as
faithfully, toward them, as others.

Thirdly, No unwritten Text of the Law of Nature, ought to be pretended against
the written Word of God.

Fourthly, That wherever God is recorded to have done otherwise, then in his
Law of Nature is prescribed; there is ever some important Mystery included: and
if there be no reason expressed for that special Act; that, that is to be
esteemed for the reason, which God has expressed elsewhere in Acts of the same
nature, to be the ground of his so doing in them.

10. Now (accordingly) with modesty, and sobriety to undertake the search, why
God, having established by an everlasting Covenant his earthly Dominion, in
David, and his Heirs, according to the Law of Nature; in the very first place
of Succession, refuses the Firstborn; and by particular appointment makes
choice of the younger? to wit, Solomon! For this I shall make bold with the
parallels hereof in Scripture: but no further then the New Testament has
afforded light; concerning Esau and Jacob; Ishmael and Ishak. And therefore, I
shall not discourse of the Mysteries in the story of the birth of Pharez and
Zarah, Genesis 38. 28. which doubtless was to evidence further manifestation of
the same thing, easily visible. Nor shall I foretell for the present (till this
that is certain has made way for it) the grounds of Moses his preferring,
before his elder brother Aaron.

11. That which is undeniable, is set forth, Romans 9. In which particular, Vid.
Orig. Ambr. Hier. in locum*
recourse had been made unto the Writings of the ancient Fathers, who were
nearer unto the Apostles days; and likewise to understand from hand to hand,
what his meaning was, that we who desire to make our own Ends from our own
bold conjectures; the great Controversies of this Age had been yet unborne.
According to that which was proved in our last Chapter; the Apostles Argument
from the former Pair of Brethren was.

That which God upon the promulgation of the Covenant of Grace, did forthwith
discover in his actions: Is to be reputed the standing Commentary of God, to
declare for ever, what was the first meaning of that Covenant. But that the
ultimate Object, or principal drift of God, in preferring (against his
Proviso, in the Law of Nature) of the younger before the elder, (without
respect unto their goodness) in the specified particulars of Ishak and
Ishmael, of Jacob and Esau: Was that, which God upon the Promulgation of the
Covenant of Grace, did forthwith discover in his actions. Therefore, the
ultimate Object, or principal drift of God, in preferring (against his Proviso
in the Law of Nature) of the younger before the elder, without respect unto
their goodness, in the specified particulars of Ishak and Ishmael, of Jacob
and Esau: Is to be reputed the standing Commentary of God, to declare for ever,
what was the first meaning of the Covenant of grace.
Whereof the grand particular of that Covenant, the establishment of Dominion
for so long as Time should be, must needs be a most considerable part; often
expressed, as the regulative part of the whole. Whence it may appear, that the
end of GOD in these Acts, was not that which the engagements of this gainsaying
Age would put upon Him: but the assertion of the Arbitrary Prerogative of GOD
above his Laws, to declare, what justly he may do; and what de Facto, he has
done, (without injury meant or done to the former House) for the younger
Brethren of the Gentiles.

12. Concerning Esau and Jacob, Genesis 24. 23. when Rebecca enquired GOD,
concerning the Civil Wars in her womb; GOD answered, Two Nations are in it,
and the younger People shall be stronger then the elder; and the elder shall
serve the younger. Which service was not literally to be understood, either of
the persons of Jacob and Esau; or of their respective generations; or so, as if
either was absolutely rejected; but that the younger House of the Gentiles was
preferred in the Covenant. Jacob, the Father of the Jewish People being the
Type of these; Esau, the elder Brother, being the Type of the People of the
Jews. For there is no absolute reprobation concluded of those, who were
Typified in Esau; for then Saint Paul himself must have been rejected: as Romans
11. 1. Has God cast away his People? (to wit, them of the elder House) God
forbid: For I also am an Israelite, etc. God has not cast away his People,
whom he foreknew, etc. And Genesis 25. 26. Jacobs taking hold on the heel of Esau
at his birth, was the Figure of the immediate Succession of the Christian
Religion, and Covenant, into the Place and Rights of the Legal; by which trip,
it got the start of the former, into the Right of Primogeniture; but both were
the sons of the same Ishak; and neither did destroy other. And if any man would
understand the construction of the word [ Hated] Romans 9. 13. let him see, Luke
14. 26.

13. Concerning the former pair of Brethren, Ishmael and Ishak, (in whom the
Covenants are looked upon as two; whereas in Jacob and Esau, they were twins of
the same womb, and one continued birth.) the Apostle, Gal. 4. having in the
beginning of the Chapter expressed, that the difference of the first and second
Covenant in the general (as has been proved of the grand Homogeneall part
thereof, Dominion) was, but (at least) as the Stock and the Graffe? as the
Blossom and the Fruit, are two. For even in that example of furthest distance
in Ishmael and Ishak, he yet concludes them there, to differ but as the same
Heir, when he is a man, differs from himself a child. And Ver. 22. he
affirms in Terminis, that these two Brethren, and the two Mountains, Sinai
and Tsijon, were but Allegories; to represent the advancement of the Gentiles,
and the Evangelicall Covenant, into the Primogeniture of the Jewish People and
Law, the former offspring of GOD: as Exodus 4. 22. Jer. 10. 16.

14. And also, that in the preferring of Ishak, there was no un-sonning of
Ishmeal, (however the Fancy of those does stand, who will not be elected
without some others may be reprobated,) the Word of GOD is clear, Genesis 17. 18.
where Abraham (who was an understanding and loving Father, that knew what to
ask) prayed for Ishmael unto GOD; Oh that Ishmael might [live before thee.]
And Ver. 20. the Lord a most wise and faithful GOD, who knew what was asked,
returns this answer; As concerning Ishmael, I have heard thee: Behold, I have
blessed him, and will make him fruitful; and will multiply him exceedingly:
[twelve Princes] shall he beget; and I will make him [a great Nation.] Wherein
was typified the one Nation of the People of the Jews; and the twelve Tribes.
Whereas in Ver. 4. Thou shall be a Father of many Nations. And in Ver. 16. I
will give thee a Son of her; yea, I will bless her; and she shall be a mother
of [Nations] Kings of People shall be of her. But alas, this no time to disport
our selves into Theoreticall Disputes.

15. But if this Plea from these younger Brothers will not serve the turn, we
are not altogether destitute of Proofs in this particular, concerning Solomon's
Succession; and the Reason thereof, in particular Texts: where we shall find
this Solomon in a double capacity; as King of the Jews, and as the Representer
of the Kings of the Christian Nations. For this, 2 Samuel 7. 12. says GOD to
David, I will set up of thy Seed after thee, etc. He shall build an House for
my Name; and (as before) I will establish the Throne of his Kingdom for ever.
I will be his Father, and he shall be my Son. If he commit iniquity, I will
chasten him with the rod of men; and with the stripes of the children of men.
But my Mercy shall not depart from him, as I took it from Saul, whom I put
away before thee, and thine House; and thy Kingdom shall be established for
ever before thee. And in the very next words, (to express the undoubted
certainty hereof) Thy Throne shall be established for ever. 1 Chronicles* 17. The
same Covenant, and the same reason is related: but at Ver. 14. the Paraphrase
shows, that the Kingdom of God is the Kings; and the Kingship of the King is
Gods. I will settle him in [mine House] and in [my Kingdome] for ever: and his
Throne shall be established for evermore. Notwithstanding all this, for the
three grand parts of the long time since, neither Solomon nor David, have had a
man to sit upon the Thrones of Israel or Judah: and yet without all doubt, the
Promise of God has been fulfilled, according to the former demonstrations;
expressed, Psalm. 122. 5. where this Throne of the One God upon Earth is in the
Plural number, twice in one and the same Verse, set down Thrones: For there
do sit the Thrones appointed for Mishpat, (i.) Judgment; the Thrones of the
House of David.

16. Now in the next place, we shall find Solomon the Type (whose Mother had
had a former Husband, not of the Seed of Abraham, according to Nature) in
another condition; and conditional upon his good behavior: in the words of
David a little before his death; in the presence of the Princes of Israel, unto
this Solomon his son. 1 Chronicles. 28. 1. God said unto me, Thou shall not build
mine House, because thou have been a man of War, and have shed blood. Howbeit,
the Lord God of Israel chose me before all the House of my Father, etc. And of
all my Sons, he has chosen Solomon my Son, to sit upon the Throne [of the
Kingdom of the Lord] over Israel. And he said unto me, He shall build mine
House and my [Courts,] for I have chosen him to be my Son, and I will be his
Father: moreover, I will establish his Kingdom for ever. [If he will be
constant to do my Commandments and my Judgments, as at this day.] This
Solomon failed, and his Line has been cut off, and the Throne it self
demolished. So that apparently, those that have stood; to wit, the Typified
Thrones of Christian Kings, must have been the Material Object of the Promise
of GOD.

17. That Solomon was the Type of Christian Kings, appears by David's
Prophetical, Praying, Benediction of him, Psalm. 72. With which Psalm, men have
dealt, as some have used, when they could not hinder the true Heir from a
Possession, which themselves aimed at; to Entitle the Prince to it, that they
might work their own Ends, while they seem to serve the King. So here, when
men either did not, or would not see the Power and Glory of Christian Princes,
to be the ultimate and typified intention thereof; and finding that little of
it (but as to an unequal Type) could be convertible with Solomon. -- Donabitur
ergo ne pereat. They think to make it sure for their own avail, by Entitling
Christ to it: whereas it suits far less with Christ (divided from the Riches
and Honor of his Adopted Sons of the younger House, the Kings of the Gentiles)
then it did to Solomon, to whom they could not justify it. So far was Christ
from the Treasures and Homage of the whole world, that when he was to pay his
Fathers Tribute unto Caesar, he was feign to borrow it of a Fish: that he was
despised, as but a poor Carpenters Son; and confessed himself to be in a more
indigent condition then the Birds and Foxes; and was so far from dispensing the
Mishpats, or Judgments of the King, or the Kings Son, in the first Verse of
the Psalm; that (having no external Commission) he refused, being entreated
to interpose his private Authority in a cause Herciscundae Haereditatis, Luke*
12. 14. Whereas indeed Christ, with his Divine Miracles and bitter Passion, was
Typified in the great and strange Victories and Sufferings of David. David's
younger Son preferred to the Crown, his Peace and Glory was the Type of
Christ's semblable Heirs of the younger House of the Gentiles. In Christ for
the Kings of the Nations; in the Kings of the Nations for Christ; can every
letter of that Psalm be justified, and of none else. And that Prophecy (which
cannot be terminated either in Solomon alone, or with his natural Successors,
who are extinct before the Sun; or in Christ alone, without the earthly Glory
of those who hold his earthly Throne) is to be understood of Christ in them; is
evinced, Verse 17. Liphne Shemesh jinnon shemo. His Name (to wit, of Christ, or
Anointed) (...)
jinnon filiabitur, shall be continued in the Succession of his Sons, (for so
the word signifies) for so long as the Sun shall have a face to show. Which
they who will not admit, cannot prove themselves to be Abraham's children.

18. Christian Kings then who were Typified in Solomon, ought to have a care of
that which is every where attested, to be that which honored Solomon, in the
eyes of his Honourer: to wit, the Material Houses of GOD. Thus 2 Chronicles. 22. 8.
The Word of God came unto me, (to wit, David) Thou have shed blood abundantly,
etc. Thou shall not build an House unto my Name, etc. (Blood, is as ill a
Reformer, as a Builder in Religion) But behold a Son shall be borne unto thee;
he shall be a man of rest; he shall build an House for my Name; and he shall be
my Son, and I will be his Father: and I will establish the Throne of his
Kingdom over Israel for ever: which certainly remains at this day. And not
only this, but the perpetuity of the Priesthood; and Temple; with the
Cathedrals, or Priests Courts, in the compass thereof; was sworn to, in the
same Oath of GOD.

19. But Acts 7. 46. where David found favor in the sight of God: and yet it
was Solomon who built him an House: there is an Howbeit: to wit, That the most
High dwells not in Temples made with hands; as says the Prophet. Jer. 66. 1.
Heaven is my Throne, and Farth is my Footstool. What House will you build me?
Or what is the place of my rest? Has not mine hand made all these things?
Which words, the gainsayers of these days (whose I hope unwitting endeavors,
are but to make God forsworn) catch at, without considering them in themselves;
or comparing them with other Texts; concerning Gods expectation, and longing
for a Temple, (Habitations indeed) His Contentation and Delight therein: His
Inhabitancy and Propriety, in these places of his Rest, from men of rest
expected; if they would have their own confirmed.

20. In themselves, the words concerning his Throne in Heaven, can but import,
that when man has done all that he can, God has of his own making a more
magnificent Temple in Heaven, (in comparison whereof, those on Earth, are but
as the Footstool of his Throne there) which indeed can no more Terminatively
(though more Gloriously) contain his Immensity, then the least on Earth. And
that nothing made, is truly fit for, or worthy of the Creator: which should
rather excite them (as the Blessings of God increase) to be more and more
Munificent, in making his Earthly Habitations; to approach as near as may be in
Glory unto his Heavenly Seat.

21. The Pattern of which Temple (as unto Moses for the Transitory Tabernacle)
was (as the Icon, or Image of that Heaven) from Heaven in represented unto
David by the Spirit of God, 1 Chronicles. 28. 12. to be built by Solomon the younger
Son of David, the Type as of Christian Kings in general; so more particularly
of Constantine the Great, who forthwith upon the final dissolution of this
Temple built by the former Solomon, decreed [ Habitatious] to be built
throughout his Empire (which was then accounted the World) to the mighty God of
Jacob; who was the younger son of Ishak; who was the younger son of Abraham;
into the Primogeniture of whose Covenant, the younger People of the Gentiles,
and their Kings were Adopted, according to the Promise of God. Though during
the nonage of Christianity, God was content (as under Moses and the Judges, to
dwell under Curtains; so) to inhabit in the Tops of men's Houses, until he
sent a complete Monarch (answerable unto Solomon amongst Christians.

22. And yet our Savior was so zealous for the Type, that only in the cause
thereof (throughout his whole life) the Lamb of God fell to blows; asserting
that, that which was indeed his Fathers House, was the House of Prayer (not
naming any thing else) unto all Nations. Whereas that which he seemed to fight
for, might not be entered by any, but those of the Circumcision. And Saint Paul,
1 Cor. 3. made (for Christians) the Temple of God, the principal Analogatum of
Holiness; a model to teach all those who expected the Inhabitancy of God in
the more minute Temples of their Bodies; in semblable Holiness to preserve
their Sanctity: affirming that God would destroy him, that but defiled his
Temple. But Saint Paul's holy Material Temple, if the Father hindered by his
Wars, may not build; the Son shall.

23. But to proceed; whose the Throne is, his is the Power: and if the Power
thereof be GODS, certainly it is Supreme on Earth, and Irresistible; and that
King Solomon's (I suppose it so set down, to express GODS more valuable
interest in the Christian Throne then any other) was the Throne of God, is
showed in the forecited words of 1 Chro. 28. 5. He has chosen Solomon to sit
upon the Throne of his Kingdom; (per Eminentiam) yea, the Kingdom of Jehovah,
for the more Religions sake, amongst all who are of the Israel of GOD. If this
be not enough, it shall be justified for them all, according to the Axiom in
Logic; Quicquid competit alicui, qua tali, competit omni tali: That which
appertains to any, as such; appertains to every one, that is such. The
place is, 1 Chro. 29. 23. Then Solomon (the Type of Christian Kings) sat upon
the Throne of [Jehovah] (by all that pretended to Religion, to be acknowledged)
[ as King] in stead of David his Father, (the Type of Christ, as he was the
medium Participationis of both the Covenants, Legal and Evangelicall) and
prospered; and all Israel (the commonalty) obeyed him; and all the Princes, and
mighty men, (the House of Peers, and the Commissioners of Array) and all the
Sons likewise of King David (the Princes of the Blood) submitted themselves
unto Solomon the King: as the exemplary Pattern for all Typified Christians.
Answerable hereunto was that of the Queen of Shebah, (who shall rise in
Judgment with this generation.) 2 Chronicles. 9. 8. Blessed be [Jehovah Elohecha,
the Lord thy God] (thine Elohim or King, as thou art others) who delights in
thee, to set thee [on his Throne] (not thy Father David's) to be King [for the
Lord thy God] (not for thy self, or for the People.)

24. So that manifest it is, that the Kinds Throne upon Earth (especially
amongst Christians) is to be reputed GODS earthly Throne; out of which he is
never, while the King is there: and the King is never out, while GOD is there.
And this is the reason, why (out of the Religion thereof) we uncover our heads,
and make our obeisance toward the Kings Throne, or chair of State; even when
we are as sure, as our eyes can make us, that our earthly King is not therein.
Answerable hereunto, is the Homage which we perform toward the visible
Monument of his Presence, in the Material Temple; where we are sure that he
always dwells, and never can be from home. Of which hereafter, when I come
to unfold the meaning of worshipping toward his Footstool.

25. Lastly, it being made apparent (for Christian Princes) that the Throne of
the Divine Power is the Kings; and that the Power of the Earthly Throne is
GODS; little will need to be said concerning that Prerogative, which belongs
unto the Kings King; in the hand of him that administreth it, for GOD and not
for Man. That, that Power must be unlimited by Man, which is not bounded by any
Positive Law of God. That, that which is Divine, and by God uncensured, cannot
come within the reach of man to censure. Accordingly did Solomon in the highest
of all our controverted Points, by his sole Regal Power, in putting to death
the greatest in his Dominions, Adoniah his eldest brother; Joab, whom his
Father feared. And in Ecclesiasticals; his deposing of the High Priest
Abiathar, before he might build the Lords House; for the Ends above specified:
as, 1 Samuel 2. 35. concerning this son of Eli. I will raise me up a faithful
Priest, (to wit, as has been showed) [ Zadok in stead of Abiathar] and I will
build him a firm House, (in stead of the insirme Legal Priesthood) and he (in
his Successors) shall walk before mine Anointed for ever. (Those Typified
under Zadok, before those Typified under Solomon) and he the Type of the one,
shall walk before him who is the Type of the other; to wit, Zadok before
Solomon. Which was accordingly performed; but Abiathar, though adjudged by
Solomon for a son of death, yet had his life spared: For that he had born the
Acke of God; and in honor of his place dyed in full possession of his
Temporalties, though he was indeed a Traitor. Only the Patrimony of the
Priests, being not Escheatable to the King; for that it is the Peculiarity of
the Kings King.

I acknowledge it a mistake in the Impression of 1631. I will build [Me] a sure
House. But were it added to the Translation by way of Paraphrase, [ I will
build Me] (to, or) for him, ( viz. to officiate in) a sure House; I conceive it
would more fully render the Latitude of the words in the Original, both Text
and Context. For it is evident, that (in that Prophecy) was foreshewed; the
dissolution of the Tabernacle erected by Moses, and the Succession both of
firm Priesthood and Temple, under an established anointed Monarch: which was
performed in the persons of Solomon and Zadok, the two Sons of Oil, who were
the Types of the Christian Kings and Priests.

It is in the Margin of our last Translation, Ver. 32. (and that according to
the Original) in stead of these words, [ Thou shall see au Enemy in mine
Habitation,] Thou shall see the affliction of the Tabernacle. And it is
answerable hereunto, Ver. 35. I will raise me up a firm or established Priest,
(which we render Faithful) for the word is Neeman, which so signifies. And
then I will build (under the same word Neeman) afirme (or established) House to
him: and he shall walk before mine Anointed for ever. This was fulfilled in
the Type (as has been said) by the Lords Anointed Solomon; the Lords Builder
of the Lords firm House, succeeding unto the ambulatory Tabernacle. And this
was (in the Type) to fulfill this Prophecy; as 1 King. 2. 27. So Solomon
thrust out Abiathar from being Priest unto the Lord, that he might fulfill the
Word of the Lord, which he spoke concerning the house of Eli in Shiloh.

For the Perpetuity and Perpetuity of this Kingship, Priesthood, and Temple,
GOD swore; but it has failed in them to whom he swore: therefore (as has been
proved) it was sworn to the Type, to be accomplished in the Typified Kingship,
Priesthood, and Temple.

Whereupon my ninth Quaere is. Since God has particularly exemplified in
Solomon, that which He swore unto David, concerning the Divine Right of Christ,
to be irreversibly administered by Christian Kings, under the Covenant of the
Gospel, for ever. How the People (all or any of them) may put in for a share,
of that which God has given away to others? Whom He has set in his own
earthly Throne, over them.

My first Argument is from the Analogy of the Counsel of God, in his
preferring the younger before the elder in several Particulars, with reference
to Solomon the Type of the Kings of Gentiles, for the finding out the just
reason thereof. Wheresoever the Prerogative of God is used to overruled the
Universal Law of Nature, there it is ever to be presumed, that it is so done
for some important cause: And where the reason is not apparently in any
particular set forth, recourse is to be had unto the like case; and what is
manifestly therein expressed, is to be admitted for the just reason of that in
Question. But in the case of Solomon's preferment unto the Birthright: God used
his Prerogative to overruled his Universal Law of Nature. Therefore, in the
case of Solomon's preferment unto the Birthright: It is to be presumed, that it
was so done for some important cause; and the reason being doubted of,
therefore, recourse is to be had to the like case. (Such is that of Abraham's
and Ishaks Children; and in both the particulars, the one reason is assigned,
that it was done for a Type, to express the preferment of the younger People
of the Gentiles, advanced above the elder of the Jews, into the just Patrimony
of their Fathers, according to the Covenant of GOD.) Therefore, that which is
manifestly expressed in the like case; is to be admitted for the just reason of
that in Question. (And that is evidently, that Solomon a King, being advanced
above his elder brother, into the just Patrimony of his Father; this was done
in a Type, to express the preferment of the Kings of the Gentiles, above GODS
firstborn Succession of Jewish Princes.) Secondly, that Solomon was the
express Type of Christian Kings. Those things which only can fill up the
whole Latitude of any Promise from God, or Prophetical Prediction of God, and
justify the Truth of God in the said Promises, or Prophesies: Are to be
accounted the chief and ultimate Object of every such Promise or Prophecy;
and the Precedent, but Types of those which succeed and exceed them, in the
fulfilling of that which they come short of. But in the Promise of God, for the
perpetuity of Solomon's Kingdom; and the Prophetical Prediction of Psalm 72.
the Interpretation of them, for the Perpetuity, Power, and Glory of the Earthly
Kingdom of Christ, in the Christian Kings of the Gentiles, and of Christian
Kings in Christ: Are the things Expository, which only can fill up the whole
Latitude of the Promise of God; (viz. for the perpetuity of Solomon's Kingdom
in the Typified) and the Prophetical Prediction of God in that Psalm, (which
evidently was more then was performed to him in Person,) and are those which
only can justify the Truth of God in the said Prophecy. Therefore, in the
Promise of God, for the perpetuity of Solomon's Kingdom, and the Prophetical
Prediction of Psalm 72. the Interpretation of them for the Perpetuity, Power,
and Glory, of the Earthly Kingdom of Christ, in the Christian Kings of the
Gentiles, and of the Christian Kings in Christ: Are to be accounted the chief
and ultimate Object of the said Promise and Prophecy; and the Precedent, (to
wit, Solomon) was but a Type of these, which succeed and exceed him in the
fulfilling of that which he came short of. Thirdly, concerning that which
through Solomon the Type was conveyed to Typified Christian Kings. Whosoever
by the appointment of God, in the sworn Covenant of God, sit in the Throne of
Jehovah* for (or in the stead of) Jehovah Elohim; [as King] for Jehovah Elohim:
To his Power, (which is the Power of God; and therefore, Divine, Supreme,
Irresistible, and Above, and Against which, there can be no Power on Earth.)
All the Communalty (that are in the Covenant of the Israel of God) all the
Lords of the Land; all the Princes of the Blood; do so owe their Allegiance,
that no Power in any, or all of them; or any other from without it; may set
Bounds unto it; may be accounted to it, Superior or Equal; may resist it in
what it does; or set up, or assist any other on Earth to Resist it; much less
to usurp, or lessen, or destroy it. But all Christian Kings, with Solomon as
King; and in him as their Type: Did and do (by the appointment of God, in the
sworn Covenant of God) sit in the Throne of Jehovah Elohim, as Kings; for (or
in stead of) Jehovah Elohim. Therefore, to the Power of all Christian King,
(which is the Power of God, and therefore Divine, Supreme, and Irresistible;
above and against which, there can be no Power on Earth) all the Commonalty
(that are in the Covenant of the Israel of God) all the Lords of the Land; all
the Princes of the Blood; do so owe their Allegiance, that no Power in any or
all of them; or any other from without it, may set Bounds unto it; or may by
them be accounted Superior or Equal to it; may Resist it in what it does; or
set up, or assist any other on earth to Resist it; much less destroy, usurp,
or lessen it.

CHAP. X.
The Contents.
Kings are Gods chief Debtors for the sins of the People; not the High
Court, or High Priest. The King to command others, what he may not execute
himself. Kings the Protectors of Religion; and Religion of them. The
celebrated Precedents of good Jewish Kings, the best Commentary upon the
Precepts of God for Kingship. This was accounted Argument enough, while we had
to do but with the Faction of Rome. Reverence to the incomparable Works of
Bishop Andrews, restraines the needless pressing of this invincible Argument.
His irrefragable Exemplification of Jehoshaphat's severalizing the matters of
Ecclesiastical and Political Cognizance: And his constitution of the High
Priest, his chief Commissioner in Ecclesiasticals.

1. THat which needs not to be, shall be short; it being sufficiently proved,
that the Power of the King, is the ( Irresistible Supreme) earthly Power of
GOD. Which Power, Religion is so far from lessening, that it adds both
Honor and strength thereunto: and is the strongest of Obligagations to
re-enforce that, which the iniquity of the times makes it to impeach.

2. Now for as much as throughout the Sacred Story, GOD ever reckons unto the
Kings the sins of the Times; and never unto the Sanbedrin, the highest of all
Courts, established (as has been showed) from the first beginning of any such,
with Power derived from the Prince; and that merely for the ease of the Princes
burden: no, nor yet unto the High Priest; the visible Head of a distinct
Subordinate Power, (answerable unto the Maternal) without which helper (meet
for him) the Christian King cannot be well alone: and whose Office is, to
train up the Children (begotten in Political Nature, in his Image) by
Religious nurture, for the making them morigerously conformable unto their
Fathers Likeness: whom the Husband is to command, though not to repudiate; to
enjoyne that she do that, which he is enjoined not to do himself; witness
the Exauctorating of King Saul by GOD, and the Leprosy of Vzziah, 2 Chronicles. 26.
21.

3. Neither of these (to wit, the High Court, or High Priest) were ever blamed
by God for their Non-resistance, or not stirring up the People to make
Resistance: nor yet the People, for sitting still, and suffering the King
uncontrollably to run his wicked race into Superstition and Idolatry; so far
forth, that the change of the Kings mind, was still the cause of the change of
the Peoples Religion; and the Peoples sin herein (throughout the whole Sacred
Story) was ever laid upon the King. Which is an invincible Demonstration from
the Effect, that the King was the only He, entrusted by God with his Earthly
Power, for the restraining of such wickednesses; and for the Protector of
Religion; the greatest and justest Adversary of those, as well as of
Resistance, against the only Supreme Ordinary Power, by God set up to pull
down them; and to set up, and protect Religion.

4. This Argument in the hands of our Worthies, was ever accounted impregnable,
while we had to do but with the opposing Roman Party; in the more colorable
Non-Supremacy of the King in Ecclesiasticalls. The other part, (to wit, in
Temporals) being never denied by men accounted serious, till now. But this
being proved, will also carry the other along with it: for fear of failing,
both are already done by the Precepts of God. And that the Covenant of God
between Him and Christian Princes was one and the same; in, and with the
Contract, plighted with the former People and the Kings thereof. So that the
Presidents of good Kings, recorded in the Book of God; are for us (for whom
certainly they were written) Declarations, given us from God, of what was meant
in his compact, between him and Kings amongst us.

5. And certainly I shall never meet with any, who will affirm and appear in
it, when he has so done; that we challenge more for Christian Kings (who had
the better part of the Charter) then what (in matter of Fact) was apparently
exercised (either in Individuo, or in Specie) by the commended Kings of that
Nation: which is so discernable by all men, that I will spare my Proofs till I
see some need of them.

6. Especially, since (in the maine concludent Part) the work is already done
(so that herein there is no need of any thing to be further added) by one (now
asleep in the Lord, and in the land of the Living; not alive amongst the Dead,
to behold with heart-beheading sorrows, the shame and deaths of the present
age,) The most Reverend, and Incomparably Learned, and Prudent Head, which the
latter times have brought forth; that has gone to peace, Integro Funere; the
late Bishop of Winchester, in his Tortura Torti: A Book, as most worthy of the
Public view; so no less with Schollerlike insight (might it find admittance)
made ready for it in our English Tongue.

7. But I desire not to urge other men's Arguments; and dare not (out of
Reverence, which also will restrain mine hands in the next Chapter) do injury
unto his by my weakness: I shall only produce an observation of his, 2 Chronicles.
19. upon which Kings ought to look, as upon a direction sent from GOD to them
alone, and all others to let it alone in their hands. It is the pious Act of
Jehoshaphat, Ver. 5. constituting Judges who (though amongst men) were not to
judge for man, but for Jehovah: those Judgments being the Lords, and not the
Peoples. So also Ver. 8. his appointing of the sons of Levi for the dispatch of
all differences in Points of Religion; Between blood and blood, (as Deuteronomy. 17.
8.) between Law and Commandment, Statutes and Judgments. And in Ver. 11. his
distinguishing of their charges, and s^tting Amariah the High Priest over all,
in all matters concerning the Lord; and Zebadiah the Ruler of the House of
Judah, for all the Kings matters. There being in Ecclesiasticals, some things,
wherein all mankind besides have not so much to do as the King alone: and
others, wherein the King has nothing at all to do, but only to see them
done: as shall be justified in the second Book, when I come to speak of the
sin of Jeroboam, in the handling the Power of Gods Likeness.

CHAP. XI.
The Contents.
No new Light after the New Testament. What was both before and under the Law,
dyed not with the Law, but was confirmed by the Gospel. Evangelicall Rules and
Examples in this particular, followed by Primitive Doctrine and Practice,
abundantly justified by others. The Divine Power of Kings, Saint John 10. 34.
not sequestrable away (by distinction) from their Persons, but to the prejudice
of the Deity of Christ. The Text of Psalm 82. 6. [I my self have said, You,
your selves are Gods, and all of you the sons of Gnelion] further cleared. Our
Saviors own Argument from that Text. Further manifestations amply performed
elsewhere, not needed here. Christ's own Assertion, that Tributes and Customs
were paid unto God in Caesar. Neither Livelihood nor Life it self, can
countenance Self-preservation by Resistance of lawful Princes, in those who
assume the name of Christians; if the Doctrine and Example of Christ, be only
that which can denominate Christians.

1. ANd now having given a brief Map of the Longitude and Latitude of such
places of Scripture (in this Point) as my weak observation was able to
describe, and this small model would permit. In which description, I have (as
occasion required) still had recourse unto the New Testament; the last of
Lights that unaccursed man may expect. Christ Jesus being the true light who
lights every one that comes into the world; either this present, or that to
come: and in the golden Candlestick, or holy Bush of the sacred Scriptures
ever burning, but never consuming either himself or it. Who himself came
down from Heaven, unto the last alive of his blessed Secretaries (his beloved
Saint John) and set his conclusory Seal unto the last written Book of all the
27. of his last Testament. And in the last clause thereof, affixed his
Commination, accursing all those, who add (new Lights) to, or take (the true
Light) from, the therein sealed Canon.

2. I shall not spend time in doing what is done. These being undeniable
Principles, That whatsoever (with the approbation of GOD) has been continued
from the beginning of the world, and has remained ever in, and under the Law,
dyed not with the Law, but is of the perpetual Law of Nature. Secondly, That
Christ came not to dissolve any part of the Law of Nature; neither does it need
any particular ratification in the Gospel: though ex Abundanti, this great
Point is impregnably fortified in that unalterable Covenant.

3. But in this particular, there is no need, were there no more written, then
that most incomparable forementioned Tract, against Resistance of the lawful
Magistrate under color of Religion, with the Appendents thereof. Unto which,
some have (now) for a long time been indebted, for ought that I could hear; I
being a man, who (for these late years) have still lived in the greatest throng
of the Disturbances of this world; and in the greatest solitude of Books; as
having ever been out of their acquaintance, or ^ode*

-- Quando fie^ (A^ite) Liber? 4. In the New Testament invincible it is, and
clearly deduced thence, That Monarchical Power is immortal, as being the
Power of GOD; and that in opposition to any other Form. As also, that paid
Obedience is perpetually from all due unto that One* both by the Injunction of
the ever-living Evangelicall Precepts of Christ himself, and his Apostles; and
by the ratification of the dying, never dying Examples of Christ himself, and
of his Apostles.

5. Which was received for Catholic Doctrine in the purer Ages (which he has
proved) and has continued in all times (which are worth a Livelihood, in any
vindicative Record) by the Religious therein; who accordingly have embraced
Death it self, rather then for quick ending Ends, They would make abatement in
either those Rules or Examples, by their Resistance of that Power: which
Doctrine had its instauration when the Roman Monarchy, was both Pagan, and by
force newly erected: while the Senate was ready upon every overture, to pull
down the Monarchy. Yet then, neither they nor we have ever found any Appeal to
have been made from any Injustice or Persecution, to either the Senate or the
People, nor yet their names so much as comparatively thought worth the mention:
but suffering under the Tyrant, -- Cui celsior ira, nefasque Justius: being
made the Glory of the Gospel-Doctrine.

6. But lest I should seem to talk of Precedents, and forget Didactically to
bring one Proof of mine own; I shall justify all that has been concluded,
with the recapitulation of a few words from the mouth of Christ himself; John
10* 34, 35. I have said, you are Gods; and this Scripture cannot be evaded, or
played fast and loose with at any time; or dissolved while there is time, (...).
And this is the Principle whereby our Savior proves his Divinity: to wit, the
known Divinity of those which have Regal Power: not as vainly now sequestered
by distinction from their Persons; which if it were admitted, would destroy the
Universality of our Saviors Medium: take away the strength thereof, whereby he
proved his own Personal Deity: and make the best Logicians that ever were (
Christ and his Apostles) inferior in that Art, to this afterbirth newly
enlightened into the world: who might better have distinguished for their lives,
against the Pagan persons of Tiberius and Nero; but either knew not, or
abhorred this knack. The least of all that has been said in the cause,
deserving an Answer.

7. Which upon the search of the Record will further appear; it is (as (...)
has been showed) Psalm. 82. 6. Any Amarti, Elohim Atem: Ipse dixi, Dii vos. I
my self have said it (in mine own Person) you are Gods (in your Persons, or)
your selves. First, I my self [ Ani] exclusively of all others, (for none but
he himself could create man, or any thing else; much less, only by saying
the word) and it is not barely expressed thus by the forming of the Verb, but
by particular Article: I my self. So is the other by Article also, [ Atem,]
vos ipsi, you your selves, exclusively of all others, (those who tell you, you
are seduced by evil Counsel, and unfit to govern) are (in respect of them)
Elohim, as in your Persons.

8. And this was done (as has been showed) by the operative Word, which
effected every thing that was made; and that so soon as it was uttered. And
again [ Amarti] I have said it, from the first Article of time that was; so
that there was no time wherein this was not true of this his speech; who
operateth not in time, but in himself, who was before all time. And in the
instant, formally effected that, in actu Signato, which in actu exercito is
daily produced. When he said in himself, Let us make Man in our own Image,
after our Likeness, and let them have Dominion: the just Right of Elohim.

9. Both these, the Articles, and the Power of this word [ Amarti,] our Savior
took care to express in the Greek, John 10. The accusation of the Jews was
Ver. 33. (...). That thou being a man make (not barely thee, but) thy self
(in thy Person to be) GOD. He returns upon them, that Divinity is annexed
(not solely to the Office, but also) to the Persons of those, to whom this
Effective Word of GOD was imparted: therefore, certainly he was such in his
Person really, who was the Word that made them so truly in their Persons; and
so, that this Act cannot be abstracted or distinguished away by Sophistry, from
their very Persons. For his words (upon which he infers, that no robustuous
ignorance or strength, can loose this Scripture from them) are (...): If he
calls them Gods, to whom the (making) Word of God was [made;] for this is the
English of the word: and not (barely) came, as a stranger to a stranger; but as
unto the Prophets, who were made Prophets by this kind of coming (to wit,
making) of the Word of God to them. If this had not been so, our Savior had
been but an ill Logician; to conclude the Divinity of his Person (which was the
Accusation and Question) from a Medium, whose strength had been extinct by the
Trifle of this Distinction: for if Divinity were not annexed to their Persons,
he proves nothing for his own thereby. And therefore he takes care for this in
the very first words of his Answer; (...), which signifies illos ipsos; them in
their very selves or Persons. So that plain it is, that abstracting (to
separation) of Divinity from the Persons of Kings (barely) to their Office,
takes away this Proof of our Saviors Godhead.

10. So wretched is the proud poverty of those, who without the treasures of
the Gold and Silver of the Hebrew and Greek Texts, will think themselves
rich: and with the tumult and noise of an Assembly, of a little Logic (worse
then none) and the Latin and Copper of Scripture Translation, will make
themselves bold against GOD and his Christ's. And so much need have men to pray
for, and pay for a learned Clergy, of the Institution of God himself; unto
whom he has promised his Spirit of Interpretation, according to his Covenant
made with his peculiar Tribe, for the duration of the Sun and Moon. Which he
recounteth by this last of the Legal Prophets, (to show, that the perpetuity
of the Covenant of Knowledge, was not annexed (but temporarily) to the Persons
of the Priests of the Law, but of the Gospel) who foretold the preferring of
the last, into the Patrimony of the first; Mal. 2. and 3. Chap.

11. Now, lest any should be further beguiled into a belief, that any others
are invested with this Name and Power of Elohim besides the King, and against
him; I shall go a little further in the unfolding of our Saviors present
Text. For the next words [ Vbne Gnelion Chulchem,] And every of you (...)
your selves (or Persons) are Sons of the most High. They have been expounped
already; and the Supremacy of the King acknowledged by S. Peter and S. Paul)
has been proved from them, as the irresistibility from Elohim. The next words
are (notwithstanding these Titles) You shall dye like men, etc. which words,
are indeed an exclusion of all those from the Name and Power of Elohim and
Ghnelion, who are not Kings. You Kings are not so Elohim, but that you shall
dye like (whom? Invincibly it must be) those who are not Elohim: from whose
commune condition (in this particular) this shall not exempt you. Who those
are, who are not Elohim: first, the Democraticall aggregate body of the People;
the words are, Achen Che-Adam Temuthun: (Achen) (...)
Truly and indeed (Temuthun) you (all before specified by your names of Elohim
and Ghnelion) shall dye. (Che-Adam) not only like single men in the
Individualls; but mankind, in the whole Aggregate thereof included in Adam:
from whom, none can be exempted; in whom, all, and every one were included. So
that clearly from hence, the People, yea, in their whole Aggregate capacity,
are excluded from the Name and Power of Elohim.

12. Secondly, the Aristocraticall Senate, is apparently (in the next words)
shut out also: And you shall dye (notwithstanding that you are Elohim, like one
of those who are not so; to wit) like one (Hasarim) of the Princes. Those (...)
who are no otherwise Elohim, then as (in the first Verse) they are taken into
the Kerev or closet of him that is (though mortal, yet otherwise) Elohim
indeed. So that undeniably by this Text is justified, (that which before was
proved) that no man whatsoever is invested with the Name and Power of Elohim,
but in relation to those whom Ghnelion has constituted (in Subordination)
under him; and not in relation to (and therefore not against) any whom GOD has
set over him.

13. Now all this our Savior makes the Medium a notiori, (as a known
Principle) to prove, that Divinity was not in him as in the former Prophets, to
whom it came, as to its Inn, not as to its proper Habitation; there being many
times when the Word of GOD came not to them. Therefore, he preferres this
Medium from them (to wit Kings, by reason of the standing Image and Commission
of Elohim, in, and to them) unto whose Persons (as his words import) Divinity
was by a perpetual Law annexed. If a Prophet (notwithstanding his miraculous,
both Predictions and Actions) had said that he was Elohim, he had deserved to
have been stoned. But of the King, it is an eternal and known truth.

14. The Argument I take to be this. Pardon Lord Jesus the weakness of the
Urger.

That which is perpetually (as founded upon an undissoluble ground) true of
him, who is but the in the Image of Elohim: That is much more true of him, who
is both the Image and Likeness of Elohim, and no blasphemy; (employed Ver. 36.
For he was both Sanctified, wherein the perfection of the Likeness consists:
and Sent, wherein the Power of the Image stands.) But, that ((...), ille
ipse) has Divinity annexed to his Person: Is perpetually (as founded upon an
indissoluble ground, true of the King) who is but in the Image of Elohim.
Therefore, that ((...), ille ipse) has Divinity annexed unto his Person: Is
much more true of him (to wit, Christ) who is both the Image and Likeness of
Elohim; and no blasphemy.
15. Concerning the Divine Unalterable Evangelicall Precept, for obedience unto
Princes, though tyrannous Persecuters; and Non-resistance of any who hold the
place of GOD: as also what was the received Interpretation thereof in the
Primitive times. And concerning the celsitude of Christianity, in the Doctrine
of Self-denial, and taking up the Cross, (whereby it visibly triumphs over
the gayest of all Religions, which from the beginning have bewitched the world:
as also the contrary Doctrine of the Zealots, and takers up of the Sword. The
forementioned most Christian Tract, has taken off my feeble hands. I shall
gladly conclude with the Example of my Lord.

16. I shall not declame how ill it has been followed; but pray that it may be
better. First, concerning his honourary acknowledgement of the Justice of the
imposition of Taxes and Tributes, (which has been made a shift to be made the
incentive of our calamities) I forbear that which our Savior declares to be of
the Jura Majestatis, or Rights of Sovereign Prerogative; and the consequences
thereof; to wit, the Impression of the Image of Caesar upon the Public Coin.
Which ( Mat. 22. 21. he makes his Medium to prove Tribute to be due to Caesar.
I insist only upon the Illation, Therefore render, (of his,) not give (of
yours) the things that are Caesar's: to wit, the Tax or Tribute which he
requires: and by so doing, you render unto God the things that are Gods; whose
Image Caesar bears, as the Tribute money bears Caesar's. And that this must be
the drift of our Savior in these words, it appears; for that in the Question,
there was nothing of doubt moved concerning GOD: but as Saint Paul, Romans 13. 6.
For this cause pay you Tribute; for they are (Gods Ministers) attending
continually upon this very thing. So our Savior answers here, that Caesar
requires it not in his own, but in the Right of GOD.

17. That all the Right which Caesar has unto it, he has from GOD; and that
he has GODS Right; our Savior (in his own case, and when he had not
wherewith to pay it) expresses, Mat. 17. 25. Of whom do the Kings of the
earth take Tribute? Of their own Children? or of Strangers? Saint Peter (unto
whom the Question was put) answers, of Strangers. Jesus replyeth, Then are
the Children free. Concluding from thence his own exemption, as being the Son
of Him, in whose Right the Custom and Tribute were due. For it is evident,
that Christ was none of those (...), None of Tiberius Caesar his own Sons: but
he was His, to whom by Caesar, the Tribute was due debt; and who did receive it
in Caesar. Otherwise, the words of him who is the Wisdom of God, had been
devoid of ordinary Reason; whose Plea was most* strong, if he who is the
Wisdom of God, knew how to argue for his immunity from the same.

18. But in the next Verse; Though Caesar have no Right to it from ( Us) yet
lest They (who are his Officers) be angry, go a fishing and pay it: which
course I am sure is Christian, and would not mis-become any times. Where it may
be observed, that they who are invested with Power that is Divine; have a
little more Privilege then the sons of Adam in commune. For it is, lest they
should be angry with ( Us,) and give it for ( Thee and Me;) but Capiet qui
capere potest.

19. Concerning the demeanor of Christ, submitting himself unto the death; it
is that which we all pretend to look for benefit by: and therefore should all
consider: when He who was the Founder of Christianity, was to gather to
himself all the Kingdoms of the Earth into one Family; while Herod, Pontius
Pilate, and the People of the Jews were gathered together against Him, as
Psalm. 2. though he wanted not Power to make Resistance; Perdidit Vitam, ne
perderet Obedientiam: He quitted his Life to preserve his Obedience. To do
thus, rather then to Resist the Power of an Heathen Prince; which he
acknowledged (though the Deputy unjustly used his Authority) to be from Heaven,
I am sure is Christian; from the Example of Christ, walking according to his
own Rules.

20. And Saint Peter says, 1 Pet. 2. 21. This was to leave us (...), an
Example for Christian Imitation: this I am sure is recorded for Christian
Doctrine to remain for ever. To do thus, by good Logic and true Paronymy,
from Christ, I can denominate Christian. But they have the luck of it (if they
may escape Scot-free) who can conjugate such Oppositions; and make that
Christian, to do contrary to the Doctrine and Example of Christ. And that as
matter of Religion for Conscience sake, contrary to both; both of Christ and
his Apostles. And further yet to erect this, as the chief Ensign and note of
Christianity; and to teach and enjoyne men to spend their bloods in this Cause,
to establish a contrary Foundation; and to enjoyne an opposite Covenant. For my
part, as yet I know no new Christ, nor no new Gospel to learn the contrary
from, and therefore Contentus hoc Catone: I will (as I am bidden) walk on this
way. For it is an Article of my Creed, that he who trod it, Ascended into
Heaven: animated by him who went before me.

-- Adsum Caesar ubique tuus (Liceat modo) nunc quoque miles. Whereupon my
Tenth Quaere is. Since all Christian Kings (more singularly then other Princes)
have the Divine Power of Elohim and Messiah annexed to their Persons, and not
barely to their Offices. And since our Savior made this Annexation, (viz. to
their Persons) His Argument a Notiori, to refute the imputation of Blasphemy,
for his affirming the Divinity of his own Person. And since', by the Gospel
Doctrine and Practice, Obedience even unto Monarchical Tyrants; in
Self-denial; and taking up of the Cross; is set forth as the differentiall
note of Christians: And Rebellion (with the Sword, or otherwise) is declared
damnable. And paying and yielding Tribute, Life, and Livelihood it self; is
that which only (from both Precept and Example) can denominate Christian. By
what Logic they can distinguish away their Blasphemy, and Paronymise
themselves into the name of Christians? Who against Christ's Gospel-Information,
Precept and Practice, affirm the Power of Dominion to be in the People! And
that we may oppose those, whom the Gospel-Doctrine teaches us, rather to dye
then Resist.

My first Argument is concerning the Argument of our Savior, S. John 10. Every
Doctrine which dissolveth that indissoluble Principle, by which our Savior
Christ vindicated the affirmation of the Divinity of his Person, from the
imputation of Blasphemy: Is blasphemous; and the Maintainers thereof had need
to be sure of a new Christ. But the Doctrine that asserteth, that the Regal
Power of Kings is not Divine; or that it is distinguishable away from their
Persons: Dissolveth that indissoluble Principle, by which our Savior Christ
vindicated the affirmation of the Divinity of his Person, against the
imputation of Blasphemy. Therefore, the Doctrine that asserteth, that the
Regal Power of Kings is not Divine; or that it is distinguishable away from
their Persons: Is blasphemous, and the Maintainers thereof had need to be sure
of a new Christ.
Secondly, concerning the Text urged by our Savior out of Psalm. 82. Every
exception of common Similitude between two several Predicates, which agree in
aliquo tertio: Is a negation of Identity between the Proposed and the Likened,
in the particulars Predicated. But in the Proposition, Psalm 8^. You are Elohim,
or you are all of you the Sons of Ghnelion; and these, you shall dye like Adam
(or the community of mankind, whether singular or aggregate) and you shall fall
like one of the Princes (or particular members of the Senate;) There is an
exception of common Similitude, (viz. of death) between two several
Predicates; To wit, Elohim, and the Sons of Ghnelion (Kings in their Persons,)
and between Kings and Adam, and between Kings and Peers. Therefore, in the
Propositions abovesaid, there is a negation of Identity between the Proposed
and the Likened, in the particulars predicated. So that neither the whole
People, nor the peers or Magistrates (with relation to the King) are invested
with the Name and Power of Elohim.
Thirdly, concerning the root of all evil, the first degree of
Antichristianisme. They who deny their whole Livelihoods to God when he
requires them, and that contrary to Christ's Information, Precept, and Practice:
Cannot be Christ's Disciples. But they that deny their Impositions to Kings when
they require them: Do (at the least) deny their whole Livelihoods to God when
he requires them; and that contrary to Christ's Information, (viz. That God is
he to whom in Kings they are due) contrary to Christ's Precept, of rendering them
to Kings; and contrary to the Practice of Christ, so paying them, that
therewith he proved, that he paid them to God. Therefore, they who deny their
Impositions to Kings when they require them: Cannot be Christ's Disciples.
Fourthly, concerning the denomination of Christians. They who hazard their
Livelihoods and Lives, contrary to the Information, Precept, and that Practice
of Christ, which he left for all men in the like case, for an Example to
imitate: Can by no Logic be denominated Christians, but that which is contrary
to that glorious Name. But they, who (when they have strength to do it) do
Resist the Regal Power, and will not part with both Livelihoods and Lives,
rather then make such Resistance: Do hazard their Livelihoods and Lives,
contrary to that Information, Precept, and practice of Christ, which he left
for all men (in the like case) for an Example to imitate. Therefore, they who
(when they have strength to do it) do Resist the Regal Power, and will not
part with Livelihoods and Lives, rather then make such Resistance: Can by no
Logic be denominated Christians, but that which is contrary to that glorious
Name.

CHAP. XII.
The Contents.
The Authors Reason for not beginning with the End of Dominion. The Reason why
God himself retroceded from the immediate exercise of his just Monarchy; that
Man might not by his Justice be consumed. The Reason why Priesthood is not
administered by the Angels. God (by thus doing) does not only accommodate our
Persons, but dignifie our whole Nature. The Fundamental Axioms (in this Tract)
recollected. The unalterablenesse of Gods Ground, for the unalterablenesse of
these Constitutions. This great vouchsafing of God, does display unto us the
Blemishes of our proud frailty, as do our clothes, and the written Word of
God. Saint Peter's cautions against wresting of Scriptures. What remains to be
hereafter treated upon.

1. I Have deduced that which will prove (alone) to be Dominion from the sole
Original thereof, unto the full establishment of it, in the unchangeable
Covenant of the Gospel; unto which, whosoever adds a diverse new one, is ipso
Facto (as has been showed) excommunicated, Gal. 1. 8. though he be an Angel
from Heaven. If I had not lived in an age, which denies Principles;
particularly this, That all just Dominion (in Earth, as well as Heaven) is
solely and Originally Gods: I had been to blame (as an ill Logician and
Methodist) for not beginning at the End. Which (as has been said) is the
composure of Earth according to the Image and Likeness of Heaven; for the
just, orderly, and lasting preservation of its happiness. This shall be
explained and justified in a particular short Commentary on the Lords Prayer.

2. The Reason of Dominion thus established (as has been manifested) is the
preservation of mankind (through the compassion of the Almighty) from his very
self. This is apparent, Exodus 33. 3. I will not go up in the midst of thee,
for thou art a stiff-necked People; lest I consume thee. Neither will he quit
his Dominion, but as in the precedent Verse, he will send an Angel to
administer his Power, and a Moses with the evidence of his Commission; as in
the Conclusion of the precedent Chapter. Both of which, are by the
incomparablenesse of his most merciful vouchsafings, interposed between Him
and Us; to keep at a distance the Immediatenesse of our Impiety and his
Justice. This manner of the exercising of his Monarchy, being man's security and
shelter from GOD; whereby the Terrors of his Majesty visibly reigning over us,
do not (once for all) appall and confound us: with the Honor of whose Justice
it could not otherwise stand, if he should not presently strike for every
Insolency committed against his Highness.

3. For this cause has he put his Temporary Scepter and Sword into the hands
of a Deputy of our own Flesh and Blood; who might more calmly exercise his
Power. It is not mine; long ago, Themistus published this Commentary upon this
action. (...). Orat. 5.
It appears, that for this cause, Kingdom was adjourned from Heaven to Earth,
that man might have on Earth a Sanctuary of refuge from the inexorable severity
of the Divine Majesty, by the exercise of Gods Dominion, by one, whose breath
(like other men's) is in his nostrils; That so GOD might not be necessitated
each moment, to fill the world with the destructions of sinful, proud, dust
and ashes.

4. When Israel saw the Thundrings and Lightnings, (Exodus 20. 18.) and heard
the noise of the Trumpet of God, and beheld the Mountain smoking: when they
saw this, they removed and stood afar off; and said to Moses, Speak thou with
us, and we will hear; but let not God speak with us lest we die. So likewise
for the Peoples sake it is, That the Priesthood is not executed by the Angels;
yea, for their honor too, if they please to consider it. And therefore, Deuteronomy.
18. 17. the Lord sweetly accepted the desires of his People in this kind, and
said, They have well spoken; to wit, that they might not hear again the voice
of Jehovah Elohim; nor see that great fire any more, lest they should perish
And thereupon GOD promised to raise them up of their Brethren, a Prophet, whom
they might hear in stead of the Archangel; unto whom the Promulgation of the
Law was delegated.

5. So that in these Dispensations, GOD Almighty does not only accommodate the
personal frailties, but does dignifie the whole nature of mankind. For, if one
member be had in honor, all the rest rejoice with it. What said I? with it!
Nay, to them only, is the employment thorny and dangerous; to the others, the
benefit redounds. For, as said Saint Augustine; They who De Civ. Dei, l. 19. c.
16.
are in eminent Place and Power, stand in more need of pity from others, and
patience in themselves; then any others, for the relief of their Servitude and
Vassallage. Our God is a consuming fire; Man in his place shall be consumed, if
he do not shed forth upon us the goodness of GOD, for the end of his placing
there: much more if he do consume us, though he be adopted; nay, because he is
adopted into the dreadful Power and sacred Name of Elohim. Thus far has GOD
(with infinite mercy) vouchsafed, and no further. And who may say unto him,
What do thou?

6. But if it may be lawful (and were further needful) to justify him
herein; there is much to be said in defense of this his Act. I keep my self
within my own Province, and presume not to spoil the just Grounds laid by
Politicians, concerning the general Freedom hereby from the danger of
Division, the mother of Confusion, etc. But these are the Maxims that I rest
upon.

That the Dominion over the Creature, cannot but be in the Creator. That the
Dominion of the Creator, cannot but be Monarchical. That if the Creators Power
of Dominion were placed in all, or more then one; it could not be Monarchy, or
Kingdom; and Christ's Title of sole King of kings must be extinct. For he that
is King, is alone in Power; and there must be Co-ordination with Cbrist, if any
have to do with those, who are properly and immediately his Subjects; who
neither can have, nor need more then such a King. That Christ's Power is
profaned, if it be held in commune: That the King is so, if he quit it; and
the Usurpers that challenge it. That nothing but the Free and Formal Donation
of God, in Terminis, can invest any under him with it; nothing at all from him.
That he, who has most frequently declared himself to be the Universal King
of the whole world, has in express terms Deputed Kings, and only Kings, as
Supreme and Irresistible Administrators of the earthly Dominion of Him and his
Christ, over all the Nations of the world: and requires most exact and
especial Obedience of all Christians to them.
7. So that this Dispensation is that, which in prudent Justice could be done;
and in inexpressible mercy (for the safeguard of mankind) is done; and which,
without ^earing of Christ from his due Throne, cannot be undone. That man may
understand and value this great vouchsafing, is the end of my Prayers and
Labors; it being the last which GOD will afford in this kind: as being sworn
unto in the former, and ratified in the last of his Covenants, which he will
make with mankind; which begun with the Law of Reason in the first: and it
being that, which is set up in the Heavens, (the sampler for Earth) Reason must
acknowledge, that to be the fittest Form of Government, to make Earth another
Heaven, which is established in Heaven.

8. And yet I cannot but acknowledge, that this Monarchical. Law is but
beneficial unto us, as are our Clothes, as is the written Word or GOD; both of
which, with the honor and comfort which they afford us, do cast a stain upon
us. As we are without the warmth which our raiment brings us, the cold would
destroy us: but if we had been, as we ought to have been, we should have had no
need either of their commendation or protection.

9. Thus are the Scriptures of GOD blessed helps to bring us to the Kingdom of
GOD; and such helps, as neither the Malice of the Jew, nor the Wisdom of the
Greek; nor the Subltily of the Heretic; nor the Outrage of the Tyrant; nor
the Gnashing of the Fiend; have been able to blast. And of so Sacred and
Inviolable Majesty are they, that whosoever shall add to, or detract one
tittle from them, shall have his Name blotted out of Heavens, and Kalendred in
the Dypticks of Hell. Whosoever, boldly blind (as Saint Peter says) because
unlearned; or timerously yielding, because unstable; dare adventure to
themselves (in the high Mysteries thereof) without Science to interpret; or
(which is more desperate) with Jeroboams Priests, without lawful Calling; to
impose upon others: or who dare not but follow the Biass of potent Greatness;
or the Tide of the giddy Multitude; or the Engagements of their own masterfull
masterlesse wills; and thereby do pervert the sacred meaning of that holy
Word, (though they cannot destroy its precious sense, yet) shall thereby
destroy their own sensual senseless souls.

10. And whosoever for such Ends, shall bring with them, either Saintlike
Virtues, or Angelical Science, to countenance a false Gloss upon the Sacred
Scriptures, is also Excommunicated from the Brotherhood of Saints and Angels.
Yet (as the Fathers teach us) this Reverend, and never sufficiently esteemed
favor, is withal an Argument of our shame. For if fallen man, had not fallen
after his Fall, GOD would have inhabited with him, and face to face conversed
with him, as a Friend does with his Friend; as he did at the first instruct the
Patriarchs in his ways. Or as afterward, when an Inundation of Sin had
estranged him from this more familiar converse, have raised up, and fitted
select Preachers of Righteousness, from his own mouth, to display his pleasure
upon all Emergencies. Whereas now we have the last of his favors in this kind;
Moses and the Prophets; Christ and his Apostles; and must for ever shut up our
eyes (even unto detestation) from exacting further Miracles and Revelations for
ever.

11. So must we do with the last of his gracious vouchsafings in this
particular; since the shame of our deservings, has but stirred up the
compassionatenesse of his condescending; that he has in inestimable goodness,
thus stooped unto our sinful frailty, not with his dreadful visibility to
Govern us; but to settle his venerable Right of Earthly Dominion, in a
glorious Line of our Flesh and Blood. For we cannot suppose, but that we
deserve (at least) as little, as his first People, to have immediate
Procurators sent from his own bosom, as they had Judges in all their
Exigents. Which Government they would not endure, nor we any long, who will not
endure that which they preferred, and GOD graciously constituted amongst them;
and through them, amongst us, for so long as the Sun and Moon shall last.

12. Thus have I (conscious of much infirmity, with unpassionate conquest of my
wants) adventured on the great Demonstrative Efficient of Dominion; according
to the entertainment of this first part, I shall address my self for the
other causes; as the Final, so the Subjective matter, and the Formal; to wit,
the Image of GOD and his Likeness, infused into mankind: which I shall call
the Seat of Dominion: wherein I make no doubt, but (through the assistance of
him, who has hitherto-kept and supported me) to make just Proof of that which
I have assumed.

That the Image of God is imprinted in the Imperial Faculty of the Will of
Man: as the Likeness in the deliberative part of the Understanding; which
though it be of the elder House, must not (here) claim its Birthright; but be
content to be as Aaron was to Moses, until it come to the Inheritance which is
above; where it shall no longer serve the younger; nor shall Japhet dwell in
the tents of Shem.

That proportionably hereunto; in the great Hypostasis of a Christian Nation,
(wherein is the Church) the Oecumenicall will of the Kingdom, is the King: and
in the included Church, the Understanding is the Bishop. Both which Powers are
united now in Heaven, in the Great High Priest after the Order of Melchisedec,
who also is King of Salem.

To whom, as it is in Heaven, so also in Earth (which his Portion, he receives
only in those, who be the Deputies of his Powers) be Really and Internally, as
well as Externally and Verbally, ascribed All Dominion, both for Heaven and
Earth; for the for ever of this world, which cannot fail him (with the Father
and holy Ghost) in the for ever of the next.

Amen.
FINIS.

