REGICIDIVM JVDAICVM OR A Discourse, about the Jews crucifying Christ, their
King. WITH An Appendix, or supplement, upon the late murder. OF OUR BLESSED
SOVEREIGN CHARLES THE FIRST Delivered in a Sermon at the HAGVE before His
Majesty of GREAT BRITAIN etc. and His ROYAL SISTER, Her HIGHNESS, the
PRINCESS of ORANGE. BY RICHARD WATSON, Chaplain to the Rt. Honorable the LORD
HOPTON.

Agnom rejecerunt, Vulpem elegerunt. Cassiodor: HAGE: Printed by SAMUEL BROUN
English Bookeseller, Dwelling in the Achter-om at the Sign of the English
Printing house. Anno M.D.C.XLIX.

To the Rt. Honoble: the LORD HOPTON, BARON OF STRATON etc. One of the Lords of
His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council.
MY LORD:
Had not my known obligations commanded my praesent address unto your Lordp.
(to whose bounty for diverse years past, and still, I owe as well my being,
as some benefit by those intervalls of study which our persecuted condition
will admit) the subject of this Discourse, which I publish, would have pointed
out your patronage to my thoughts, who have hitherto been such an eminent
Assertour of Christianity by your life, and of Monarchy by your Sword. What
defects are in it, too late seek your name for their cover, having allreadie
run their hazard of censure from them, whose judgment I chiefly reverence,
and whose sole displeasure I fear. If it may be owned by your Lordp. as the
least title of my duty discharged, and by your honor commended to any future
opinion of my disavowing to the world all old or new rebellion and Judaisme, I
have the end of my vvishes, and farther encouragement to express my self:

MY LORD Yo Lordships most grateful and obsequious servant RICHARD WATSON.

St. John 19. chapter verse. 14. and 15. And he says unto the Jews, Behold your
King. But they cried out. Away with him, away with him, crucify him. Pilate
says unto them, Shall I crucify your King? the chief Priests answered, We
have no King but Caesar.
WEre not my text Scripture, I should apologize for assuming such a sad
subject, the sound of which words must needs turn that strong current of
grief upon your ears, which has allreadie for diverse weeks streamed forth
abundantly from your eyes. And though it be, were not this a week where in
we are every day obligd, as well by Christian duty as command of the Church,
preaching or praying, mournfullie to commemorate the sufferings of our Savior,
and, like loyal subjects; make some sparks of our old allegiance rise out of
those ashes which we cast on our heads upon the forowfull remembrance of so
unjust a judgment pronuunc'd and executed upon so just a King; I should mine
own self check my imprudence, and prevent your censure of my importunity in
this choice. But the whole Gospel for the day (which I presume you observed)
was no other then St. Matthew's long narrative of the Jews malicious
proceedings against Christ, and my text but a part of the same in St. John,
with Pilates express declaring him to be their King.

Indeed the name of this day, which is Palm Sunday, speaks songs and praises,
Tract. 49. in Ioann.
victories and trophies, Rami palmarum lauds sunt, significantes victoriam,
says St. Austin: But the service of the day speaks sorrows and sufferings,
betraying and murdering, Holy Church not thinking worth her practical record
their slight Hosannas, their high way blessings upon the Son of David, who
within few days after could silentlie hear those Anathema maranatha's, those
judicial blasphemies against the Son of God. Not deigning to preserve, for
sacred relics, those cast rags, the garments I mean the multitude this day
spread in his way to the City, S. Matthew. 21.
whose persons and lives ought in conscience and duty to have obstructed his
Fridays passage to the cross. The next Sunday, the solemnity for the
Resurrection of Christ, it will be mors in victoria, death swallowed in
victory, 1. Cor. 15. 54.
but this day, the first of Hebdomada Magna, the great week, appointed for us
to meditate on his passion, it is victoria in morte, the palm turned into
cypress, victory drowned in a deluge of blood, overwhelmed with the cruelty
of death.

It should seem Pilate, whether upon some touch he had in his conscience, with
a partial illumination of Gods spirit; or upon the circumstantial
accomplishment of many known predictions of the Prophets, or upon the grandeur
of our Saviors speech, and more then humane Majesty in his countenance; he
collected that, which St. Chrysostom calls megalen syponoian, Hom. in 18. and
19.
a great suspicion of some what more then ordinary in his person; Joan. S.
Matthew. 27. 19.
Or whether scared by his wifes dream, and dissuaded from the business by her
counsel; Or whether the principles of moral honesty prevailed with him to
resolve against the condemnation of innocence, and instrumental completing the
malice of the Jews; it is notoriously evident what shifts he used, what
pretenses he framed, either to retract them from their madness, or withdraw
himself from any interest in the murder.

The first instance here of may be his transmitting the process from his own
Court to the Sanhedrim of the Jews. Take ye him, and judge him according to
your Law. St. John 18. 31. Quae non sunt verbae concedentis, Kai epi pragma ou
synkechoremenon autois (...) othountos.
sed horrentis crimen, says Cajetan, which are not words of concession, but
detestation of the fact, aphosimenou says St. Chrysostom. But this they put
off with a non licet, It is not lawful for us to put any man to death, either
because the Romans had forbid them the legal cognizance of all capital causes,
which Maldonat says is the opinion of the most: or as some lay to their
charge, though they might stone, or strangle, or burn, crucify they could
not, and none but that would satiate their malice, because the most ignominious
way of execution, and as good not all, as not wholelie to their purpose, as
they express it indefinitelie, with out any limitation. It Is not lawful for
us to put any man to death. St. John 18. 39.
A second instance of Pilates aversion may be the advantage he took of a
custom they had to free a malefactor at this time, and so none fitter then
he, who, were his person as bad as their malicious charges would make him, must
be least guilty by his office or dignity, in all reason and justice most
capable of their favor which made him use (at least in our Evangelists story)
the Royal title in his quaestion, and say, Shall I release unto you not Christ,
or him who, you say, makes himself to be the Son of God, but your
Sovereign? Iudaeorum Regem, tht King of the Jews, verse. the 39. of that
chapter. And here their non licet could not pass for an answer, for all though
is was not indeed lawful for them to put at least this man to death; it was
not only law, but conscience, and duty, and allegiance, to save his life and
restore him to his liberty. But here comes in their clamor and cry, for
fear the Judge should be deaf at such a senseless demand, Verse. 40.
Non hunc sed Barabbam, they all cried, Not this man, but Barabbas. Thieves and
robbers, villains and murderers, set whom they will at liberty but the King,
Non hunc sed Barabbam, we will not save him but Barabbas.

The third and last experiment we have of Pilate, may be draw'n out of the
words of my text. Behold your King, this he thought might move their
compassion. Shall I crucify your King? this he hoped would confound them with
shame. But they have impatience where with to turn off their pity, they will
take no thought to what pass they brought him. Away with him, away with him,
and a false color they have ready at hand to cover their shame Habemus
Caesarem, they good men have Caesar for their King.

My text divides it self into four parts.
I. First here is Pilate, a heathen Judges ingenuous profession of Christ's
Regalitie, his Kingly dominion over the people of the Jews, Ecce Rexvester,
behold your King.

II. Secondly, Their impatient aversion from acknowledging such his supremacy
of power. Away with him, away with him, crucify him.

III. Thirdly Pilates profession resumed, and framed into a strong argument
for the freedom and indemnitie of Christ. Crucifigam Regem! Shall I crucify
your King? which quaestion, the know, implies a negation, and the enthymem's
this. He is your King, therefore, non crucifigam, I must not crucify him.

IV. Fourthlie, and lastly. The chief Priests cunning evasion, and apology
for the Jews rejection of Christ. Mistake not us, nor the good people we
countenance, whose thoughts are not set upon murdering their King, Habemus
Caesarem, We have Caesar, who may be well assured of all fidelity and loyalty
from us, we must hear of no other, alium non habemus, we have no King but
Caesar.

These be the parts. Before we enter upon the handling of which, Let us pray
for Christ's Holy Catholic Church, etc.

And he says unto the Jews, Behold your King.
THis He in my text is that Pilate you meet with every day in your Creed,
infamous there for the worst of his acts, his condemnation of Christ, recorded
here for the best of his words, his public profession to the Jews that he was
their King.

Christi nomen and regnum ubique porrigitur, Advers. Iud.
says Tertullian. As the name, so the regalitie of Christ is held forth every
where to the world. In the Prophets predictions, such as that of Micah the 5.
of his prophecy and 2. But thou Beth-leem Ephratah though thou be little among
the thousands of Judah, yet out of thee shall he come forth unto me that is to
be ruler in Israel. In the Wisemens search and inquisition at his birth St.
Matt. 2. Where is he that is borne King of the Jews? In his own
administration and spiritual exercises of his power, as when he rebuked the
winds and the water, and they obeyed him St. Luke 8. In several intimations by
his words. In this place is one greater tben the Temple. The son of man is Lord
even of the Sabbath. St. Matthew. 12. In his silent acception of the acclamations
and worship from the people, whose mouths were full with Rex Iudaeorum,
Cornell. a Lapid.
Rex Indaeorum. This is he that has been the desire of Nations, this the
expectation of the people, the King of the Jews. The sum and fullest period
of which was the strange ecstatike reverence was given him at his entrance this
day into the City, by spreading of garments, cutting down of boughs, and
crying Hosanna to the Son of David, Baron. A. 34.
which is Free us, or save us we beseech thee, a speech never used but in their
feast of tabernacles, being there a piece of their public service, a part of
the peoples responsals to the Priest. So that he which had conversed with the
Jews, and heard at least, if not read, the writings of their Prophets; He that
knew what pains the Wisemen took to adore, and do him fealty in his cradle;
He that saw the miracles he wrought, and heard the strange language that he
spoke; He, whose eyes, and ears were this day filled full with the
accomplishment of that Prophetike exhortation in Zachary. 9. 9.
Rejoice greatly o daughter of Zion, shout o daughter of Jerusalem, (for
never was joy so highly expressed, never before this was Hosanna known to be
turned into a shout) Ecce Rex, behold thy King, comes unto thee lowly, and
riding upon an ass, the very same language with this days history in the
Gospel, He I say that had all these inducements to believe, had reason to tax
the incredulity of the Jews, Tract. 35. in 27. Matthew.
and allay their cruelty by pointing at their Sovereign. Ecce Rex, Behold
your King. In the foregoing chapter Pilate, at his entrance, into the Judgment
Hall, so dissembled his inclination to believe, that Origin puts to
peradventure his quaestion, Art thou the King of the Jews? deridens, aut
dubitans, that he asked it in derision, or doubt. And, upon our Saviors
reply, Say thou this of thy self, or did others tell it thee, so loath he
seemd to be taken for a Christian, that he would not own the remote alliance
of a Jew. But when he saw the malice of the Priests delude his cunning and
assail his conscience; when the importunity of the peoples clamours was
likely as well to violate his faith, as ravish his justice, then he doubted
about nothing but his honor, a Christian he was, pre conscientia Christianus
Tertullian calls him, but he would with all continue Praesident in Jurie, Apol.
c. 21. P. Gagn. Ambian.
God and Caesar must be content with a joint interest in his service, Convictus
ille, imo and confessus, nec tamen professus, says one, Convinced he is, and
confession he makes, though he becomes no professed Christian, what he thinks
not good to assume to himself (in all likelihood only for fear of Caesar's
displeasure) he presses very hard upon the Jews, Ecce Rex, Behold your King.

But this Ecce here seems not only to hold forth Pilates faith, but to guide
the Jews to a sad object, worth their commiseration and pity. At the 5. verse
of this chapter, when, to avoid greater mischief, Pilate had taken Jesus, and
scourged him; When with platted thorns, and purple robe the soldiers had
crowned Jesus, and arrayd him; When with their Ave Rex, Hail o King, they had
in scorn derided and mocked him; 'anosios catechismenon 'aphoretos
'exybrismenon, says St. Chrysostom, thus undesetvedlie chastis'd, thus
unsufferablie reviled, he brings him forth as a fit object for humane
compassion, and says no more but Ecce homo, Behold the man. Chapter 53.
Behold and see, whether this be not he, whom your own Prophet Isaiah speaks
of, despised and rejected of men, a man of sorrows and acquainted with grief;
Whether it be not he that is wounded for your transgressiont, he that is
bruised for your iniquities; Whether upon him be not the chastisement of your
peace, and whether by these stripes ye may not be healed But when he saw those
sharp thorns that pierced his head could not prick them at the heart; When
he saw those stripes, which had ploughed up and made long furrows in his
back, could by no means break the dry barren ground in their breasts; When
no argument draw'n from such a spectacle of humane misery could move them; He
becomes, as he thinks; imperious in his Rhetoric, hopes the name of Majesty
will awe them; that they, who would take no pity on him as man, will recollect
themselves and reverence him as their Sovereign, Ecce Rex, Behold your King.
But they, who once have burst the chains of humane Society, will break the
bonds of Soveraigntie asunder, and cast away their cords from them; They, who
have forgoten to be men, to be merciful one to another in love, will scarce
bethink themselves to be subjects, to be obedient all to any one in duty.

When Seneca had defined cruelty to be a certain fierceness of the mind in
exacting of punishment, De Clem. l. 2. c. 4.
he discovered a generation of bloody men that could not be comprised in this
definition, such as, no fault nor injury preceding, can be said neither to
punish nor revenge, but qui occidendi causa occidunt, kill merely because they
will kill, nec interficere contenti saeviunt, nor are they content to kill
only, but torment too, and rage in the manner of their murder. And he knows
not what to style these men's distemper but a brutish savagenesse, a raving
madness, both implying their incapacitie of doing, or hearing any thing that
is reason, so that Ecce homo and Ecce Rex to tell them of man or King, to use
any rational argument to appease them, is to take a lamb from a lions mouth,
to divert an evening wolf from her prey, it heightens their rage, it inflames
their fury, impatient they are of hearing any thing that tends to that
purpose, nothing then but Toll, Crucifige, Away with him; Away with him,
crucify him. And this leads me to my second part, the Jews aversion from
acknowledging Christ's supremacy of power, aggravated first by the violence of
their passion, Clamabant, They cried. Secondly by their vehement iterated
expression, Toll, Toll, Away with him, Away with him. Thirdly by the
cruelty of their tumultuarie condemnation, Crucifige, Crucify him.

Aut ignorantia nos rerum aut insolentia iracundos facit, Senec. De Ira. l. 2.
c 31.
said the Stoike. It Is either ignorance or insolence (which in his sense is
somewhat hapening beyond expectation, or out of course) that is the cause of
our anger and fury. Either of which, though it can not fully excuse the
excess of our passion, may abate somewhat the delinquencie of such acts as
very naturally issue from the extremity of the same. To plead either in
behalf of the Jews were to deny that their fathers had a cloud by day, and a
pillar of fire by night to conduct them. Habent Mosen and Prophetas; They have
Moses and the Prophets, and they showed before of the coming of the just one,
St. Steven tells them Act. 7. I shall not stand to reproach them with those
glorious beams of the sun of righteousness, which will they, nill they, St.
Matt. 2. St. Luke 2. 49. 10. Baron. Apparat.
stroke themselves into the eyes of the Jews, to which the Wisemens star in
the East was but a sparkle, and the light that encircled the shepherds but a
shadow. The known accomplishment of the promise in Genesis, That when the
Scepter departed from Judah should Shilo come, evidenced First in Herod the
Idumaean, who was no native, but a proselyte to the Jews, who transmitted the
Scepter to his son Archilaus, and he to Antipas who had a foreigner for his
mother, giving them, that minded it assurance of the thing, might very well put
them upon search after the person, and if our Saviors promise were valide in
the 7. of St. Matthew, Seek and ye shall find, (which Tertullian says, De
Praeser. advers. haeret. c. 8. 24. 1 3.
with the rest of that nature, was in this case directly intended to the
Jews) that search would have ended no otherwhere then in the clear discovery
of Christ. But they were Rebels lumini, as Job speaks, Rebels against the
light in a proper sense, for when this light, that was the Sun of
righteousness, the King of the Jews, 5. John. 3. 19.
was come into the world, they loved darkness rather then light. This
darkness some of them loved in Herod, Tert. De Praeser. c. 15.
whom they would needs in flaterie make that Anointed of God, and instead of
Christians were called Herodians. This darkness others of them loved in the
Serpent whom they commemorate as the founder of knowledge of good and evil,
Ibid. c. 47.
whose power and Majesty they say was lifted up in the brazen image by Moses
in the wilderness, and in the son of man by that pattern, as himself
professes in the 3. of St. John, the likeness whereof Tertullian says, they
used in their sacrilegious mysteries, preferring the Devil himself before
Christ, and from thence were called Ophitae. Thus like silly children, they
changed the bread that came down from heaven for a stone, and the fish that
their father gave them for a Serpent.

St. Paul indeed in the 3. of the Acts notes that they and their rulers did out
of ignorance crucify Christ. St. Luke 23. 34.
And Christ on his cross prayed, Father forgive them, for they know not what
they do. But it may be said, That St. Paul's charity might possibly get the
uper hand of his faith, and yet our Saviors words were unquaestionable truth,
relating to their fatal imprecation, S. Matthew. 27. 25.
Let his bioud be upon us and our children, made when they little thought how
long that purple vein would be running, how many generations of their children
they plunged into this river of blood. Their knowledge of this might else have
amused and startled them in the act. And in this sense perchance our Savior
might speak it, Ignorant, They know not what they do.

But let their knowledge be what it will, I am sure it could not be greater
then their malice, which brake out into this extremity, of passion, that the
Evangelist says not, 'elegon they spoke, but 'ecraugesan, they cried.

An affectus sint corpora, Sen. Ep. 106.
Wherher the passions of the mind be not bodies, has been a question sprung in
moral Philosophy. Such strange alterations have they made, such shapes and
representatives of themselves, as seem more then effects of immaterial forms
more then bare impressions of a spirit. Thus of tentimes has fear shot that
blood to the heart which shame had flushed up in the face, and showed her self
in the image of death. Thus when joy had painted out to the life the verdant
spring in the countenance of man, has sorrow sent his moisture to the root,
and as if it were the autumn of his age, Id. De Ira l. 1. c. 1.
parched up his skin like a leaf. But quod aliiaffectus apparent, hic eminet,
whereof other affections are the shadow, anger seems to be the substance it
self, what they in a transitory apparition, this in a permanent habit and
real.

Does modest shame discover it self in a gentle blush, and pass away like the
dawing of the morn? Anger drives furioussie like the Sun up to the meridian
of his rage. Does sorrow sigh and sob it in a corner, or whisper in the
secrecy of a wood? Anger cries aloud in the streets, and clamours to a tumult
in the mercate. What had been stilly dropped by tenderhearted pity in a tear,
Anger raises in the noise of an earthquake, and throws about the world in a a
tempest. Tous. 7. Hom. 83.
Wrath is cruel and anger is outrageous, says the Wiseman Prove. 27. 4.
Chrysostom renders this 'ecraugesan, 'epeboon, which is, they bellowed it out
like an ox. And otherwhere paraphrasing upon my text, says he pros
'aptoisteran mallon 'apotauroumenoi gnomen, they were raised in their minds up
to the fierceness of a bull. A similitude very expressive of a licentious
headie multitude in a rage, which, says Tullie, Bro Planc.
non dilectu aut sapientia ducitur ad judicandum, sed impetu, is not lead to
judgment by discretion and wisdom, but hurried by the violence of their
passion. With such beasts as these was good King David encompassed. Ps. 22.
Many oxen are come about me, fat bull, of Basan close me in on every side.
Vituli and tauri, it is renderd by St. Hierom as if young and old had been all
of this temper, all in a cry, and a terrible one too. They gape upon me with
their mouths, Sicut leo rapiens and rugiens, as it were a ramping and roaring
lion. Verse. 13.

If you observe the history of their actions, who are crying in my text, they
all speak the fierceness of their wrath, and most irrational extremity of
their passion. St. John 18.
First for the surprisal of his person they must have no less then a band of
armed men, S. Matthew. 26. 47.
and other Officiers of the Pritstes and Pharisees with swords and staves, when
he was only with a few Disciples in a garden. Then whereas they had him
daily in the Temple, they must come with this power of darkness in the
night. And in this night, (thought as the learned Grotius observes, at the time
of full moon, too bright for such an interprise as theirs) they must blaze
their fury meta phanon kai lampadon, in lanternes and torches, S. Ioh. 18. 12.
and feign a senseless difficulty in the search. When they have got his
person, in their power, they must bind him before they carry him away, scarce
trusting him with the liberty of his legs when Pilate demands their accusation
against him, feign would they have sentence pass with out a charge, upon
Pilates implicit faith in their honest word, S. John 18. 30.
that had he been no malefactor they would not have delivered him to the
Judge. And, after many passages of this kind, when Pilate presses upon them
that he was their King, rhey make an open sepulcher of their mouth, and bury
Royal Majesty in a cry.

But this cry of theirs was not merely a confused nothing, to stop Pilates
mouth about their King, 'athetousi doxas, as St. Jude speaks, They set aside
or despise dominions, Away with him, away with him, are words of scorn,
contempt, and derision, by which they do, as it were spit Regal aurhoritie in
the face. St. Cyprian calls them, Advers. Demetria. Apol. c. 21.
violenta suffragia, Tertullian in the abstract, suffragiorum violentiam, which
I will English no otherwise then the madmens verdict. This is gladius linguae,
the sharp sword of the tongue, that cuts off the legal process of a Court,
pierces law and justice to the heart. When the Herald calls for the cap and
knee for due reverence to be rendered to the King, Ep. S. Jude.
these raging waves foam out no thing but their own shame, Away with him, away
with him, is all can be got from the madness of this people. When the Judge
commands silence in the Court, and would have a quick hearing of the cause, as
in the 59. Isai. By the strength of their cry is judgment turned away
backward and justice bid to stand afar off. Non juris ordinem quaerunt, sed
furore vincere volunt, says one. Tolet.
They look not after the method of the law, they will cast him not in
judgment but fury. That the Prophecy in the 53. of Isai. might be
fullfilled. De judicio sublatus est. He was taken away from prison and from
judgment. Thus in the propriety of David's expression, was our Savior made a
scorn of men, Ps. 22.
and the King of the Jews an out cast of his people. And what was done by the
Jews unto the King, was afterward by the Romans to his subjects decreed to the
death, and when their own sins had draw'n down vengeance upon their heads,
when any public calamity took hold of them, Tertull. Apol.
Christianos ad leones, it was solemn with them to surround their Magistrates
in tumults and cry to have the Christians cast unto the lions; And not only
so, but, as if they had learned their lesson from the Jews, and desired to
maintain as well their words, as their actions, Baron. An. 301.
Christiani tollantur. Away with the Christians, was a second form of their
tumultuarie clamours.

But there remains yet a third aggravation of their fury in my text. They are
not content to have him taken out of their sight they are not satisfied with
the nullitie of his power, the imprisonment of his person, they must quench the
thirst of their malice in his blood, not only Toll, but Crucifige, Away with
him, crucify him.

Death and life are in the power of the tongue, says the Wiseman, Prove. 18.
21. Which power never plays the tyrant more, then when it gets into those
habitations of cruelty, the mouths of a rebellious multitude in a cry.
These, if any, are the madmen he speaks of Prove. 26. who out of their burning
lips and wicked heart cast, not words but, Tract. in Ps. 36.
firebrands, arrows, and death. St. Austin makes the mouths of the Jews
fiercer executioners then their hands, and their tongues sharper instruments
then the nails that fastened our Saviors body to the cross. Vnde
occidistis? gladio linguae. Et quando percussistis nisi quando clamatis
crucifige?

Now, the two principles of popular fury are, for the most part, ignorance and
malice. By the one they are not able to judge of the species, or kind, much
less the degree of that which they take to be a crime, and, being jealous that
what may be bad, is the worst, they proportion revenge by their illimited
sensitive appetite, never weigh it in the balance of reason. By the other they
become exquisite inventours, and as curious about the circumstance or form, as
violent about the substantial part or matter of their mischief. Such is this
jurie of raging Jews in my text, who do not only outrun judgment in their
have, Away with him, away with him, nor in their rage throw mercy out of the
Court, by crying kill him, or, put him to death but specificate execution at
their pleasure, and exercise the tyranny thereof, Paul. Apul.
as well in the shame, as the torment, by crying out for the worst of the kind,
Crucifige, crucify him, 'apenestaton thanaton, says St. Chrysostom* summum
supplicium says another extremam poenam, a third, and S. Paul more
emphaticallie then they all, the cross, the shame, as we translate him. Hebr.
12.

Baronius observes that the Jews never clamoured to have our Savior
crucisied, An. 34.
until Pilate had given them their option, Shall I release unto you this man
or Barabbas? And then, upon a sudden, advantage they took by this unfortunate
occasion, to quit Barabbas of his double due, as he was a thief and a
murderer, and cast the cross upon our Saviors neck, who was so far from
being either of both, that he was Lord of life, King, of heaven and earth, and
sole proprietarie of the world. Thus oftentimes are very unhappie opportunitier
of mischief administered by such innocent adventures, and fury by accident
carried beyond design.

I shall not exspatiate about the circumstances of his death, only desire you
but to glance upon the two specious objects they set up, the one upon his right
hand, the other at his left. S. Matthew. 27. 38.
In which to his last gasp he might see the double image of their malice, with
out any reflection upon the least guilt in himself. Briefly, such was the
ignominy of his sufferings, as put part of Christianity to the blush, and
made many haeretikes about the cross. In the head of whom was Simon Magus,
Baron. An. 60.
who said Christ withdrew himself at the instant of death, and suffered only
in the counterfeit of his person. After him Cerinthus, author of that
concision you read of in St. Paul. Phil. 3. 2.
Beware of dogs, beware of the concision, which was a cutting or dividing Jesus
from Christ, and asserting that Jesus did both suffer and rise, but that Christ
was impassible forsook his company, and left Jesus to suffer by himself. In
the rear of these comes Basilides with a fiction; That Jesus and Simon,
meaning him of Cyrene, who helped to bear the cross, changed shapes by
consent, and so Simon suffered, while Jesus slipped away in his disguise. Tert.
De Praescript. cap. 46.
And these are taken to be the men whom St. Paul mentions with tears in his
eves. Philip. 3. Whose end was destruction, because (in this manner as I have
told you) enemies to the cross.

But to take off your thoughts from these idle fancies, I desire you to fix
them upon a serious object in my third general, and behold Pilate with
amazement and horror metamorpho'zd for a time into a statue, till at length
blood melting in his veins, and just wrath burning at his heart he speaks
with his mouth, yet has not patience to be explicit in a syllogism, he
presses, I told you, his argument in an enthymeme. He is your King, therefore,
non crucifigam, I must not crucify him, Nay he yet contracts that into a
quaestion, and when neither, humane misery could move them to pity nor
setting Royal Majesty in their sight, draw them to a remembrance of their
duty he thinks to shake their obstinacy in pieces, and strike dumb the
insolency of their cry, Tow. 7. Hom. 84.
'emphratton 'auton ta stomata, Kai panton ton categorein boulomenon, xai
dejenus hoti to oikeio basilei 'epanestesan, says St. Chrysostom, by
Crucifigam Regem? Shall I crucife your King?

I know Interpreters differ about Pilates meaning, and are as apposite as may
be in rendering their conjecture upon his words. St. Cyrill of Alexandria says.
That his first words. Ecce Rex, Behold your King, might be spoken in compliance
with the Jews, whose charge lay chiefly against him for accepting that title
from the multitude at his entrance this day into the city, and so, Behold I
deliver him up unto your pleasure whom some idle people among you publikelie
cry up for the King of the Jews. And upon that ground Euthymius makes an
ironie of his quaestion, wherein, he says, Pilate rather mockes at Christ,
then reproacheth the Jews: What? shall I crucify your King? The learned
Grotius takes the clause with the Ecce to be in reproach, but of what? not
their malice, but their folly. Which may seem to be in favor of Theophylact,
who makes a longer speech for Pilate then in my text, to this purpose almost.
You that charge this man to have taken upon him the authority of King, where
did he do it? whence do you collect it? from the purple robe wherewith the
soldiers arrayed him? [some rag of their own, having nothing but the
counterfeit of the color.] From a few th^enes, [gathered out of a hedge by the
highway side] and platted into a diadem to crown him? From a broken reed
[taken out of the water] and put into his hand for a Scepter? Ou panta 'auto
'eutele; xai stole; xai trophe; xai 'oixos, xai oude 'oixos. Are not all things
poor and beggarlie about him? S. Maeth. 9. 20.
his raiment? his food? his house? nay 'oixos 'oude 'oixos, his house and no
hoose? as he said truly. The son of man has not where to lay his head.

But I follow interpreters of another strain, such as favor Pilate in his
belief, and are not prone to censure him for his words. Or the same rather
dissenting from themselves, and fairlie altering the ill property of the sense.

St. Cyrill first, S. Matthew. 29. 24.
who, upon Pilates washing his hands from the fact, and persevering in the
defense of our Savior, thinks that at first he gently rebuked them,
Reverentiae Bilati istud etiam fuit Stgnum Orig. Tract. 35. in 27. Matthew.
and suggested to them, that in as bad a condition as they see him, this is he
of whom not long since they had a beter opinion then they own. Ecce Rex,
Behold your King. And that afterward he reproacheth their wicked humor to the
purpose. You that professed what words you heard, Never man spoke like this
man; You that acknowledged the miracles which he wrought. Behold the dumb
speak, the lame walk, the blind see, and the dead are raised unto life. You
that upon these etc. justly built the belief you had, S. John 7. 46.
that he was the Son of David and your King, Is your great Hosanna turned to
crncifige? What? shall I crucify your King?

Theophylact next who, observing Pilate very peremptory in maintaining the
title he had caused to be set up on the cross, with a froward answer, St. John
19 22.
Quod scripsi, scripsi, What I have writ, I have writ, says he did it
'amunoumenos tous Ioudaious, in revenge of the Jews, who would give no ear to
his Ecce Rex, and Crucisigam Regem? 'Ameinomenos `omou de 'apologoumenos hyper
tou Christou.
but would persist in their rebellion against their King.

But let Pilates faith be what it will about the person of Christ, and his
meaning as ambiguous as may be in this his conference with the Jews, his words
I am sure must import the sense of the world at that time, and, apprehension
they had of the just indemnitie of Kings, and exemption from the ignominy of
the cross. D. Chrysostom. Hom. 84.
And indeed he that shall recollect with himself the awful expressions dropped
from the pens of the Romans, may have enough to reproach any wicked regicide,
Jew or Christian, and hiss him out of the communion of men. The Roman Seneca
little thought of deposing, much less of murdering Kings, let their actions be
what they will, when he made that compendious Directorie for the subject, Lib.
2. De Ir. c. 30.
Rex est, si nocentem punit, cede justitiae, si innocentem, cede fortunae. He
is thy King, if he punishes thee with desert, submit to his justice, if with
out, give way to thy fortune, or ill chance, to suffer with out a cause. And
what he said in these words, he made good in his practice, when he suffered so
patiently, and bathd Nero's fury in his blood. All indeed were not of his
mind. Himself makes mention of some Kings heads set to public sale, Ibid. l.
1. c. 2.
Principum sub civili hasta capita venalia, of others throats cut by their
subjects, of some tormented to death upon the cross, but in his stoical
language he says they were mali exempla fati, all examples of a bad fate, he
says not, paternes for bad men.

But I pass hence to the fourth and last member of my text, the chief Priests
cunning evasion, and apology for the Jews rejection of Christ, Loath they are
they should take them for persecuters, much more for murderers of Kings,
Habemus Caesarem, they good men have Caesar for their King, to whom they
profess subjection and fealty, the mistake or real injury is his, who would
impose a new tyranny upon them, and to this they make answer by their
Priests, Alium non habemus, We have no King but Caesar.

Wherein are 3. Particulars to be handled. First the persons that were the
modellers of the answer, and they were Pontifices, the chief Priests.
Secondly, their caution in a subtle abetting or acknowledging a King, Habemus
Caesarem, We have Caesar. Thirdly, their traytourous rejection of Christ,
Alium non habemus, We have no King but Caesar, I begin with the first.

Livie compares the multitude to the sea, Lib. 28.
which has very little motion of it self, calm enough and quiet would it be,
but when the winds rise the waters rage, some leading gale first swells the
minds, and a stronger gust forces on the madness of the people. Throughout
the whole history of the Gospel you may easily see how the chief Priests
were the excitantes Aeoli the windy Gods that raised the storm, and their
furious breath the tempest that did shipwreck our Savior. demos 'atactos hypo
ton 'archonton diephtharmenos, says St. Chry: Tom. 7. Hom. 83.
speaking of the Jews. The confusion and disorder, of the people came by the
corruption of the Priests. No Sooner was he come into the world, but they are
the men that must cure Herod of his trouble, and make the discovery where he
should be borne: And they said unto him in Beth-leem of Iudaea Math. 2. They
the men that were sore displeased with this days reverence done him by the
people, the childrens crying Hosanna in the Temple, and said unto him. Hear
thou what these say St. Matthew. 21. The chief of them all, good Caiphas I
mean, the first that found out the blessed expedient for one man, St. Ioh. 18.
14.
and that man was this King that must die for the people, St. John: 11. The
matter being resonted by them all, they hold a consultation about the manner,
Nihil ausuram plebem principibu: amotis. C. Tacit. An. 1.
and, in order to that, they first covenan, with Judas to sell him. St. Luke
22. And notwithstanding all the diligence was used, when the design was
likely to have fallen to the grond, they take it up in this apology for the
people. Pontifices responderunt, The chief Priests answered, says my text.
And truly did not the people find such cunning apologists as these, they are
neither more praecipitant in enterprizing, nor more violent in prosecuting a
bad cause, 2. Deuteronomy. Hopou gar hoi archontes 'emicterizon ti chre peri teu
eoinou plethous logizesthai; Theophyl. in Luc. 23. Vid. Hug. Grot. De Imper.
San Matt. Potest. circ. Sacra.
then they would be facile in deserting the same, when they once find patience
to hearken to, and shall hear reason to convince them of their error, Nec
quicquam facilius quam in quemlibet affectum mutare populum, says Qninctilian.
But when they have authority to countenance, and subtle sophistry to color
their actions they have a guard both for their wilfulness and ignorance, and
can then bid defiance to the world. The great stroke that the Priests had here
in the demagogie of the Jews came from the legal eminency of their place,
they sitting upon the highest bench of their Magistracy, and the chief of
them being adaequate in power to their principal Judge or Justiciarie by his
office. Sacerdos summus summo Iudice adaequatur, says one. Which laid to the
leter of a poenal law, whereby death was ordained for him who was disobedient
to the command of the Priest, reverence and fear might very well involve the
common jews in a silent assent to what their chief Priests answered in my
text, Alium non habemut, We have no King but Caesar, Thus, as St. Chrysostom
says, tes'oletriou miaiphonias `egemones, xai strategoi, xai paraitioi, 9. 16.
which the prophet Isaiah 5. language translates. The leaders of this people
cause them to err, and they that are lead of them are destroyed.

But we'll leave the persons, and come to their answer, which implies their
formal subjection to Soveraignitie in the heat of their process to crucify
their King. Habemus Caesarem, We have Caesar.

Two things there are in the soul of man so clearlie writ in the fair
indelible characters of heaven, that the hand of hell and malice of the devil,
with all the works of darkness he can graspe, can never wipe away into a
blanke, and those are religion to a God, and subjection to a Sovereign. Exodus
32.
The peevish Israelites that are angry at Moses because he stays somewhat
long in the mount, as hasty as they are, will stay themselves, and not stir
a foot till a God be made, be it but a molten calfe; to conduct them in the
way. They that cast away their portion in David, 1. Kings 12.
and spit out their inheritance in the Son of Jesse, will not summon Israel
to their tent's till they have designed Jeroboam their Captain for their King.
And Jeroboam, when he has snatched away the crown, thinks not of putting
down the old religion, the going up to Jerusalem to worship, until he makes
Dan and Bethel two stalls for his calves, and proclaims their golden images
his Gods. The most stupid Egyptian, that will not think upon the paradise of
heaven, Genesis 3.
nor hear of him that was walking in Eden in the cool of the day, will as he
walks in his own garden pluck up a leeke or an onion for his God. I laugh at
the foolish Atheist in the Psalmist, who mutters in the secrecy of his heart,
but will not tell me plainly with his mouth, Ps. 53.
non est Deus, there is no God. And I dare the most traitourous villain in the
world what soever he pronounces so gravelie in a public Hall, where he has
his guard of ruffians about him, to retire into his closet a while, take the
chair in the Court of his conscience, and then pass sentence upon his King.
No, Rebellion and Atheism are duo magna mendacia, two impes of the Devil the
father of lies, begot by him upon the deceitfulness of the heart, in a mist or
cloud of pretenses and shows, humanity can not own them for its off spring,
and Reason discovers them to be a bastard brood when she brings them to
conscience, goes about to try them in the light. 1. Pet. 2. 17.
Fear God, and Honor the King, were commands not made but revived by St.
Peter, they had their first impresse in the first borne of Adam, and in the
native habit stick, as close as a worse business, original sin to the
souls of the rest, all though they often deny them in their practice.

The Sovereign Majesty of God in heaven, and of his Vicegerent on earth, in
spite of all the rebellious Indepedent crew in the world, will preserve a
seat for it self in the acts, or words, or thoughts, of Christian, of Pagan,
of Jew. In the heat of their rejection of Christ you see they lay hold, in
profession at least, of a Heathen Emperor for their King; Habemus Caesarem, We
have Caesar. But let us look a little as well into the actions as words of
Caesar's good subjects in my text, and see whether they do as they speak,
whether they give to Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and by their practicke
obedience own him for their Sovereign. I shall not need to tell you they were
the sons of them that for a long time had the best of Kings, 1. Sam. 12. 12.
for it is said the Lord himself was their King, and they were the worst
subjects in the world. How does the Prophet Esai cry out, Hear o heavens, and
give ear o earth, for the Lord has spooken, I have nourished and brought up
children, and they have rebelled against me? Chapter 1. How does he prefer before
them the ox and the ass, the one for knowing his owner and the other his
masters crib? And for such of them as should have been wiser then the rest,
Principes populi, the very representatives of the people they were rebellious
and companions of thieves. Verse. 23. Their Prephets were conspiratours, and
their Priests violatours of the law. Ezech. 22. And yet I Will warrant you this
dutiful crew had the confidence at that time to profess, Grotius tells us
they did it very solemnlie in their Talmud, Habemus Deum, We have God for our
King.

But to let their stubborn ancestors alone. Aetas parentum pejor avis tulit
hos nequiores, Act. 7. 51.
St. Steven says of these good men in my text, that they were sclerotracheloi
and 'aperiptmetoi, stffienecked and uncircumcized in heart. That they did
pneumati 'antipiptein, we translate it resist, but the word is more emphaticall
and signifies to fall forward or press against the Holy Ghost. Act. 2. 2.
Now they that did thus on purpose with stand the rushing wind of the Spirit of
God, were very unlikelie to be fairlie guided by the breath in the nostrils of
their King. No, it was their malice to Christ that made them pretend such
subjection to Caesar, Quem tyrannum and hostem reputabant, profitentur Regem ut
Jesus crucisixionem obtineaent, says Cajetan. And if we look into the history
of those times, we shall find this one people of the Jews make more work for
the Roman Emperors and their Viceroys then all the rest throughout their
dominions in the world. Baron. An. 4.
No sooner came Pilate to his charge, to succed Gratus the Praesident of Jury,
but bringing certain images of Caesar; as others say golden bucklers to
dedicate at Jerusalem, all our good subjects are in an uproare, and never
leave bringing tumults to his doors, till he translates them and his
solemnity, to Caesarea. Not long after he borowes but a little of their corba
their holy treasure, to employ about the making of a conduit, our good people
fall to their old trade, petition him to lay his building aside but they
humbly speak it ore gladii, in the most dutiful expression of the sword In
Claudius time they were such dutiful subjects, An. 51. An. 315.
that he was feign to banish them all out of Rome. And in Vespasians so
loyal-hearted at Jerusalem, that he sent Titus his son to besiege them, who
put 110000. of them to the sword. D. Chrysostom. Hom. 2. in Ind.
And so observant were they of the good Christian Emperor Constantines
commands, that, to keep them in awe, he was feign either to cut off their
ears, or stigmatize them otherwise in their bodies, and so mark them for
slaves that would not keep the impression of subjects in their hearts.

And thus have you a short essay of them, their fathers, their children, who
would sooth up Pilate so handsomelie in my text with Habemus Caesarem, We have
Caesar for our King.

There remains now naught but the last particle of all, the last of the Chief
Priests answer to Pilate, being the Jews final rejection of Christ, Alium non
habemus, We have none bnt Caesar for our King.

The most wilful answer that ever was rendered by men pretenders to gravitie
and judgment, the most incongruous to Pilates demand For had Christ's Kingdom
entrenched upon Caesar's, he that was his Provincial Substitute durst not
doubtless at the same time own his place and his desire to praeserve the life
of him to the ruin of his Master. But Pilate was well satisfied in the point
by the discourse that passed between our Savior and him, and so in all
likelihood were the chief Priests too, if their malice had not more perverted
their will, then ignorance blinded their understanding hereof. For the Common
people who are not the best masters of reason, and the very worst moderatours
of passion, upon slender grounds to raise a tumult for their Patriots
advantage, to sell a little breath for a sixpence, cry Toll, Crucifige, Away
with him, crucify him, is no great deviation of nature, their earthie souls
incline them to the center of profit, and their servile spirits make them not
only ready at hand to fetch and carry, but, mastivelike, with open mouth
furiously to assail, if commanded only by the eye or the fingar: But for
the chief men the Rulers of the people, no less then the States of the
Parliament of the Jews, which Maldonate says consisted of the chief Priests,
Elders, and Scribes, as it is in the 50. of Esai. Not only to kindle a fire,
and compass themselves about with the sparks, and walk in the light of their
own fire; But hope to smother their guilt in the smoke; For them to profess
subjection to Caesar, and thence to vouch their rejection of Christ, S. Ioh.
19. 12.
for them to tell Pilate to his face that he can be no friend to Caesar unless
he become a murderer of Christ; this is very wilfully to walk in the way of
the froward, Prove. 22.
wherein the Wiseman tells us are thorns and snares they can not but prick
their feet as they go, they can not but be taken in the net.

When our Savior strictly commands them to pay tribute, they pretend, that at
the same time he prohibites paying duty to Caesar. When he tells them his
Kingdom is not of this world, S. Ioh. 18. 36.
they are zealous to show their subjection is. Habemus Caesarem, they have
Caesar, and none but Caesar for their King. Whereas well they might know, and
were bound to take notice of what St. Cyrill of Alexandria says he evidenced
to them in speech. `oti tes tou Kaisaros basileias 'oue 'esti polemiot, that
Christ and Caesar are no such inconsistents in government, the very same
subjects may they have and yet be no corrivals in duty. The chief Priests
might have said, Habemus Caesarem, We have Caesar indeed, and yet Habemus
alium, we may have, another, We may have Christ for our King. But 'ap'
'elactizen 'en routois `o `egapemenos Israel, xai tes pros Teon philias
'anaphandon 'exalletai, most elegantlie says Chrysostom. In these words
beloved Israel Kickes away Christ with the heel, and in public view leapes
out of her friendship with God. But they that kicked against, and leaped from
this relation to God, and, as I showed you eve'n now, leaped in, were very
desultorie, very uncertain in their subjection to Caesar, have been justly
since kicked away and rejected by both, continuing still in that forlorn
condition, wherein 1400. years since and more, I say again 1400. years
since, that you may see how soon, and that you may see how long revenge
follows rebellion at the heels, Apol. c. 21.
Tertullian very sadly described them, dispersi, palabundi, and coeli sui
extorres, vagantes per orbem, sine homine, sine Deo Rege, dispersed vagrants,
banished from Christ's Kingdom in heaven, and from Jurie, then Caesar's, now the
Turks province on earth, wandering up and down in the world, having neither
God nor man for their King.

Desino, and hoc infigo. Thus have I done with Pilate, the Jews, and the
chief Priests in the leter, Epinan.
as they bear a part in the History of the Gospel. Yet some others there are
very nearlie concerned, if not in the doctrine, I am sure in the use and due
application of my text deuteroi Iudaioi, such as deserve the name of second
Jews beter then the Paulian heretics that had it. And there is deuteros
xrites, a second Judge, I shall not do him the honor to say a second Pilate,
he acted very little of his part, not any that I know but passing an uglie
sentence upon his King. And there are deuteroi hiereis, second Priests, and
those chief ones too, even they of the Assembly and Sanhedrin it self, who,
as silent and uninteressed as they seemed when that traytourous charge was
brought into the Court, have, for above 7. years together, made the pulpits
ring, and the press groan with the strength of their cry, and weight of
their books, (I say not of their arguments) to give notice to the world, that
with out covenanting (you know who said it) against reason, K. Chapter 1. Eix.
Basil.
conscience, houour, oath; reforming the reformation it self against Scripture
and Apostolic institution, so many hundred years precedential practice; and
undeniable Catholic profession, Non habebimus hunc, We will not have CHARLES
for our King. And there is deuterot Christos, a second Christ, an anointed of
God, that came as near as ever King did to our Savior in his life, and I dare
say never any so near in the similitude of his death. And there is deuteros
Ioudas, a second Judas, not as the first only with a band of men, and a few
pike-stav'd officers at his heels; but not many years since in the head of a
cursed numerous army, and cursed be the memory of that man unless blessed
with repentance before his death, that so perfidiouslie sold and betrayed him.
And here you have set in your view persons enough for a second tragoedie.
Quinto productior actu, one that would admit of a sixth act, surpassing several
circumstances of the other, if your grief would give the patience to hear it
or had I just abilities to compose it. Instead whereof I shall crave your
favor to repeat my text with some short allusive paraphrase upon the words.
And he says unto the Jews, Behold your King.

Which He in the moral is our mocke-Judge, but no rightful successor of that
relenting Pilate in my text, because he went not about to stop the peoples
cry, by moving their pity, reproaching their insolence, saying, Ecce Rex,
Behold your King, He exposed him to their cruelty and scorn, revived their
calling for Justice, Justice, saying, like a miscreant as he was, Ecce carcer,
Behold there the prisonor at your bar. Never any President in the world took
more pains then Pilate did to deliver guiltless innocence from death; Nor
any more then our unjust Judge employed industrious malice to condemn it. To
that purpose, as in the 6. of Amos, Turning judgment into gall, and the fruit
of rihhteousnesse into hemlocke, that he might be sure to give Majesty its
bane. Lactantius and St. Chrysostom are of opinion that Pilate did not
positivelie pass sentence upon Christ, but gave only permission to the Jews
to execute, as before he had to judge, when he said. Take ye him, and judge
him, according to your law. But ours I believe durst not trust the people with
the liberty of that power, I rather think if his hand had been as strong as
his heart cruel, he would have saved the State the charges of a vizard, by
becoming the barefaced executioner himself. Pilate much affected to discourse
with our Savior, propounds quaestions, is attentive to answers, seems very
solicitous about his Kingdom and truth, And thou a King then? and what is
truth? both in the 18. Chapter of St. John: but our furious Rhadamanth breathes
out nothing but brimstone and fire, he takes the sponge himself and dips it in
the sharpness of his speech, stops the mouth of condemned Soveraigntie,
indulgeth not the liberty of a word. Will you hear me a word SIR? a strange
request to be made by a King to a rebel, a stranger to be denied by a subject
to his Sovereign. We'll take Seneca's divination for the reason, Lib. 3. De
Ira. c. 19.
Timuit ne quam liberiorem vocem extremus dolor mitteret, ne quid quod nollet
audiret, afraid he was he should hear what he little desired, lest the last
breath of a dying man, an innocent King designed for murder, should cast a
cloud of horror on his soul.

But to keep near to the words of my text. Wherein our Praesident faild of the
parallel with Pilate, I believe the conscience of every Jew did supply. I
believe it called upon him often enough, saying, Ecce Rex, Behold my King.
Behold that King who in compliance with my wilful and unreasonable demands,
'exenosen heauton, as 'twas said of our Savior, Philip. 2. 7.
has evacuated himself, and is become almost aequal to his subjects; has
suffered a diminution of Majesty, is divested of much of his just legal
dignity and power, Customs, Courts, Monopolies, Taxes, Militia, Bishops, all
pretended grievances, I could make are either taken away, or limited to my
purpose. But then conscience lays the other Ecce at his doors. Ecce Homo,
Behold the man. Behold I am that man that set my hand to that rebellious
remonstrance, and my heart to have it throw'n into his coach. I that man who by
seditious tumults affrighted him and his from their palace; I that persecuted
him in my purse or my person, and hunted him like a partridge in the
wilderness. I that at such or such a battle levelled many a piece at his
quarter sent many a curse to his Royal Person with the shot; I that bid fair
to corrupt his governer and lay him in his garrison; I that, when the bargain
would not hold, inveigled him out in a strange disguise by many specious
promises to protect him. I that when I had him in my hands Judas like kissed
him and betrayed him into his prison. And then, as in the 34. of Job, There is
no darkness nor shadow of death where these workers of iniquity may hide
themselves. Their own guilt is a perpetual thunderclap in their ears, and a
fixed flash of lightning in their faces. No promise of mercy can clear their
jealousy, No act of oblivion setle their fear; Despair turns Regnare
nolumus to Nolumus vivere, They that cried before, We will not have this man to
reign, cry ten times louder, We will not, We dare not suffer this man to
live. And what then remains, but Toll crucifige, Away with him, Away with
him, crucify him. And Pilate says unto them, Shall I crucify your King?

And here I must again tell the, our Judge is nothing like that Pilate in my
text, because he did not put it to the quaestion, saying, Shall I crucify?
but, when he entered first into the Judgment Hall gave good assurance to his
clamorous Jews, saying in effect, Crucifigam, I will crucify your King. You
therefore that have got the best estates by plunder and pillage, the highest
places by supplanting, sequestring, the greatest names by rebelling and
murdering. You that have stuck malice at the point of your sword, and wreakt
it in the bowels, of your brother; You that have broke the bars of Religion,
run away with the reigns of government and law; You that have draw'n all kind
of iniquity with cords, and all sin as it were with a cart-rope. You that,
as it follows in the 5. of Esai, say, Let him make speed and hasten his work,
that we may see it; Fear nothing, Have patience a while, I will but gull
ignorance with a form, take the stool of wikednesse, wherein to do justice,
imagine mischief for law, and then your wish you shall have, for Crucifigam
Regem, I will crucify your King.

It remains in the words of my text. And the chief Priests answered, We have
no King but Caesar But our Pilate, as I told you, not putting it to the
quaestion, Our Priests have saved the labor of this answer, which is not
withstanding in part taken up by their forward disciples, who render this
account of their 7. years instruction by the new light, to have Monarchy
crucified as well their King, enacting, and boldly proclaiming to the world,
Habebimus nullum, We will not have any one for our King. I could yet go on in
the antiparallel, aggravate their malice and transcendent cruelty, as
otherwise, so from the place which they chose wherein to murder their innocent
King, which was no Golgotha, a sad place of dead men's skulles, but a place for
the living to rejoice and banquet, as if Cannibal like, they meant to feast on
his flesh, and carowse it in the cup of deadly wine (for so I believe they and
their posterity will find it) the blood of their Sovereign.

I shall only take notice of Pilates last courtesy to Christ, who, when he
could not prevail for his life, set a crown upon his head at his death for
such, Tom. 7. Hom. 84.
says Origin, was that title he writ, Jesus of Nazareth, the King of the
Iewet. St. Chrysostom says he erected it for a trophie, hosper 'epi tropaiou
tinos, houto ta grammata etheke, lampran 'aphienta phonen, kai ten niken
delounta, kai ten basileian 'anakerytonta. But our Judge and his Jews in stead
of giving crowns pull down Kigdomes, hide them as deep in oblivion as they
can, that they may lay the firmer foundation for their new modeled government
in a state. St. Matthew. 7. 26.
But if he that built his house upon sand was likely to find such an
uncertain foundation, how sliperie will his be who undertakes to erect a
republike on blood? If there be a woe for him that builds his house by
unrighteousness, and his chambers by wrong, (and there is that woe Jeremy
22.) what is there for him, that frames his new fabrike by murder? The stone
shall cry out of the wall, and the beam out of the timber shall answer. And
what this cry and answer shall be the Prophet Habakuk tells you the second of
his Prophecy 12. Vaeilli. Woe unto him that builds a town by blood, and
stablisheth a city by iniquity.

But to conclude all. Maugre the wicked policy of our Jews, in racing his
name, altering his stamp, burning his papers (and leprous may that arm be
that brings such precious fuel to the fire) I say for all this their politic
malice, our Royal martyr has not only (no thanks to his Judge) the crown
and trophie of a title, but the everlasting stupendous monument of a book,
raised higher then the Pyramids of Egypt in the strength of language, Eikon
Basilic.
and well proportioned spiring expression, built with out an hyperbole to
heaven in divine meditations, and raptures, to which the Babel of other men's
thoughts fall down, and lies like an heap of confused useless rubbish upon
the earth.

It is recorded of St. Paul; That when his head was stroke off, there issued no
blood, but pure milk out of every orifice of his veins. Sermon. 68.
Nec mirum says St. Ambrose, Abundasse lacte nutricium Ecclesiae. And no
wonder is it that abundance of milk should come from the nurse of the Church.
Never Church had such a Kingly nursing father as this in his life, and never
Saint gave better milk at his death. So sweet is the relish of his words, such
a miraculous meekness in his speech, as if he had as well been fed with his
Saviors food in the infancy of his life, as he tasted the bitter cup of
passion at his death. Of whom you know it was Prophesied of old. Buter and
honey shall he eat, that he may know to refuse the evil, and choose the good.

And may our hopeful Jonathan, our gracious Sovgraigne, with his fathers
blessing not Saul's curse, break his fast every day in this honey, and thereby
let his eyes be enlightened as Jonathans were, 1. Sam. 14. That he may every day
more and more see and avovd the enemies of his peace. Let him every day take
one drop at least thereof upon the top of his rod. Let that sweeten his rod of
affliction to him. And let his other rod, his rod of revenge, dipped in this
honey, chastise gently his enemies for him. And may he grow up in the strength
of this food to all the moral virtues fortitude, temperance, magnanimity, and
the rest; to all the divine graces of his father, till having reignd with as
much righteousness, honor, and much more peace after him here, he may, by no
other then the hand of heaven be translated, in the fullness of time, to reign
with him in glory hereafter. Amen, Amen.

Glory be to God.

