A WARNING TO THE INHABITANT'S OF THE EARTH.
But more especially to those who say they believe in the Nameof the Lord Jesus
Christ, with all those that in the simplicity of their hearts, and tender
desires toward God, are seeking the Kingdom of Heaven, (in several Forms, and
diverse Observations) with their faces thitherwards; The Lord has opened his
bowels of Love and tender compassion (through me) toward you all; And these
are the words that are laid upon me to give fo^^^, that in the Name, Fear,
Dread and Power of the Living God, they may be Read amongst you.

He that can receive them let him.

HEar, Fear, Dread, before the Living God, who has laid it upon me, to warn
you all, and all that in tenderness make mention of his Name, To Have, have,
have, out of Spiritual Sodom and Egypt, to the City of the Living God, Christ
Jesus the Rock of Ages; For the Field is white unto Harvest, and the
Everlasting God has given a sharp instrument (Power) into the Hand of his
Angel, to cut down the Wheat and the Tares together; And the Wheat he is
gathering into his Arms, into his Bosom, into the Power of his Love; But the
Tares he is bundeling up in bundles, Yea in great bundles (Mind that) and
casting them from him.

He that has an Ear let him hear what the Spirit says.

Again all people Prepare, prepare, prepare, for the day of ^^e Lord God is at
hand, the Great and ^errible Day of the Lord is even as it were at the door,
ready to enter in, wherein all Professors of God, Christ, and the Scriptures of
Truth must be tried, whether they Worship the Living God in Spirit, and in
Truth Yea or Nay? For now the bare profession of his Name in words and outward
show will no longer serve your turns; Not any thing in this day of Trial will
stand you in stead, but that which will stand in, and abide the Fire, Fire
within and Fire without.

The Word of God was as a Fire in my Breast, till I was made willing to give
forth this Paper: Yea when I refused to write, I was charged with Disobedience.

The People of God must be tried as by Fire: And if Judgment begin at the
House of God, what will become of the Wicked, the Persecutors, those that make
a mock at sin, and of those that forget God?

Woe is me, woe is me, Who is able to stand in this Day of Trial? The very
remembrance of it breaks me often into Tears, I am ready to Faint, Yea I am
ready to Faint, and but that my sure hope is in the Living God, I might rather
wish that I had never been Born, then live to see that Day; Alack, alack, I
cannot abide that Day of Trial, unless the Living (who does strengthen by his
Love, and support by his Power) God therein support me.

The remembrance of it is so terrible, that I am even ready to say ( But that I
believe it is the Lords pleasure, that such a Day shall come upon the Earth;
not only to try all Professions and Professors, and to cleanse the Land of
evil doers, but also to deliver his Seed out of Bondage, and his Lambs and
Little Ones out of the Hands of their Oppressors) Lord if it be thy Will (let
this Cup) or Day of Trial pass from me; Oh the remembrance of it melts my Heart
often into Tears, often when I do it remember, I do exceedingly Fear and
Tremble.

What? Has not the Enemies of Gods Truth intents to destroy the Lambs,
Children, and Servants of the most high God: Surely it was in their Hearts to
destroy the Heir that the inheritance might be theirs; Therefore has the Lord
laid it upon me to warn all Professors, and people to meet him speedily by
repentance.

Oh turn, turn, turn, from the evil of your ways, and repent and bring forth
Fruit worthy of amendment of Life, the Lord my God desires not the death of a
sinner, but rather that he should turn from his wickedness and live; Oh
repent, repent, repent, whiles you have a day, for after death there is no
repentance in the Grave.

Again I say unto you, this is the Day of the Lords Power, wherein he is risen
and arising to plead with all men.

Again I say unto you, this is the Day of the Lords Power wherein he is risen
and arising A Light in every man, and none from him (Christ Jesus the Son of
God, the Heir of his Fathers Kingdom) can shun, neither can they from him (the
Light) hide themselves, go where they will, He is present in all Places. This
is the Condemnation that Light is come into the World, and men loved (and do
love) Darkness rather then Light, because their deeds were, and are, evil.

Verily, verily, Again I say unto you, this is the Day wherein my God, the
Omnipotent, Powerful, Wonderful, One, only Wise God, is risen and arising
(more terrible then an Army with Banners; More valliant and strong then a Giant
refreshed with strong Wines; Yea more fierce then a She Bear bereaved of her
Whelps, or any hungry Lion that utters his voice after his Prey) who has given
Power to his beloved Son Christ Jesus (The true Light that lights every man
that comes into the World) To Summon all men (to the ends of the earth) to
appear before him (The Light) and those that will not that he (Christ Jesus the
True Light) shall rule over them, slain they must be by the Word of his Power:
Great and terrible will that day be, to all those who will not submit to Christ
Jesus the Light in them; I say unto you, this is the Higher Power Christ Jesus
the True Light, to which every tongue must confess, and every knee must bow;
All Power in Heaven and in Earth is given unto him; Who can his Power resist?

Given forth in the Year 1661. By me who Loves and Fears the living God, and is
made to tremble at his Powerful Word. Known by Name, Geo. Watkinson.

THE END.
London, Printed for Thomas Simmons.


