A LETTER From one of the TRAINED-BANDS Now in the ARMY Under the Red and
White REGIMENT, To his Wife in LONDON.

Sent from FARNHAM-Castle, November. 2. 1643.

Printed in the Year, 1643

Loving Wife;
WHen I look back upon my ways, and consider from what happiness I am
fallen, and into what misery I plunged: I am so oppressed with sorrow and grief
(that to take up the words of the Psalmist) My soul is even melted with
heaviness. O how it pierces me to the very heart, to think how I have
dishonored God, disobeyed my King, scandalized my Religion, betrayed my Faith,
disgraced my Friends, shamed my Country, undone my Family, and hazarded my own
salvation. So that I have made my self a laughing stock unto mine Enemies, and
unworthy of the least pity. The heavens frown upon me, hell triumphs, and the
earth casts me off as unworthy of her nourishment, My Conscience flies in my
face and will not suffer me to take any rest, So that even the Curse of Cain is
fallen upon me, because I thirsted to spill my Brothers blood, that I am forced
from mine abode, and am become as a fugitive and vagabond on the earth: and as
I accounted it a note of malignancy, to desire Peace, and would have no Peace
with others, so now my soul is filled with naught but War. So unhappy is
that soul whom God forsakes, and misery is sure to attend the disobedient man.
Where sin dwells, there is trouble, and though it may seem never so sweet in
the committing, it will prove full of bitterness in the end. 2. Sam. 2. 26.

How suddenly and strangely is my state and condition altered? upon what a
precipice do they stand that trust on earthly things? how soon is the face of
them changed? In a moment is our plenty turned into scarcity, mirth into
sorrow, peace into war, riches into poverty, liberty into bondage, order into
confusion, loyalty into rebellion, and wisdom into folly. Has not God in his
just judgment recompensed my ways on my own head? For I that heretofore
wallowed, as it were in pleasure and delight (having God scarcely at all in my
thoughts) am now acquainted with naught but trouble. I that sent my servant
like a sheep to the slaughter (cheating his parents of their son and their
money both at once) am now come to be sacrificed in the same manner my self; I
that have had servants at my command, am now my self commanded rather like a
slave then a servant. I that accounted Charity a Popish virtue, am now glad to
be relieved by the Charity of others; and whereas I have been able to give to
others, I am now oftentimes by necessity compelled to beg my bread. I that had
a house to hide my head in, am now exposed to all extremities of weather, and
am feign to embrace the cold earth for my Lodging. I that rejoiced at other
m^ns miseries, am now become more miserable then they. I that cursed, the King
in my thoughts, am now filled with naught but crosses. I that in the pride of
my heart, said, I should never be moved, am now brought to a very low estate,
having (as Esau) sold his birthright for a mess of pottage, passed away my
estate for the Public Faith and I know not what; and brought my person in
danger every minute to be lost. I that made a God as it were of the Parliament,
have found them to be but men, and the words of the Psalmist to be true. That
it is better to trust in the Lord, than to put any confidence in Princes. I
that despised to receive correction, feel now the heavy hand of God upon me. I
that contemned and mocked at Gods Ministers, wilfully hardening my self against
the truth, am now given over to a reprobate sense, that I should only believe
a lie. My feet were swift to shed blood, therefore as it follows, Romans 3. 16.
destruction and misery are in my ways. For these and other sins is the wrath
of God come upon me and my fellow-Citizens; that he has even suffered the
Devil to have his will of us, who has forced us (as he would as served Job)
to curse God to his face: Has he not been in our City and Army-Prophets, as
he was in Ahabs four hundred and fifty, a lying spirit, teaching us Rebellion
and Sedition, inciting us to plunder and take away other men's goods, to
profane Gods house, to adulterate his worship, to imprison his messengers, to
reproach the footsteps of his Anointed, Psalm 89. 51. to abuse his Word, to
Covenant against him and our King, that neither should rule over us: to
contemn his ordinances, to persecute his servants, to wrong our neighbors, to
break the Laws, to overthrow the power of the Magistrate: every man taking
the sword into his own hand, to betray and kill one another, thinking thereby
to do God good service, and all this for the advancement of Religion, and as
the only way to make an happy Reformation. But our sad experience does
sufficiently prove the contrary, and they may as well persuade men, that the
next way to come to Heaven is through Hell by breaking Gods Commandments. I
should have been loath to have laid open my own guilt and discovered my
nakedness, but that I hope others would be warned by my example, to have a
care lest they be drawn away as I was) with fair pretenens, to the indangering
both of their bodies and souls.

To conclude, I may even bewail the unhappy estate of my Country at this
present, in the words of the Prophet Jeremiah, in Lament. O Lord, how is our
gold become dim, how is the most fine gold changed? our moneys are parted from
us, and we are like the hungry man. Isaiah 29. 8. He dreameth, and behold, he
eats, but he awaketh, and his soul is empty; So we for the moneys that we
have exhausted, dreamed of mountains of gold, but being awakt, we find them no
other then the price of blood, and sums laid out to purchase our own misery.
Our beauty is turned to ashes, the glory and honor of our Nation is quite
eclipsed, and we that were once the admiration and envy of other Nations, are
now become their laughing stock and scorn. The young children ask bread and
no man breaks it unto them, the Soldier sweeping all away, leaving nothing
behind him but penury and want. They that did feed delicately are desolate in
the streets, they that were brought up in scarlet, embrace dunghills. Our
Nobility, and Gentry, are despised and trampled upon by vile persons; and
though they dwelt in houses of Cedar, are forced to lie in a loathsome prison.
The anger of the Lord has divided us, he will no more regard us, we have not
respected the persons of the Priests, nor reverenced our Elders. For we have
hated their persons, slighted their message, ^equestred their means, and not
suffered them to pass the streets in quiet. For which our Inheritance is
turned to strangers, our houses to aliens, which are Schismatiks, and
Separatists. Other men enter into our possessions, and take our dwellings from
us without a cause. We are Orphans and fatherless, our mothers are as
widows. We have drunk our water for our money, and out wood is sold unto us;
our goods are taken from us at other men's pleasure, and for our money restored
to us again. Our necks are under persecution, we labor and have no rest, what
we take pains for, others enjoy, and reap the fruit of our labors; we are
made slaves unto their wills, who command not only our servants and our
estates, but even our lives also. Servants have ruled over us, and there is
none that does deliver us out of their hands. The joy of our heart is ceased,
our dance is turned in to mourning, all our delights are passed away, and we
are compassed about with sorrow on every side. The Crown is fallen from our
head, the King who was our glory is driven from us, and is banished from his
own habitation his Palace^; is left desolate, and scarce any man dwells
therein; Our Temples are shut up that we have even forgot how to praise thy
Name. We have nothing but complaining in our streets, and we go mourning all
the day long. Woe unto us that we have sinned. For this, our heart is faint,
our eyes are dim. Turn thou us unto thee O Lord, and we shall be turned, renew
our days as of old. Remove thy judgments, forgive our sins, Unite our
hearts, cure our wounds, open our eyes, that now at the last we may behold
those things that concern our Peace. Amen.

Your ever loving Husband A. W.
From Farnham Castle, Novem. 2. 1643.
FINIS.

