THE True and Original Copy of the first Petition which was delivered by sir
David Watkins, Mr. Shute, who were accompanied with Mr. Burrowes, M. Peter's,
Mr. Goodwin, and fourscore and fifteen more, who framed this Petition upon
the grounds of the late Protestation which they had formerly taken.

Which Petition was delivered to the Honorable House of Commons on Thursday
the first of December, 1642.

Whereunto is added Master Shutes Speech at the delivery of the said Petition,
together with their propositions and demands; also the Reasons why and
wherefore the aforesaid Petition was delivered.

Together with the House of Commons Answer to the said Petition.

Likewise the gracious entertainment and answer which both Houses of Parliament
gave to the other five thousand Petitioners on Wednesday being the fifteenth of
this month.

Published for all those that desire truly to be informed; as also concerning
the last Tumult at Guild Hall, and by whom it was caused.

Printed at London for Francis Coule. 1642.

TO The Honorable the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses, of the Commons House
of PARLIAMENT.
The humble Remonstrance and Petition of many of the Citizens of London.

Showing.

THat ever since the beginning of these present distractions which threaten
ruins to these flourishing Kingdoms, and indeed ever since the sitting of
this present Parliament, they have been ready out of their zeal to the cause
of God, and sense of their duty to to this Honorable Assembly, upon all
occasions to contribute subserve, and lay out themselves in all those ways,
which they did either discern, or were directed, did tend to the maintenance
of that Cause, or were necessary for the defense of the common safety, wherein
they have at all times with all cheerfulness and readiness, advanced such
moneys as have bin desired, (in the whole to very great and vast sums) and
have levied and raised amongst them the greatest number of those men, who both
first formed and now also recruted the Army.

By all which they hoped to have seen the end of their dangers and removal of
their fears, by the just, severe, and exemplary punishment of Delinquents, who
are the causes of all these ruining perturbations, and to have been by this
time settled in the enjoyment of that happy Peace they have always desired: but
deceived of this hope, they cannot omit humbly to remonstrate, that after all
this vast expense, they find themselves but little nearer their end, if not
more dangerously involved, and like enough to keep those intestine Wars on
foot, (...) they shortly become a prey to foreign force, as late discoveries
give them cause to fear.

And however they are very sensible of the great burden of renewed
contributions, both beyond the example of former times, and their own
expectation of such supplies; yet they shall with the samelife and
cheerfulness go on to adventure more; so as it may be employed in a more
speedy and effectual prosecution of the Wars, which they humbly conceive
would not have been drawn out to this length, had it not bin for giving ear
to those counsels of accommodation, a proposition induced by our enemies to
gain time, which if concluded, they will keep only so long as to serve their
ends, but the very conclusion of it wholly incomptable, as your Remonstrants
humbly conceive, with the Protestation of bringing to condign punishment these
grand Delinquents, and incendiaries, who have imbroyled our State, and sought
to iutroduce a tyranny, without whose counsel and influence nothing on that
side can be concluded, and as also the ready way to expend and wast their
remaining Treasure, and render them thereby wholly unable to defend themselves.

The contemplation of their emminent danger thereby, inforceth them humbly to
remonstrate, that if these destructive counsels of accommodation be
reassumed, they shall think it necessary to look to their own safeties, and
forbear to contribute to their own ruin; to which only accommodation, and
not the greatest force of these enemies of the public peace can ever bring;
the motion whereof your Remonstrants believe, will be exploded with the
greatest indignity by all the good patriors of your honorable assembly, yet
humbly desire you will be pleased to publish such a Declaration herein, as
shall seem good to your Wisdoms, whereby not only the people may be assured,
that men mis-affected to the public may not serve their own ends, or drive on
their particular designs in this destructive accommodation; but also the
Ingenires of these contrivances may lie under the expectation of a just and
heavy censure; if they shall yet by such dangerous and unreasonable
interpellations, to bereave us of the right and wholesome use of our advantages
and opportunities; by which for the present, besides all other dangerous
effects, the Delinquents and Incendiaries are encouraged with the hope of a
good retreat, when they have done their utmost.

The sad effects of this accommodation appearing at distance, more terrible
unto your Remonstrants then the present view of the worst of this unnatural
war, gives the boldness to them, to make this humble address to this most
honorable assembly: withal professing that they are resolved with the utmost
expense of Lives, and estates to stand by, assist, maintain, and execute all
your counsels and command^, that shall tend to the vigorous and effectual
prosecution of this War.

They therefore humbly pray you will be pleased to declare your Sense against
this dangerous accommodation, that being assured of your fixed resolution not
to treat with his Majesty, but in parliament, and divided from his wicked and
desperate Counselors, they may with the greater resolution be prepared to go
on cheerfully in such supplies, as are necessary to bring these distractions to
a happy issue.

For which they shall ever pray, etc.

The reasons and Propositions by M. Shute to the House.
That whereas we being sensible of many pressing dangers upon this City and
Kingdom, which without speedy removal are like to fall heavily and
undeservedly upon them, are bold to present these following.

1. THat no Accommodation be made but such as is according to those honorable
and safe conditions, which have sundry times been presented by both Houses, and
expressed by Master Pym in Guild Hall: together with the punishment of
Delinquents, and repairation of those vast Charges expended by the City out of
Delinquents estates.

2. That this Treaty be put to a period in very few days, which otherways
will consume our estates, sink our spirits, and expose us to desperate dangers.

3. That there may be an Army of six thousand Horse, to pursue the Enemy
uncessantly till the work be finished.

4. That his Excellency may instantly go forth, which was certainly promised;
and by us fully expected before this time.

5. That our loving Neighbors of Essex and Hartford which came and are gone
back, may be instantly recalled and employed in this service.

6. That life may be given to such Ordinances as concern the seazing and
securing of the malignant persons and estates, both in City and Country.

7. That the Prisons in London may be secured by turning out the Malignant
Keepers, and putting in men of trust; and that no malignant be discharged
without good information from honest men that know their spirits and estates.

8. That our Army may supply their necessities upon Papists and Malignants, as
well as they have done upon us; else we shall preserve them and destroy our
selves.

9. That the Countries that now lie in danger to be seized on by the enemy,
especially Kent, may be fully secured by speedy and convenient forces, with all
Castles.

10. That the Ministers in the City and Country that have declared themselves
Malignants, especially such as have been convinced and ajudged unworthy of
their places may be presently seized on, and so kept from opening their mouths
against God, the Parliament and all goodness, as they daily d^e to the
prejudice of the Cause in hand; and other godly Ministers appointed to supply
their places, and their Livings presently Sequestered for their pains.

THe Petitions being come to the House of Commons, notice being given of the
said petitioners without, with a petition from the City of London; upon which
relation the petitioners with their petition were admi^ted into the House, Sir
Benj^m^n Rud^a^d
and the petition being delivered, it was publicly read, which being finished,
Demand was made by a worthy Member of the House of Commons, whether the
petition was of themselves, or whether it was by the consent of the City, yea
orn^; or whether the Common Counsel had any notice of the same: Answer was
made, that is was not with consent of the whole City, nor was it with the
advice of the Common Counsel; but done by themselves who were here present,
and who had engaged themselves and estates in the Parliaments and whole
Kingdoms Cause, and it being according to their late protestation: It was
replied, that the parliament and the whole Kingdom was much beholding to them
for their love and care, and likewise for their great pains, especially in
this particular; and likewise to the whole City for their love and hearty
expressions to the parliament, and that the parliament would engage themselves
for the Cities security and safety, for their real and former expressions and
intentions: withal desiring the petitioners to return back to their
habitations, and to acquaint the Lord Major and the Common Counsel of London
with the said petition, and that if the Lord Major and the Common Counsel
would agree to it, and make it their and the whole Cities Act they would
hearken unto it; and very suddenly give them and the whole City a fair and a
plenary answer. The petitioners returned, and the next day acquainted the L.
Major with their proceedings; whereupon the L. Major promised the petitioners
that a Common Counsel should be called, and the petition read; which was done,
and and being all or most of them present, the petition of the said Master
Shutes was openly read, and many arguings and debatings there was, pro and
contra about it; but at last by most voices the said petition was rejected and
thrown out of the Court.

Then diverse other very good able, and sufficient Citizens hearing of this
petition, and that the petition as they heard was for no accommodation, as you
may judge of it, framed an other petition for an accommodation and for peace;
thinking first to acquaint the Lord Major and the Common Counsel therewith,
and to desire their consents therein, distasts were taken at their proceedings,
jealousies, fears, and doubts on both sides did arise, whereupon diverse
coming to Guildhall to second their petition, both parties being met, words
agravated, and ill language, caused spleen and choler to arise on each
parties, whereupon in a daring manner diverse soldiers that were without in the
yard were commanded to go into the aforesaid Hall, who came in with their
swords drawn, brandishing and flourishing them about their heads, and driving
all those innocent men who had neither stick nor staff to defend themselves to
the other end of the Hall in a heap together, frighting some, wounding others,
in so much that the Sheriffs were called for out of the Court to come to
pacify their fury, who commanded the soldiers to depart away, so the business
was quallifyed for that time, and thanks be given to God not much hurt done,
though the sign was in Capricorn, and so I conclude, wishing and praying for
a firm and a true peace, which the God of all peace grant unto this poor
Nation and City; And so let all good men and faithful Subjects say Amen.

This day being Wednesday and the 14 of this month of December. diverse worthy
Citizens to the number of 5000. went to the parliament* he use with their
petition for peace; which was honorably accepted of both Houses, being
promised to have a fair and full answer the next day by one of the choice from
both Houses.

FINIS.

