CONSIDERATIONS CONCERNING Free-Schools, As settled in ENGLAND.



Printed at the THEATER in OXFORD; and are to be had there. And in London at Mr
Simon Millers at the sign of the Star near the West end of S. Paul's Church.
Anno 1678.

Imprimatur.
HENRICUS CLERK Vice-Cancel. Oxon.

May 25. Anno Dom. 1677.

To the Reverend Dr. HENRY CLERK President of Magdalene College, AND
Vice Chancellor of OXFORD. To the Worshipful Dr. THO. BOVCHIER, Kings Professor
of the Civil Law in the same University.
Much Honored Patrons,
THE Subject of this Enquiry low in it self, and accordingly apt to be deprest,
is yet a part of this State not altogether inconsiderable, since it has
formerly engaged the concern of Personages great for Parts and Quality. Only
that Problem must needs have somewhat Topical in it, upon which able men, and
well-affected, and on both sides in earnest, are divided; though, perhaps,
unequally: the practice of some few who had managed their own affairs with
discretion, and whose good meaning is not doubted, bearing up against the
declared sense of many of like unquestionable Prudence. This address in a Cause
conjectural and prejudged by Popular Fame, being divested of other Authority
from the Reporter then what the matter furnishes, can only hope for a
Reception, as upon trial it shall approve it self to you; before whose
impartial Determination, those ill-grounded prejudices, which have, for these
not few years, averted many charitable intentions for the encouragement of
learning, will abate.

Reverend Sir, That which gave occasion to this small discourse received hopes
of life from the Right Reverend Lord Bishop of Bath and Wells, at that time our
Vice Chancellor, in whom, without respect to this instance, was a Prudence
watchful against surreption: a judgment known to be stable: backed with
Courage, as being the result of his own clear reasonings. He therefore is
advanced to an Honorable Government in the Church. Suffer now with the Service
of the Author, the Patronage of this Work to devolve upon your self. In the
Universities are helps of Study, Examples of accurate performance. The Favors
of Oxford to me great, as undeserved, not obscure. All Motives from without
command an humble Deference of Honor eminently to you, which your own inward
worth invites. Give your self the importunity with patience to glance over this
piece, and allow some of the imperfections to difficulties to my present
circumstances insuperable: which difficulties, upon a nearer Review, may give
way to a right understanding through your favorable acceptance.

Nor may I Worshipful Sir, without due Veneration tender these Papers to your
Perusal. Provisions for Schoolmasters while Ecclesiastical Benefices, for
Students in the University while Portions of Tithes lying originally in the
Canon Law, before what more competent Judge can they justify their Reason? The
Privileges of Students are there most amply deduced: with us in England laid up
in Charters through the Royal Indulgence: Their Revenues indeed fenced by the
Statutes of the Realm, Whatever Court take the cognizance of School-causes, let
them prove their claim by tenderness to the interess'd: you are more Zealous
for Justice then enlarged Jurisdiction. Thus you do right to that Faculty,
which managed with such Knowledge, Prudence, and Integrity must reconcile
Commerce with Church-Judicature; and by Authority justified from the strongest
Reason happily advance all the ends of right Government.

Many are the Blessings vouchsafed to this place: among the chief of which we
thankfully acknowledge a prudent Magistracy: wholesome Laws and Statutes:
intent Exercise of Discipline: administration of Justice tempered, but not
corrupted, with Mercy. Reverend Sir, These Genial Influences of your unwea'rid
Cares, cherish the Studies of Oxford: propagate a lasting honor on your memory:
and lay up for you the blessing of many Orators. Give me leave from sense of
particular duty to add, increase of Happiness on both your Persons to be the
unfeigned Prayer of

Your most obedient Servant Christopher Wase.

The Analysis.
1. The scope of the Work. 2. Education granted universally necessary. 3.
Learning doubted whether universally useful. 4. Some Learning argued
universally necessary. 5. The good understanding between Learning and Trade. 6.
Schools necessary. Free-Schools advantageous to the public. 7. erected by
Heathens. 8. Catechistical Schools in the Primitive times. 9. The Congregation
of Canons under the Fathers. 10. Cathedral and Parochial Schools of
Christianity in the German Empire. 11. Since the Council of Trent, Seminaries.
12. Upon the English Reformation Free-Schools. 13. necessary to the subsistence
of the Church. 14. as left by K. Henry 8. 15. as under Edw. 6. and Q. Mary. 16.
as it proceeded under Q. Elizab. 17. since the Q. represented too many. 18.
Many Free-Schools necessary to this Church. 19. useful to the State in Law. 20.
in Physic and diverse other Professions. 21. Many Scholars diverting to no
Faculty, admitted inconvenient. 22. Scholars in England not proved too many
from the late Differences, nor present Divisions. 23. nor from the discontent
of others. 24. nor from the many Schools. 25. nor from diverse thence highly
preferred, 26. Scholars in England probably not too many. 27. Free-Schools
probably not too many. 28. Schools how far in equity free. 29. Church and
Schools, with Empire flourishing, encouraged; decaying, neglected. 30. An
instance that there is room for new Foundations in some places of England. 31.
Free-Schools would be cherished by augmentation of the Masters wages. 32. by
further Exhibitions to Scholars. 33. would not be deserted by the Gentry. 34.
have not all of them been declined by the Nobility. 35. Country Free-Schools
somewhere improvable by having their Patronage annexed to some House in the
University. 36. consist in a right understanding between Town and Master. 37.
advantaged by their enfeoffement^ 38. Orders. 39. Catechizing. 40. Special and
General Visitors. 41. Library. 42. Writing-Schools to be kept within the esteem
due. 43. The Conclusion.
CONSIDERATIONS concerning FREE-SCHOOLS.
. 1.
THERE is an opinion commonly received, that the Scholars of England are
overproportion'd to the preferments for lettered Persons. Hereupon the
Constitution of Free-Schools comes to be questioned, as diverting those, whom
Nature or Fortune had determined to the Plough, the Oar, or other Handicrafts,
from their proper design, to the study of Liberal Arts, and even Divinity it
self. But the multiplying these Foundations is yet higher represented as
dangerous to the Government. These jealousies have gained upon the Prudent, the
Powerful, and, not the least, upon the Scholar: as indeed allegations of such
consequence deserve not to be slighted; when proceeding from The L. Verulam
Advice to the King touching Mr. Suttons estate. Bacons Resuscitation.
men of Authority, and published in Books by Francis Osborne Esquire; Advice to a
Son. Edition 7. 1673. * Present State of England. Edition 9. 1676.
repeated Impressions they have passed into a constant Fame. Schools, a name
against which many have an Antipathy carries in it, at the best, an unpleasing
notion of restraint. Free-Schools sound mean, and illiberal: yet had bin fafe
in their contemt. This charge admitted, if they escape present Suppression, or
Diminution, they must nevertheless ly under the perpetual displeasure of the
Magistrate, more grievous then Dissolution it self. Besides, an Imputation laid
on the judgment of former Founders leaves small encouragement to the Devout
Rich to dispose their charity upon a subject avowed unnecessary, or suspected
by the state. Now because the public Peace, and increase of Commerce are
desirable to any Nation; and Parents, in particular, make it a principal
concern, that their children be brought up to sound principles, and employment,
which may be hopeful of an honest livelihood, it may be convenient to call
under examination whether the Free Grammar Schools of England be so notoriously
multiplied beyond their occasion, as is demanded we should believe; if first
their usefulness can be evinced to reasonable satisfaction.

. 2.
It is agreed on all parts, that Education is absolutely due to man, either as
in his imperfect or corrupt estate. Did not our early follies require
di^cipline and restraints, yet knowledge is Gradual, and Habits of good, not at
once contracted. Add hereto snares and discouragement from abroad; the
necessity of nurture and manud^ction in a ^ight and steady course, especially
for those of unripe judgments, and in the slippery paths of youth is yet more
evident. Good in^^itution prevents or reforms vice; nor does it improve
particulars only, but seasons Families, and communities: whereby it mightily
promotes the common Peace and Pro^perity both of Church and State.

. 3.
Now this wholesome Breeding allowed n^cessary for all, so far as it respects
those that are born in a lower condition, some would have understood only what
may train them up to work; for as to what is commonly called Learning, and
which would engross the name of Education, the same effects either on Policy or
Religion are not so universally accorded, to belong to the general propagation
of it. There are places and have bin times (these observe) abounding with a
people very devout, and tractable to all commands of superiors, that ^ever s^te
years at School, have heard few sermons, nor were ever trusted with reading the
Bible. Advice to a Son. A too universally dilated Learning has bin found upon
Trial in all Ages no fast friend to Policy, or Religion; being no less ready to
discover blemishes in the one, then Incongruities in the other.
Light is indeed pleasant, but in its full luster scarce suited to our weaker
sight; discovers blemishes in others, even the most beautiful objects, disturbs
rest in all, and in what regions it makes the longest stay, is there
accompanied with least heat: the Scythians ignorance being found more innocent
then the Athenians knowledge. Discourse and Reading entertain, but working
supports life. Arts and labor are the poor man's Indies: the surest fond of a
Nation: the inexhaustible Mine of Princes. Trade is that stock from whence not
only private necessities are plentifully supplied, but also the public charge
defrayed, and a portion by the thankful separated for uses truly charitable, in
a just and pious offering. Epicurus in his B. (...) approves of reading and
writing, tho he seem to impugn the learning all other Sciences. Sextus
Empiricus adversus Mathemat. B. 1. Chapter 6.
Letters indeed may without much difficulty be admitted as to the faculty of
reading, and writing, for thus far they minister to commerce to which all Arts
and Labor in their issue refer. But to make a Profession of teaching obsolete
Languages, Poetical Fancies, or, what has more appearance of gravity, the Art
of Suiting colorable Arguments, whereby to hold any question in matters sacred
or civil eitherwaies indifferently: to set up Schools throughout a Land to
this purpose, and by rewards take off the Youth from following Labor to
sedentary studies, Lucan. desuntque manus poscentibus arvis. Has bin to this
purpose long since quoted.
while the fields (say they) want hands to till them: is this a benefit to the
public, or grievance? to be encouraged or redrest? For if the providence of
the state has thought fit at times, and places by sumptuary Laws to limit the
Rich in spending their own; with much more reason does the Government take
cognizance, whether such as have no visible estate for their support, take to
some calling.

. 4.
Here it may be seasonable to interpose, whether there be not a General as well
as Particular calling. All ages, sexes, ranks, relations in every condition,
all capacities, ly under some Duty toward God and Man. Now that any Persons
can be too early instructed in this Duty or too often admonished of it, that
any Nation can be too universally learned in the laws of well-living, would be
positions hard to be conceived, were they not the Dictates of safe Guides, men
reputed wise and honest. Particular callings may through different Providence,
at least in the timely retreats of old Age from business, be decently laid
down; but the General runs parallel with life. This regulates the better part
of man, and looks forward to eternity.

Now could it be made out that this duty required of us were a common notion,
spontaneous in our Nature and sufficiently clear in all its parts to the light
of our reason, in its present condition, there were less need of teaching. Then
might the scriptures without much danger remain unsearch'd: the Preacher betake
himself to some calling necessary, and beneficial to the Community: and Schools
for Catechizi^g to better account, be converted into Workhouses. Indeed
morality, the Law written in our hearts needed not to have bin learned out of
Books: it was to man in his first institution Catholic Religion; and however
those Characters be defaced, remains inseparable from the rational Nature.

But the Doctrine of Faith being an ingrafted word, not from nature, but by
culture, needed to be reveled; to be couched in Holy W^itt; exhibited under
Sacraments; and entrusted to Dispencers not only faithful, but able also. For
reason irrad^ated with the Light of supernatural Truth cease not to be
rational.

Again of those that admit Revelation, some argue that whatsoever is Prophecy
cannot be acquired: thereupon disclaim Reading, Meditation, and whatsoever
other Methods preparatory for the Ministry, were recommended to the
Apostolical men. Others, of opposite judgment, contend that whatsoever is
acquired cannot be Prophecy. These are scandalized that the Minister should
demand audience of the people in the name of God; or pretend to speak with
demonstration of the spirit. Neither of them, I think, duly distinguishing
between extraordinary Gifts and a standing Office: both furnished by the same
spirit suitably to the different exigences of the Church: for the Bread of
Canaan was no less the Gift of God, then the Manna in the wilderness.

Further of those that could allow Schools of the Prophets, all have not
equally favored popular enquiries into the rule of Faith and Manners. Some
Persons who have taken up for a Principle that Ignorance is the Mother of
Devotion, and Obedience, are wont to magnify the peace and prosperity of those
days, wherein knowledge was not yet vulgar and cheap: while the Priest and the
Oracle were inseparable; nor examined, but obeyed: since, as admiration, so no
less has Reverence of the Clergy decreased: in the mean time dissembling that
those parties which at present divide Christendom, truly date their original
not from the breaking out of any clearer light, but from the blindness of
former Ages: whilst what opinions and practices were then insensibly admitted,
must now be studiously maintained.

It may indeed so fall out, that people may owe a temporary quiet to the not
searching in to their state, through an entire acquiescence in long obtaining
customs. A Judgment resigned supersedes the trouble of examination, silences
all disputes: is very zealous too, but at the instinct of other men's passion:
and needs must it be a frail, and ignoble obedience, which acts not according
to knowledge. Scriptures translated, there may be who pervert to unsound
opinions; there were who wrested them at their first Revelation in the Vulgar
Tongue: at their own peril, tho not without others danger. Both of them men 2
Pet. 3.16.
unlearned, and thereupon unstable. All that learn, are not presently learned.
Some may be proud upon their little taste of knowledge: become intractable to
superiors, prepared to embrace New Doctrins. Be there stif necks that struggle
with the Yoke of Discipline? this comes not from having bin kept in aw,
subject to statutes, and orders. Be there unstable minds, not yielding
themselves up to be grounded upon firm principles: They learned not that in
their Catechism. They who have a more favorable opinion of their own
proficiency, may do well to suffer a strict Judgment to pass upon their notions
least they be found to know nothing as they ought. For indeed it is not the
being end^wed with more or less knowledge, (if per^aps, little knowledge be an
endowment) but the Grace of Charity with either, that accordingly makes men
sober and useful: without which they become conceited and factious, whilst
Synod. Exon. An. 1277. c. 20. Omnium matter errorum ignorantia.
Ignorance is of it self the certain Mother of Error. To decry the publishing
of truth, upon pretense of securing peace, argues a consciousness of some
opinions, which must be indulged because useful, would be concealed because
unwarrantable. A dark shop gives suspicion of corrupted wares, that would
escape the Magistrate and impose upon the buyer. Again, admit the most knowing
Teacher, yet subject to human frailties, if his hearers come unprovided of a
Judgment of discretion, they cannot have assurance in practice, whether they be
the Discipl^s of Divine verities, or servants of human passions. And the more
laborious the one is in Teaching, the more diligent and affectionate the other
in hearing: nay, in repeating what they have heard, they will run the greater
risque. So that to take away the rule of discerning Doctrins from the People,
and confine them to the sense of particular Pastors, has as small probability
of advancing Catholic Religion, as it has appearance of promoting commutative
Justice to call in standards, and warrant every sellers Weights and Measures,
upon his private seal.

In short, that the Canon of Faith be communicated to all Believers is honest
to the People. Deuteronomy. 33.4.
The Law of Moses was the inheritance of the Circumcised: the whole Bible is
the Birthright of all the Baptized. Now, because some unhappy instances may
have bin found of particulars, who have embezill'd their patrimony to their own
damage, and the injury of others, with what color of Justice can it be urged
that the community of their country be disinherited?

It is also honorable to their faithful Pastors. Would not a good Musician
desire his whole Auditory well instructed in the Art of Music, that they may
the better judge of his Airs? And an accurate Limner be pleased if all
spectators of his Pieces were competently skilled in proportions, colors,
shadows, and what else is requisite that they might rightly discern the
Beauties of his Pictures, and set a due price on them?

Lastly it is safe to the Magistrate. A people delivered up to implicit faith
in their leaders is in the next disposition to be seduced, they are only by
accident Loyal: and their Virtue owing to Fortune, because at another man's
choice. Right and well grounded submission to Civil and Ecclesiastical
Government is the Genuine issue of knowledge to sobriety. For the manifold
benefits of order, and in conscience of the divine institution and command,
Obedience is not to be withdrawn from morose and hard Masters; but therefore to
advise to keep a people low in understanding, and Fortunes are the
misadventurous Politiques of such as serve themselves of Governors, and set up
a private against the public interest: whereas, when truth and civil beatitude
are intended, the more any Nation increases in wisdom, the more intrinsecal
inforcements of Loyalty will they derive from the eternal Reasons of that Law
which injoins their obedience; and the Bands of such Government become
indissoluble.

. 5.
There is therefore a learning which cannot be too universally dilated: a fast
friend both to Policy and Religion: nor is it an enemy to trade, but by strict
injunctions 2 These. 3.10.12.
commands Labor. Mechanical and manual Operations are several times styled
Titus 3.8, 14.
good Works. Handy-crafts exercised by the Ancient Rabbis, did not upon their
conversion unqualify for the Did. 91. Clericus. Conc. Carthag. 4. cap. 51.2,
3. De Clericis ut artificio victum quaerant. R. Moses ben. maimon. tract. de
studio legis cap. 3. Sect. 8, 9, 10. Quisquis legi operam dare vult, laborem
autem recusat. etc.
Apostolical dignity. Nay the Author of our Profession, and common Master of
all did not disown a Parentage conversant about an honest Art. Nor do Kings his
Followers account it any diminution of their Majesty to be enrolled in Company
with Artisans. Again, as the right bred Scholar sees reason not to magnify
himself against the industry of other honest laborers and Artists, since God
has charged his support in good measure on part of their labors; so we find
the more ingenuous both of City and Country to bear a true respect to Learning.
This they have testified among other proofs by many monuments of their piety in
all parts of the Land erected to the breeding up Youth in good manners and
Literature. These worthy Persons had bin so far proficients under the ordinary
means of instruction in the Church, as to acknowledge the good success of their
labors to have bin from the gift and blessing of God: had tasted the fruits of
Wisdom, and highly prized it. Whereupon in humble retribution to the divine
goodness, and out of compassion to the plaee of their Nativity or Preferment,
founded there some Free School, especially for the poor, that they might also
be provided with means of knowledge. Others have added exhibitions that if
Children at the School should give hopes of profiting they might receive
farther encouragement to proceed till they arrived at fitness for emploiment
suitable to their Education. A zeal unanimously allowed to have proceeded from
a pious intention: only for the matter, by some disputed. These favor Learning
yet are not reconciled to Free-Schools. Nay, great contention has bin needful
to convince Towns, after many years, to admit such foundations, tho fairly
endowed, as any ways beneficial to the Neighborhood; with so much the more
reason may the Gentry require that such as would have the liberal Arts and
Sciences should pay for them: without censure keep their blood unmixt with mean
conversation, by immuring them at home, or sequestring them into some
convenient recess, to be trained up in society with their equals, remote from
Markets and Towns, nor countenance such places with the Education of their
Children. Upon these allegations duly considered it may not be improper to
examine what is the import of free-Schools to a state, especially Christian;
since upon the issue of this Question, not only the discretion of Founders
comes to be decided, but the hope of obtaining future Benefactors does in
great measure depend.

. 6.
To the acquiring this Learning above argued universally nec^ssary, Domestical
Institution cannot be universally sufficient. The Rich are not always at
leisure to attend private occasions. Court and Camp avocations from House and
Nursery: Voiages and Journies, in this ambulatory condition of life often
unsettle them; at last, Bands of Families come to be dissolved. The poor, they
can less teach their Children what themselves are too commonly, ignorant off,
Now the want of good principles, at first laid, proves an impeachment to
profiting under the public Instruction of the Ministry, that is, to growth in
all Christian virtue. Besides, if particulars, however able (for the charge
must be great) might entertain Tutors, who did not employ Chaplains, this would
render the Scholar numerous and unprovided for. Schools therefore and Masters
are nec^ssary. These would be in every Parish, nay Township: for petty
Scholars. Further it comes to be enquired whether others for Grammar are not
requisite to be had at distances not grievous. There is occasion for some that
are learned in all places. Where there are no men of Language and reading,
particular Governments can scarcely be well administered: nor many offices
executed. The professions of them, as their entertainments, some higher, others
of inferior rank. Again the temper and inclination of Children whether of rich
or poor in their first rudiments will discover themselves who give hopes of
being to good use advanced to further studies. Seeds of modesty and diligence,
from a pregnant wit would by no means be suppressed in what ever condition they
were found. Yet through their own unfavorable circumstances, as soon as they
have exerted their vigor, must languish unless they find some other expedient.
Their only relief therefore remains in the favor of Princes and Patriots, this
is, public endowments. These whether advisable, and how far, is the adequate
matter of this present disquisition. That there should be Champions of Justice
and Truth with great diligence trained up may seem a public concern, since the
enemies of Church and State are not seldom polite in language, subtle in
distinctions, and pugnacious in dispute: nor to be otherwise repelled then by
sound arguments, clear judgment, and copious utterance. A prize hardly
attainable without legitimate study, in places regulated by established orders
for Direction; and no less, for restraint. That Philosophy be free, but not
licentious: bounds set to speculation: and the wantonness of calling in
question, then exposing, principles of Religion and Government, (which hinders
action, disaffects society, and embroiles the world) by Authority curbed.

. 7.
But why do I dwell any longer on private reasonings? In controversies of this
moment, it is safer to consult the approved practice of Ages and Nations.
Monarchs as well as Free-States have of old agreed in this, Ex viribus Reip.
Eumenius. Constantius (Constantini M. fill.) C. de praebendis salariis l. 1. e
fisco. Sueton in Vespasiano 18. public. Plin. Secundus. (...). Suid. in (...),
at the public charge to reclaim their subjects from natural wildness. Hence to
wave times and places commonly called Barbarous, Besides Athens, at Alexandria,
Tarsus upon Cydnus, Antioch, Rhodes. Strabo. Suidas.
the Greek and Rome, Spain, Gall-land* in Province, Autun, Bourdeaux. Sueton,
Eumenius, Ausonius.
Latin Empire (successively the Pale of the Civil World) did in Cities and
Towns of most note hire at honorable salaries, Professors of Philosophy and
Rhetoric. These, mainly to direct in pleading; that the Civil Law might run. A
learning of great importance to the security of Empire, because not only
Doctrinal, but Coercive. Philosophers to inform the mind in things human and
divine. These not only staked out the bounds of honesty, but left marks to
discern truth of conclusion from appearance: and withal by dextrous application
of number and proportion, made the way of commutative Justice plain. These
produced the Calendar, the Globe, the Mariners Chart and Compass, by their
Labors now rendered easy. In a word, much of that, which now is polite in
Arts, or facilitates Labor, is owing to the methodical invention of the
Contemplative; be it spoken without derogation from the honor due to the
casual Experiments of the Practick.

As to Grammar, neither has that been unprovided for, or ungrateful to the
Public. For to omit the elder Grammarians, who after speech resolved into its
distinct parts, proceeded to expound the Poets; when Empire had once embraced
Nations of diverse Languages, it became necessary to the preservation of Peace
to plant a right, which must, at least, be a common understanding between them.
The structure of words, composition of sentences, with all the reason of
interpretation, was now formed into an Art: and rendered the comprehension of
diverse Tongues not difficult. Only turn the key (Grammar was the P^sse
per-tout) the gate of several Idioms was unlocked: and learners from the
narrowness of their homebred simplicity, at once let into all the benefits of
Rhetoric and Philosophy abovementioned, with whatever other advantage the
Learned Languages can communicate. Which good to promote, schools were erected
in the Imperial City, and about the Provinces. Masters invited at liberal
Pensions issuing out of the Exchequer, or from the stocks of Corporations: nor
were endowments of Country Schools then unknown. And Academ^es had their
Revenues. That which was first called Suid. in (...).
Academy was a school-house within a grove in the suburbs of Athens: by an
Hero of that name dedicated to the propagation of wisdom. Idem in (...).
Plato living there had only a garden valuable at some three pound of yearly
rent: a small pittance in comparison of what his Speusippus, Xenocrates,
Polemo, Crantor, Crates.
successors enjoi'd. For at last the revenue came to be a thousand pound a
year or upwards. This augmentation arose from devout men and well disposed to
Learning, as, at times, such dying in their wills left several donations to
those that would espouse a contemplative life, that so they might with more
freedom attend the rules and study of Philosophy.

As for Country Schools, take one instance. Plin. Secundus, B. 4. Epist. 13.
Pliny the younger, upon occasion, finding that his Townsmen of New Como sent
their sons to Milan to school for want of Masters there, advised the Burgers
how much it was their interest, who were Fathers, to have Teaching upon the
place. For where can children with more delight reside then in their Country?
be more watchfully guarded then under parents sight? or cheaper kept then at
home? that it would be no such great expense to contribute toward the
entertainment of Schoolmasters: considering what is now expended upon board,
upon journeys, upon purchase of all necessaries abroad at the dearest hand,
would pass upon account in a Masters salary: bids them agree what to subscribe:
he that had no child yet, for his Countries sake, would bear a third of it. The
whole he would have undertaken had he not feared least in process of time his
cheap beneficence might be, through sinister ends, misapplied, as he observed
to have fallen out in many places where the community were Patron. Bids them
confer together, conclude upon a bold sum; he should be the better pleased the
higher his proportion were raised. They could do no act more to the credit of
their children, or their Countries profit: that those be bred there, who were
born there: that from their infancy they contract an habitual love to their
native soil, and be there much resident. In fine, he wished they could invite
such eminent Masters as the neighboring Towns might be content to study with
them: and as now other places drew their children to themselves, so by that
fair reprisal they might win over others children thither. Plin. Secund. B 1.
Ep. 8.
He furnished his Townsmen a Library: In the same place, B. 7. Ep. 18.
settled a stock for the breeding up the children of honest decayed and
over-burthen'd Housekeepers: not to mention B 6. Ep. 32.
the portion given to the daughter of Quintilian his old B. 2. Ep. 14.
Rhetoric master, or other benefactions of that good natured Moralist. Sueton.
de Illustrib. Grammat. in Verrio Flacco.
In the Palace of Augustus was a College where the young Caesar's, in the head
of the most promising flower of the Nobility with silence attended the dictates
of their Tutour. In other places should I enumerate the Illustrious Grammarians
among the ancients Greek and Latin, their successions with the noted Towns
where there Chair stood, it would require a just Volume: suffice it to our
purpose, that we shall not find any free-Citizens, what ever their rank were,
desirous to profit in Learning, debarred ftom their Lectures: such care to
provide means for training up the youth of all sorts in liberal Arts and
Sciences had those Empires while Heathen.

. 8.
Christianity, sure, having greater inducements to the attaining of Wisdom,
affords men of every condition not less encouragements to follow the study of
true Knowledge. In the Church is a standing occasion for Teachers, to whom
Learning is necessary: other advantages of Fortune may at sometimes be greatly
serviceable, but were never indispensably required. The first effusion of gifts
fell upon the willing and faithful, at least in disposition, however in opinion
erroneous: nor did lowness of estate put a bar. Upon this, the S. Paul,
Timothy. S. Peter, Mark.
Apostles trained up such novices as minister'd to them while they were called
from place to place and referred their Viaticum to be taken at the Churches
through which they past; which those Churches esteemed themselves under an
obligation to confer upon them; such was the fervor of primitive Charity. Nor
is it a wonder if the Apostolical conversation were a constant exercise to all
Christian knowledge and virtues The Roman Court has University Privileges
since the sitting of Innocent. 4. Gloss, upon Clementines B. 4. Tit. 1. Chapter 1.
In studiis Romans Curiae.
when the verge of the Roman Court carries about with it, whithersoever it
removes, the privileges of an University. We may not here presently expect
public and endowed schools; since neither do we now know what Churches were
yet erected, or what settled maintenance was for the Ministry. Some adult
proficients in the Jewish and Heathen Schools were by the power of Truth
brought over to be instructed and then Teachers in the Christian Church. Indeed
a Catechistical school was kept at Alexandri^ about the latter end of the
second Century successively by Pantaenus, a Stoic Philosopher, taught the
Alexandrine school under Commodus. Niceph. Callist. B. 4. c. 32. Clement
succeeded him. chapter 33. Origin at 18 years old: under Severus by the Bishop
Demetrius made Catechist. B. 5. c. 4, 5. Heraclas admitted in the 12. of
Alexander, after Bishop. Then Dionysius, after Bishop. Sixthly Athenodorus. c.
18.
Pantaenus, Clemens, Origin, Heraclas, Dionysius, and Athenodorus. Here it were
worth the considering, whether under the modest name of Catechistical and
School, were not couched over and above the delivering a complete Circle of
Arts and Sciences, whatsoever is with us preparatory to the highest degrees in
Divinity.

S. Gregorii oration ad Origenem Panegyrica and valedic^oria.
Gregory sur-nam'd Thaumaturgus, that is Worker of Wonders, upon departure from
his Catechist to be Bishop of Neocaesarea in Pontus, made a valedictory
oration; which he recited before Origin in the presence of many Auditors: in
this panegyric of thanks, having premised by what maze of Providence he had
been led to Caesarea in Palestine, whither that excellent Professor was then
also removed; he recounts with much affection the several Arts and Faculties in
which he had been instructed for five years by that eminent Person: whereas he
had before only laid the foundation of Rhetoric in order to the study of the
Law. First he won him over to Philosophy: pressed him with gentle compulsions;
How disingenuous, how short of religious must that man needs be, nay scarce
worthy the name of man who neglects Philosophy, that is, the study of Wisdom,
the privilege peculiar to his nature above all others in the world by the
divine favor indulged? here he instilled into him the principles of Christian
Doctrine. And, because we are apt to give an overhasty assent to whatever is
confidently asserted; and again without sufficient reason contradict what is
decry'd by the multitude; he would direct his scholar in general to suspend his
sentence, till he should rightly inform his judgment: and withal traced him
out the methods, whereby to demonstrate Truth and discover Fallacies. A skill
most necessary for men in all conditions of life, if it be their interest not
to be imposed upon in any of their communication with others. Farther, whereas
our spirits left to themselves are ordinarily low, scattered, or narrow, he
would erect, dispose and enlarge his hearers thought by displaying at other
times before him the mighty and wonderful and various and all-wise work of the
Creation: the beautiful order of nature: abstracting the mass of first matter
collected from the continual motion of particular sublunary Bodies, of
different properties, compounded of Elements, diversified by forms, resolvible
into atoms alike fine and imperceptible by our grosser capacities in their
source, course and resort: all which attest providence and a first cause;
although his work cannot by us be perfectly comprehended. Then would he let
his pupil into the knowledge of the Mathematics, made him ascend that ladder
whose basis are the unshaken maxims of Geometry; whose steps, conclusions
rightly deduced; whose top, Astronomical speculations. But, what is of most
intimate and chief importance to the comfort of human life, he labored in
delivering sound and divine morals about Passions, Virtues and Vices: what was
inordinate, rectified: what immoderate, retrenched. By seasonable discourse; To
mind the concerns of our soul, he would give out for the true Justice. A man to
know himself, and see God with a pure spirit: for the only prudence. To guard
from incursions of pleasure and passion the evenness of our temper, right
temperance. To persevere in holy purposes against all discouragements, the
highest fortitude: these precepts he rendered visible by a lively practice. His
attentive and well-dispos'd scholar although he assumed not to himself the
present possession or near approach to this divine treasure or even human
perfections, through the dullness of his own apprehension, or deadness of his
mind, yet withal did avow a love to virtue, a pursuit after it, and affiance to
obtain it through the divine benediction. This rare proficient magnifieth above
the rest his Masters sacred Metaphysics: and Lectures in Divinity. His talent
was singular in expounding difficult Texts, and the mystery of Religion: to
speak the things of God as from God: to the instruction of men, man as he was:
till both speaker and hearer were rapt up into the same transports of devotion.
He would allow his scholars to range through the Philosophers and Poets, not to
espouse any sect, but hear all and excerpe out of their works what might
conduce to good manners, or give testimony to the Deity. Only cautioned
against the Atheist and voluptuary, who deny God or Providence: counting him
beneath the reasonable nature, who disowned the cause of all Being. When
Gregory had taken solemn leave with this public acknowledgement, and many
other pathetical expressions, he was dismissed by Origin with a prayer suitable
to the occasion: and proved an instrument in the Church to such admiration,
that having found at his return in the City where was the Sea of his residence
but 17 Christians, at his decease he blessed God that he left not more Pagans in
the City and Country of his Diocese. This instance of Catechistical Education
in a place yet almost warm with the footsteps of the Apostles and Apostolical
men has been the more particularly specified to leave some intimations that
the primitive discipline was not laxe: only consisting in an affected
simplicity: that Academical studies have been of old applied to the better
enabling for the work of the Ministry: and principally that the Assistances of
Divine Grace are not contra-distinguish'd to human preparations, which, as time
and opportunities are offered, it rather prerequireth. In the same City and
Century Pamphilus set up a like School and Library: wherein he was succeeded by
Eusebius: such care of breeding up youth in Religion and Learning was there
amidst the hottest persecutions.

. 9.
A second age of the Church follows from Constantine the Great. In general,
lettered persons of whatever profession, received then from the state great
immunities and C: de Professorib. and medicis l. 6. Medicos and maxim
Archiatros.
Privileges. At Rome, and to be sure at Constantinople, was a kind of
University called C. de studiis liberalib. Urbis Romae and C. Politanae.
the Auditory of the Capitol: here under Theodosius the great were entertained
three Latin Orators, ten Grammarians, five Sophisters, one Philosopher, two
Lawyers. But this seminary seems to have been principally for secular occasions.

The Empire now become Christian, Churches and Monasteries were erected in all
Provinces. large endowments and privileges conferred on the Clergy in
particular. What time, besides the teaching in Monasteries, there were in
Mother-Cities especially, in the Western Church a Close and House for the
Bishop. At the first entrance of whose Court was an Appartiment where the young
students who were trained up for the ministry had their common Dormitory and
Hall with other convenient Rooms: under the charge of some grave Guardian:
having a Master to instruct them in Arts, and another to oversee their manners:
all under the inspection of the Bishop: whom they did assist in the public
divine service, according to their degree: maintained at a portion from the
Canonical dividend of Diocesan Tithes and Offerings: with a prospect of being
placed in the Churches of the same Diocese as they became vacant, nor to remove
elsewhere without leave of their Ordinary. These Deacons, Council. Toletanum
quartum Anno 633. In veteri lege ab an. 25. Levitae tabernaculo servire
mandantur cujus auctoritatem in Canonibus and S. Patres sequuti sunt, a 25
annis aetatis Levitae consecrentur: and a 30 annis Presbyteri ordinentur. S.
Laurence is called Levita in Prudentius; and a MS. Calendar in Balliol Col.
Levites, Canons, Clerks, or Nurslings were the Probationers for the Priesthood
and the Congregation of Canons is By Binnius.
judged to have laid the platform of Cathedral and Collegiate Schools and the
modern Seminaries. Augustine. de communi vita Clericorum. Sermon. 22. Ad Presbyt.
S. 36.
Hither S. Austin when Bishop of Hippo did not refuse sometimes to come and
dine in the common Refectory among the Presbyters and Clerks, to countenance
and oversee the students sequestered to the service of God, and entitled to the
nurture of the Church in those days by a voluntary, and often by a necessary
poverty: yet if any did embrace a married life and which consequently admitted
possessions (such as were called secular) he admonishes them to be circumspect,
yet would by no means deny them ordination (though they quitted their title to
the community.) After all this care Heresies broke out, and contentions between
the Eastern and Western Empire, followed with an inroad of Barbarous Nations,
whereby Religion was much eclipsed and Learning almost wholly exterminated.

. 10.
Come we therefore to a third period of Christianity from the times of Charles
the Great. Italy was now become Gothish; Spain, Moorish; and France spoke
generally Dutch. Germany it self but newly converted to the Faith. The Offices
of the Church were then in Latin; a Language not well understood by many that
did officiate; and by very few that assisted at them. In these circumstances
the necessity of Schoolmasters greatly increased. Since the good Grammarian is
now become previous, and in some measure conditional to the good Christian: at
this time the Emperor applied his latter years to the Learning of Arts and
Sciences: called in from foreign parts Learned men in great numbers and among
them that eminent Britan Albinus, Alcuinus or Gwyn (his Grammar is yet extant
with us) at whose persuasion he erected the famous University of Paris. His son
Concilium Paris. An. 829. L. 1. c. 30. a Domino Ludovico jussum and admonitum
est, ut Rectores Ecclesiarum, etc. Unde omnibus nobis visum est ut abhinc
postposita totius torporis negligentia etc.
Lodowick the Pious (in the nonage of that University) laid his command upon
Rectours in their respective Churches to train up stout soldiers of Christ by
whom God might be appeased. Hereupon, that order being slackly obeyed,
Provincial Councels finding Council. Valentinum Anno 855. Quia ex hujus studii
longa intermissione, pleraque Ecclesiarum Dei loca and ignorantia fidei, and
totius scientiae inopia invasit. Council. Tullense apud Saponarias, Anno 859.
Quia quod nimis dolendum est and perniciosum maxim divinae scripturae verax
and fidelis intelligentia jam ita dilabitur ut vix ejus extrema vestigia
reperiantur; and idcirco ingenti cura and studio remedium procurandum est.
a general decay of Piety through ignorance of the Holy Scriptures required
that the several Rectors should exhibit their young Scholars at those
Assemblies. Articles were drawn up upon which Archdeacons should enquire in
their yearly visitation: by 858.
Herard Archbishop of Tours; by 859.
Theodulph Bishop of Orleans; 871.
Walter Bishop of the same; by 874.
Hincmar Archbishop of Rheims. Whether their Walteri Capitula. cap. 6. Ut
unusquisque presbyter Clericum and scholam habeat.
Priest had a Clerk; and whether he kept School in the Church. Theodulphi
Capitulare 20. cum summa caritate doceant: nihil ab eis pretii pro hac exigant:
accipiant quod eis parents caritatis studio sua voluntate obtulerint.
These Schools were free and seem at first to have been chiefly to teach the
Council. Mogunt. 1. Anno 813. ut fidem Catholicam recte discant, and orationem
Dominicam ut domi alios edocere valiant. Et qui aliter non potuerit, vel in sua
lingua hoc discat.
Lords Prayer and Creed, or perhaps the Psalter, at least some select Psalms;
and what may amount to our Primer, only in Latin; though the meaner sort were
permitted to say the Lords Prayer and Creed in their vulgar Tongue. Schools of
Christianity which carried on others of a higher form to Capitulare
Aquisgranense, an. 784. Psalmos, notas cantus, computum, Grammaticam per
singula Monasteria vel Episcopia discant. Sed and libros Catholicos been
emendatos habeant.
prick-song, and the use of the pie with Grammar. The care of farther
propagating divine and human learning was a common Head in the Councils of
those Ages: still recommended to the Bishops, Dis. 37. de quibusdam: quia in
his maxim divina manifestantur atque declarantur mandata.
acknowledged the principal means whereby the commandments of God are declared
and made manifest to the people. Hence that Act of the third Lateran ( Decret.
lib. 5. tit 5. de magi: and ne aliquid exigatur pro licentia docendi. Quoniam
Ecclesia Dei, sicut pia matter, providere tenetur, ne pauperibus, etc.
inserted into the body of the Canon Law and mentioned in our Chronicle The
Clerk was then to the Priest Companion in conversation, Assistant in Divine
Service, Master of his School, and designed Successor in the Living.
of Gervase in the reign of Henry the second.) Whereas the Church of God as a
tender mother is bound to find such as stand in need, both in what belongs to
their bodily sustenance and in what may conduce to the improvement of their
souls, least convenience of reading and advancement in learning should be
withheld from the poor who cannot be assisted in it by means from their
Parents, be there a competent maintenance in every Cathedral Church allowed a
Master to teach freely the Clerks of the same Church and the poor Scholars:
that so the Teachers wants may be relieved and a door set open for the studious
to attain Learning. This sort of Schools might be better borne with because
Colleges have often some provisions for the Collegers and means of preferment.
But the complaint is, that besides these, there are of late Grammar Schools
founded and endowed in almost every Market Town of England where the Children
of the Town are only to be taughr gratis without any other allowance. Consider
we therefore though these Erections have been of late whether the practice be
so modern. In the year 1215 it is expressly further enacted in the fourth
Lateran Decr. l. 5. tit. 5. de magi. c. Quia nonullis etc.
that not only in every Cathedral but also in other Churches whose means be
not able to bear a Divinity Lecture, there be at least appointed an able
Master to be chosen by the Prelate with the Chapters consent to teach the
Clerks of those Churches freely Grammar, and others according to his ability:
and that a Prebends place be assigned every Master by the Chapter. This was
ordained in the times of King John, in whose Reign Newbury School is said to
have been founded and endowed with many other in sequel which were suppressed or
continued by King Henry the Eighth, or King Edward the Sixth.

. 11.
Thus are we arrived at the fourth and present Age of the Church, being that of
the Reformation, and about the times of the Council of Trent. This Council
wanted not some men of Politiques profound enough. These awakened with the
revolution of National Churches; well advised that conduct of Conscience, that
is (if I may so speak) of the Reasonable subject, is most safely committed to
such as can render a reason; and that to the gaining Consequences it is
ordinate to deliver Principles; made eminent provision for Seminaries Counc. of
Trent. Sess. 23. Chapter 18. Pauperum filios praecipue eligi vult, nec tamen
ditiorum excludi.
whereinto poor men's sons especially should be elected, not excluding the
richer. This order was accordingly put into execution in the Provincial
Councels of diverse Countries: most effectually in that of Milan: where all
their Offices with their particular charges are amply delivered by that eminent
of Cardinals, the since canonized Borromaeo. Others in Flanders at the
solicitation of Cardinal Allen: nor has this constitution devised for the
maintaining that power, then shaken, been wholly unanswerable in the success to
its first intention.

. 12.
About what time upon the several dissolutions of Religious Houses in England,
some Schools were reserved, some erected: with general license for
well-dispos'd Persons to found others and endow them within a Mortmain by the
State determined. According to which gracious liberty such as have contributed
to so pious a work seem to have deserved well of their Town, For however we may
be prone to judge of the forward accommodations of life, all is not in present
food and raiment. There is improvement of mind, the fruits of discipline, not
to be despised. A learned slave would sell for more. A youth brought up at
school will be taken Apprentice with less money then one illiterate. The broken
Colt, tamed Heifer, polished Diamond; known instances: nay, ground reclaimed by
culture will set at the higher rent. Grammar-learning is requisite to very many
honest callings: and with industry, faith, and other virtues qualifying for
trust, has opened a way for high preferment: nor is it a privilege to be
meanly prized by any people, to have such education provided, that out of their
children, in due season, may be chosen such as may bear the Office of the
Ministry.

Hence too accrues advantage to the state. That instruments be fitted for
emploiment imports; but more, that Officers of trust be prevented with sound
principles. Miserable is the face of any Nation where neither Schools nor
Universities be frequented: no Law, no safe commerce: a general ignorance, and
neglect of duty both to God and man. Now that Universities flourish, and
Schools are in many populous Towns erected, from those places of public
education especially, persons are sent into all parts of the Land, engaged in
the strictest bonds of Allegiance.

13.
Lastly, as to the Church, these Foundations have to that a more immediate
respect. The statutes of these Houses generally injoyne a diligent and decent
attendance on the public worship. Nay, learning well the first rudiments of
Religion, and bearing a yoke of Government, prepares a people to be more docile
under their proper Ministers, stayed in judgment, and compliant with the
Discipline, as well as Doctrine, of their Spiritual Pastors. Further, what is a
manifest advantage, the salaries to Masters and exhibitions to Scholars provide
in great mesure that the Church be not burdened: since, upon supposition of
their being withheld, Ecclesiastical Benefices are taxable to the breeding up
of students, as, in fact, at the Injunctions by Queen Elizabeth, 1559. the
twelfth Art.
beginning of Queen Elizabeth's reign they were taxed a thirtieth part. Conc.
Trident. Sess. 23. cap. 18.
When the Fathers at the Council of Trent assembled, had propounded a fair
Model of Seminaries knowing the advantages that arise to Religion from
Learning, and the necessity of endowments to the attaining those advantages,
till such endowments could be had, for the immediate bringing that design to
effect they levied a Tax on all the rents assigned for the Bishops, and the
Chapters Table, on the profits of all Dignities, Personages, Offices, Prebends,
Portions, Abbeys, Priories, Benefices as well of Regulars, as Peculiars, on the
Fabric of Churches, and other Religious Houses; on Colleges, Corporations,
Guilds and Fraternities, Monasteries, and Exhibitions. Of such importance was
this work by them then esteemed: as indeed it has since proved a great
accession to the relatives of that exempt and peculiar jurisdiction; and
firmest support of the Papal throne.

. 14.
Now the better to form in us a right sense of what regards we ought to bear
to these worthy Patriots, whom God raised up to be Founders and Benefactors, it
may be not improper to examine in what posture the state Scholastic was found
at the entrance of King Edw. 6, upon the Government. It is well known that a
great part of the former Teaching was in Monasteries. Coke upon Littleton. Lib.
2. Cap. 6. Sect. 137.
Now there were in England 118 Monasteries of Royal Foundation whereof 27
mitred Abbots: and 2 Priors held their Estates in Barons Fee, and gave vote in
Parliament. All these were dissolved with the others which were many more
during the Reign of K. Hen. 8. First 1524.
40 of the lesser by Cardinal Woolsey: with the leave of Clement 7. 1536.
then such as were under two hundred pound per annum to the number of 376:
1538. 9.40.
afterward the greater: 1541.
the year following, the great Priory of S. John's of Jerusalem. 1546.
At last, all Hospitals, Chantries, Schools, Colleges were without any
condition given into the Kings hands: to be disposed of according to his better
intentions. Then was the survey of Eaton and Winchester Colleges returned up:
but the death of the King that year interposed between the Act and its utmost
Execution. 1415.
Henry the fifth when he suppressed the Priors Aliens, had thoughts of going
farther, but was diverted upon a French War by the prudent address of that most
vigilant and Reverend Prelate Chichly. Strange may it be thought here why the
Lords Spiritual and Temporal should agree with the Commons to put up these
Bills to King Henr. 8. in so unlimited a manner: 37. Hen. 8. For as much as it
is right well known that the said Governors or the greatest number of them
hitherto have not, nor yet do use etc. And for that the Kings Highness of his
godly and blessed disposition etc.
unless it did argue, as to the incumbents of those Monasteries and Chantries,
a public dissatisfaction about their having answered the pious intention of
their Founders: and as to the King, an affiance in his Royal purpose to settle
those means in a more decent and convenient order for the service of God, and
safety of the Realm. And indeed having dispossessed the Monks that had intruded
he reestablish'd Bishop Godwyn. Rerum Anglicarum Annal. l. 1. Henry 8. 1539.
Canterbury, Winchester, Ely, Norwich, Worcester, Rochester, Duresme, Carlisle
upon Dean and Prebendaries: erected upon a new Foundation Westminster, 1540.
translated 1546
( Osney first, then) Oxford, Gloucester, Chester, Peterborough, Bristol, into
Bishoprics, Records in the Augmentation Office.
and had before him the project of other Collegiate Churches to be erected in
the place of eminent Monasteries, upon a fair proportion for maintenance of
Divine service, Hospitality, Learning, Alms and other necessary expenses. Much
of this drawn up, first in an ample scheam, then contracted, at last, his death
intervening, was laid aside. Thus stood the affair: Monasteries dissolved:
Appropriations, that is, once Church-Revenue sold. Indeed the erecting of
Free-Schools recommended to Purchasers; which showed the good inclinations of
the King to the work, however not fully accomplished in his life time.

. 15.
After his decease, the Parliament 1 Edward VI.
passed an Act for taking away the remnant of those Houses not yet actually
dissolved; but with a distinction between Religious and Superstitious uses, and
with reservation of some places by name. (Whether experience had rectified
their former opinions, or that they did repose less confidence in Governors
during the minority, then in their natural King.) Schools were among other
pious uses reserved in that remnant, Office of the Augmentation of the Kings
Revenue. Warrants, Surveys, Erections of Schools.
Hereupon Commissions are issued out by a set day returnable. The Surveyors of
each County, after Examination upon the place, return Certificats signed: among
the rest, where a Grammar School had been continually kept, with the Revenue of
what Chantry, who the Incumbent, what stipend, and whether fit to be continued.
Then were Warrants made from the two Commissioners to that purpose authorized,
and sent to the Auditour and Receiver of his Majesty's Revenue in the
respective Counties, to continue the School, and pay the Master out of the
Crown-Revenue, till farther order. The salaries were but small, as in a dry
rent charged on old Tenures: and those Priests were otherwise assistant at the
divine Service. A Table extracted from several Warrants all dated July 20.
1548. and in Parchment engrossed, might be here inserted for 25 Counties: but
the provision of it self amounted to some stay, yet no great relief. One or two
instances may be not ungrateful whether to the curious, or judicious Reader;
showing the County, the Town, the former Title, the Incumbent, and Revenue
continued.

Herefordshire, Ledbury, Trinity service, Richard Wheeler. 3 l. 11 s. 3 d.
Bosbury, Parish Reven. Tho. Keyling. 2.9.9. ob. Richards Castle, Serve. of our
Lady, and St. John Baptist. Jo. Parkyns. 4.16.7. Pembredge, Serve. of our Lady.
Jo. Roode. 3.13.0. K^ngisland. two stipendaries at the Alter of our Lady. Jo.
Hartley. 8.4.3. Delwyn. Chant. of S. Nicolas. Tho. Nicolls. 3.11.6. ob. q.
K^nnersly, Lands finding a Priest. Will Pyke. 6.2.0. Bromyard, Lands to find a
Priest. Jo. Battenall. 3.9.11. Yardsley, Lands and Tenements to find a Priest.
Will Stone. 4.13.10. Bucknell, Lands and Tenements to find a Priest. Laur.
Johnson. 5.6.8.
Oxfordshire. Cheping Norton. Trinity Guyld. Hamlet Malban. 6.0.0.
Herefordshire. Ayshewell. the Guyld. Thomas Day. 6.13.4.
Besides these and diverse others throughout the Land, continued, as may seem,
for the laying the first grounds of Religion and Orthography, the same most
Religious Prince, in lieu of many Country-Schools formerly suppressed, erected a
new several others in many Towns; in Sherbourne principally Dorsetshire, and
after that form Macclesfield, Cheshire. Chelmsford, Essex. Leominster,
Herefordshire. Grantham, Louth, Lincolnshire. Morpeth, Northumberland.
Shrewsbury, Shropshire. Bath, Bruton, Somersetshire. Stafford, Staffordshire.
S. Edmondsbury, Suffolk. Brymycham, Nun-Eaton, Warwickshire. Marlborough,
Wiltshire. Stourbridge, Worcestershire. Sedburgh, Yorkshire. All of them upon
considerable Revenue established: however partial any modern Historian has
appeard to the fame of that most worthily renowned Prince.

Under the Government of Queen Mary some Foundations were yet added: she was a
Lady not less accuratly bred then highly born. The unhappiness of her Reign
consisted in troubles from ill subjects; and, more in giving way to private
resentments, heightened by the Artifice of those men, who knew no way so
effectual to ingratiate themselves with a power they had abjured, as to be
officious in impeaching their Brethren more innocent then themselves: wherein
she hearkened to her own Princely motion, gave tokens of innate Clemency: zeal
for the Religion she professed, and a propension to favor whatever belonged to
learning. Banbury, Oxfordshire. Boston, Lincolnshire, may testify that: nor
would it be past over in silence, that the salaries of the Beadles in the
Universities are ftom her Royal donation.

. 16.
But a far greater accession came during the long and flourishing Reign of
Queen Elizabeth. This gracious Princess received the Crown from her Sister much
in debt, was embroyld in diverse and chargeable Wars; yet found such Blessing
upon her Councels and conduct, bore such piety and love to learning, that she
did in great measure effect what her Father had designed, and her Brother so
happily advanced. Her first liberality was, 1 Eliz.
to discharge Hospitals and Schools of first fruits and Tenths: after that, the
18 Eliz.
Statute of provision, by which all Colleges at this day subsist. Lastly, the
41 Eliz.
Act ordaining the Commission for Charitable Uses. A Seal of public Trust
added to all Charities: not long before her death. A law by which the Throne is
for ever warranted against Sacrilege, having appointed ordinary means to
redress abuses, the pious intention still preserved. But in particular her own
Royal Foundation the most famous School of Westminster: supplying a noble part
of each University bears witness to her zeal comprehensive of both: after
which munificence, I need not instance in lesser donations. This inclination of
her Majesty once known, excited like affection in her subjects of all ranks and
estates upon the first fervors of the Reformation: nor did Bishops only, and
men of dignity and place in the Church, but the secular Nobility also and
Gentry, the Judges, Mayors, and Aldermen, with the more wealthy Citizens, with
much devotion raise up monuments of their love to the places of their birth or
settlement, in making provision for their Instruction. And this Virgin Queen
may be observed in her Charters to such Corporations, to have taken a
particular delight in adopting those Foundations into her own Name, The Clergy
at Paris recommend to Hlodowig and Hlothar setting up three public Schools at
convenient parts of the Empire. Quoniam ex hoc facto and magna utilitas and
Honor Sanctae Dei Ecclesiae and vobis magnum mercedis Emolumentum and memoria
sempiterna accrescet. Council, Paris. Anno. 829.
being not ashamed, like a tender Mother, to take into her especial care the
breeding up the Children of her Country. Should I here recount by name the
several Schools by her endowed, augmented, or at least erected, I should
anticipate the greatest part of what History could follow. In a word, the Tax,
which at the beginning of her Reign had been laid upon Ecclesiastical benefices
for the maintenance of Students at the University, was no longer continued: so
far had the Church repaired her almost fatal Dissolution

. 17.
Not long after the Queens decease, some men of no mean reputation for Wisdom
and place, upon whatever occasion or ground of conjecture, represented these
foundations as too numerous. The great Advancer of learning, pursuant to that
presumption, labors with King James to disannul Suttons Will, as to that point
of the intended Teaching of Children. Upon such like suggestions was the
accomplished Sir Robert Dallington (as is said) really diverted from settling
twenty pound per annum on his fair School-house at Geddington in
Northamptonshire, where he was born. Now if such opinion took place so long
time since, which notwithstanding, Schools not a few have been erected in the
Reigns of King James, King Charles the first of blessed memory, and are daily
under our present Sovereign: with much more force ought it now to prevail.
There are yet living, who (as I am credibly informed) would have bestowed
Fellowships in the Universities, were they not dissuaded from that sort of
Charity by men on whose parts and integrity they repose entire confidence, as
having in other causes had experience of them. Diverse persons of Catholic
principles, who pay Reverence to Antiquity, submission to Councels and Canons,
who no less approve the Prudence then the zeal of Founders, as seeing great use
and necessity of Free-Schools, yet believe in process of time they may grow too
many; and from some occurring appearances, perhaps, they have been apt to
conclude that they are so: the resort of the whole Question is therefore,
whether the English Free Grammar-Schools be overproportion'd to the occasions
of the Church and State of England. The cause imports, especially the esteem of
later Founders, and direction of present Charity: but withal, it is exceeding
perplexed to state what professions have need of learning: and define within
what proportions of men any profession should be stinted. Then for Schools, to
compute their Number; distinguish of their nature, discover their true Revenue,
carries with it no small difficulty; yet more then all this must go to the
right determining the case proposed.

. 18.
The first necessity of raising Learned men, is for the Church. About 10000
Parishes in England and Wales duly to be supplied with Pastors. Add hereto
Dignities, Curacies, and whatsoever else may give Title to H. Orders; not
omitting the Plantations: the residue of Ecclesiastics has been judged some
5000 more. A great Harvest requires many Laborers. Those therefore that attend
on the preparatory part, Incumbents on Schools and Colleges in the Universities
would be not a few.

But might not the Collegiate and Cathedral Schools furnish sufficient to this
exigence? Those who understand what of these are remaining in England, whereof
some are little more then Choral, and what proportion of Scholars are
maintained in each of them, with the fall of places yearly, are convinced how
vastly short of the necessity that single supply must needs be: since in
Collegiate Schools, and their correlative Colleges, not the standing Bodies
come here to be considered, but the succession. Besides these therefore, in
succor to a Church left almost destitute at that juncture, several Country
Schools have been erected, not only in some Market Towns, but elsewhere: with
freedom to the poor Inhabitants, and convenience to those who need not make use
of that privilege. These provisions, as Rivulets scattered through the
Valleys, have rendered the breadth of the whole Land fruitful: which benefit
could not have been so conveniently derived from the greater collection of
seminaries; not upon Church Exhibitions, because an exhausted Church, in many
places scarce able well to sustain its Pastors, could ill defray the training
up such Students as should be for supply necessary: nor upon Pensions from
home, for, where Cures are great, and maintenance hardly competent, if the
Parent must purchase all at the full rate, the consequent Benefice would rarely
refund the charge of Boording abroad, and Schooling; both which circumstances
upon Free-schools inconsiderately diminished, have in themselves a manifest
tendency to render the Ministry of the Church of England impracticable.

. 19.
Nor would less dis-service redound to the state Civil then Ecclesiastic from
such diminution. Counselors at Law, whether civil or common, in a Nation ample
and mercantile, and in a Church aptly organized and ordered, cannot be a few:
and that Courts of judicature administer right judgment, would be, not in the
Law only, but in Arts of reasoning and utterance, not unlearned. The Militia
of the Bar is a standing Army by Parliament allowed: the surest Lifeguard of
King and People, since other force ordinarily in a well settled Government is
only to protect the Ministers of Justice, and execute their Decrees. As to
Stat 3. Jac. 7.
multiplying Lawsuits and immoderate charges, orders for the Regulation of
those Courts have in no small measure provided against them: though, I know
not, whither with some advantage, as to those points, in the Civil Law; where a
suspicious allegation is presently stifled by the Oath of Calumny, and the
Bills of Expense taxed by the Judge. But the decision of this I submit to the
impartial and more experienced: this insertion might have seemed foreign to my
Argument, had not the clamor against the Relatives and Retainers upon this
noble Faculty been so managed to the Odium of Schools, that it could not be
wholly omitted.

. 20.
There is another occasion for Learned men, which nearly concerns the welfare
of our State. In 25 populous Cities, and 52 Counties, Practitioners of Physic
may be some hundreds (there being Hospitals not fewer) whereof many have in
their life given proof of excellent learning, and at their death left estates
not inconsiderable.

These superior Faculties, as they consist of men to whom learning and
Industry, is of absolute necessity, raised Fortuns not always requisite; so
cannot they be well exercised without the ministry of subordinate Professions.
Attorneys, Sollicitors, Scrivenors, have their honest use. C. de Professorib.
and Medicis, l. 6. Medicos and maxim Archiatros.
The Justice of contracts is best preserved by those that are least distracted
from attendance on their private occasions: and must Lawyers and Justices of
Peace have no Clerks, (to omit the Clerks of several offices in Courts of
Judicature) or must means of their Education be withheld? nay, the Nobility
and Gentry require servants of different abilities; and education. The Doctors
credit, and what of more momenr depends upon it, the life of the Patient may
miscarry through the ignorance of an Apothecary: and the Surgeon by foreign
discourses be more accomplished. Booksellers, Printers, have been for learning
very famous and Instrumental to it: briefly, knowledge of Grammar is of use in
Navigation and in Travel, and in most of the politer Handicrafts, in its
degree; for (as the Vitruvius of Architecture Book 1 Chapter 1.
Roman Surveyor says) an Architect neither is nor should be as good a
Grammarian as Aristarchus, yet not illiterate: nor as good a Musician as
Aristoxenus, yet not unmusical: nor as good a Limner as Apelles, yet not
unskilful at designing: nor as good a Founder as Myron or Polycletus, yet not
ignorant of the way of moulding: nor again, as good a Physician as Hippocrates,
yet not unacquainted with the Grounds of Physic: nor in the other Faculties
singularly eminent, but not ignorant of them: even in hedging and ditching men
of improved sense and forecast, that comprehend Lines and Numbers, and Seasons,
will be Master Workmen among the other Laborers: nor is it for the particular
or public more advantageous, that any who may honestly hope to arrive at the
Grand Jury-man, or to assist in the Government of his Corporation, be a mere
Plough-man or Grazier.

. 21.
What has been on this occasion by some alleged, that a surcharge of poor
Scholars draws inconveniencys with it to the public must reasonably be
allowed. The consequences are doubtless bad enough. All is summed up in this.
Too many Ecclesiastics must either amortise an over-proportion of the Land,
which creates envy, or live indigent, which exposes to contempt. But here it
is worthy to be considered, whether the case may not so fall out, that
necessary emploiment may be wider then competent maintenance. Concilium
Rhemense primum An. 813. cap. 27. Ut in civitatibus and Monasteriis non major
numerus servientium Deo mittatur quam possibilitas eis ministrandi fuerit.
Counsels do provide, that in Monasteries and religious Houses greater numbers
be not maintained then the means of the place will support: nor Clerks
multiplied beyond the occasion of their Churches. But here the same Cure of
souls remains, as when the Church-Revenue was greater. This condition deserves
pity, not scorn; rather that the poor Vicarages be augmented, then the Vicars
diminished. In this low estate that many Congregations are not left destitute
of the means of public worship, and all the benefits that accompany it, is, in
great measure, owing to the opportunities of learning, so largely provided by
charitable benefactions: so that they who would depopulate the Clerks, are
fellow-laborers with such as would exterminate the Priests and Bishop. In
Israel a twelfth part served at the Altar, and was instated in a tenth part of
the increase of the Land. An unlimited proportion of attendants on the work of
the Temple might divert from the function of the Magistracy, the exercise of
Arts and Labor, and the guard of the Country.

. 22.
But that England should be overstock'd with Scholars for the occasions of the
Land, is not sufficiently concluded from the late civil Commotions: if we will
be still looking abroad for the causes of divine displeasure, it is precarious
to fix it upon this Education. Grand Authors of the Troubles were Politicians
of a higher form; and noted Officers that executed their designs were many men
illiterate, pure Instruments, beneath such ingenuous breeding. Besides, if some
bred up under this discipline have failed of their duty, through a deceived or
depraved judgment, notwithstanding all engagements to the public and long
habit of private obedience; must the Master be censured? as though the Minister
or Magistrate reclaimed all,

Nor yet can this assertion be certainly collected from our present Divisions,
the equally pernicious effects of those dismal Distractions: for as through the
divine goodness in these benefactions no remarkable failleur appears among us
in the carrying on his public service, so need not any certainly that are in
holy Orders be unemploy'd, if in the common Faith there were Unity of Affection.

. 23.
Neither can this excess of learned men be necessarily inferred from the
discontents of others. Much heed should not be given to casual complaints of
such who are always apt to conceive their proceeding short of their merit. For
whither should we turn over these supernumerary Scholars? To the more
profitable Plough? Alas! Corn is a Drug. Farmers through up their Leases, they
are so undon with Plenty. To grazing? Wool bears no price in the Market. But
yet to other more beneficial Manufactures, the Tailer, the Hatter, the Weaver,
others; these abound with men, want work. All Trades think themselves
overstock'd: some have fancied the World to be so, that if men did not in Wars
kill one another, they must eat one another. This supposition may yet be
perhaps ill-grounded. All men are not thriving in any profession. Some in all
would live alone upon the Earth. Magistrates here moderate and by the Prudence
of their Orders remove obstructions to Trade, that Work be not wanting to the
Industrious; as also provide encouragements for Industry, that Laborers be not
wanting to the Work.

. 24.
Neither yet can this abundance of Scholars be enough evidenced from the
multitude of Country Free-Grammar-Schools: for, if the matter be nearly
regarded, many of these Foundations by their constitution or narrow Revenue are
only Nurseries of Piety and Letters, as preparatory to Trade. This
discrimination in every County duly made, would depress the swellings of minds
possessed with prejudice arising from the growing numbers of these Houses of all
sorts, yet supposed to prepare men for an unactive Life only. A wise
Commissary will soon discern what passes barely for muster, from what is firm
and effective. Some Counties, both in England and Wales, slenderly provided of
the conveniences of this Education. In Wales, where some Counties have good
establishments, others not any, yet that defect is in no small measure repaired
by the Marches, well fortified with these Foundations in more then ordinary
number, through Herefordshire, Shropshire and the rest: elsewhere in England a
Free School, sometimes not erected, or without Scholar, or without
School-house, or unendow'd, or with incompetent endowment, or arbitrary for a
Towns convenience, and revocable at the Patrons pleasure: some wholly, very
many in part, having stocks to bind out for Husbandry or Trade. At best, the
maintenance but of very few in a County, such as may vindicate Masters from
being necessitous and contemptible; of the rest scarce what may invite the
able, and give them freedom to be diligent. This preparation is not like to
give terror to the State, though the provision may minister some relief to the
Church.

. 25.
Whether it were Hen. 8. by dissolving Monasteries, and alienating their
possessions: or his Norman and Saxon Predecessors that erected them, and by
the Indulgence of Popes annexed Benefices to them, made their Lands Tith-free,
or occasioned the Tith of them to be redeemed at a mean composition; whether of
these parties it was that impoverished the Church, is controverted. Farther how
far what is devoted to God upon false suggestions is confiscable to the King.
Again legal settlements upon the faith of Kings and Popes how advisable it was
to move, I suppose the privy Counsel then concluded for Church-revenues granted
to Votaries tith-free, were in effect so to their Tenants, who also upon the
attainder of their Landlords had the opportunity of praeemption. But to pass
over these nice points. The Free-Schools have bred up such Pastors as have
much dispelled the ignorance that had overspread the whole Church: and with
the better men cut of that entail of contempt under which the Parochial Curat
so long lay.

And indeed had Free-Schools furnished meaner Vicarages only, they might then
have been born with silence: but from these Nurseries have been sometimes taken
such who passing through subordinate steps of preferment have been at length
seated in the highest pitch of Ecclesiastical Dignity; the Seat of Princes.
Archbishops have founded Free-Schools; and if Piety, Prudence and Learning by
their King approved have advanced any to that Seat which at times has becn
with like Virtues adorned by Persons of Noble and Royal extraction, what room
is left for envy? By such steps have others ascended in the State to great
Trust. Why then should it seem cause of offense to any that in a matter of
highest moment to be managed with Prudence and Courage the scrutiny should not
always run upon favor or wealth? Princes would not be confined to employ men
of title or money, but in some Affairs of State require abilities well purchased
at the expense of both the other. Should then the Lord of all have less choice
in his Ministers? Indeed if the certain labors and danger of the Sacred
Function be put in the Balance with the possible honor and profits, there is
no place for just resentment that either Nobles or the sons of the Menu (as one
styles those that are born of the Commonalty) should partake of both
indifferently.

This place seems proper to rectify an opinion about the multitude of poor
conceived to be bred up to Learning. That I may keep close to our age and
Nation, the Gentry, the Plebeians, and the poor considered, of those that come
to the University, the poor Servitour in all Colleges is for number
inconsiderable. The Plebeian, that is, son of the Yeoman or Tradesman, not
many, and for subsistence oftentimes not worst provided for. May not then this
ungentle Reflection, however let fly, light upon the younger Sons of the Gentry.
There are Privileges in the way of an ingenuous Education allowed the poor, and
since upon the issue of an unnatural War, or otherwise; many Families of
Gentlemen may have rendered their Children honestly poor, nothing but an
aversness to learning can dispauper them. But suppose we otherwise. Obscurity
of birth is no Canonical obstruction. The poor received the Gospel: and sure
they that receive it, may deliver it. There is an honest ambition in many of
mean Fortune: Generous seeds which would be cherished. The Jewish Doctors
enjoin Children be taught a Trade: but above all Trades the Law. The better
gifts all should follow: though all cannot in the same degree obtain.

. 26.
The temper of the world in variety of dispositions as in diversity of Sexes is
ordered by a Providence more then human. But, besides our own inclinations, the
will of Parents, our fortunes narrow or over-large alike avert from attendance
on studies, and determine our counsels so, that we are disposed by a choice
mixed, with necessity. But work to be sure directs as to the number of
Laborers, though ordinarily reward excite industry. He that says England is
over-stock'd with Scholars for the proportion of its preferments, and for its
employment for Lettred Persons, would do well seriously to consider who may
with any right be termed a Scholar: what is to a modest mind preferment: and
how large the employment for Lettred Persons is in so great a Church and State.
Suppose we therefore first adult proficients, such as are fit to be employed
and may need as well as deserve, to be preferred to a subsistence: what, I mean,
may not discredit their profession, and may comfort them in their labors. Then,
not insisting, at present, upon other of the superior Faculties, regard we
nearly the occasions of Divinity. This Emploiment is large; as conversant about
diverse Millions of Persons in England and Wales. It is of necessity; as wherein
the care of Souls is concerned. It must be performed with diligence; fidelity
and prudence, as being the Lords work. Compute we therefore the yearly number
of Inceptours in Arts in the Universities: in both perhaps about three hundred
by which number 15000 Incumbencies or Titles being divided, will produce a
Quotient of more years then Masters, after their commencing do usually attain
unto: in which the Succession of Ministers circulates. But must the collation
of H. Orders, or benefices be restrained to degrees? What the Canons of the
Church and Statutes of the Realm, have not positively enjoined neither does
this disquisition suggest: but because some knowledge in Languages and Arts
with skill in the H. Scriptures has been ever accounted preparatory to the
Ministry; because proficiency cannot amongst us be otherwise more publicly
known, and because dignities have been usually conferred upon those, who by this
means have been found eminent, I know no Argument in this case more decretory.
This also, with other proofs, Bishops do respect as a good testimonial: and
Archbishop Chichley did in his time order that Livings of the greater value
should be conferred on Persons that had taken the higher degrees.

Before this account pass for evidence it may reasonably be demanded whether
many are not used in the Church before any of the complete degrees taken. To
which this reply will be offered, that if many leave the University before the
taking of such Degree, and enter upon emploiment, a great part of them
afterward return to take it: the rest were they not straightened in maintenance
or perhaps encumbered with domestical cares would proceed; and therefore,
further, toward satisfying the demand, if we resume the former calculation,
not one in five will be found to arrive at 50 years Master: so large is the
period of succession assigned. Indeed the matter in question is in its own
nature incapable of full demonstration because the term of Life is uncertain.
Such estimate however as may nearest approach truth is needful to direct
practice. And, unless a Paralogism can be discovered in the present account, it
will remain highly probable that there are not too many Scholars in England for
the necessary emploiment for lettred Persons, whatever the provision for them
be.

. 27.
Neither want there grounds of conjecture that the number of
Free-Grammar-Schools is not excessive, else what means it that so many private
ones are every where judged allowable? that diverse Parishes find themselves
necessitated to entertain Masters upon a voluntary contribution? no specious
reasoning can conclude against experience. With far greater reason do the
Canons of our Church give liberty to all Vicars and Curats to take out a
license to teach Grammar. And the Canon Law forbids under severe penalties the
not granting freely, that is without purchase, such license to any R. Moses ben
Maimon. tract. de studio legis. cap. 2. Sect 6. Crescat Lex and magnificetur.
person duly qualified desiring it. Much better Catholics are they therefore
that have promoted the good institution of many by providing maintenance for
Teachers, then those who being otherwise dispos^d propagate evil surmises to
the disparagement of these Charities, and avert the purposes of such who had
intended further encouragement to Learning.

. 28.
Free-Schools not too many! (will they say) the case is plain, for where are
there any such in England? Hereupon with heat enough urge the intention of
Donors every where abused: salaries paid, yet tutorage, for all that, no where
remitted: not without some imputation upon Masters, as from the Canon Law of a
certain species of simony: but, as to this, more cannot in equity be desired
then that the number of Free Scholars be proportioned to the Revenue: Joannes
de Turrecremata sup. Decr. 2. Part. in c. non solum. 1. q. 3. Si Magistris
praefatis non sufficiant stipendia Ecclesiae vel si etiam nullum stipendium
habent ab Ecclesia possunt exigere salarium moderatum: and si sponte offertur,
possunt accipere, etiamsi sua sibi sufficiant.
if the maintenance be not competent, Masters may require moderat consideration
for their Labor: what is offered, they may receive; however sufficient their
allowance be. Only provided that they regard the poor with equal diligence,
and affection as any others what ever they pay: Charity would not that the
painful Teacher be over-burthen'd to ease the Glossa in pauperes gratis
instrueret. Divitibus gratis laborem suum impendere non tenetur. The Master may
impart his doctrine freely, yet set a price on his Labor. The Lawyer rightly
demands his see for pleading. The Judge, Witness, Lawfully demand their charges
to be born. The Bishop his procuration at Visitations de cr. l. 2. tit. 26. Cum
ex officii.
Rich Scholar: nor that the means intended for his relief be made a pretense to
oppress him: but rather that a 1. q. 1. cap. qui studet Gloss. in sanitatis.
Magister non recipit pecuniam pro scientia, quam dat, sed pro labor vel
honor, sicut propheta recipit. Gloss. Decret. B. 5. Tit. 5. cap. de Magist.
etc. Beneficium ei constitui debet secundum dignitatem and scientiam suam sicut
advocatis.
Honorary be set him out according to his dignity and knowledge. The Prudence
as well as Piety of some Bishops has appeared in deciding this controversy,
where the stipend has been narrow, and the freedom expressed in terms not
particular; they have limited the number of such as should enjoy it to a just
proportion. Arts, and Sciences, and Faculties, have Analogy with gifts
Spiritual, and therefore the Law which enjoins to impart our Temporals to such
as have communicated their Spirituals to us holds in the Catechist as well as
in the Priest: indeed the same Peter is Pastor of the Lambs as of the Sheep.
And after a sort one lot is common to the Schoolmaster and the Minister; the
flock, the warfare, the labor, the hope not unlike: but to dwell upon this
subject might incur a sinister interpretation. The more ingenuous of this Land,
such as have regard to Learning, are not wont to undervalue the right manners
of their Children nor the Tutors pains. The rest nothing can reconcile to put
their Sons to that way of breeding, but a visible assurance that it shall in
the issue turn to more advantage then it is ordinarily seen to do.

. 29.
The connection between Church and State has rightly been observed to be
intimate: their interest, inseparable: their growth, state and declination
uniform: and the crisis of both in the neglect or favor extended to Schools.
Learning, the Nurse of Civility and Religion, is ordinarily found in
flourishing Empire: whether as cause or effect, or rather as being mutually
productive each of the other; whereas in extreme degeneracy of manners a
contempt of Teachers of its own nature and merit tends to farther calamity.
Sueton. Aug. 42
Augustus founder of the Roman Empire protected Professors. Id. Domit. 10.
Domitian the later Nero and last Emperor of the Flavian Family banished
Philosophers the Town. Trajan, Hadrian, Antonine the Philosopher, and Alexander
Severus all of them men of refind parts, and eminent for encouraging Lettr'd
Persons; were also not unsuccessful in their Government. Sextus Aurelius
Victor, and Paulus Diaconus.
Licinius insense against Letters (which not for want of ignorance he would
call the very bane and plague of the State) especially the pleading in Courts
of Judicature, and withal the Christian faith, through his boisterous and
brutish valor, being of rude and rustical extraction embroyled his Country in
Civil Wars, and with the blood of many thousand Citizens, and his own, quenched
those fiery Persecutions which had for several Ages tried the Church as in a
furnace. C. de Professoribus and Medicis. l. 6. Medicos and maxim Archiatros.
Constantine the founder of New Rome, and who rendered the Empire Christian
favored Learning. A Decree of his is extant whereby having granted Physicians,
and especially Doctors that waited in Ordinary on the Emperor, or that had
waited in Ordinary on the late Emperors, Grammarians and other Professors of
Learning with Doctors of Law to be free from all public charges with their
Wives, Children and all they possess, not to be burdened with free quarter in
the Provinces, nor to bear office, nor to be arrested, nor impanel'd, nor bound
to any Personal appearance, nor molested (otherwise the Delinquent to be
punished at the Judges discretion) he further adds his command, that their
wages and salaries be effectually paid that so they may with more liberty
attend the breeding up many in liberal Sciences and the Arts above mentioned.
Ammian. Marcellin. B. 21. Illud autem inclemens, obruendum perenni silentio,
quo, etc. Greg. Naz. Stelit. 1.
Julian the Apostate, by an ungratious edict, worthy to be wrapped up in eternal
silence, shut up Schools against the Christians, and prohibited all Masters of
Rhetoric and Grammar to teach any of that Profession those Arts and Faculties
which he fondly termed peculiar to the Greek, as he would have meant, Heathen,
but his fall in Persia proved infamous to the Roman name. On the other side C.
de Professoribus and Medicis. L. 11. Grammaticos, Oratores, atque Philosophiae
professores.
Theodosius the Great settled large immunities on Students. Afterward upon the
incursion of the Northern nations, while Schools were either wholly neglected,
or not competently encouraged (for both failings in their degree redound upon
the public) into what barbarity of Learning, manners and Religion did Europe
soon revolt? and was not the study of the Holy Scriptures, the integrity and
Truth of divine service at once with good Arts and Disciplines restored? A
passage which shall be subjoined take only as an Argument of that light esteem
of this calling which is easy to be impressed upon the Vulgar by men true to
their own interests at the hazard of others reputation. The ingenious Boccace
in his Decameron; the first days discourse Edition at Venice, Anno 1552.
Novel 4. had told a Tale of a Monk that having fallen into a sin deserving the
most grievous punishment yet with credit saved himself from suffering any at
all, by recriminating upon his Abbot, the very same fault. This foul charge the
Inquisitors appointed by Pius V. thought no ways expedient to remain upon the
file to the scandal of the Brotherhood as taxing the Luxury of Friars in an
Author so much in the hands of all Italy, and the most neighboring Countries,
and therefore having eras'd Monk and Abbot they dexterously substituted Scholar
and Master: as though that Relation were less sacred. Not to aggravate this
disreputation beyond the jest, imposed more to the convenience of the relators
then the merit of the Subject defamed; they who should go about to persuade a
suppression or diminution of Country Grammar Schools in England besides that
they seem not duly to have examined the occasions of this Church: so neither
understand they the temper of our Kings and People; donations however small
have been in good measure rescued from the dissolutions of Religious Houses and
preserved amidst the Sales of Fee-farm Rents: nay, even in the late Invasion of
Church and Crown Lands. Kings of Spain know best what matters are inconvenient
and prejudicial to their Kingdom. Perhaps their Schools might be too many. The
same degree of Light is not convenient to all eyes. Perhaps else their state
has not thrived the better since the diminution of them. Kings of England have
graffed upon these Policies, this conscience; that their Subjects pay them a
rational obedience: that they ground their Faith upon principles of sound
knowledge: and where men have failed of duty, their cause has been pleaded by
a superior power: so that in the issue, those principles and that reason of
their subjects however a while clouded through prejudices, or through wrong
insinuations seduced, has returned upon them more powerful, then standing
Armies: has struck the Top-gallant of their ill-Victorious Fleets to waft home
their natural Sovereign and the Royal Family: nor can there any surer pledge be
given for a durable Loyalty to be transmitted to posterity then a Conscience
rightly informed by good education.

. 30.
Since then the Crown of England has been so munificent in erecting, so chaste
in preserving the Schools of this Land with their Revenues: since the Lords
both Spiritual and Temporal with the people of diverse ranks, have with no small
success carried on the work: this work so necessary to the Church and
beneficial to the State, let not our ingratitude retard or frustrate. There are
corners of the Land yet but thinly furnished with these helps. There arise also
not seldom persons touched with strong inclinations of disposing some portion
of what means God has blessed them with, to such use as may best serve their
Country. Amongst other charities, some are apt to conceive what is extended to
children, to be to the public, not the least fruitful, and to them most
helpful, especially wherein it improves them in knowledge, and good manners:
and thereupon would determine upon that object, if the occasion were evident.
Now if convenient place offer, as such foundations have been argued, to bring a
local and public benefit, so that they do not necessarily overstock the Land
with Scholars, but rather improve such as shall design that way, this instance
may render somewhat probable: that from those Counties where are hardly any
Free-Schools, there come not the fewest Scholars to the University, though not
allways so well grounded as where better means of Learning is publicly
afforded.

. 31.
Now as prime Founders are worthy to be had in perpetual and blessed memory; so
following Benefactors, which have left any Augmentation of Revenue, deserve no
less to be celebrated for their like pious affection. Were the particular
salaries of Masters throughout the Land, as in a Table set forth, it is not to
be feared least their ample patrimony should excite the Covetousness or Envy of
the Reader: nothing rather might seem a more effectual motive to the well
disposed to enlarge their beneficence, then the weighing the assiduous labors
of Teachers against their incompetent maintenance. Be it the condition
ordinarily does not require those large expenses which higher Stations exact:
yet to be abbridg^d in necessaries, must needs discourage labor: and the mind
under daily distractions can less intend its more desirable charge. Add hereto
the manifold indecencies of indigence in the exercise of the meanest authority,
accompanied with many temptations: nothing is of its own nature more expensive
then want: whether it seek out diversion from the importunities of care, or
call in foreign aids to repress the insults of danger. The divine providence
is not to be limited, nor yet tempted. He that can work above or without means,
yet requires of us all possible endeavor after honest means. Should I perchance
here intimate that the straightened Laborer is some object of pity, especially
in Towns populous well traded and replenished with youth, where the number of
Scholars cannot be well taught without an Assistant; when the stipend already
appointed is but tolerable living for one man; the train of this Discourse,
would by no means be interpreted to reflect on the munificence of first Donors.
It is well known what was really plentiful in our forefathers days, is now
become really less then sufficient, nor would it be understood to move a
promiscuous and unseasonable compassion. The Nobility and Gentry of this Land,
would be found upon the review; to have been greatly favorable to Scholars; but
since the furies of these Civil-Wars, Domestical wounds bleed inwardly. The
rude have run down the ingenuous. Only the Prince and an industrious Age can
cure these breaches. Other Laborers there are, who may come in for share of
relief. The sum of this discourse is, that, whosoever are so disposed, and with
whose particular affairs it may comport, be assured, that among their other
Charities, whatsoever they bestow in Augmentation of poor Schoolmasters
living, is not unacceptable to him who has ordained that whosoever labors,
should upon his labors competently subsist.

. 32.
Then, because want of sufficient maintenance, and consequently of like
Residence at the University renders men less firmly grounded in Arts and
Divinity; and thereby less capable of serving Church and State to that degree
which otherwise they might: not only those Kings, Prelates, and other Nobles,
who have largely endowed ample Colleges, deserve honorable commemoration with
posterity; but such other Patriots, who of less abundance have yet conferred to
the maintenance of one or more Students at the University. Upon which this
twofold question may arise, whether such Exhibitions as are appropriated to a
School, County, or certain Counties; or such other as are indefinitly given
without limitation of place, be more conducible to the public. Again, whether
such as are for a certain term of years, or those as to time undetermined. The
question is not, but that the will of Donors be kept inviolable. Local
Benefactions were given out of peculiar respect to the inhabitants of such
place to which the Benefactor was some way related: but over and above these,
some men of enlarged fortunes and spirits, have out of regard to their whole
Country left full choice of their Exhibitioners to the free discretion of their
Feoffees. Again, Temporary provisions at a certain period expiring, engage the
Pensioner to seek out early emploiment, and returning upon others, communicate
the beneficence to a greater breadth: though the longer the term is, they more
assist to maturity and constancy of judgment, so that Exhibitions of shortest
date may be said most to mul^iply Scholars, while the perpetual may more
advance Learning. And were there more of these Exhibitions, whether to Schools
or Counties, or otherwise unlimited then as to the character of the receiver
for a competent time, or till preferment to sufficient maintenance in the
judgment of the Trustees, perhaps, we should not have more Scholars, but more
Graduates: fewer virulent invectives and unlearned disputations about nice
questions, to distract and grieve the consciences of those whom they should
rather support and direct: which may probably have contributed to that opinion,
as if there were already too many Scholars.

As to the greater Schools whereon any Exhibitions are settled, the very
expectation of the reward draws resort thither, and excites an emulation in
Learning and good deportment. This extends a benefit farther then what the
actual Exhibitioners receive, and is a Lottery in truth without hazard. As the
use of Prize-Plates in a County is not terminated in the pleasure or profit of
Victory, but propagates a love and care of that generous exercise of
Horse-man-ship throughout the whole Land against necessary occasions, and upon
any sudden emergency: nor do these provisions, nor would they, were they more
numerous then they yet are (respect being still had to the Country wherein we
live) burden the Land with multitude of unnecessary Scholars, but furnish the
functions both of Church and State after their several capacities with apt
Instruments without impeachment to the Rich and Noble, who stand always
recommended by their more benign Stars whenever they please to offer
themselv's to undergo the fatigues of preparation and business.

. 33.
And could indeed the Education in Free-Schools approve its qualification so
that the Gentry who now frequently judge themselves under a necessity of
entertaining a Tutor at great charge in their own houses, or of boarding their
Sons abroad at rates answerable to their quality, might be induced to trust
their Children in their Town-School whereof they likely are Governor, then
would they augment the stipend of the Master with the diminishing of their own
expenses. A Gentle-mans Son in a Free School, if of his Town, converses with
Neighbors, or perhaps Tenants Children; receives respect, returns courtesy:
political virtues less capable of being exercised in a Parity, grows into an
habitual esteem among his People, and is so much the greater as he is known to
be such by those, who are conscious of their own meanness and distance. Having
escaped from the indulgence of Parents, and flattery of servants, he is not
translated into a select Society, being unacquainted with emulations and
formalities, unwary of friendships, only durable till by respective interests
divided; but betimes engages in a mixed conversation, the true image of life:
here strips himself, I mean, to severe labor: with his form as in a ring, takes
the place due to his Industry, not his Birth, and begins to see somewhat in
persons of lower fortunes worthy to be honored. Moves strongly after wisdom,
whether born on by the press, or himself, leading a troop of Fellow-students:
profits by the praises, reproofs, admonitions made to others; nay, the very
dross of vulgar rudeness and misdemeanor, the only momentous dissuasive from a
promiscuous breeding, even that will make his domestical virtuous education
shine the brighter, and by the punishment of others, he will stand corrected or
confirmed in good habits, and stick the closer to them as to his chief security
when afterward he comes into the World. Judicious Persons, such as these
Parents generally are, cannot affect to purchase this separate way of Breeding,
because private Masters are in less subjection, or dwell better. The room for
study is but a sojourning, not an habitation, its meanness the more endears the
Parents house. Other arguments, I think, weigh to the advantage of the public,
if the Master be allowed of parts and discretion: now Country Foundations are
not seldom provided with Teachers, that have been bred up themselves in the
greater and Collegiat Schools, or otherwise very sufficient.

. 34.
One word, though possibly not required, may yet not unseasonably be here
interposed. These measures of reasoning would not be too boldly extended to the
Nobility. They are designed for highest Operations in the State: born Peers of
the Realm: the most ancient and presiding part of the great Council of the
Kingdom. Their Honor and Interest in the Country safe and planted, so that what
is prudent in the best of the Commonalty may not be ordinate to their Affairs.
A pale not of caution only, but of Veneration is to be set about them: and
therefore they may challenge a Privilege of peculiar education. Domestical, if
they judge it expedient: though were the Annals of Eaton, Westminster, and
Winch^ster extant, not excluding some other Schools of note, many very
excellent personages of the Nobility, would stand recorded in those places
where with Arts and Languages they received those deferences which their
Honorable Birth might justly require, and were instructed what offices of duty
or civility, from them especially, would be expected: there have they
understood in the prime Master of Latin comedy improved, poor old Hegio
bespeaking the great and wealthy Demea Terent. Adelph. Act. 3. Sc. 4. V. 56; 7,
8, 9.
Quam vos facillime agitis, quam estis maxume,
Potentes, dites, fortunati, nobiles;
Tam maxume vos aequo animo aequa noscere
Oportet, si vos voltis perhiberi prob^s.
As best you are to pass, as you are most
Potent, Rich, Honorable, High of blood,
So you of all men should be most content,
Reason to do, if you would pass for good.


There have they drawn from the fountain Sarpedons speech to Glaucus (it is
rendered out of Greek from the Prince of Poets in an English Paraphrase by the
late most ingenious Sir John Denham.)

Homer II. 12. from V. 310. to V. 329. (...); etc.
Divine Sarpedon, since he did not find
Others as great in place, as great in mind.
Above the rest, why is our Pomp, our Power,
Our flocks, our herds, and our possessions more? etc.
But that as well in danger, as degree,
We stand the first; that when our Lycians see,
Our brave examples, they admiring say,
Behold our gallant Leaders! These are they
Deserve the greatness; and unenvied stand:
Since what they act, transcends what they command etc.
. 35.
But, to digress no longer from the straight course of this Inquisition; resume
we what even just before came cross into observation that the fruit of Country
Schools in good measure depends upon an opinion of the Master, to the Electors
of whom more then truth and honesty is required: therefore prudent Founders
have been circumspect as to that point; and where certain Townsmen upon the
place have been allowed most proper Governors as to the management of the
Revenue, and Execution of the Statutes, yet Colleges in one of the Universities
have been judged sometimes more competent Patrons, and rather with the
Diocesan, consulted in the compiling those Ordinances of Government: for
instance in Advised by Letter, from the Reverend Doctor David Morton, of Saint
John's College in Cambrige Fellow.
one College.

That eminent School of Shrewsbury when it was first founded by King Edw. 6. by
procurement of Mr. Edwards (ancestor to Sir Francis now living in the College)
had an upper and under Master only, nominable by the Bailiffs and Burgesses of
the Town of Salop, who had also power of making ordinances for Government of
the School and salaries of the Masters, yet with advise of the Lord Bishop of
Coventry and Lichfield. But when afterward Q. Elizabeth visited the place upon
occasion, a fairer establishment was made for 4 Masters and a Catechist. In
drawing up the orders the Head Master used (who had been instrumental in
procuring the new settlement) with the advice also and authority of the then
Bishop of Coventry and Lichfield: this was done upon better stipends for all
the Masters; and uses appointed for the stock remanent or surplusage. But what
directly concerns the purpose of this allegation in this following Article;
that, when any of the 3 first Schoolmasters places shall be void, the Bailiffs
(now Mayor) of the Town shall within 20 days after notice to them (or him)
given, make advertisement thereof to the Master and Fellows of Saint John's
College in Cambridge, with request to them to elect and send to the said
Bailiffs (now Mayor) one able, meet, and apt Person for that purpose. The
Composition runs thus. 1 One born in the Town of Salop, the Legitimate Son of a
Burgess there and having been a Scholar in the Free-Schoole; in defect whereof.
2 One born within the Franchises of the said Town Legitimate Son of a Burgess,
and that has been a Scholar also in the same School. 3 One born in the County
of Salop (the preference given to Cherbury and brought up in the same School. 4
One born in any other County the preference always had to such as have been of
the School. The Schoolmaster so nominated by the Master and Fellows of Saint
John's College Cambridge shall be allowed and sworn by the Bishop of Coventry
and Lichfield, and afterward by the Bailiffs (now Mayor) of the Town, who if
they have reasonable cause to mislike him, shall certify such cause of their
mislike, to the said Master and Fellows who are then to proceed to a new
election in form abovesaid.

In Sedburgh Yorkshire founded by Roger Lupton Doctor of the Canon Law and
Provost of Eaton, the Master and Fellows of Saint John's College in Cambridge
are always to nominate and elect a Master within a Month after every vacancy
certified; upon default the Governors with the consent of the Diocesan for that
turn elect.

In Pocklington, the same County of Yorkshire, the Free School founded by John
Dowman (or Dolman) Doctor of Laws, and Archdeacon of Suffolk at first
entrusted to the Master, Wardens and Brethren of the Guild there: upon that
Dissolution was by Act of Parliament. 5 Edw. 6 so far transferred to the Master
and Fellows of Saint John's College in Cambridge that the Nomination of
Schoolmaster within two Months after vacancy belongs to them which otherwise
for the turn lapses to the Lord Arch Bishop of York.

In Rivington Lancashire, founded by James Pilkington Bishop of Durham the
Governors within 6 weeks after the vacancy of a Master recommend to the Master
and Fellows of the same Saint John's 2 persons who have been Students in either
of the Universities for 4, or 3 years at the least, of the Age of 24 years; one
of which the said Master and Fellows are to elect.

In Stamford Lincolnshire, founded by Master William Radcliffe of that Town,
the Mayor with the advice and consent of the Master of Saint John's in Cambridge
appoint the Schoolmaster there.

In Spalding in the same County founded by Mr. John Gamlin and Mr. John Banks
if the 4 Governors or major part of them fail to elect a Schoolmaster within
40 days after vacancy, the Master and Senior Fellows of the same St. John's
shall nominate and appoint a fit man Schoolmaster there.

Lastly, in Aldenham Hertfordshire, founded by Richard Plat Citizen and Brewer
London. The Master was appointed at first to be chosen by the Masters, Wardens
and Assistants of the Company of Brewers London, the Governors of the School at
a Court wherein 12 or more shall be assembled, by an Instrument dated June 1.
41 Eliz. but, upon later thoughts, by a new Instrument dated Nov. 28. 43 Eliz.
the aforesaid Governors are bound within 14 days after notice of the Avoydance,
or sooner, to direct their Letters under their common Seal to the Master and
Fellows of St. John's Camb. to desire them to commend to their Election and
nominate within one month after, 3 Masters of Arts, one of which is to be
chosen by them. After this why should I mention Sydney Sussex College for
Houghton Conquest? why Emanuel fot Godmanchester? why Trinity Coll. for
Stevenage Hartfordshire, for Vtoxeter, Staffordshire? or what need I dilate in
Oxford upon New College for Adderberry or for the nomination of two for Them
whereof the Lord Norris elects one? upon Corpus Christi for Chelt'nham? upon
Queens College for Childrey Barkshire, Norleech Gloucestershire, Appleby
Westmoreland? upon Brazen-nose for Charleberry, Steeple-Ashton Oxfordsh.
Middleton Lancashire? The sum of this large enumeration would amount to this
inference; that the annexing the Patronages of Country Free-Schools to several
Houses in one or the other University has been experienced mutually
beneficial: and may be practiced under such articles of composition, as that
the Towns may reserve what real privilege of presentation they can value, and,
what is of greatest import, secure an able Master, while at the same time they
communicate to such Hall or College the collation of their School, the resort
of their Exhibitioners: and as they may pleasure them with the supplying of
Pensioners, so may no doubt at times be pleasur'd in the having their hopeful
poor Scholars received. The connection between Collegiat Schools and their
correlative Colleges conduces to their common good, and evinces that there are
cases, wherein restraint may be to advantage: though neither would that be so
rigid as that the pension presently desert him, who upon some farther step of
advancement removes from that Roof. Since the attacking small Exhibitions to
inconvenient Houses, is, by an incompetent provision to avert the Receiver from
the pursuit of a reasonable subsistence; but this cause having different merits
nor to be determined by any general rule of practice would be reserved entire
to the discretion of the Trustees. What has been thus freely discoursed would
be understood strictly of Country Schools, since all Corporations stand not in
the same terms for skill, or choice of candidates as do Collegiat Churches and
Ecclesiastical Patrons or Noblemen, or the greater Companies of London.

. 36.
But let, whatsoever circumspection may, be granted in the choosing, this good
opinion can be no otherwise durable then in the right comportment of Town and
Master, each with the other. In all conditions of life regarding settlement and
society this observation or experiment universally recurs that a fair esteem
may be acquired from abroad, must be maintained at home. Now that a Master be
able, of sound principles, and good example is supposed: that he be diligent in
laying the Foundations of Religion, and of Arts and Sciences is required: (a
task which Conscience and Affection to the work can only make easy.) And which
will not want its reward: that he be dextrous in Teaching and Sagacious in
discerning the temper of his Scholars are felicities of nature, yet improveable
by experience. Now the former of these being secured, as to the two latter
there is a latitude may be safely allowed. A growing Teacher, is not to be
despised. And perhaps such difference is not with reason insisted upon by all.
True, Alexander the Great would not sit to any but Apelles, nor be cast in
Brass by any other, but Lysippus: and though every ones darling, be his little
Alexander, yet every Age and Place cannot furnish him an Aristotle for his
Tutor. It is not necessary that all Towns at all times be supplied with the
best. He that professes the Art of Dancing should be well behaved, of a modest
garb and mien, nor unready at usual Dances, the received Laws and performances
of his profession; and then persons of very good quality may without danger
either enter upon learning, or practice with him, what they have elsewhere
learned: although he be less airy, nor so absolute a Master of the Foot as some
others may pretend to be. Townsmen do not all understand Greek and Latin yet
they can read deportment and industry either directly in the Schoolmaster; or
in the more obvious reflections at home upon their Children committed to his
charge. Only they would be desired not to suspect what they less comprehend.
Those who profess the study of wisdom they see to be men: have like passions
with themselves: short of perfection. But they should nevertheless persuade
themselves that learning is the nurse of diligence, bridle of the appetite,
exercise of unfeigned humility, and in every condition the surest antidote
against discontent and faction; and therefore they would be desired to think
their faithful Schoolmaster what in a sort he is, a fellow-Laborer with their
Minister: one who has put on all the affections of the Father, except
fondness: that so by forming a right esteem of his work, they may set a true
value upon his Person.

. 37.
Now because the Patrimony of Schoolmasters, for the generality, whether small
or somewhat greater, being wholly committed to the custody of Feoffees, must
needs in the dispensing be straightened or enlarged upon motives to the Teacher
unavoidable; the matter of enfeoffement in this consideration would not be
altogether neglected. The ancient way therefore of enfeoffing most Parochial
Donations since the Conquest was to invest the trust in the two Churchwardens
and the Parson: where the stipendiary Priest was removeable at the will and
pleasure of men not always of the greatest judgment: the latter practice
since Henry the Eighth has reposed these trusts in Corporations themselves who
have often aimed at as large power of suspending the continuance of the
Schoolmaster, not on his behavior, but their private discretion; whereas, by
the way, the Patents last age run, juxta eorum sanam discretionem: now a legal
will in a Corporation is different from their will and pleasure: a style
incommunicable to any Subject; for though Sovereigns need not always declare
and remonstrate, but rest often satisfied with a conscience of the justice of
their proceedings, yet is it an essential property of subordinate authority to
render an account. This absolute dependence cannot but retard the endeavors,
and may endanger to shake the stedfastness of the best resolved Teacher. Some
Founders have nominated the chief of their Neighbors to the Government of their
Foundations. These were intent on their ability to protect them: on their
plenty, judged not to stand in need of retribution; and therefore called in
worshipful and honorable assistance without other regard had to them then the
counting them worthy to undertake the overseeing their Charity. But practice
rectifies that opinion. And persons of high place and emploiment not obtaining
leisure from their own, or the public important occasions to attend the rule
of a petty School, have often waved the trust. For what honor is there in an
accession of trouble without profit? or where the reward of Business is not
specified, would the reward there (may some think) be meant unlimited? Though
Charity may more particularly require this liberal inspection of some great
ones upon whom the title of their Family-beneficence descends. Local Governors
are certainly most proper, and the highest would be rather not past by, then
affected. One instance of enfeoffement may be here worthy the remark. Upon the
latter erection of that great School of Shrewsbury abovementioned which was in
the thirteenth of the Queen, the Statutes upon mature deliberation revised, and
a new settlement made, it was ordained; the Mayor of the Town and
Head-School-Master join in letting out the School-lands. An honest constitution
since by that means neither will the Townsmen lie under a temptation to
misconvert the pious use, nor shall the Master be able to impair the
School-Revenue. Besides it may be accounted not very reasonable, that a Master
of Arts formerly at the University thought fit to be entrusted with the
disposal of his Pupils allowance, should now be again reduced into Pupillage:
the only man in the Parish judged proper from whom the value of his estate be
concealed. Be the tenure in almain it is not without president, that even in
Hospitals some chosen Almesmen have enjoyed the like power and privilege.
Every body consists upon its own Laws: but that constitution is less liable to
corruption from at home or abroad, where not only Conscience but Fame is
secured.

Indeed where the wages for Teaching issued out of the public stock of
Corporations, the Masters were to be allowed anciently among the Romans by 7 of
the C. de Professoribus and Medicis L. 7. Magistros studiorum Doctoresque.
Decuriones or Aldermen, and received a license for Teaching from the Bench, or
Town Hall of that Borough, whereby they were entitled to several profits and
immunities. These were limited to a certain number, which number was in the
same order of election supplied upon the vacancy of any place upon the L. 10.
Siquis in Archiatri defuncti locum: with L. 5. Nec intra numerum.
death of the former Incumbent or his L. 2. Grammaticos seu Oratores.
removal. For Gordian the Emperor declares it as a ruled case that if upon
trial the Master were found unuseful he was removeable by the same authority
whereby he had been approved. Thus to survey differing Feoffments, although it
draw with it no necessary consequence of innovating unduely what is already
established, yet where the matter is under consultation, and in settlements not
yet made, variety of Paterns compared may be serviceable toward determining
the choice with more success.

. 38.
The diverse orders and customs of Schools upon such occasion too considered
might have their use. Let none expect here a Body of Scholastical Policy:
Herein the Statutes of many eminent Foundations prescribe with great Authority,
nevertheless it may be needful in this place to mention, that public Schools
are ordinarily regulated by some Statute of superannuation: if Children give
slender hopes of proving Scholars after 7 years trial in learning of the
Grammar, they are to be removed out of the number: now those years are usually
the more unfit for labor, and most capable of good impressions, during which
time the more averse they were to their Book, yet having been inured to
watchfulness and diligence, to subjection and hardship, they prove often from
that very frustration the more resolved and active in such other emploiment to
which they freely betake themselves. Idle Drones and hurtful Wasps no where
less safe, more readily discovered and sooner expelled then from these Hives.

Again, methods of teaching sound and sufficient here strictly enjoined, and
legitimately carried on have past into a regular course of studies. Consistent
with these public injunctions is a liberty still allowed improving Stud^nts of
retrenching some superfluous rule, adding an exception, altering a particular
Hypothesis; Grammar maxims and the system established by Act of Parliament,
always saved. But to demolish foundations out of private opinion daily
changeable is a presumption of ill consequence to the public. Our modern
Januists of the Latin and Greek tongue seem in great measure to leave Grammar
and build upon Dictionary; as do others who practice without Rule, or by a Rule
not Catholic. Due length of time and depth of culture withheld rather palliate
ignorance then produce Scholarship; and Errors in the groundwork first laid
are rarely corrected by the Scholars after-diligence. Directions for delivering
Languages and Arts, this enquiry dares not attempt: it is the work of Master
builders: and some judicious Treatises are extant upon the same subject: to
pass over foreign Didacticks, at home Ascham, Hoole, and the latest Mr.
William Walker yet surviving has after his wonted manner solidly discoursed
it. I shall only take leave at this present to consider one opinion which has
of late obtained among persons of very good quality; they have designed a son
for the profession of the Law of the Land: thereupon would bar the Master from
teaching him Poetry and Greek as no ways ordinate to their Child's pretense.
This declared pleasure of Parents will find no difficult admission with
Masters, whatever their judgment be, and is readily embraced by the Scholar,
because it saves both of them much labor, whereof no man, at his own choice,
is prodigal. Upon this occasion I shall not digress into a just defense of
Poetry, nor enlarge upon the excellencies of the Greek tongue: but to speak to
both connexly and with submission; what of this reason falls under my
comprehension only amounts to a caution against dwelling among Gentile
superstitions, turning after the levity of some pieces, the Chimaeras of
others, being lost in empty ravishments, in a word, against making an
emploiment of this however pleasing diversion to the prejudice of his further
design: for when it shall again be considered, that the seasonable and moderate
reading of Poets, whether Greek or Latin, elevates the thought; furnishes upon
all occasions succinct, pertinent, well-humor'd discourse; impresses the
passion requisite; nor contented with terms barely proper sets on strength of
Argument with facetiousness of sense, and gayetie of phrase; these virtues
considered, it may appear more advisable to restrain this candidate of the
Laws with due cautions that he may rather bind himself, then stop his Ears with
Wax, while he passes by these Sirens: besides, that, mispronouncing Latin in
prose, incident to those that are unacquainted with Verse, blemishes the best
Orator. His judgment rightly informed, this hopeful Student may profit
himself, at these ingenuous recreations, and at spare-hours to no small
advantage converse with the Poets of our own Language especially. Whether
polite literature accomplish a common-Lawyer, for more reasons then one is not
for me positively to determine: some shining instances in our own Age favor
those that shall affirm it. There is a Reason and Equity common to all Laws:
the Roman youth soon as designed Lawyers were delivered to some Master of
Poetry and Greek. Oration pro Archia Poeta.
Tully says of Aulus Licinius Archias, That from the utmost of his childhood
as ever he could remember, that Poet and Grecian had been his director both to
undertake and carry on his course of studies. Now because the Greek Poet was
then questionable whether subservient to the Roman Orator he subjoins by way of
prevention that he never was resigned up to be a mere Lawyer: and that all the
liberal Arts and Sciences have a mutual affinity and connection. Orderly
disposition of matter of fact, apposite application of Law, with graceful
utterance in opening a case may do a cause right. Poets furnish whereby the
thought exhausted with pleading may be recruited, and the Ears wearied with the
din of the Bar find repose: for having been strained at waging hard
controversies, men are best relaxed and unbended by the more soft yet moral
divertisements: soon after he adds, that the studies of other Faculties are
comprehended in teaching, in Rules and Art; a Poet has his excellency in his
very nature, and is elevated on the wing of Fancy and as it were inspired with
certain divine Raptures. Wherefore old Ennius does by a just Prerogative call
Poets sacred: because they seem to stand recommended to us by some especial
Grace and Favor of Heaven. Be therefore sacred with men of so great Humanity
this name of Poet, which no Barbarity ever violated. Rocks and deserts echo
sounds: and savage Monsters often are charmed and stop at Music. Should not we
that have had ingenuous breeding be affected with the voice of Poets? Thus the
Prince of Advocates with much more in his Masters behalf: somewhat might be
farther added on the subject, but what has been loosely noted here may render
men less forward upon private notions though taken up with some color of
probability to recede from the approved ordinances of public Schools without
like Authority.

. 39.
But that which is of far greater importance to Parents is best secured in
public Schools, that their Children be trained up in the principles of
Christian Religion, entire and incorrupt: that they be built up in the
fundamental points: by Catechism and other seasonable address.

As for Catechism; the Church has provided all her Children means of
Instruction, charge Parents with their spiritual nurture, enjoyneth Masters
to promote this especially: and exacteth of the Children when grown, to account
for the summary of Christian Doctrine received. A form is given to convey the
substance: and therefore the Church has not prohibited explaining that, or
joining others with it. Nowells Catechism is enjoined to be taught in the
School of St. Paul's by their local statutes. Vrsine translated into Greek by
Hen. Stephens, with the Praxis of Berchet has been elsewhere with good success
learned: neither of them, I think, to exclude the Church Catechism; nor ought
any other; for is it reasonable the Examinand should prescribe his Examinor
what he should ask him? the Child his Pastor, his Bishop? or would a Child
despise the Indulgence of his Poser, who should prompt him before hand, to
every question the answer wherewith he would rest satisfied. There are many
Catechisms, but one faith. There are many Grammars to one Language; yet that is
the best to the Learner, that is taught in his Form: though perhaps a Scholar
brought up in another method to some perfection in the Tongue the Master would
not put back to be initiated in the same Elements. The Mother, the Nurse may
teach a Child the Church Catechism, the Master must hear him repeat it: and may
be thought most proper to carry him on to farther perfection. It is required of
every one that is matriculated a Member in either University to subscribe the
Articles of Faith and Religion which supposes him to have been informed in
them: either by his Minister, or Schoolmaster.

Neither would discourse, more particularly at certain seasons, be without a
prudent direction to serious and useful points of Doctrine. In the Greek S.
Maximi Confessoris and Martyris (...) alternis Interrogat: and Respons.
Asceticks we may see a Novice putting Questions to an old Father upon Heads of
Practical Divinity. Talmud. Tract. de sab. quoted by Buxtorfe.
The Jews record memorable sayings of the Rabbis and bring in their Disciples
asking the solution of what was allegorically delivered: prescribe Rules to the
Scholar of a modest liberty in propounding R. Moses ben Maimon Tractatu de
studio Legis C. 4. Sect. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. Sect. 7. Dixerunt sapientes neque
aut verecundum been discere, aut iracundum been docere, as in a MS translation
of Mr. Isaac Abendana, eminently skilled in that Learning.
his doubts apposite to the present lesson and subject in discourse: as also to
the Master of a gentle condescension in resolving those doubts: that he think
it not grievous to repeat, to inculcate his instructions with regard to the
difficulty of the matter in debate or slowness of the Learners comprehension.
Thus have many Teachers been improved by forming an apt answer to pregnant
questions proposed by their Auditors. And for our Instruction doubtless was
Luc. 2.43, 46.
the child Jesus found in the Temple sitting in the midst of the Doctors both
hearing them and asking them questions. This work has been carried on by
exercise, or Books.

As for Sundaies and Festivals, Verses upon the proper Gospel, or Psalms:
reading sacred Poems, Dialogues, Epistles, Meditations, Confessions, and such
like pieces which have been set forth in a small form fitted for the use of
young Learners. In diverse Places the Statutes require over and above decent
attendance on the public worship, that the Scholars be called to render an
account of what they were taught. When St. Chrysostom upon occasion had pressed
his Auditors to the repeating at home what they had at Church heard: that every
Housekeeper being returned would spread a double Table the one of bodily food,
the other of the word of God and the Husband to recount what had been there
spoken, the Wife to learn, the Children also to hear, nay the very servants not
to be debarred from that repetition. (...). S. Chrysostom. Edit. Savil. Tom. 5.
Sermon. 6. p. 21. lin. 34.
Make thy House (says he) a Church as being accountable for the Souls of thy
Family as the Minister stands charged with those of the whole Congregation: the
people of Antioch hereupon broke out into loud (...). Id. Sermon. 7. p. 22. l.
25, 26.
Acclamations, which that Father accepted, not as an empty Applause, but as the
pledge of their obedience. As to the religious conduct of youth, I shall only
add upon this Head that there is extant a Treatise of the same Fathers,
anciently styled the This Treatise is not to be found in the Savillian Edition.
Golden Book of Education, brought to light by the learned Combefis and
rendered into English by Mr. John Evelyn: a person whose fruitful industry has
obliged his Country, nor ever to be mentioned by me without much honor.

. 40.
Further, as care is taken that the Masters Salary be duly paid, so because
the Tenure is not Frank-almain as was that of Abbeys, and may that of Hospitals
be called, but what implys a duty to be performed which gives Title to the
Reward, in many places besides the Governors, special Visitors are appointed;
whether some Gentry by the designation of the Founder thought fit and willing
to oversee the discharge of the trust, or some three or four Neighbor
Ministers, who annually at certain prefixed time or times preside over the
sollemn exercise of the Scholars, and from their proficience estimate the
abilities and diligence of the Master.

After all which the Bishop as general Visitor both superintends the Master,
and is Head of the Commission for charitable Uses. Indeed subordination and
Dependency is the form of Bodies collective, without which nothing is strong:
nothing is beautiful. The more immediate concern of the Church Organical
successive is commended to the Bishop not only by the 2 Timothy 2.2.
Holy Scripture but by the ancient Canon. Apost. 2.
Canons, by Council. Tolet. 2. Anno 531. De his quos voluntas parentum a primis
infantiae annis clericatus officio manciparit Statuimus observandum ut mox cum
detonsi vel ministerio electorum contraditi. fuerint, in domo Ecclesiae, sub
Episcopali praesentia, a praeposito sibi debeant erudiri. Constit. Eugen. (2)
37 dis. de quibusdam. Conc. Romans 7. An 1078. Ut ommes Episcopi arts literarum
in suis Ecclesiis doceri faciant.
Canon Law and by the 23 Eliz. 1. Jac. 4.14 Car. 2. Act of Uniformity.
Statutes of this Realm, and practice of all Ages and places Christian: the
Ordinary gives license to the Schoolmaster and exacts his duty, but withal
the same with other Commissioners by him engaged vindicates School-Revenues
detained by Executors, or interverted by Trustees. As much fond as any are of
Liberty, no man surely envys the greatness of that power which he apprehends
for his own Interest. Romans 13.3. 1 Pet. 2.14.
And Interest in the highest Prelate may the poorest Schoolmaster assure by
assiduity and vigilance over himself and his small flock. I shall only add
upon this Head, that such seeming not to have considered enough their own
weakness, draw upon them^^^^es the low rate and esteem set upon this
Profession, and gratify that whether overt hatred or inconsiderate policy of
others in impeaching the growth and flourishing of the state Scholastic,
whosoever do not with humble gratitude embrace that superabundant strength
which God has vouchsafed them from the Kings Majesty the common Nursing Father
of public Schools, in his gracious Letters Patents: from the High and
Honorable Court of Parliament, in Laws made for their Immunity and Vindication:
from worthy Neighbors or worshipful Companies of the great City, their vigilant
and faithful Governors: from many of the Nobility, Gentry, or Neighboring
Ministers, often their special Visitors: lastly, from the Right Reverend their
Diocesan, and Spiritual Father, always their general Visitor.

. 41.
There remains another advantage of public Schools: the greatest benefit to
Learners after the Master, is a good Library. Before the Art of Printing was
discovered, when Books all written by hand were rare, and however less correct
and complete to be purchased at excessive rates, those that set up Schools in
the Provinces of the Empire Greek and Latin Heathen or Christian, provided
themselves ordinarily with some store of Copies to promote the common studies
of their Scholars with themselves. And even in that affluence of Books, which
this present Age daily furnishes, although a Parent can afford to provide his
Son of such as are cheap and portable for his present use as he proceeds in
Learning, yet there are voluminous Authors, Pillars of a Library, which would
highly advance Study, yet are not the purchase of every one that is most
studious: and therefore best able to use them. In which regard a Library would
even at the present be reputed a necessary Member of a School-House.

This would not consist of promiscuous Books. English Histories, Treatises in
Faculties, of Law, Physic and Divinity, unseasonably read intervert the time
due for other studies preparatory to the Scholars daily exercise: and therefore
Universities lay a prudent restraint on Artists, according to their several
progress in the Faculty, to keep some years in Seats at the entrance of the
public Library under Books of those Arts about which they are for that time
conversant. Some having been questioned how it came to pass that former Ages
who framed the very Theoremes of those Sciences, in compiling and transforming
the Systemes whereof we so much glory, could advance so far, have been ready to
attribute it to the fewness of their Books upon this very account; not without
some appearance of reason, though how truly, I list not here farther to enquire.

Be therefore only proper and organical Books hither admitted and few of that
sort would be excluded. He is a good Workman, that can use every Tool. Even
those writings that are earnestly censurd as hindrances to Scholarship; allowed
with careful directions in their time and place, prove helps to proficiency.
Better were it for the peace and comfort of Life if it fell out in matters of
higher consequence that we were never prone to condemn and inveigh, where we
should rather limit and caution. This Book is to be read over, that consulted
only. This to furnish matter, that disposition, a third ornament. Words and
Phrases are not sufficient to form a discourse; nor a Concordance, to make a
Sermon: they do not therefore obstruct, they may conduce to the Work. A
systematical Artist, is not the worst Artist. They that always despise helps to
perfection may as much prejudice their own profiting, as those that continually
rest in them.

Best Editions, as latest are ordinarily, may be desirable, yet former are not
to be rejected. So much judgment in dealing with the Bookseller as not to buy
corrupt Copies at the rate of the best, but at a price vile as they are, is
frugality in a Scholar: when to be skilled in the choice of Editions and withal
so ice as to nauseat what is not most elegant in Print and Binding is not
discretion in a poor Student, but Luxury.

Few Books, well chosen, may be of much use, and the benefaction considerable:
but because Scholars grow, these also range themselves into suitable Classes,
and because Schools grow, they may spread. Were I able to pursue this Argument
particularly and at large it might be perhaps with some Readers of use but
would arise to a just Volume both beyond the bounds and besides the Nature of
this short Essay. Some Heads of matter it may be nevertheless not amiss to draw
over. Therefore consider we learning in its Birth, Growth, and Ripeness; and
distribute we our Scholar into the Grammarian, the Linguist and Critic; both
in Greek and Latin.

In the first Class Grammar and Dictionary: each small, middling, or large. The
large Dictionary would be Ety mological, as a Latin Scapula: Which method
seems most natural to words and best complys with the memory of Children. Now
whilst Sentences, Fables, Dialogues, Epistles are carrying on, the practice of
Translation, for instance of English-Latine, Latine-English mutuasly best
advance here with truth of interpretation. Noun and Verb joined, as
congruously, so proper each to other: Particles rightly used fall in, and from
these result a phrase lively, and in some sort elegant. Distinct helps to these
are rather to be sought then refused, as Phrasiologies, Elegancies, Idioms,
directions for the use of Particles, and the like Guides of Imitation. Of which
form are Rolls of Names, Glosses enterlin'd, or side by side, literal
Translations, in a word; Locks and Keys and Doors of Language not successless
as may be attested by many Late-Learners especially to furnish fluent discourse
upon all Subjects: the Greek yet wider in its Dialects and curious in its Tone.

For a second Class, when style comes to be formed, and the Scholar proceeding
to the Classical Authors, is entered upon Theme and Verse, aids are here most
needful. Select Orators, Poets, Historians fair and true printed at least, with
the Life and Testimonies concerning the Author, with Arguments; and some with
plain and useful comments: apart or in Bodies as the Greek and Latin Poets and
Authors of the Imperial History. Abridgements too not to be disparaged. Match
me L. Florus and Justine: these conduce not to the memory only but to the
understanding also, while they bring actions disjoined in time and place under
one view: accommodated to the narrow capacity of unripe judgments: especially
when illustrated by Tables Genealogical, Chronological, Geographical; and what,
perhaps, are beyond comments to studious Children profitable, would be had the
approved Translations of Historians, Orators, and Poets into our own tongue:
since by them a Child comes at once to understand writers how-ever abstruse
equally with the man that had particularly at leisure informed himself in that
Author.

But for assistance in Theme. Invention is a hard Tax to be laid on the barren
and unfurnished minds of Children. Therefore, let these busy Bees fall upon
those flowery meads that have been fenced in by the industry of others; let the
young merchants trade in Wits Commonwealth for an Apophthegm, an Example, a
Similitude till they can set up a Staple at home: the wisdom of Proverbs is not
to be neglected; and therefore Adagies at large, or in their abstract would be
procured. Symbols and Emblems are embellishments rather pleasing, when offered,
then required. When ripe for Institutions of Oratory, there would be prepared a
small, middling, and large Rhetoric: such are extant old and latter, Demetrius
Phalereus, etc.
Greek and Latin, till they arrive at Declamation and Panegyric. As to
Poetry; steps not unlike do well. A Poetic Institution small, middling and
large. Then authority for quantities in making a Copy of Verses. Their matter
will be scant: enlarge it with Poetical Fables and Fancys: these too moraliz'd
by Apollodorus, etc. Palaephatus, etc. all three set out with Notes by the
Learned and industrious Dr. Tho. Gale Master of St. Paul's School.
Mythological applications of such as have unlocked the mystery of Poesy.
Their Language mean: Open to them the Storehouse of Poetical phrase. Flowers
of speech: proper Epithets: fashionable terms: and choice of Expression: all
which are yet furthered by select Sentences, Epigrams, Epistles, Orations and
pieces of History: thus the very Fragments of Sallust and Cornelius Nepos and
Polybius may compare with the most complete Volumes of diverse other Writers.

A third Class of School-Books, to finish this Library, would be further
serviceable, when the style being well formed, and the judgment grown to some
maturity, the Scholar sticks no longer in the bare forms of speaking or
composition of Sentences, but can so read whole Books as to compare one Book
with another, and some parts with other parts of the same Book: (and yet be
glad at times to have recourse to an Index or Synopsis) can raise higher
observations from them for common Life, for Morals, for Policy. Here would he
be helped in Antiquities, in Presidents of solemn Acts, in several Pieces of
particular Eruditions as of Measures, Weights, Coins, Habits, and the Histories
of other like Species; now begins he to discern Readings true from false:
authorities genuin from supposititious: a skill that has done the Church
service in allegations of greater concern. Therefore would relish variant
Lections compared diligently. He begins now to control time and place:
Therefore would he be entered into rationaries of time, and Geographical
Institutions the greater by the less: not unacquainted with Maps, and Globes,
Wit cannot be taught: but may be provoked; and emulation arises betwixt
persons chiefly where no great inequality is apprehended. Therefore modern
Poets, Orators, Historians or other late Writers in Greek and Latin that have
well imitated the Ancients would have their due place and respect; since it may
deservedly move disdain in an ingenuous spirit, if that should be feasible to
others of the Age wherein he lives, unto which he might not aspire.

This Collection cannot everywhere be made in one day. If Gentlemen could once
judge these public Schools worthy to be trusted with the Education of their
Children (as in almost all Counties some are undoubtedly most fit) they would
without difficulty be induced at the entering of their Son to bestow some useful
Book, such as the Master should propose: this in process of time would furnish
such places, at least with the more necessary helps; and leave a standing
Treasure to the House; not to be despised by the Town. In diverse late
Foundations a room for Books has been annexed to that of the School: elsewhere
desks or Presses; for indeed without a certain Repository provided all utensils
are exposed either to be lost or injured: nor are there Presidents wanting of
this sort of gratification, if it might be conducing to provoke beneficence in
this nature I would not pass over what has fallen under my notice, more
particularly, upon occasion. The Right Honorable my L. Crew was content to
sever two Books from his own Library (they were Hen. Stephense's Thesaurus of
the Greek Tongue in 4 Volumes, and Athenaeus his Dipnosophists with the Notes
of Isaac Casaubone in 2 Volumes) and give them to the use of Northampton School
and Master, at a sole request made by the means of that Mr. Ferdinan. Archer.
School Master.

One of the present Honorable Secretaries of State conferred a set of excellent
School-Books such as the Mr. Jo. Keen.
Master signify to have been there wanting; a decent respect to that Borough
which had elected him their Burgess of Parliament.

The Worshipful company of the Merchant Tailors of London at the motion of
their worthy Mr Jo. Goad.
Schoolmaster erected a fair Library, and replenished it with store of choice
Books: some contributing 50 pounds others too very considerable sums toward
it. These Books were through the great industry of the Master preserved as to
the main in the fatal Conflagration of that City: and remain a monument of the
Donors munificence, still growing to the advantage of the Foundation. Other
examples of Bounty in the same kind, not wholly unknown to me, though in
themselves worthy of honor, I yet forbear here to specify, since multitude of
instances rather overwhelm then excite the Reader: in a word, these gifts are a
multiplied benefit to the Giver: when contributed by diverse among many, they
yet all remain entire to each particular.

After due endeavors to provide, the next care is to preserve such Library. The
Library Keeper to be charged with a threefold Book the Register of Benefactors:
the Catalogue of To be called over by the Master or Usher some hour in the
Month or Year least any be diminished or impaired.
Books: and a Note of what of them are lent out and on what day; the same to
enter into these respective records what shall be needful: nor would he be
required to open and shut the door at its hour daily without some salary: to
engage his watchfulness and constancy. A piece or 2 yearly chargeable upon the
community (for this occasion is incident only to Schools of some note) will
betimes acquaint him with the just and advantageous connection of Work and
Wages. He would be taken out of the uppermost form: the more studious, faithful
and discreet that will undertake such trouble: studious, that he be acquainted
with the use of what he has in charge: faithful, for it is a trust: and
discreet, because on him chiefly would rest the execution of those Orders which
should concern the Students or Books in the Library. Those Laws would not be so
rigid as to debar all lending forth of any Book as if it disappointed others:
since in the place but one can read the same Author at once, nor yet so laxe as
without occasion, without memorial, to part with them: and for time unlimited.
Again they would not be so loose as to receive the wounds, or flourishes of
every malicious or wanton pen: nor yet so strict as to prohibit the Masters
occasional Animadversion: the very trace of whose hand is supposed to leave
some useful direction.

. 42.
Before the conclusion of this Discourse, it may perhaps fall under some
observation, that in this loose range of enquirys, a most material point has
been omitted. Writing an universal advantage, ought certainly to have place in
public and Free Schools. For though, perhaps, it be not the principal benefit
of that Education, yet to write is in common life necessary, and to write well
commendable. The truth is in petty Schools (and such are the most in every
County) no small regard is to be had to it: that the Master bring his Scholar
to a fair engrossing Secretary, or the neat Italian cursive: and if he be
designed for the Law to acquaint him with the large exemplifying Court hand:
and the lesser wherein old Rolls are written with their Abbridgements would be
of singular use to him. I do not say that in the greater Grammar-Schools
Masters can much attend to that business: yet there also is exacted that the
Child bring his exercise written fairly, as he can, without blots, and without
dashes, the marks of precipitate negligence. That censure heretofore ordinary
as if a bad hand were the property of a good Scholar may seem to have received
its original from such like occasion. Quicquid Roma legis, quicquid studuistis
Athenae, Quicquid Chaldaei dogmatis Indus habet; Quicquid Aristoteles divino
pectore sensit, Cumque Platonistis Pythagorea cohors; Quicquid ad Elenchos
arguto disputat ore Gallus, and in medica jactitat art Ligur; Crescit ab
auditu: prudens, docilisque periret Litera, si surdis auribus esset homo.
Bernardus Sylvester. ex Cod. MS.
In former times, when Books were rare, Scholars took in notes their Masters
Dictates: which that they might more readily dispatch they practiced
Abbridgements, and fell into deficient Characters. This habit improved the
learning, but withal impaired the writing of those Ages. A legible hand
endeavored seems to carry with it some respect to the Reader: and easy
flourishes, in their place add grace and distinction, sometimes dignity: but
though it be useful for all to write, it is not therefore necessary for all to
embellish: yet in Schools destined to farther Operations, the place for writing
though it be not a distinct room, would be furnished with proper Instruments
and so more solemn; and also for the general Works of Numeration. Whatever of
this be needful as to the question in debate, none, I think, in these days are
of opinion that the skill and practice of this Art can be too universally
propagated: some may with reason fear it is by many perverted from its noblest
end, when emploid to the discouragement of other more excellent Arts and
Sciences, or restrained in a manner wholly to the service of secular advantage.

. 43.
Rather, to sum up what has been alleged on the present occasion, whatsoever
opinion any may have entertained concerning the multitude of Schools, the
multitude of Scholars in England; before they pass any peremptory sentence to
withhold their own Charity, or to discourage the benevolence of others upon
this Subject, they would be desired withal seriously to consider several
Millions of inhabitants in this Land, in the Plantations, in Factories abroad,
the Subject of Pastoral cure: then to set before their eyes with such
compassion, as the matter requires, the provision remaining for many Vicarages:
afterward to descend in their inquisition into the manifold Exigencies of the
State, in offices, and Professions requiring men not illiterate. Whether they
retain upon the Ministry of Justice in either Law: or upon the Profession of
Physic, or other polite Arts. The Nation would be reputed, as it is, ample:
the traffic copious: the course of Justice regular: the Cities, and Country
populous. Now when youth is multiplied, should we diminish means of
Instruction? when necessities enlarged, streighten supplies? Again on the other
side they would be desired to measure the fluid Body of the Universities, by
Degrees, as it is let out; and duly inform themselves whether the number of
yearly proceeders upon an indifferent estimate may not rather seem
underproportion'd to the public occasions. At the best, I fear, they will find
many raw Students for want of sufficient maintenance at the University thrust
forth upon emploiment before any just proof of their proficiency given, who
needs must bring weak Shoulders to the weightiest work: whereas Counties and
Companies of the City before late calamities and various Troubles of the Age,
have exhibited liberally to the support of diverse at their Studies, what time
the Nation enjoid a long peace, as Charities of this nature, if rightly
considered, will be found to return upon any Church in fruits of sound
doctrine, and an established judgment.

But we have too many Ecclesiastics already: there are among us who say so.
And indeed do they who have suffered themselves to receive such persuasion know
how many they are in Spain? how many they were in England in the reign of K.
Hen. 8? do they reckon thus, that however revenue may vary, the same work
abides?

But have we not Free-Schools in almost every Market Town? Did we depretiat
benefactions received: we should be unthankful to God and unjust to the memory
of many worthy Patriots, ornaments of their Profession, who have so far
extended these provisions toward the preparing youth for business religious
and secular: of which benefit, others more directly, but the whole Country in
some measure partakes. Lastly we should ill deserve of that Faith, whose
Charity we dishonored. Yet may it be not unneedful to consider whether there be
not still parts of the Land capable of new Foundations to good advantage. Let
not any be offended at the seeming multitude of present Schools. Certainly we
all bear no less affection to the common Christianity, then the Jews express to
the Law of Moses, who have ordained R Moses Maimon: in tract. de studio Legis
Cap. 2 Sect. 1.
that Schoolmasters be appointed in all Cities, and the inhabitants of that
City wherein are no Scholars be excommunicated till they provide themselves of
Schoolmasters. Farther, if upon this they take no care to get them any; then,
that City to be executed; subjoining this reason that the world would not
subsist if it were not for the babbling of little Schoolboys: as who should say,
the world would fall from the Law and worship of God, and would fall into all
dissoluteness of manners, were it not for that contemptible emploiment of
preventing Children before they can well speak plain, with an early instruction
in the principles of religion. To the erecting such new Foundations wheresoever
they shall be found wanting, whosoever shall at any time consult upon the
matter will be the rather induced, because many Free-Schools at proper
distances disposed, not only minister help to the poor, but with all
opportunity to the Rich of their Childrens institution at less charges then
abroad. One word only concerning the old Foundations submit we to further
regard: the Masters stipend is usually below envy: but what was well sufficient
in the time of Donors though faithfully dispensed by Feoffees, in fact is now
become incompetent of it self for his reasonable maintenance; it were for the
honor and no less for the advantage of Towns, that he be so far encouraged, at
least, as to be enabled to attend his Calling without distraction, especially
if he carry on many to the University, such as perhaps in all Counties of
England some Masters are found to be; so will this Church and Nation be blessed
with apt Instruments for service and the Age to come seasoned with a sense of
their duty in all capacities.

Upon these considerations referred always to better judgments, the memory of
worthy persons the former Donors of these Charities has been with us hitherto
concluded precious: their honor stands inviolable: nor, till other
circumstances appear, ought we to have a less grateful esteem for present
Founders, Benefactors and Exhibitors to Students: but acknowledge it owing to
their pious munificence that many are encouraged, who may promote the Peace of
the Catholic Church: and be examples of constant loyalty to their Sovereign,
and the Royal Family: in the prosperity of both which, the welfare of these
Nations is contained.

FINIS.

