DIVINE POEMS, WRITTEN By THOMAS WASHBOURNE, Bachelour in Divinity.

Omne tulit punctum, qui miscuit utile dulci.

A Verse may find him, who a Sermon flies,
And turn delight into a Sacrifice.
Herberts Church Porch. LONDON, Printed for Humphrey Moseley, at the Princes
Arms in S. Paul's Churchyard. 1654.

TO THE READER.
NOt any itching ambition to be in print (though a very catching Disease of the
time) but a zealous affection to be doing some good (though by weak means)
has inclined the Author to the publication of these Papers, in hopes that the
reading of them may make some pious impressions on thy soul, as the writing of
them did in his. He is no pretender to extraordinary Gifts of the Spirit, as
too many are, who have very little or no evidence to commend or approve them to
others: whatsoever high conceits they may have of themselves; yet he is modestly
confident that as these his Meditations now running in Verse, streamed for the
most part from the Sanctuary, the Fountain of the Sacred Scriptures, so in some
measure they derive a tincture from those holy Waters; which though they may
not relish well with the captious Critic, or the sullen Cinnick, to whom they
are not intended, yet he believes they will not displease the Charitable and
Conscientious Christian; presuming that thou art such, he is bold to present
them to thy view in print, and thee to God in prayer, desiring thee to esteem
of him no otherwise then of thy Servant in Christ,

TH. WASH.

To the Right honorable, My ever Honored Lady, The LADY VERE.
Madam,
SOme of these Papers coming to your view,
Received encouragement from you,
You first commended them unto the Press,
And therefore I could do no less
Then give them these commands,
First that they kiss your hands,
Then at your Honors feet let them fall low,
Confessing they their being to you owe.
Nor is this all, but let them further-say,
I owe you more, and more would pay
If I knew how; yet it is my hopes you will
Take this in part of the whole bill.
As patient Creditors use
Those Debtors, who their dues
Acknowledge, and by fair entreaty win
A longer day to pay their money in.
To His Ever honored MOTHER, The UNIVERSITY OF OXFORD
LEt Poets pray the Gods their wit to inspire,
My holy Flames are kindled by thy fire,
My Muse drinks at thy Fountain, thou alone
To me Parnassus art and Helicon;
And though that some would dam up all thy streams,
And with their new lights put out thy old beams,
Yet I shall pray, and hope Heaven will me hear,
That thy light still may shine, thy Spring run clear*
I tender thee this slender offering,
Wishing that I a better had to bring;
But what it wants either of wit or Art,
To make it up, I here present my Heart.
To his Learned, Pious Friend, the AUTHOR.
MOst do but sin in Verse, and pale sheets dress
Fitter to cloth their penance, then the Press,
And all their vain* though most advanced Rimes,
Are but soft mischiefs, and ingenuous Crimes.
For to write well^where it is ill to write,
Is to transgress a Poem, nor indite.
Loose fancies frenzies are, and our fond lays
Require more wreaths of Hellebore then Bays,
But from thy guided choice thy Poem is,
Not thy distemper, but thy Artifice.
Thy numbers are thy Zeal, yet not thy fit
This is not to impart, but hallow wit.
MARTIN LLEUELLIN M.D.

On the Author.
THe Muses met to find a way (though late)
Their servants trespasses to expiate,
And make amends for the wit vainly spent,
On many an ungracious Argument.
Urania said, I have a man of worth,
Whose Verse is holy, he shall put it forth.
C. B.

To the READER of my Dearly Loved, because truly Pious Friend, Mr. T. W.'s
RELIGIOUS POEMS.
DRaw near, but draw devoutly, for you may
Better keep hence, then come and be away;
And yet approach still, though thy soul brings none,
That it may carry hence Devotion.
Expect, if thou be such, some loose sin here,
That so thou may be caught at unaware:
So Heathens, when to Christian slaughter they
With Pagan hate flocked only to annoy,
Did return Converts, and there learnt to do
What they saw done, hope, confess, and dye too.
He that came Snake, and S^rpent, sting and hiss,
Did return man; for there he left all these;
He that did come, and but in part a man,
Went back a whole, and entire Christian.
He that was got so far would still go on,
And by Gods faith reach up to Gods own Son;
Serpent too much, and man too little; I
And Christian too; he would be saint and dye.
B^the in these Sion streams, that even thou here
May be a Star, a Sun in the upper Sphere;
This is the way to b^th, way and end, this
Will infuse P^ety, and that assure bliss;
This will that Serpent of thy heart unskin,
And to thy false brow add a M^n within,
Make thee love God and man; unlike him, who
'Cause he cannot hit God, sh^ots his image through;
This will first teach thee to escape his hell,
And then-convey thee whence that serpent fell.
Til thus thou love and loath'st, it is not safe
To tell thee all the holiness of each leaf.
For what to cock is Jewel, Pearl to sow?
His chafe, her husks, are Pearl and Jewel too.
Here is no chafe no^ husks; the Prodigal
May hither come, and find it good corn all;
Come hither they, who the vain Poets prize
For their unsens'd verbal Hyperbolies;
Can they express beyond a heaven? Here
You have that only, and what came from there;
Make they a God, and then by him rehearse?
The God that made this man, fills all his verse.
Does a fair Virgin teach them to indite?
Faith is his Lady, by whose beams to write;
Her and her God he loves, more then all they
Can by their false Gods to their false loves say.
Expect no fond invokings; We confess,
There is no Genius besides holiness.
Were this left out, had he another theme,
Child's straw, and bubbles, would be all the gemme;
How many, and none, compose and not compose*
For without this, it is neither Rhyme nor Prose;
Read this man's storms, and that man's fairer weather,
Compare them both to none, not each to either;
What get you? but that you can only tell
T^is line's like that, a decasyllable?
That he was Knight? ^he gentleman? Their fire
Tuned not to David's; but Apollo's lyre;
And that because there is in neither even
What was in Johnson's self, a close to heaven.
How many shillings have I thrown away,
To read in Monteigne his own Prose-essay,
Mixed with some lay, because but profane song,
Unspirited with firm religion?
When I read Finis, this is all I know,
Both are the same piece, Author and work too;
His book's his self; when That my hand does carry,
I graspe both Caesar and his Commentary.
Why did I give so much, that I might look
On a French picture, not worth a French Cook?
One Quelque Chose; and you have him; I could eat
The Author now, and sell him to buy meat.
Cart^right is Wit throughout, but I read over
More then his four plays, his ^ast pious four;
And then his several Gratitudes unto
Him, whose head taught him, and purse fed him too;
Who gave him to buy books, and gave him skill
In each of them, to choose out Well from Ill;
The Learned, Pious, Con^^ant Dupp^; h^
Who was, and is still Reverend in those three;
Whom these three, voice, and pen, and heart cannot
(No not Cart^rights own) enough celebrate;
In these he kept Christ's law, loved God, and then
His next act was to pay his debt to men,
He did it here; for this one to him would
Be Universal, ev'^y neighborhood,
Though he out-sobers, out-words, out-wits all,
Grave Virgil, Horace nice, Salt Martial,
Yet more then in's (though unprofane) verse, would
^ ^rench my soul in his Diviner stood;
Those Sermons in which he did wind about
Our passions more then Cicero could do it,
In which he did out-sense deep Plutarchs skill,
And taught so well, almost all else taught ill,
Unless when is Father Duppae 'gan to preach,
Who us to live, and taught him too to teach.
Oh, for that Text where he forbad to ly,
And pressed home truth, in unbound Poetry?
Where David like, he did instill and charm
Us to be honest, though to our own harm,
Charged truths upon us, such as do shine here
In this small volume, scorned and damned elsewhere;
O for his Passion-text, that we might buy
Th'inestimable price at Sixpence fee;
That we that winepresse which at Edom was,
And Christ's Church trod, might taste from a new press!
And here we hav't in the dialogue between
Christ Angels, and Apostles, of slain sin;
Jesus is up again, he did not die,
He but lay down, that death it self might lie.
I, who this book throughout love, Adore here
As (though all Horace was to Scaliger
Precious and rich, yet above all the rest
He did affect his Lydia dialogue best,)
He who t'ave made That, would give Empire, though
A world he offer here, he bids too low;
For as the whole is sacred, and each line,
Though it is not God, yet it is each Divine;
So here, it is not Apostle only who
Does speak, and Angel, but it is Jesus too;
What would that Learnings lover now impart
To speak with an Apostle heart to heart?
(For they did not converse, as some of late,
With face of love, but with a breast of hate)
What would his inquisition give to hear
An Angel vocally round him in the ^are!
What would he? nay, what would he not bestow?
A world! almost another Jesus too,
To hear his own Christ speak, who since sixteen
Last hundred years, was neither heard nor seen.
This Copy is the blessed Jesus; and
The rest do all as one John Baptist stand
Round about this; before, behind, each where,
To make that way plain for the Lord t'appear.
This Copy is the Word, and the rest are
The Voice and Echo of this Character;
This is the supreme heaven, without this
Is heaven too, and what is in heaven, Bliss.
But O, when he does joys of heaven tell
Cheerful, and without dread pains of hell;
(Whither the Savior Christ does convey some,
And whither the Judge Christ does others doom)
How does he with mixed artifice contrive,
Either for fear or love, that all should live!
I dare not name all, left I emulate
The bulk of his Town, with my swelling Gate,
APOSTROPHE To the AUTHOR.
YOu Sir, who study, and sport too, this way
Whose spare hours heaven, and whose serious day;
Whose two week Sermons are to others aim;
Whose whole week-life is to that your own claim.
Who preach both ways, b'Example and by Rule,
Whose life's a Sermon, and whose house a School;
Who your own self do, without hire, supply
With breath and pattern, this twin Curacy;
Who make each day the Lords, whilst there are some
Do grudge him one in seven; who make your home
To be his pious house, whilst some there are
Who scarce allow him his own house for prayer;
You who do read, and meditate, and live
Scripture, and thereby midst of world's frowns thrive;
You know, they who on Gospels first word look,
Learn from that first word, this is all the book.
They who proceed and search on, find that this
Is only Scripture, all else writ amiss;
They who wade further yet, know there is not one
Word besides this, This is the Word alone.
And yet though nothing else is Book, but what
God himself made, the Man not that he wrote;
Though nothing else be Scripture, but pretense,
Because if not the same with this, not sense;
Though nothing else be Word, 'cause Parrots may,
Without this, talk to as good ends as we;
Yet as those birds are said to come more near
To what we speak, then other Fowls of the air,
Because they imitate our Cadencies,
So we do more, speak when w' approach to thee.
Blessed be the charity then, of your wise choice,
Not to vex us with an unmatter'd Noise;
Since though in hundred sheets of paper, he
Has silent been, who does not edify.
Since without this, though Stentor he out roar,
He has said less then the mad Bull, or wild Boar;
Since without this, each other book's a crime;
It robs my purse, and what is more deer, my time:
Blessed be your guidance too, that to all were given,
Both to discourse, and write, and Print for heaven;
He that writes next, this is his praise or curse
He makes the Reader if not better, worse.
But friend, you often ask why it is that I
Preach to the next ear, and not to the distant eye?
Why it is that I wh'ave taskt my self a scheame
In learnings own behalf, forbear that Theme,
Pray ask no more; how can you wish my heir
Were come to the birth, when there is no midwife near?
Copy 't once more, and tell the brave Lord N.
Be he Mecaenas, and I will write Then.
HAbes haec, e manu subitanea, prope incogitanter effusa, quippe ab eo cujus
nulla in instituto pars est, Tibi placere, (qui, cum caeteris Dominantis
fortunae ludibriis and insultibus par es, undiquaque similis, et Tibi constans;
Soli illius Approbanti Lenocinio irasceres, vir, aliter Pacatiss^mus) sed
lectori tuo, voce invitatoria prodesse; Ejus interest, non tui, quod Fercula
haec, e Promptuario tuoenatantia, ut sitiat ipse, Collaudo; Unum hoc mihi
(cujus (...), Facultatisque, qualiscunque, aut quanullacunque in animo est, Res
Angusta Domi Tumulus secundus) Satis est, utrumque (quod est omne) punctum
tulisti Tu. Vale hic, sed e supra Internos, Angelus ipse Tu, diu; Vale supra
inter Affines Angelos t^os, Semper, sed Sero.

July 26 1653. GULIELMUS TOWERS. B. D.

On the Divine Poems of his friend the AUTHOR.
SOme say a Poet's born, not made; but I
Say he is twice born that made this Poesy.
Nature imparted little to his wit,
'Twas grace which had the greatest hand in it;
His pen came from the wing of the holy Dove,
Dropping no gall, but innocence and Love;
No scurrilous obscenity to make
It vendible, and with the Rabble take;
No tenter stretch'^ conceits, no puff-paste strains,
Which serve not to instruct but wrack men's brains,
No such as their invention draw from wine
And reele into a Verse; but all Divine,
Clear as the beams are of th'inlightned day,
Smooth as the Galaxy or milkie way,
Pure as Ezekiels waters, which did glide
Forth of the Sanctuary on each side;
Made not to please the Pallat of the foul
And carnal man, but to revive the soul
That humbled is at sight and sense of sin,
To cheer his spirits, comfort him within;
To scare bold sinners from their wicked course,
And win them to a penitent remorse;
That they who take these Poems up as men,
May lay them down as Saints made by his pen.
Thus Ambrose caught an Austin, by his quaint
Divinity, the Manichee turned Saint.
E. P.

The Table.
THe Accident. 135 Affliction brings man home 22 The Ague 134 Angels our
guardians. Psalm. 91.11, 12, 18 The Antipodes 90 All Saints 110 The Ascension
107 The passing Bell 94 The Blind man. Mark 10.51 49 Gods Bottle. Psalm. 56.8, 14
The heavy burden. Psalm. 38.4. 12 The bush burning. Exodus 3.2. 2 Care cast on
God. 1 Pet. 5.7. 75 The child and the old man 130 Christ's second coming
compared 89 Christ calumniated. Matthew. 11.19. 46 Christ's cup. Matthew. 26.39. 48
To Christ Jesus 140 The Church black, but comely. Cant. 1.5. 29 The
Circulation. Eccles. 12.7. 27 No continuing City. Heb. 13.14. 71 The good man's
clothing. Job. 29, 14. 8 The Circumcision 105 Man complaining without just
cause. Lam. 3.39. 32 Country Disputations 133 To day hear Gods voice, Psalm,
95.8 20 An Apostle a Devil John 6.70. 52 Of Divine Love 8^ The Dove and
Serpent. Matthew, 10.16 4^ The dream 10^ The drunkard 12^ Gods two dwellings.
Isa. 57.15. 3^ The Echo 8^ Faith and works. Jam. 2.20. 7^ Fear of falling 1
Cor. 10.12. 6^ Former favors earnests of future 1 Samuel 17, 37. 7^ The
fountain. Zach. 13.^. 40 To Doctor Hammond 122 The best Harbinger. John 14, 2.
56 The good harvest 101 No hiding from God. Gen, 3.8. p. 1. The Christians hope
not in this life. 1 Cor. 15.19 64 Gods Jewels. Mal. 3.17. 42 The impartial
judgment. Rev, 20.11, 12. 76 The Inquisition. Zeph. 1.12. 39 To his kinsman Sir
E. B. 118 To the Lady M. C. 125 To the Lady M. T. 120 To the Lady P. 121 To the
Lady R. 119 The Larum 95 Against going to Law for trifles 127 Much in a little.
Psalm, 37.16. 11 The three lives of a Christian. Gal. 2.20. 67 To the malic^ous
man 128 What is man? Psalm. 8:4. 10 To one that married a rich, but most
unhandsome woman. 131 The Mystical marriage 34 To his Cousin Mistress M.B. 123
Themist 126 No^e but God. Psalm. 73.25. 15 Paul, Paradox, 2 Cor. 12.10. 66
Passion without Reason. Jonah 4.1. 36 The Pastoral 84 The path of the just.
Prove. 4.18. 23 Christ persecuted in his members. Act 9.4.5 58 Peter's prayer
Luke 5.8. 51 The power of Prayer. Exodus 32.10. 3 Lay men's preaching 98 Upon
Doctor Prideaux 116 A Poem of Grotius translated 111 Two of Boethius translated
114, 11^ The Race. Phil. 3.13, 14. 69 The Resurrection 206 The Rock. Numb.
20.11. 4 Scylla and Garybdis 96 Secret things belong to God. Deuteronomy. 29.29. 6 The
holy separatist. Psalm. 4.3. 9 The Snake in the garden 81 Snow in May. 138
Treasures only in heaven, Matthew. 6.19 20. 43 The Temple of the holy Ghost. 1
Cor. 6.19. 60 The contrary effects of Tobacco 110 The toothache 93 Upon denial
of Tithes 87 The Vine wasted. Psalm. 80, 12.13. 16 The way, the truth, and the
life. Joh. 14, 6. 57 The wind and sun 102 The souls wish. 88 The wounded
spirit. Prove. 18.14. 25 Youths Memento, Eccles. 12.1. 26
GENESIS 3.8. And Adam and his wife hid themselves from the presence of the Lord
God, amongst the Trees of the Garden.


WHat fancies sin in our first Parents wrought,
That they a hiding place so quickly sought
From Gods all-seeing Eye? As if that he
Who formed the eye, were blind and could not see
Through the thickest trees, or darkest shade,
Which in that Garden he himself had made.
Such simple fools are their posterity,
Who seek out places of obscurity
To sin unseene, and mask themselves all over,
That God should not their wicked deeds discover;
As though that they from him themselves could shroud,
Like Juno from Ixion in a cloud.
Or like the Wood-cock hide their heads, and then,
'Cause they see none, think none sees them again.
Be not deceived, a double folly lies,
In sinning first, then hoodwinking Gods eyes.
All Is one to him, the darkness and the light,
The night as clear as day is in his fight.
Think not by putting of a candle out,
Or drawing of a curtain round about
Thy bed, or by fast barring of thy door,
To shut God out, or make him see no more;
Thou can not be invisible to him,
Who did behold thy substance, every limme
And member of thy body, ere that they
Were perfect, and received day by day,
Their form and fashion; the womb to him was
Clear as the Crystal, or the purest glass*
Search the worlds closest corners over and over,
Amongst all thou can not find a place that is more
Invisible and secret; then reveal
Thy sin to God, which thou can not conceal;
And what thou can not hide from him, confess:
So seeing, he will no^ see thy wickedness;
But with the whitest Robe will cover thee,
That without fear or shame thou may him see.
EXODUS 3.2. And the Angel of the Lord appeared unto him in a flame of fire, out
of the midst of a bush; and he looked, and behold the bush burned with fire,
and was not consumed.


Lo, here a sight
Presented to the eye,
A Bush on fire flaming bright,
Yet not consumed, a wondrous mystery.
The Bush the Church,
Affliction is the fire,
Which serves not to destroy, but search
And try her gold, raising the value higher.
It gathers dust,
And ^ullied is with ease,
Wherefore to rub off all the rust,
To cast it in this fire God does please.
Whence it comes forth,
Far brighter then before,
And is advanced much in worth,
One pound being equal now unto a score.
This bush that flame
Could never long withstand,
Unless the Lord were in the same;
It Is he that does uphold it with his hand.
Whiles he is there,
And does his light dispense,
The heat we need not greatly fear,
How ere it may seem grievous to our sense.
For though we be
I th'fiery furnace cast,
Our faith the Son of God may see,
Preserving of our very hairs from waste,
Much more he will
By his almighty arm
Defend the souls of his Saints still,
That by this fire they shall sustain no harm.
For this fire shall,
Like that which snatched away
The Prophet once, ^ransport them all
From this worlds sorrows to a world of joy.
Exodus 32.10. Now therefore let me alone, that my wrath may wax hot against
them, and that I may consume them.


WHat a commanding power
There is in prayer? Which can tower
As high as heaven, and tie the hands
Of God himself in bands,
That he unable is to loose the raines
To Justice, til released from these chains?
Samson could break his cords
As tow, and yet the Lord of Lords
Who gave that strength to Samson, can
Not break the cords of man;
Man makes his maker pray, Let me alone,
That on this people my wrath may be shown.
Since then such virtue lies
In prayer, as will exorcise
The almighty, and fast bind his arms
In spiritual magic charms;
O for another Moses now to pray
That the like benefit we might enjoy.
But Gods wra^h long has been
Against us hot, a sign our sin
Cries louder then our prayers to God,
Which makes him use his rod,
When once our prayers grow more servent, then
We may expect they will bind Gods hands again.
Numb. 20.11. Moses lift up his hand, and with his rod smote the rock twice,
and the water came out abundantly, and the congregation drank.


WHat wonders this, that there should spring
Streams from a rock to quench a peoples thirst!
What man alive did e're see such a thing,
That waters out of stone should burst?
Yet rather then Israel with drowth should die,
God by a miracle will them supply.
What wonders this, that from Christ's side,
Water and blood should run to cleanse our sin*
This is that fountain which was opened wide
To purge all our uncleanness in,
But this the greater wonder is by far,
As substances beyond the shadows are.
Christ is that spiritual rock from whence
Two Sacraments derived are to us,
Being the objects of our faith and sense,
Both receive comfort from them thus,
Rather then we should faint our Rock turns Vine,
And stays our thirst with water and with wine.
But here is another Rock, my heart
Harder then Adamant, yet by and by,
If by a greater Moses struck, 'twil part,
And stream forth tears abundantly.
Strike then this Rock my God, double the blow,
That for my sins, my eyes with tears may flow.
My sins that pierced thy hands, thy feet,
Thy head, thy heart, and every part of thee,
And on the cross made life and death to meet,
Death to thy self, and life to me,
Thy every fall does save; O happy strife,
That struck God dead, but raised man to life.
Deuteronomy. 29.29. Secret things belong unto the Lord our God, but those things
which are revealed belong unto us, and our children for ever, that we may do
all the words of this Law.


THis was good doctrine once, but now
We not contented are to know
What God thinks good for to reveal,
Unless we with Prometheus steal
Some fire from heaven, or commit
A rape on Pallas Divine Wit,
Or pick Joves lock, and secrets get
Out of his closest Cabinet.
We with the Bethshemites dare pry
Into Gods Ark, and cast an eye
Within the Veil, although that we
Or blind, or dead strait stricken be;
Such boldness well deserves to have
No eyes, or else a sudden grave.
He that would know more then is fit,
Forfeits his life as well as wit.
And while he seeks what God has hidden,
He eats again the fruit forbidden;
So striving to be overwise,
Is justly banished Paradise.
But if we would know safely more,
Let Us practice what we knew before;
Not search his secret will into,
But his revealed let us do;
It Is that concerns us most: the way
To understand is to obey.
1 Samuel 17.37. David said, moreover, The Lord that delivered me out of the paw
of the Lion, and out of the paw of the Bear, he will deliver me out of the hand
of this Philistin.


WHy should I doubt Gods providence,
Or fear he will not protect me in my ways?
Since he his goodness still to me displayes,
And proves it by experience.
One day another certifies and says,
Each several Mercy does confirm my faith.
His former favors earnests are
Of future; he that saved me from the Bear
Would not permit the Lion me to tear.
And he that of me took such care,
As from the Lions paw to set me free,
Will from this Philistine deliver me.
Lord, from a fiercer Lion thou
Have saved me by thine almighty power,
I mean that Lion which sought to devour
My soul and body. Shall I now
Suspect that thou who spar'dst me from the devil,
Wilt let me perish by a lesser evil?
I am resolved to fear no more
What man can do, though he Golia be,
Much less a Bear or Lion, though I see
Him never so much against me roar;
I have so often been rescued by thine arm,
That I believe nothing shall do me harm.
JOB 29.14. I put on Righteousness, and it clothed me.


'TWas sin brought shame into the world, til then
There was no nakedness amongst men;
And till they put on Righteousness, they will
Though clad in Gold be naked still;
They may their clothes change every day, yet find,
That clothes they want, unless they change their mind.
The newness of the fashon's not enough,
Nor yet the richness of the stuff,
To cover the souls nakedness within,
Whiles it is deformed with deadly sin.
The gallant without grace for all his brags,
Is worse attired then truth that goes in rags.
What matter is it if that his body be
Adorned with all the bravery
His wealth can compass, or his wit invent:
For all this costly ornament,
If he be destitute of Righteousness
To clothe his soul, he is naked never the less.
God looks into my inside, and if there
He see that I do virtue wear,
And that the habits of my mind are white
As Innocence, and clear as Light;
Then he invites me as a proper guest,
Being thus apparrel'd to his marriage feast.
Now Lord, since mine own righteousness will be
Too short a robe to cover me;
(For who alas, with so great store is clad,
But he to borrow may be glad?)
Do thou some of thine own on me bestow,
That Is long enough for both of us I know.
Psalm. 4.3. But know, the Lord has set apart him that is godly for himself.


BEhold an holy Separatist,
Whose sancti^y does not consist
In setting of himself apart,
Both from the world, and his own heart
With a keep^back, as if that none
Must near him come, but stands alone,
Like the disdainful Pha^isee
That thinks no man so good as he.
No, he himself does most despise,
And humble is in his own eyes,
So full of meekness and so mild,
As is the newly weaned child;
His faith though firm is lowly built,
Judging his own, not others guilt;
This humble minded man God deems,
So highly of, so well esteems,
That he divides him from the rest,
And in him impropriates for the best,
To his own special use him takes,
And his select companion makes.
The godly man most humble is,
There is no godly man but this.
Let me cast down my self among
The ordinary common throng;
And with Paul make it my belief,
That I of sinners am the chief.
In lowliness of mind let me
Think that all others better be,
So shall I with the Publican
Be the more truly Christian,
And God to his immediate
Attendance will me separate;
Thus the most high will not disdain
To make the lowest one of's train,
And he that does himself abase,
Shall be preferred to highest place,
Psalm. 8.4. What is man that thou art mindful of him, or the Son of man that
thou visitest him?


LOrd, what is man that thou
So mindful art of him? Or what is the Son
Of man, that thou the highest heaven did bow
And to his aid did run?
He is not worthy of the least
Of all thy mercies at the best.
Man's but a piece of clay
That Is animated by thy heavenly breath,
And when that breath thou take away,
He Is clay again by death.
He is not worthy of the least
Of all thy mercies, at the best.
Baser then clay is he
For sin has made him like the Beasts that perish,
Though next the Angels he was in degree:
Yet this beast thou do cherish.
He is not worthy of the least
Of all thy mercies, he is a beast.
Worse then a beast is Man,
Who after thine own Image made at first
Became the devils son by sin. And can
A thing be more accursed?
Yet thou thy greatest mercy have
On this accursed creature cast.
Thou did thy self abase,
And put off all thy robes of Majesty,
Taking his nature to give him thy grace,
To save his life did dye.
He is not worthy of the least
Of all thy mercies, one's a feast.
Lo man is made now even
With the blessed Angels, yea superior far,
Since Christ sat down at Gods right hand in heaven,
And God and man one are.
Thus all thy mercies man inherits,
Though not the least of them he merits.
Psalm 37.16. A little that a righteous man has, is better then great riches
of the ungodly.


THe wicked rips Earth's bowels up to find
Treasures to fill his mind;
Lays heaps on heaps, and riches gets great store;
For all that he is poor,
Because he carries that about him which
Forbids him to be rich;
A greedy mind that never can be content,
With that which God has sent.
But by ungodly ways graspeth more gold
Then Is hand or house will hold.
And what he thus has got with care and pain
He fears to lose again;
His conscience on the wrack is all the while,
It will not let him smile.
Or merry be, since many a bitter curse
Helps to fill up his purse.
And what by fraud or force he compasse^h
Shall vanish with his breath.
Or if unto his heir his wealth descends,
He lavishly it spends;
Consuming that in few years which was not
In less then an age got,
Thus goods ill gathered many times we see
The owners ruin be.
But the condition of the godly's such,
In little he has much.
And though that his poss^ssions be but small,
Yet his content is all.
He is as rich as Crassus, though but poor
'Cause he desires no more.
If to his mind his state he cannot fit,
He frames his mind to it;
And dines as well upon a piece of bread,
As if on dainties fed.
As merry when he water drinks his fill,
As those that wine do swil;
As warm in poor John Baptists Camels hair
As those that scarlet wear;
His conscience clear from sin in peace does rest
And that is his daily feast.
Thus he being rich in the midst of poverty,
Nor fears nor longs to die.
Psalm 38.4. My iniquities are gone over my head, as an heavy burden, they are
too heavy for me.


NO leprosy can be compared to sin,
It does so spread
Without, within.
It Is at my heart, and it is gone ore my head,
No part is free from top to toe,
It Is here, it is there, above, below.
Nor does it only spread through every part,
It Is heavy too
And on my heart,
Like lead it lies, so that I cannot do
The good I would, the weight's so great
That under it I sink, I sweat.
Some fools indeed, whose hearts are hard as flint,
And neck's as steel
Take pleasure in it,
And run away with it, yet no burden feel,
But sport make of it every day,
And with it as a feather play.
VVhiles they make light thereof, O let me fear
And it avoid,
As if it were
The greatest plague by which man is destroyed,
The heaviest burden, that will crack
My heart strings, and even break my back.
And since I feel it such a ponderous thing,
A way I find
That ease will bring,
And from this plague, this burden free my mind:
Upon thy back Lord, let it fall,
That Is strong enough to bear it all.
PSALM. 56.8. Put thou my tears into thy bottle.


TO value tears I now begin,
Since thou Lord do provide,
A bottle for to put them in
That none should fall beside;
One drop will raise a sinner from a swound;
What pity it is to spill them on the ground?
I spill them when I spend them on
Vain trifles. Worldly losses,
They are not worthy of a groan,
Much less a tear. Such crosses
I rather should rejoice in, since they prove
The tokens of my heavenly Fathers love.
When from the Limbeck of mine eyes
My tears for sin distill,
That Aqua vitae thou do prize,
And with it thy bottle fill.
O let my tears for my sins only fall,
That so thy bottle may preserve them all.
Then of them, Lord, a Cordial make,
Against sins poisonous sting,
Which when my heart with grief does ache
May comfort to it bring.
Last a Collyrium make of them, which may
Take all the soreness of mine eyes away.
Psalm 73.35. Whom have I in heaven but thee? and there is none upon earth that
I desire besides thee.


HAve I not many things in heaven and earth
Besides thee, that are worth
The having and desiring? Have I not
Some friends, some riches got,
Some honors too, and may increase my store
Of all these three yet more?
Excuse me then (my God) if that I pray,
And covet somewhat else for to enjoy.
Besides these earthly there are things in heaven
Which for my use are given;
The Sun, and Moon and Stars, which do dispense
Their light, heat, influence;
Angels and Saints to whom in my distress
May I not make address?
Excuse me then (my God) if I repair
To these sometimes as objects of my prayer.
Yet when I think a little better on
these things, I find there is none
That can compared be to thee; for friends,
They are for private ends,
And do me courtesies, because I do
Courtesies for them too:
But thou a faithful friend wast unto me
When by my sins I was thine enemy.
For Riches, they are subject to decay,
And quickly fade away.
Honors are bubbles, which the breath of men
Blows in and out again.
Nor those, nor these any true virtue have,
Body or soul to save:
But thou my Riches and my honors art,
That savest both, and do from neither part.
The Sun, Moon, Stars are goodly creatures, yet
As they rise, so they s^t;
The Saints ^riumphant happy Creatures are,
But ^now not how I fare.
The Angels glorious, yet but finite, seeing
They have from thee their being;
Thou art my Sun which only I adore,
Who once did rise from death to set no more.
Thou art all Saints in one, they have from thee
Alone their sancti^y;
Thou art the Angel of the Covenant,
And wilt not let me wan^;
Thou made me with thy word, and with thy blood
Redeem'dst me: none so good,
So great as thee in earth or heaven abides,
And therefore I desire none besides.
Psalm 80.12, 13, 14. Why have thou then broken down her hedge, that all they
that go by pluck off her grapes? The wild Boar out of the Wood does root it up,
and the wild Beasts of the field devour it: Turn thee again thou God of Hosts,
look down from heaven, behold and visit this Vine.


COme Lord and look how thy poor Vine lies wast,
Her hedge is broke down every hour,
And if thou do not make the greater haste
The Wild bore will her grapes devour.
Come Lord, thine aid we crave,
Come quickly her to save.
Lord it is that Vine which thy right hand has planted,
And fenced about for thine own use.
But she alas too long thy care has wanted
And little fruit she does produce.
Come Lord thine aid we crave,
Come quickly her to save.
Her Sprigs are dry, the holy Sacraments
Are stopped, or run not free to all;
Her Watch men disagreeing make her rents
So wide, she does to pieces fall.
Come Lord, thine aid we crave,
Come quickly her to save.
Under her shade we did securely rest
And comfort we did take in it.
But now we pine away with grief oppressed
To see her in th dust to fit.
Come Lord thine aid we crave,
Come quickly her to save.
Our hearts are broke, our Harps unstringed be,
Our only Musick's sighs and groans.
Our Songs are to the tune of Lachrymae,
We Are fretted all to skin and bones.
Come, O come Lord Jesus,
Quickly come and ease us.
This is the last and worst Age we live in,
For the most righteous go to wrack;
Then set an end unto these days of sin
And misery; thy help we lack.
Come, O come Lord Jesus;
Quickly come and ease us.
Punish the men are settled on their Lees,
And at our sufferings make a sport;
But lift the hands up that fall down, the knees
That feeble are, do thou support.
Come, O come Lord Jesus,
Quickly come and ease us.
Bind up our wounds and pour in oil and wine
Give Cordials to our heavy hearts,
Make up the mounds once more about this Vine,
Repair her breaches on all parts.
Come, O come Lord Jesus,
Quickly come and ease us.
Psalm 91.11, 12. He shall give his Angels charge over thee, to keep thee in
all thy ways. They shall bear thee up in their hands left thou dash thy foot
against a stone.


HOw dear to God is man
That he his mercy should enlarge
To this poor span,
And thus to charge
His Angels to keep every limb
of him!
Such are his strict commands
To them, that they are bound to bear
Him in their hands
Secure from fear,
Of dashing but his foot upon
a stone.
If they so careful are
To keep his foot from hurt, they have
Much greater care
His soul to save,
And it int' Abraham's bosom they
convey.
Did we poor Creatures know
How much unto their watchfulness
And care we owe;
We would express
Our thanks to God, and his name praise
always:
For highly honoring us
With this rare privilege to be
Attended thus
By Angels, he
The greater makes to serve the less;
O bless
The Lord for this, and pay
To these pure spirits reverence due,
That so they may
Never forsake you,
Do no vile action which may these
displease,
Or cause them to retard
Their wonted aid; each wicked deed
Raises their guard
In time of need;
Live so that they may you attend
to the end
Psalm 95.7, 8. To day if ye will hear his voice, harden not your hearts.


A DIALOGUE Between GOD and a SINNER.
Sinner, MAy I not this day take my pleasure,
And hear thy voice, O God at leisure?
One day will break no square, men say,
And will thou be more strict then they?
O give me leave now to rejoice,
And hereafter hear thy voice.
Thy voice which does to virtue call
And to repentance summons all,
But that I do not love to hear,
It sounds harsh discords in my ear,
Whilst I am in my youthful blood;
When I grow old, it may be good,
To take thy counsel, and attend
Thy will when I draw near my end.
Then 'twill be time enough I trust,
To be temperate, chaste and just.
Till then I hope thou will dispense
With my want of innocence,
With my sports and wickedness.
I know Lord thou can do no less
Then hear my Prayer at the last,
For thou thy faithful word have past
To pardon me when ere that I
Shall implore thy clemency.
The theif upon the Cross did find
Thy mercy, the same gracious mind
Thou still retainest, may I not then
Expect to find the like again?
I am resolved what ere comes on it
To hazard even my soul upon'r.

God, Bold sinner, do not thou presume
Upon my Grace; a sweet perfume,
Or pleasing Sacrifice does from
A late repentance seldom come,
Can thou believe that tree's ought worth,
That not till winter fruit brings forth?
Or would thou be content thy wife
Should play the harlot all her life,
And at the last should tender th^e
Her love and service, when that she
Through age and sickness over worn
Is most unfit to serve thy turn!
Judge then thy self if thou would be
So served as thou servest me?
Thou Would have her to thy self alone
Before her youth and beauty's gone;
I must thy love and service have
When thou art dropping in thy grave.
When thou art lame or impotent,
Then thou will be a penitent.
Fool not away thy soul with this
Presumption, for the high way it is
To hell; a double danger lies
In such late conformities:
For that man that does delay
To hearken to my voice to day,
Will be to morrow more unfit,
And have his ear quite deaf to it.
Each cranny there will be fast barred,
And his heart will grow so hard
Through long continuance in sin,
That not a word can enter in;
Although I call and call again,
He is still deaf, it is all in vain,
Besides, should he knock at my door
When he is dying, not before,
He shall perceive it then too late,
Fast locked will be my Mercy Gate,
Because my Justice will not bear
That I should his Petition hear,
Who would not hear my voice at all,
Albeit I did him often call.
O then take heed, do not delay
The hearing of my voice a day.
The thief of the Cross no pattern is
For thy deferred repentance: his
Was extraordinary, thou
Ought not to look for the like now.
When Christ is crucified once more
Presume upon it, not before.

Psalm 119.67. Before I was afflicted I went astray, but now have I kept thy
word.


MAn like a silly sheep does often stray,
Not knowing of his way.
Blind Deserts and the wilderness of Sin
He daily travels in;
There Is nothing will reduce him sooner then
Afflictions, to his pen.
He wanders in the Sunshine, but in rain
And stormy weather hastens home again.
Thou the great Shepherd of my soul, O keep
Me thy unworthy sheep
From gadding: or if fair means will not do it
Let soul then bring me to it.
Rather then I should perish in my error,
Lord bring me back with terror;
Better I be chastized with thy rod
And shepherds staff, then stray from thee my God.
Though for the present stripes do grieve me fore.
At last they profit more,
And make me to observe thy word, which I
Neglected formerly,
Let me come home rather by weeping cross;
Then still be at a loss.
For health I Would rather take a bitter pil.
Then eating sweetmeats to be always ill.
Prove. 4.18. The path of the Just is as the shining light, that shines more
and more unto the perfect day.


THe just man's life's the path to heaven,
Though narrow, yet it is even,
No dark nor obscure way,
But shining bright as is the day;
And as the day's each minute brighter, so
He step by step does to perfection go.
No violent motion it is, but creeps
A gentle pace, and peeps
Like break of day, a light
That Is checkered betwixt black and white,
Till it increasing more and more appear
A perfect day within the Hemisphere.
The man new started from his sins
When he his race begins,
Just so much light he has
To show him that there is a path
Which leads to heaven, though scarce enough to guide
His feet from slipping sometimes on each side.
A little now, a little then
As he Christ cured saw 'men
VValking at first like trees,
So does the righteous by degrees,
Each cross he meets at first seems more then man,
A Giant in his way to Canaan.
But as his light, his courage grows,
And then away he throws
His fears, takes heart of Grace,
And boldly looks the world in the face,
Bids do its worst, and what before did seem
A Monster, now a Pigmy he does deem.
Vice in his Native colors he
Sees and hates perfectly;
Virtue's the thing alone
That he makes his companion;
Adding of grace to grace till that his Sun
To the Meridian of his day has run,
And then like Joshuah's fixed stands
To do all Gods commands,
Nor shall it e're go down
But glory shall his graces crown,
And make one constant day that knows no night,
Nor lessening nor augmenting of his light.
Lord, let thy grace about me shine,
That I may not decline,
The path which leads to thee,
And may it still increasing be
Till grace and glory shall unite their rays
Into one perfect light that never decays.
Prove. 18.14. A wounded spirit who can bear?


Is It possible? who will believe
A spirit can wounded be and grieve?
What has no body needs no blows to fear:
Yet it is most true,
Gods word tells you,
A wounded spirit who can bear?
One thing there is a soul will wound
So deeply, that 'twill bleed and swound,
And even dye for grief, for shame, for fear.
Sin is the thing
Does all this bring.
A wounded spirit who can bear?
Sin's a two edged sword which slayes
The soul of man a thousand ways:
It killed the devil though he a Spirit were,
For dead he is
To Grace, to bliss.
A wounded spirit who can bear?
That man whose conscience within
Is galled with a crying sin,
How much it wracks him, how it does him tear
No tongue can tell,
It Is worse then hell.
A wounded spirit who can bear?
Since then it so torments the mind,
O Lord let me this favor find,
Prevent me with thy grace whiles I live here
That I may be
From great sins free,
An innocent spirit let me bear.
Or if that favor be too high,
Yet this I pray thee not deny;
That sovereign Balsom, though it cost thee deer,
Thy blood I mean,
To wash me clean,
A cleansed spirit I can bear.
Eccles. 12.1. Remember now thy Creator in the days of thy youth.


KInd is that piety which does begin
In youth: e're it is accustomed unto sin
The mind white paper is, and will admit
Of any Lesson you will write in it.
What Is then imprinted there does firmly stand
Not to be blotted out by any hand.
But when that vice has first took up the place,
'Twill be a double labor; one to raze
Out that which long has got possession,
Another for to make a new impression;
And a much harder task you will it find
To root out vice, then virtue plant i'th'mind;
To cast one Devil out is greater pain,
Then two good Angels there to entertain,
To keep a Vessel sweet is not so much,
As when once sowred it is to make it such
And look at first how it has seasoned bl^,
It will retain that odor still therein,
He that never thinks on God till he is old,
Gray headed, and his blood froze up with cold.
Wrack with Diseases, one foot in the grave,
Whom all the Art of Physic cannot save,
A College of Physicians not reprieve,
Or keep his carcass scarce a day alive;
O what a business it will be to climb
To heaven by penitence, when there is no time,
Nor means for him to do it in! but he
By virtue of his faith, not works, must be
Rapt thither in an instant, as if heaven
Would be to him at the first asking given.
But man remember thy Creator now
Whiles God both time and means does thee allow*
Trust not thy soul upon a broken reed,
Faith without works will stand in little steed:
When thy first days and best in sin are past,
Think not God will accept thy worst and last.
Eccles. 12.7. Then shall the dust return to the earth as it was, and the
Spirit shall return to God that gave it.


OUr famous Harvey has made good
The circulation of the blood,
And what was paradox; we know
To be a demonstration now.
The like in bodies does befall
Civil as well as Natural.
Such revolutions in them found,
That they are always turning round,
We knew a kingdom which of late
Converted was into a State;
And from the hands of many men,
That State devolved to one again.
We know that wealth, which now does flow
In The City veins did lately grow
In The Country furrows, and the same
Soon runs to the place from whence it came.
We know our bodies frame of dust
At first created was, and must
Crumble to dust ere long; we see
Not one from Dissolution free.
We know, or (what is equivalent)
Believe our souls, which God first sent
To make our bodies move and live,
Shall go to him who them did give;
When once their Maker them commands,
They strait return into his hands,
Thus we see almost every thing
Circling about as in a ring.
The winter season of the year,
Is now turned Summer every where.
This summer will to winter turn,
And that freeze, which before did burn.
Rivers which borrow from the main
Their streams, do pay them back again.
Since nothing under heaven has rest,
But floating up and down, it is best
To look above, and fix mine eyes
Where not the shadow of change lies:
No variations there, but all
Stand still in state pacifical.
Go then my Dust to Dust, but thou my soul
Return unto thy Rest above the Pole.
Cant. 1.5. I am black but comely, O ye Daughters of Jerusalem.


A DIALOGUE Between the CHURCH and her DAUGHTERS
Daught. YOu were our Mother once, most bright and fair
Admired and loved by every eye,
No earthly beauty could with you compare;
But now you are of another dye.
We never beheld a Moor more black then you
Are by this unexpected change,
We hardly can believe it to be true,
The sight so uncouth is and strange.
You are become a widow desolate,
You have no Suitors as before.
We are ashamed to own you, since of late
Most men have cast you out of door.

Church, Despise me not, although that black I am,
The reason you shall understand;
From an extreme hot Country late I came,
From that Egyptian Sunburned Land.
There I was scorcht, and lost my beauty there,
By lying long amongst the Pots
And Brick-kilns, heavy burdens I did bear;
Thus I contracted all my spots.
Yet be not you ashamed of me, for I,
Though black without, am fair within;
My soul is purged from impurity,
And grace has now excluded sin.
It was the plot of my Beloved, who
Seeing me proud, and wanton grow
Of my unparalleled beauty, served me so;
To keep me up he brought me low.
He took away the luster of my face,
But gave another to my mind;
And now I do account it no disgrace,
Since this the better far I find.
It Is not the fairness of the face, but soul,
Which does invite my Lord to love:
If he perceive the inward parts be foul,
The outward not at all him move.
No matter though I black to others seem,
Whilst I am comely in his eyes;
If he me worthy of his love esteem,
I care not who does me despise.
When he shall find it fit to wash off all
My black, and outward grace restore,
Like the Sun after an Eclipse, I shall
Shine brighter then I did before.

Isaiah 57.15. Thus says the High and Lofty one that inhabiteth Eternity,
whose name is Holy, I dwell in the high and holy place, with him also that is
of a contrite and humble spirit:


LOrd, thou have told us that there be
Two dwellings which belong to thee,
And those two (that is the wonder)
Are far asunder.
The one the highest heaven is,
The mansions of eternal bliss;
The other's the contrite
And humble sprite.
Not like the Princes of the earth,
Who think it much below their birth
To come within the door
Of people poor.
No, such is thy humility,
That though thy dwelling be on high,
Thou do thy self abase
To the lowest place.
Where ere thou see a sinful soul
Deploring his offenses foul,
To him thou will descend,
And be his friend.
Thou will come in, and with 'him sup,
And from a low state raise him up,
Till thou have made him eat
Blessed Angels me^^.
Thus thou will him with honor crown
Who in himself is first cast down,
And humbled for his sins,
That thy love wins.
Though heaven be high, the gate is low,
And he that comes in there must bow:
The lofty looks shall never
Have entrance there.
O God since thou delight'st to rest
In the humble contrite breast,
First make me so to be,
Then dwell with me.
Lam. 3.39. Wherefore does a living man complain? a man for the punishment of
his sins.


WHy does a living man complain,
When for his sins he punished is?
Since his complaint is all in vain
And he no ease obtaines by this,
But rather adds new torments to the sore,
And by impatience makes his sufferings more.
So have I seen in the Fowlers gin,
A bird by striving out to get,
The faster has entangled bin,
And never could escape out of the net.
Were he a while but quiet, he might spy
Perhaps some hole or other through to fly.
But man of all things has least cause
To murmur or complain at all,
Since by often breaking of Gods Laws
He justly in this toil does fall.
For sin and suffering are correlatives,
A Malefactor well deserves his gyves.
A mercy it is that he yet lives,
And hopes a pardon he may have,
Not so much favor the Law gives,
It Is the Lawgivers part to save.
He ought not to complain, but to be glad,
VVhiles he is alive and pardon may be had.
When thou chastizest me, O Lord,
And for my sin do make me smart,
I Will not return an angry word,
But take it from thee in good part;
Since thou exactest of me less then I
Deserved have for mine iniquity.
Hosea 2.19. I will betroth thee unto me for ever, yea, I will betroth thee
unto me in Righteousness, and in judgment, and in loving kindness, and in
tender mercies:


LEt all Records be searched over and over,
Such an unequal marriage as this
Was never seen or heard before,
Where heaven and earth, God and man kiss,
Where Majesty and misery do meet,
Power and infirmity each other greet.
Thou art the King of Glory, Lord of life,
Thy Spouse at best a Creature poor; but since
Her fall deformed, and no fit wife
Will make for thee so great a Prince.
Go court the Angels then; yet they, though bright,
Are creatures too, and scarce pure in thy sight;
How much less I that on my belly creep,
And cleave unto the earth, that did begin
As soon as I was born to weep,
As soon as I could go to sin,
When I polluted in my blood did lie
No eye would pity me but all past by;
Cast out in the open field I was, to the shame
And loathing of my person in the day
That I was born, then my Lord came
Like the Samaritan that way,
And took me up; thy mercy did thee move,
Not my desert, that was thy time of love.
Nor is thy love fickle as most men's be,
Who soon grow weary of their former choice,
When they a greater beauty see,
But thou with me wilt still rejoice.
Thou have betrothed me to thy self for ever,
And if I leave thee not, wilt leave me never.
Thou that did love me when I nothing had
That lovely was, endue me with thy grace;
For with that wedding garment clad,
Thou will no blemish in my face
Or any other part of me espy,
But I shall always seem fair in thine eye.
And that my love to thee may never fail,
No more then thine to me, open mine eyes,
And then thy glorious face unvaile
That above all I may thee prize,
Believing I the greatest bliss obtain,
When thou love me, and I love thee again.
Jonah 4 Upon Jonas his anger at Gods sparing of Niniveh, and destroying the
Gourd.


ARt angry Jonah 'cause God gracious is
And merciful to Niniveh? is this
Thy charity, that thou have rather see
Thousands of people perish, then to be
Deemed a false Prophet? would thou have thy Lord
Deny himself to justify thy word?
Not spare the Penitent, since thou have said,
Yet forty days and Niniveh's destroid?
Not so; forbear thy passion, curb thine ire,
Let God be true, and every man a liar.
It cruelty, not Justice were, if them
Who have repented once God should condemn.
God is as just as merciful when he
Forgives the sinner his iniquity
Upon his true Conversion. Nor may we
Think God is mutable in his decree,
But man the Changeling is, it is his contrition
That makes him capable of Gods remission.
The judgment thou denouncedst did suppose
This tacit limitation, if that those
Against whom 'twas past, continued obstinate
Without returning from their wicked state.
But they repenting God, revokes his doom,
And the objects of his pity they become;
Yet thou art angry still, and needs wilt dye,
Before that God shall show his clemency
On them, whiles thou art guilty of the same
For which thou do thy God so boldly blame,
Thou but a mortal man do pity take
Upon a gourd which God made for thy sake;
And shall not the immortal God have pity
On Niniveh, that is so great a City?
A City he for his own glory made,
And must that City perish whiles thy shade
Remains untouched? This gourd no fruit does bear,
Yet flourish must, whiles men for whose use were
All things created, must dest^oyed be,
Only to please thy froward fantasy;
This gourd, because thy covering, thou would spare
Though it grew up without thy cost and care;
But Niniveh must down, which God did frame,
And to that height of honor brought the same,
That it is the imperial City of the East,
Within whose walls rests both man and beast;
It is a shade to thousand^, yet must down,
Or else thy Lord shall now incur thy frown,
This gourd came up and vanished in a night,
Yet such thy love's to it, and such thy spite
To Niniveh, that though it was not built
In many ages, must in one be spilt,
Yea, thou would have one hour to deface
And ruinate this stately towering place
Of three days journey, th'wonder of the world,
Into a strange confused Chaos hurled.
O Lord, how far thy thoughts above man's are,
Thy ways 'bove his! 'twixt them there is no compare.
Man's mercies cruel be, if weighed with thine;
Thy judgments, mercies be, mercies divine
And infinite. Such vast and mighty odds
There is 'twixt our affections and Gods;
If he were not more merciful then we,
One of a thousand would not saved be;
Whom God thinks fit to spare, we damn to hell,
And think in doing so that we do well:
All that dissent from us we curse and banne,
As if they were worse then a Publican.
Cease, cease rash man, who dust and ashes art,
To contradict thy Maker, and to thwart
His righteous Judgments, which are so profound
A deep, that thy short line can never sound
The bottom of them; thou may in thy span
As soon contain the Earth and Ocean,
As comprehend them in thy shallow brain;
The thought's blasphemous as the attempt is vain.
Seek not above thy reasons reach t'aspire,
And what thou can not comprehend admire.
Submit thy Judgment unto Gods, so shall
Thy feet stand firmly, whereas others fall;
Thou shall like the Israelites, walk on dry ground
Whiles others like the Egyptians are drowned
In the red sea of their own censures; so
By judging others, they themselves judge too.
Do not conceit thy faith to be the less
'Cause it abounds in charitablenesse;
Without all question his faith is the best,
Whose charity flames highest in his breast;
And his religion is most Christian,
That saves a world rather then damns a man.
Let then God mercy show to Niniveh,
I will not with the Prophet angry be;
But wish to all the same repentant mind,
And pray they may the like forgiveness find.
Zeph. 1.12. It shall come to pass at that time, that I will search Jerusalem
with Candles, and punish the men, etc.


WHen God shall inquisition make
For sin, What man can choose but quake?
No place he has his head to hide,
Lu^ke where he will, heel be espied.
But why with candles will God look,
As if some corner or close nook
Of his Jerusalem could be
(Without their light) 'from his sight free?
No, he that formed the eye will see
Through the greatest obscurity.
Candles are useless, when the day
Appears, we throw them then away.
Yea when the Sun begins to shine,
The brightest (...) their light decline.
Gods eyes ten thousand times more bright
Are then the Suns, and there is no night
At all to him; by Candles then
He speaks to the common sense of men,
Letting them know, that as when we
Intend to make a scrutinie,
And strictly search for some rare thing
That Is lost, Jewel or Diamond Ring;
We candles light, and pore about
The house, we pry within, without,
Leave not a hole unsearcht, for fear
The thing we look for should ^ye there.
So God to take all ^houghts from us,
Of scaping his inquiry, thus
Himself expresses; If he search
Jerusalem so close, his Church;
What will become of Babylon
The wicked City, where not one
Righteous is to be found? That needs
No inquisition, their ill deeds
Are so transparent to each eye
As he that runs may them epsy,
Where crimes are open to the view
Of all, not s^arch, but plagues are due.
Lord give me grace for to prevent
As well the search, as punishment;
Teach me to cast mine eye within
My breast, and spy out every sin
Which there lies hid, that so I may
(Judging my self before the day)
Avoid the Judgments just which shall
Upon the wicked heavy fall.
Zech. 13.1. In that day there shall be a fountain opened to the house of David,
and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem for sin, and for uncleanness.


NEver was Lepers body half so foul
As is the sinners soul,
Each power and faculty
Polluted is, not the least part being free;
No Fullers soap, nor nitre can.
Make clean this soiled soul of man,
But ^o an holy Well is opened wide,
Which runs from Gods own side,
Whose virtue is so rare,
That it will make the blackest Ethiop fair;
In this clear fountain sinners may
Wash all their spots and st^ins away.
Open it is to all, to all that be
Of David's family,
And of Jerusalem;
This fountain only opened is to them
That of the faithful seed are sprung,
To them of right it does belong.
They that are strangers to the Covenant
And saving faith do want,
This holy Well disdain,
As if it no more virtue did contain
Then Abana and Pharpar, which
Can hardly cure a scab or itch;
Much less the spreading leprosy of sin
Which sticks so close within
That naught can cleanse the same
But the Aqua Vitae which from Christ's side came:
Go then, my soul, and drink thy fill,
See, from his heart it does distill.
What though thou very poor and wretched art,
In it thou may have part,
For it is the beggars bath
As much as it is the Kings, and he that has
A mind for to be cleans'd indeed,
May use the same as he has need.
Mal. 3.17: They shall be mine says the Lord of Hosts, in that day when I make
up my Jewels.


YOu that of godliness do make a mock,
And those that are religious jeere,
As if they were your laughing stock;
Know that ere long God will appear
To judge this wicked world; and then
They will be found to be the only men.
Though now you tread them underneath your feet,
And no more reckoning of them make
Then of the dust that is in the street,
The time shall come when God will take
Them for his richest Jewels, and
Prize them, as 'twere the signet on's right hand.
Yea to your shame and wonder he will raise
The value of them above all
That you can think is worthy praise,
Or whatsoever thou precious call:
Gold is but dross, Pearls pebbles are
To what they shall be, there is no compare.
And how can it be otherwise, when they
Derive their luster from his face?
Not Sol himself shines at midday
With so illustrious a grace;
For every grace which they have here,
Shall be a glory in the highest sphere.
I care not then how I am vilified,
Or what the world does make of me;
Let men at pleasure me deride,
So that I may Gods Jewel be:
For though I now am trampled down,
He Will make me up a diamond in his Crown.
Matthew. 6.19, 20. Lay not up for your selves treasures upon earth, where moth
and rust does corrupt, and where thieves break through and steal: but lay up for
your selves treasures in heaven, where neither moth nor rust does corrupt, and
where thieves do not break through nor steal.


GIve over your greediness, much-worms give over,
And trade no more;
For Apes and Peacocks, and such petty toys
Are nt for boys.
Men that have reason and religion too,
Scorn so to do;
They count that voyage to be lost that brings
No better things.
For all the treasures of the earth will not
Make a man happy if they could be got.
Some think the Indies to the King of Spain
Bring little gain,
And that our seventh Henry was more wise
Them to despise,
Though offered to him; this we know, that Prince
Is poorer since;
And notwithstanding all his golden mines
He still declines.
For all those treasures that are fetched from far,
When home they come are strait consumed in war.
What private man can then his riches boast?
He that had most
Amongst us when our troubles first begun,
Is now undone;
And he that since of thousands is possessed,
Though kept in's chest
Fast under lock and key, may soon be brought
Not worth a groat.
Thus fortunes wheel is turning up and down,
To day 'twil smile on thee, tomorrow frown.
Who then of this worlds wealth would guilty be,
Since that we see
No certainty in riches can be had?
That man is mad
Who seeks to hedge the Cuckoe in, and stay
What will away.
For riches wings unto themselves do make,
And their flight take,
Like the Eeagle toward heaven; none can hold
Or clip their wings, though they be made of gold.
Be wise, and lay up treasures that are sure
And will endure
In spite of fraud or force. Heavens the place
The treasures grace.
When all your temporal estates do perish,
This still shall flourish.
How much it does all earthly goods excel,
I cannot tell;
But this I can assure you, there is none
Can bring it under sequestration.
Travel by Sea or Land, go where you will,
It Is with you still.
It costs you naught the Portage, nor will make
Your Back to ache.
No burden it is, but full of ease and joy
In the convoy.
Nor Soldier nor Pirate can it force,
Or make divorce
'Twixt you and it. Once fix it in your heart,
And make much of it, it will never depart;
But grow from Grace to Grace, and never cease
For to increase,
Bringing forth fruits of Piety and Love,
Making us move,
Fast toward our Center, Heaven, until our soul
Knock at the pole
And enter into that eternal rest
With all the Blessed.
Society of Saints and Angels, this
When all is done the only treasure is.
Matthew 10.16. Be ye wise as Serpents, and harmless as doves.


NExt to the Angels Man created was,
In knowledge and all parts he did surpass
The other Creatures; yet is such a fool
^ecome by sin, that he may go to School
^o birds and beasts, the little Ant and Be,
^oth thrift can teach him and good husbandry:
^he Serpent wisdom, the Dove innocence,
that to avoid, this to give no offense,
That to prevent dangers before they fall,
And this not to revenge a wrong at all.
How far is man to seek in both these kinds,
He by too sad experience daily finds.
Into a world of mischiefs he does run,
Undoing others, and himself undone.
Some Serpents craft he has, but not the love,
The candor, and the mildness of the Dove;
That has took wing long since and fled away,
Naught but the Serpents sting behind does stay.
Malice enough to be revenged, but none
Of the true wisdom of the beast; that is gone.
My God, who did both these at first instill
In Dove and Serpent; let it be thy will
T'infuse them both in me, that I may live
So innocent, as no offense I give
To others, and so prudent too, that I
May not to injuries exposed lie.
Matthew. 11.19. Behold a man gluttonous, and a win^ bibber, a friend of
Publicans an^ sinners.


WHy should I think to be
From calumny or slander free,
When I see men afford
No better language to my Lord?
My Lord though free from sin,
Free from detraction has not been:
If to a feast he come,
He is a glutton called by some.
If wine he drink, O then they cry
He is a drunkard presently;
If he converse with common people, then
He Is friend to Publicans and sinful men*
My God, since thou did b^ar
Such vile reproaches, I Will not fear
The like, nor be ashamed
By wicked men to be defamed:
It is the Godlies lot,
A blessing rather then a blot.
Their tongue no slander is,
They kill me when they kiss.
When they revile, I Am never the worse,
When they commend me, it is a curse.
Their commendation is a sign that I
Too much with their ill courses do comply.
Let them then do their worst,
And swell with poison till they burst,
Spit all their venom on me,
Till they believe they have undone me,
Cast all the dirt they can
To make me like them, a bad man;
It shall not trouble me,
Since so they served thee.
My Lord and Master suffered so,
Why should I Scot-free think to go?
VVhiles thou art witness of my innocence
I Will take it for a favor, no offense.
Matthew. 26.39. O my Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass from me:
nevertheless not as I will, but as thou will.


LOrd, what a bitter draught this was,
Which made thee pray
Thy Father thrice that it might pass
From thee away?
'Twas deadly poison filled the glass.
Thy Fathers wrath, and our sins were
Both in one cup,
Who then could blame thee for to fear
To drink it up,
Or pray it might not thee come near?
Yet such thy love to man was, and
Thy duty to
Thy Father, thou would not withstand
His will, but do
What e're it pleased him to command.
Though it displeasing were to thine
As flesh and blood,
Thou said, Thy will be done, not mine.
I think it good
This cup no longer to decline,
My God, it is my purpose now
Sin to detest,
And never more it room allow
within my breast,
Since with it thy cup did overflow.
But if to me disposed thou art
Some of the gall
And bitter potion to impart,
I Will take it all,
And pledge my Lord with all my heart,
And good cause why, since I am sure,
That on the Cross
Thou drank'st the dregs, I may endure
A gentle dose,
'Twil not my corr'sive be, but cure.
Mark 10.51. The blind man said unto Jesus, Lord, that I may receive my sight.


WHat would thou see poor man, that thou would fain
Receive thy sight again?
Should Beauty be thy object? That Is a fire
Will kindle loose desire,
And put thy soul out, making thee in mind
As in thy body blind.
I made a Covenant with mine eye, Job said,
Not once to look on maid.
If then to gaze on beauty thou delight,
(...) want thy (...).
What would thou see poor man, that thou would fain
Receive thy sight again?
Should Riches be thy Object? they entice
Unto a baser vice,
And make thee poorer then thou wast before
By coveting of more;
Wishing with Achan for that wedge of gold,
Thou did but now behold;
Or else with Ahab, longing to be Lord
Of Naboth his Vineyard.
If then to gaze on riches thou delight,
Thou Would better want thy sight.
What would thou see poor man, that thou would fain
Receive thy sight again?
Should Honor be thy object? That Is a thing
No true content can bring,
But puff thee up with an ambitious rage,
And to high acts engage,
With Herod Law and Justice trampling down
Thereby to gain a Crown;
Til Icarus his fall become thy fate,
And thou repent too late;
If then to gaze on Honor thou delight,
Thou Would better want thy sight.
What woudlst thou see poor man, that thou would fain
Receive thy sight again?
Should Jesus be thy Object? He is one
Worth looking on alone;
For had thou eyes, in's person thou might see
Both God and man to be;
Humility his majesty did shade,
When he a man was made;
Thou could not see his face, and live before
That flesh had veild him over;
As friend with friend, so thou may with him talk
As Moses once, and walk
As Enoch did, but more familiarly,
Since he is a man like thee
In all but sin; in him as in a glass
We see God face to face.
The Godhead bodily in him does dwell,
Of life he is the well,
The way to heaven, the spring of grace and glory.
O it is too long a story
To tell thee what he is, so great's his worth
No pen can set it forth
Though snatched from Angels wing: well may thou pray
To see this Star of day,
This Sun of Righteousness which with his rays
Produces endless joies.
If then to gaze on Jesus thou delight,
'Twere best to be all sight.
Pray still that he would give thee the fruition
Of this thrice happy vision.
Luke 5.8. Lord, depart from me, for I am a sinful man.


LOrd thou art just, I am a sinful man,
Thou art as fire, and I as tow, how can
We meet together, but I needs must be
Consumed to dust and ashes strait by thee?
Since I so frail am, thou so furio^s art,
Have I not cause to pray thee Lord depart?
Yet thou art merciful as well as just,
And he from whom thou partest perish must.
As I do fear thy Justice, so do I
Thy mercy want to help my misery;
Have I not then far greater cause to pray
That thou would not depart, but with me stay?
My God, in thee both Attributes combine,
Enough for me if one of them be mine;
Thus thou whose presence heaven and earth does still
Ma^^t go from me, and yet be with me still;
Whiles I am sinful, Justice get thee gone,
Mercy, be thou my sole companion.
John 6.70. Have not I chosen you twelve, and one of you is a devil?


NOt chance, but choice did first Apostles make;
Christ did not them at all adventures take:
But as his heavenly wisdom thought most fit,
For his own purpose, so he ordered it.
He raised not an army for to fight
And force religion, but did men invite
By gentle means; twelve of the simpler sort
Served to make up his train, and kept his court;
His father could (if so he had been bent)
Have more then twelve legions of Angels sent
To wait upon him, but he was inclined
To put off state, and put on a meek mind;
That so the world condemned by man's pride
Might by an humble God be justified.
These twelve thus chosen were enabled too
(...) divine all miracles to do,
All languages to speak, and by his word
All nations to turn unto the Lord.
Let the pretenders then unto the Spirit
P^ove by the like effects, that they inherit
The Apostles preaching office, and we shall
Obey their voice, and hearken to their call;
But whiles they speak no language but their own,
Nor any miracles to work are known,
Yet take upon them the Apostles places
To teach and preach, though void of all their graces.
Have we not reason then to think, that they
Who enter not by the door, but some back way
Into the sheepfold, and not called dare
Intrude thus boldly, no true Shepherds are,
But wolves, that under a false vizard creep,
Not to instruct, but to devour the sheep?
But who would ever have imagined
One of Christ's College, which had Christ for head
And founder too, should devil turn, and be
A traitor to his master? Yet we see
One of these twelve, that could preach very well,
And wonders work, his own deer Lord did sell
For a small matter; thus the best of things
Corrupted once, the worst contagion brings.
What place or person can be free from vice
Which seized on man even in paradise,
Crept into heaven, and Angels caused to fall,
Made them and an Apostle devils all?
To gather Churches then is a vain attempt,
As if you could have any quite exempt
From sinful men; when do what e're you can
The hypocrite will be the holy man,
And put as good a face on it as the best:
Purge never so much your body, there will rest
Some noxious humors in it, some Judas will
In spite of you, lie lurking in it still.
Christ's Church is likened by him to a field
Which tares and wheat confusedly does yield,
And he commands us to let both grow
Together til the harvest, left that now
By hasty separation, e're the day,
We not good husbands, but the wild Bores play,
Rooting up both, whereas they both should stand,
And wait the weeding of the Angels hand.
You Will say, by Tares is meant the hypocrite,
Which cannot be discerned by our sight,
Being only known to God; and therefore we
May mix with him in our society;
Whereas the wicked is so easily known,
We may and ought shun his communion.
Why then did Christ into his fellowship
Take Judas, suffer him to kiss his lip,
Call him by'th' name of friend, nay give him leave
The holy Sacrament for to receive;
Although he knew his heart, and all the evil
He had conceived, which made him up a devil?
And so no hypocrite to Christ was he:
What shall we purer then our Savior be?
'T^s true, the childrens bread should not be cast
To dogs, yet of the crumbs the dogs may taste;
And who knows but the tasting of them may
Turn dogs to Christians ere they go away?
The Word alone converts a wicked mind,
Much more the Word and Sacrament combind;
Both holy be: And if we must for bear,
To give the Sacrament to some for fear
Of profanation, Why do we dispense
The Word to all men without difference?
Or if we must not give it 'cause it may
Prove death to some that take it the wrong way;
The very same may of the Word be said,
Therefore to preach it we should be afraid
To mixed Congregations, left that some
Should worser then they were before become.
This only so falls out by accident,
It Is neither in the Word, nor Sacrament.
God commonly by them grace on us pours,
If it prove death, the fault's not theirs, but ours.
It is the duty then of every one,
To fit himself for this communion;
And if the Minister the danger tell
Of taking it unworthily, it is well;
His own soul he delivers if he do it,
Upon their peril it is that will come to it.
We wish the Church invested were again
With power, notorious sinners to restrain,
And excommunicate them too; til then
We may reprove, but not correct these men:
It is our hearts desire, and we pray
That every one rightly receive it may;
And that no Judas any more may be
Admitted to this blessed Society;
But this is rather to be wished then found
In this crazed age, where more are sick then sound.
More traitors then are faithful, twelve to one,
How can we then make separation?
For if we will not partial be, but just,
Scarce one of twelve into our flock we must
Receive; and then how many little flocks
Will there be of us, subject to the mocks
Of all our enemies? and whiles that each
Intends his own particular, the breach
Will wider grow in the general, and we
May seek a Church, but still to seek shall be.
John 14.2. I go to prepare a place for you.


WHat a high favour's this,
That God should be man's harbinger to bliss?
When John prepared the way before thy face,
O Christ, 'twas no small grace
Unto the Baptist then;
Much greater do thou now bestow on men,
In that thou go before to make us room
In heaven against we come.
Lord, we were not more glad
At thy first coming, then we should be sad
At thy departure; did not thou impart
This cordial to our heart,
Chearing our spirits thus,
That thou possession take of heaven for us;
Thou in our flesh have entered there, and we
By virtue thereof be
Assured of our places,
As soon as ever we have run our races;
With all the Patriarchs we shall sit down
And there receive our Crown,
It is then fit and just
That we should think of shaking off our dust,
And laying down our earthly Tabernacles,
Which are to us as shackles,
And hinder our souls flight
To those blessed Mansions which are ours by right.
Let us not dream of setting up our rest
Til w' are of heaven possessed.
That is our center, that
Our country is, our proper place, whereat
All our endeavors must aim, since we are never
At home til we come there.
O thou that art the way,
And wan^'st the way before us, grant we may
Follow thy steps so close, that in the end
We may that place ascend.
John 14.6. I am the Way, the Truth, and the Life.


I Came from heaven to be your guide, and I
Am he by whom your path to heaven does lie,
The steps I trod on earth are the only right
Way to those Mansions of most glorious light;
The doctrine which I taught you is the whole
Truth, which if followed well, will save your soul,
And bring you to those joys shall never end,
The joys to which blessed spirits do ascend;
Life without death, to that your hopes must tend.
Acts 9.4. Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me?


NEver was union seen
So strict as that between
Christ and his members; though in hevaen he be,
And we on earth, yet see
We cannot suffer here, but strait he cries
And feels our miseries,
As if they were his own:
So well to him the are known,
That what e're persecutions we sustain,
He has the greatest share, and will complain.
Talk not what virtue lies
In secret sympathies,
As that between the loadstone and the steel
Which do at distance feel
Each others force, and by an innate love
This unto that will move,
Or that betwixt the wound
And Talbot powder found;
Or of that sensitive plant, whose virtue's such,
That it contracts it self at every touch.
All these, though very rare,
Secrets in nature are;
But grace a stronger sympathy does make
'Twixt Christ and us: we take
New life from him, as he took flesh from us.
We now are one; and thus
Our wounds are his, our smart
Grives him unto the heart;
Who touch us, touch the apple of his eye,
A tender part, how can he choose but cry?
You then that persecute
And all your arrows shoot
Against the truly Christian, know that you
One day shall deerly rue
And pay for this your spite, your arrows all
On your own head shall fall,
You Will find it hard to kick
Against the sharpest prick;
And whiles you aim at man, you shoot far wide,
Hitting your God through your brothers side.
Why then my soul art thou
So sad, because that now
By wicked men thou persecuted art?
Thy Savior bears a part,
And will revenge thy cause against thy foes;
His hand thy wounds will close,
As though his own they were,
No more their malice fear;
For let them do the worst to thee they can,
Since that thy fellow suff'rer's God and man.
1 Cor. 6.19. What, know ye not that your body is the Temple of the Holy Ghost
which is in you, which ye have of God; and ye are not your own?


LOrd, what an humble God art thou,
Thus to descend
And be my friend,
Yea, more then friend, mine In-mate now?
Do not enough thy self abase,
To look on me,
But I must be
Thy Temple and thy dwelling place?
This my vile Body thou do take,
And think fit
To honor it,
And for thy use a house it make.
Henceforth I Will prize this house of thine
At a high rate,
Being consecrate
To thee, and count it no more mine.
Not any part thereof shall be
An instrument
To sin, but bent
In holy ways to wait on thee.
The windows in it shall be mine eyes
Through which I Will see
My God, thou me;
My tongue shall off^r Sacrifice.
My lips the Calves which I will pay
To thee my Lord,
And every word
Well weighed I Will on thine Altar lay.
My Lungs the bellows which shall blow
The holy fire
Of my desire,
Till to a lively flame it grow.
My Prayer as Incense shall ascend,
And every room
In me perfume,
That no ill savor thee offend.
My heart shall be the Holocaust,
My hands shall bring
An Offering
And all shall serve the Holy Ghost.
1 Cor. 10.12. Let him that thinks he stands, take heed lest he fall.


LEt none presume he stands so fast,
But that he may fall first or last:
The most confirmed in grace,
Stands in a slippery place:
He treads on ice, and if he take not care
Unto his steps, is down e're he is aware.
It Is hard to keep a middle way
'Twixt two extremes and never stray,
Since to the worst, man's mind
By nature is inclind;
Each virtue has two vices on both sides,
It Is odds, that into one of them he slides.
So many snares, so many evils,
So many doubts, so many devils
Environ him about,
That be he never so stout,
His faith may fail, his feet may slip awry,
And he soon fall from his integrity,
David that was so great, so good,
And highly in Gods favor stood,
In two such sins he fell
As might have damned him well,
But that in mercy God pleased to restore
Him to that state that he was in before.
Peter though he a pillar were
Of the Church, his Master did forswear,
Such power had fear to make
His former faith to shake.
Thus he who stood the day before so strong,
Was to his grief and shame laid all along.
I will not be too confident
Of my fast footing, but content
My faith and fear should stand
Together hand in hand,
That fear may keep my faith from being too bold.
And faith my fear from losing of its hold.
1 Cor. 15.19. If in this life only we have hopes in Christ, then were we of
all men most miserable.


I were of things the worst
And most accursed
If in this life my happiness did end,
Beasts and Birds me exceed
In strength in speed,
The Devils me in knowledge far transcend.
The wicked in sports swim
Up to the brim,
The Epicure abounds in carnal pleasure;
The ambitious man is crowned
With Honors round;
The Covetous augments his daily Treasure.
My conscience will not let
Me Riches get
As others do, by rapine and deceit;
Such ways it checks me in
Saying it is sin,
And warnes me of the hook under the bait.
As sparks do upwards fly
Even so am I
To troubles born; at every turn we meet:
Reproach and i^nomy
My Honors be;
My wealth serves but to buy a winding sheet.
Yet courage take my soul,
Let faith control
Thy reason; let it fix thy thoughts elsewhere;
These worldly things never can
Make happy man;
Thy happiness comes from a higher sphere,
With holy Job then know,
Though thou art low,
Thy head's as high as heaven; there lives he
Who thy Redeemer is,
And that thy bliss
In seeing him with these same eyes shall be.
Worldly delights be gone,
In him alone
All wealth, all honor, and all pleasure lies:
No sorrows then shall rest
Within my breast,
His hand shall wipe all tears from my sad eyes.
His hand my head shall raise,
And crown with joys,
Such joies no eye has seen, nor ear has heard,
No tongue of men can tell,
Nor Angels well,
Only to feel them shall be my reward.
2 Cor. 12.10. When I am weak, then I am strong.


WHat Paradox is this, that there should be
Weakness and strength at the same time in me?
A Paradox to Nature, not to Grace,
Where without contradiction both have place;
When I am weakin body, then I find
That I am strong in the virtues of the mind;
And when I am brought by affliction low,
Then I in spiritual comforts high do grow.
When of my self I cannot go nor stand,
Yet I supported by Gods heavenly hand
Can safely travel through a world of woe,
Yea, through the valley of deaths shadow go
And fear no ill; walk through a sea of troubles,
Yet never sink, counting the waves but bubbles,
Which my faith blows away; my hope does sound
The greatest depths, and even touch the ground;
When I am ready to be swallowed by
Deaths greedy jaws, faith sets me up on high
Like Moses on Mount Pisgah, whence I can
Behold a better Land, of Canaan.
And enter too, where I with joy shall see
His glories in a blessed eternity.
If so much strength to weakness does belong,
Lord make me weak that thou may make me strong.
Gal. 2.20. Nevertheless I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me; and the
life which I now live in the flesh, I live by the faith of the Son of God, who
loved, me and gave his life for me.


BEhold the privilege of a Christian
Above another man,
Both Tenants to one Lord,
Yet in their Tenures they do not accord:
One has two lives in present, and the third
In future, but confirmed by Gods own Word.
The life of Nature first, the life of Grace
Takes up the second place,
The life of Glory last,
Which comes not till the other two are past.
The Christian esteems the Natural
Compared with the other nothing worth at all.
The Natural man in present has but one,
And in reversion none;
Yet he does so depend
Upon that one, as if it never would end.
Not once considering how each trivial thing
Serves to draw on its speedy ruining.
And as the beasts that perish, so shall ^e
To dust dissolved be;
Yea, a worse mischief shall
After this life this wretched man befall.
Of his unhappiness it being the least
That his short breath expireth like the beast.
For his one life a double death shall have;
His body in the grave,
His soul in hell shall lie,
A second death that is to eternity.
A miserable man he is indeed,
Whose single short life two long deaths succeed.
I will account no more this life of mine
To be my own, but thine;
Not I, but thou do live
In me, who for me (Lord) thy self did give.
It was thy love that made thee dye for me,
It is my faith that makes me live in thee?
Phil. 3.13, 14. I count not my self to have apprehended; but this one thing I
do, forgetting those things which are behind, and reaching forth unto those
things which are before, I press toward the Mark, for the prize of the high
Calling of God in Christ Jesus.


THis ilfe is like a race,
Where every one's a Runner, and the prize
A Crown of Glory: Heavens the place
Where the Mark's set before our eyes.
I who have not as yet
Scarce run out half the way, must not sit down
And think I Have done enough, but sweat
And labor hard to get the Crown.
Nor may I cast an eye
Behind, to see how many I Have out run,
But with the foremost I must vie
And better end then I begun,
For if I fail at last,
When I have gone the greatest part of the Race,
Or give off when the worst is past,
It will be much to my disgrace.
Nor is that all, but then
Another man shall take my crown from me,
And I with the faint-hearted men,
Out of the Lists quite cast shall be,
O Lord do thou anoint
Me with thy oil of Grace from top to toe,
In every lim and every joint,
That I may never weary grow.
But persevering in
My course with vigorous and active strength,
May be so happy as to win
The Goal first, and the Crown at length.
Heb. 13.14. Here we have no continuing City, but we seek one to come.


MAn is a Creature loves society,
And cannot long alone be well,
Hence God made Eve that she
Might with him dwell.
From these two sprung
A numerous family,
That to a City grew ere long,
And that impli'd strength and stability.
But see how soon this City came to naught,
Being destroyed with its own weight;
And by division brought
To ruin strait.
Then how can we,
A City have that is strong
Or permanent? It cannot be
What Is made with hands should e're continue long.
The best is made with lime and stone, how then
Can that which is compact of such
Frail matter last? yet men
Are frailer much.
Those men that make
This City, are all cast
In moulds of Clay, and do partake
Of earth themselves: such vessels cannot last.
Nor they, nor yet their City can endure,
Many mishaps there be will end them,
To perish they are sure,
None can defend them.
Each little thing
To pieces breaks their frame,
A very wind, a breath will bring
Them to that nothing whence at first they came.
Yet whiles their worst part crumbles to the dust
And falls to ashes in their urn,
Their souls immortal must
To God return,
That God has made
A City without hands
For them, which never shall fail nor fade:
Unmovable its vast foundation stands.
A most magnificent and glorious place;
Which they that see 't can scarce set forth,
Or give it half the grace
As to its worth.
There God keeps Court,
Millions on either side
Of Saints and Angels do resort
To wait on him; this City's wondrous wide.
The least of all those many Mansions ther^
Our greatest Cities far transcend,
Each one's a Kingdom which shall never
Admit of end,
This then alone
Requires our chiefest care
In seeking it, for there is none
On earth's round ball that can with it compare.
On this lets fix our thoughts, to this aspire,
To this let all our actions tend,
Be it our sole desire
There to ascend.
For all our bliss
God has reserved above,
Our happiness there seated is,
There is our Treasure, there must be our love.
James 2.20. Will thou know, O vain man, that faith without works is dead?


Hark, vain man, hark what the Apostle says,
And do not boast so much of thy great faith;
For though 'twere able mountains to remove,
It Is nothing worth unless it wo^k by love;
Love is the life of it, it is tha^ alone
Which quickens it, or else it is dead, it is none.
That man who breaths not at the mouth a jor,
Whose heart no motion has, whose pulse bea^s not,
We say is dead; the like we ^ay infer
Concerning faith, that is dead which does not stir:
If it be living, 'twill be active too,
What the heart thinks, mouth speaks, the hands will do.
Let others show their faith if that they please
Without their works, while I show mine by these.
First my Religion shall be pure, and then
Peaceable, if it be possible, with men;
Forgiving wrongs, giving what I can spare
To those that want and in distresses are;
I will be feet to the lame, eyes to the blind,
Helpful to all, and unto none unkind.
If thus my faith be qualified, I shall
Approve it to my self, to God, to all.
1 Peter 5.7. Casting all your care upon God, for he cares for you:


COme heavy souls, oppressed that are,
With doubts, and fears, and carking care.
Lay all your burdens down, and see
Where Is one that carried once a tree
Upon his back, and which is more,
A heavier weight, your sins he bore.
Think then how easily he can
Your sorrows bear that is God and Man;
Think too how willing he is to take
Your care on him, who for your sake
Sweat bloody drops, prayed, fasted, cried,
Was bound, scourged, mocked, and crucified,
He that so much for you did do,
Will yet do more, and care for you.
Rev. 20.11, 12. And I saw a great white Throne, and him that sat on it, from
whose face the Earth and the Heaven fled away, and there was found no place for
them. And I saw the dead, both small and great stand before God; and the Books
were opened, and another Book was opened which is the Book of Life, and the
dead were judged out of those things which were written in the Books, according
to their works.


HAd I the Art in painting like to him
Who did the day of Doom so lively limn,
That when a Heathen Prince beheld the same,
With terror struck, a Christian he became;
Thus would I set it forth unto your eye,
The Heavens should put on a sable dye,
Masked with the blackest vail of thickest clouds,
Which to the Sun, Moon, Stars should be as sh^owds
To muffle them in one continued night,
Not once affording the least spark of light,
Hiding their heads as shamed or grieved to see
The horrid sins of men which then should be
Made manifest and naked to the world,
And the dire plagues that on them should be hurs'd,
From this sad object let your eye retire
To the other side and see the earth on fire,
The Sea all blood, the Throne of God on high,
Whereon he sits in glorious Majesty,
Legions of Angels him surrounding there,
Millions of men that newly raised were
Out of their Sepulchers, by his command,
To hear their final sentence trembling stand:
Below the Devils in the various shapes
Of hideous monsters, and he^^ (...) wide gapes,
Casting forth flame of (...) thick smoke,
Enough to blot out h^av^^ (...) to choke.
As soon as God has said, Ye Cursed, go
Int' everlasting fire, the Devils lo
Are ready strait, and drag them down to hell,
Where they in torments infinite must dwell.
But since Apelles skill I want to make
This Picture right, I shall be bold to take
A Copy from the Pencil of Saint John,
As here I find it in his Vision.
I saw (says he) a Throne both white and great
Of God Almighty, 'Twas the Judgment Seat;
Mysterious in the color, which was white,
'Cause Justice should be innocent and bright.
Not like to Herod's Throne, that was died red
With blood of Infants which he massacred;
Nor sullied over with falsehood and with wrong,
But like the milky way, clear all along.
As white for color was this stately Throne,
So great for quantity, whereby is shown
The greatness of the Judge that thereon sits,
Past the apprehension of the greatest wits.
For such is his immensity none can
His measure take; beyond the reach of man.
No Power then his Justice can withstand,
Whose power does both heaven and earth command;
For earth and heaven there shall be found no place,
When he appears they both flee from his face;
His face, the fight whereof is heaven alone,
And joys beyond imagination.
I saw, (says he, the dead, both great and small,
Stand before God the Judge impartial,
His judgments are a great deep, into which
All fall alike, the poor, as well as rich,
The small as great; there not a cobweb lies,
Through which huge sinners like, to greater Flies,
A passage force, while lesser stick behind
As prisoners, and no way to escape can find;
Not a net there, in which the lesser fry
Of sinners, like to fishes, may espy
Holes to slip out, whiles that the greater be
Entangled without hopes of getting free;
No, this great Judge does small and great convent
Before this highest Court of Parliament,
From which are no Appeals, but all must rest
Irrevocable, be they cursed or blessed.
There Is no resisting, the stiff knee must bend,
And the stout heart from his high thoughts descend
And listen to its doom, You shall see there
Great Alexander quaking stand for fear,
He who the world once conquered, and did weep,
For want of more, now in a hole would creep,
And give that world which he had conquered
For one small corner in it to hide his head,
And all that wealth he got, to clear the guilt
Of all the blood which his vain glory spilt.
There shall you see that Absalom the fair,
Who hanged was in his proud dangling hair
Confounded stand, expecting when to hear
A heavier judgment thundering in his ear,
Condemning him to hang in hells hot'st fire,
'Cause to his fathers Throne he did aspire.
There shall you see King Ahab, who by's wife
Robbed Naboth of his vineyard and his life.
And that lewd woman Jezabel his Queen
Amongst many of her S^x shall there be seen,
And for her Witchcrafts, pride, and painting sent
To Pluto's Court to have her punishment,
There shall you see Doeg, who in pretense
Of holy vows did work no small offense;
For by his malice he with Saul so wrought,
That more then fourscore Priests to death he brought
There shall you see the Sodomites that burned,
In Lust unnat'ral, and to ashes turned
By fire from heaven; but now the Lord shall send
A fire from hell to burn them without end.
There shall you see those three presumptuous men,
Core and his Accomplices appear again,
Who for their striving against Moses, and
Against Aaron too, do stigmatized stand
To all posterity; as the earth before,
So now hell gapes to swallow them once more.
There shall you see Uzziah, though a King,
Condemned for his Incense Offering,
And taking on him the Priests function,
Whereto he had no right nor unction.
There shall you see Antiochus the Great,
Who did commit that Sacrilegious feat
In robbing of the Temple, doomed to pains
Proportioned to his unlawful gains.
There shall you see that glutton who did fare
Deliciously each day, and purple wear,
Suffering poor Lazarus to starve the while,
Begging himself now in an humble style
But for a cup of water to assuage
The furous flames that on his tongue do rage;
And justly shall that tongue such torments bear,
Which pleased it self so much in dainty cheer.
There shall you see that Phocas (who did slay
Mauritius his Master, to make way
For his Ambition to ascend the Throne)
Descend into the deepest dungeon
Of Belzebubs black Vault, perpetually
To suffer pains for his damned Treachery.
There you the Traitor Judas shall behold,
Who his dear Lord for thirty pieces sold.
There you shall see those Prophets that pretend
To inspiration, and uncalled ascend
The Pulpit, venting of old Heresies
And most abominable Blasphemies,
Under the notion of new lights, these shall
To utter darkness be condemned all.
For I beheld the Bookswide opened were,
Another Book, the Book of Life was there
Laid open too, infallible Records,
Wherein were written all the deeds, and words,
And thoughts, and names of men, which shall be read
In public then, and they be punished,
Or else rewarded with great woes and joys,
According unto all their works and ways.
Upon a Snake in a Garden of Flowers, having stung one that trod upon him
unawares.
WHo thought this Snake would e're have found
An entrance into this enclosed ground,
Or that a Serpent here should hide his head
Under this sweet and flowery bed?
But it is no news, for long ago
(It was the Devils trick man to entice)
A greater Serpent made his way into
A better Garden, Paradise.
And ever since there is no place
Of pleasure which we would impropriate,
But that therein the Serpent shows his face,
Though we discover him too late.
We see him not before we feel
That we by his envenomed teeth are bit,
And when, Achilles like w' are hurt in the heel,
We seek for Balsom to cure it.
Better it were if we took heed,
How to avoid the Serpent e're he stung;
So should we feel no pain, nor medicine need,
But safely sit our flowers among.
Whiles we securely take delight,
Amidst our many sweet and fragrant flowers,
The devil Serpent turns and does us bite,
And with sharp pains our pleasure sowrs.
Let us look then before we leap,
And timely seek the danger to prevent,
Le^t we in stead of joys do sorrows reap,
And when it is too late repent.
Upon Divine Love.
HOw strong is Love, what tongue express it can,
Or heart conceive, since it made God a man?
How strong is Love, which made that God-Man dye,
That man might live with God eternally?
Lord, let this love of thine my heart inspire
With love again, as sparks rise from the fire.
Thy love's a Sun, give me a beam from thence,
Which may both light and heat alike dispense,
Light to direct others the surest way
That leads to heaven and everlasting joy:
Heat to preserve in me a constant motion
Of fervent Zeal to thee, and pure devotion;
That all my thoughts, words, actions may prove
There is no passion half so strong as Love.
A passion is it? a divine virtue rather,
Which from a Deity springs, and calls God Father;
Yea, Love is God, and God is love; O then
Adore, but not profane it with thy pen!
The Echo, or Answer of a good Conscience.
What Is a good Conscience, Echo, can say? Ay.
Say then, and what it is manifest. A feast*
Where is it? in the Understanding wholly? O lie.
Is it then (Echo) in my breast? My rest,
Rest? is'^ from pain or sin, say whether? Either.
If both, It Is heaven on earth, a Saints bliss. Yes.
Is It in our own or others powers? Ours.
O then a jewel it is, rich and bright. Right*
Then tell me how shall I come by it? Buy it.
If Gold will buy't, Gold I Will provide. O wide.
If Gold will not, what else will do it? Do it.
Is It not enough that I believe well? Live well.
Dos't not consist in good affections? Actions.
To get it are good works the best way? Ay.
How long must this be my endeavor? Ever.
A PASTORAL DIALOGUE Concerning the JOYS of HEAVEN, And the PAINS of HELL.
DAMON. PHILLIS. Phillis. DAmon, Is It true, or do they fain
Who say that we shall live again
After w' are dead? Dam. Philis, It Is so,
That thou and I, and all must go
To another world, where we
In endless Joys or Pains must be.

Phillis, Damon, I prithee Damon tell,
How call'st thou it? Dam. Heaven or Hell.

Phillis. What is Heaven, Damon? say.

Damon. A place where all the year is May.
Where every bird does sit and sing
Continually, as in the spring,
Where are always to be seen
Flowery meadows, pastures green;
Where many springs and fountains meet,
As Crystal clear, as honey sweet;
Rich flocks, whose fleeces are of gold,
And whose flesh never will grow old,
But the Ewe is as tender there,
As the new fallen Lamb is here.
The shepherd needs not watch to keep
Either from wolf or beat his sheep.
No beast comes there that is fierce or wild,
They are all innocent and mild;
No grief nor want amongst them found,
But all are well, and safe, and sound.
Our Roundelayes harsh discords be
Unto their sweetest harmony,
Beyond the music of the spheres.
O thou would wish to be all ears,
Our feasts, if we to theirs compare,
Not feasts, but rather fasts they are:
Their food so full yet without waste,
O thou would wish to be all taste.

Phil. O happy place, be thou my guide
That I may ever there abide,
But once more Damon, prithee tell,
What is that place thou call Hell?

Dam. A dismal place, where is no light,
It Is always winter, always night,
Where vultures feed on men, and where
The Scretch-owle cries all the year,
The ground with flames is parcht about,
Like those mount Etna sends out,
No flowers nor wholesome herbs are seen,
Not any that are sweet or green
Grow in that soil, which naught else bre^ds
But hemlock, and such poisonous weeds,
Which who so tastes, he soon goes sad,
And through deep despair runs mad;
No fountain, but one standing ditch,
Whose water is as black as pitch,
Bitter as gall, so foul does stink,
That you may sme^'t before you drink;
But if you drink, it poisons you,
And makes you black as it self too.
There be no sheep, but goats, whose hair
Does like bores bristles wildely stare.
They Are old and tough, and monstrous evil,
Fit meat for none, but for the devil,
Pandora's box there opened first,
Has made the place e're since accursed
With all diseases, which do still
Much torment cause, yet never kill;
The inhabitants there never dye,
But in quenchlesse fire they fry;
Their best music is the groans
And howlings of the damned ones;
In stead of feasting on good meat,
The worm of conscience does them eat;
Like Tantalus fruit they may see,
Yet never taste, but starved be.

Phil. O wretched place! be thou my guide,
That I may never there abide,

Upon the peoples denying of Tithes in some places, and ejecting their Pastors.
THe shepherd heretofore did keep
And watch the sheep,
Whiles they poor creatures did rejoice
To hear his voice;
But now, they that were used to stray,
Do know the way.
So perfectly, that they can guide
The shepherd when he goes aside.
To pay the tenth fleece they refuse,
As shepherds dues;
They know a trick worth two of that,
They can grow fat,
And wear their fleece on their own back,
But let him lack
Meat, drink, and cloth, and every thing
Which should support and comfort bring.
What silly animals be these,
Themselves to please
With fancies, that they nothing need,
But safely feed
Without the shepherds careful eye?
When lo they die
E're they be ware being made a prey
Unto the wolf by night and day.
Besides, they are subject to the ror,
And God knows what
Diseases more, which they endure,
And none can cure
But the shepherds skilful hand;
In need they stand
Of his Physic and his power
To heal and help them every hour.
The danger set before their eyes,
Let them be wise;
Not trusting to their own direction,
Nor protection,
But to his rod, his staff submit;
His Art, his wit
For every sore a salve has found,
And will preserve them safe and sound.
The souls wish.
O How I long to be dissolved, and see
This mortal put on immortality!
Me thinks each day's a year, each year's an age
Til I arrive at that most glorious stage
Of heaven, where Saints and Martyrs gazing on,
Look if I tread the same steps they have gone;
But I (like Drake) so great a compass take
About the world, such strange Meanders make,
That they have got the goal in shorter space,
Then I have been in running half my race,
So have I seen a crystal stream to glide
In various windings by a meadows side,
Making a thousand paces 'bout the shore,
Which in a strait line had not been twelve score,
O my deer God, cast down those banks of sin
That interrupt my soul from running in
An even channel to thy Sanctuary.
Ad wings unto my feet, which soon may carry*
Unto her Ark my Dove-like Spirit, blessed,
By being fixed in the center of all rest.
Upon Christ's coming to judgment.
LOrd, when thou come to judge the world with right,
Thou'st steal upon us like a thief in the night,
Or like a flash of lightning from the sky,
Or like the sudden twinkling of an eye,
Or like the pains on woman, much about
The time when once that her account is out.
O let me like to that good husband watch,
Lest that the th^ief me unprepared catch;
O let thy Grace be evermore my light,
That the other lightning may not me affright.
O let mine eye be ever fixed on thee,
That thy last coming I with joy may see.
O let me cast up my accounts so well,
That I may never feel the pains of hell.
The Antipodes.
WHy art so sad and sullen, O my Muse,
That now to make a verse thou do refuse?
Must thou be moved by a reward to raise
Thy fancy up? Lo here is a sprig of Bays
To make a laurel; if that will not do it,
Mere indignation will create a Poet,
Art thou not angry yet at these mad times?
Can thou forbear to write Satyrick rhimes?
A rod is good for mad men in their fits,
'Twil them restrain, if not restore their wits;
The world is a great Bedlam, where men talk
Distractedly, and on their heads do walk,
Treading Antipodes to all the Sages,
And sober minded of the former ages.
They were content (good souls) with slender meat,
Such as their gardens yielded they did eat:
A sallet, bread, and water fresh that ran
From the next spring, did dine a Gentleman*
They were content (good souls) for to be clad
In skins which from the beasts backs could be had,
And so it did them from the cold defend
It was enough, they had no other end.
They were content to sit under the shade
Of their own Vine, never offering to invade
Their neighbors, or take arms them to oppress,
So they their own might quietly possess.
They were content with such instructions as
From their own Priests and Prophets mouths did pass,
And with that fear and reverence did them hear,
As though the only oracles they were:
It was the golden age of the world then,
When merit and not money raised men.
Grace was their gold, their hearts were the rich mine
Where virtues most transparently did shine.
Faces about now, and behold the scene
Turned topsie turvie, all things changed clean,
No fare contents us, but what is fetched from far,
And deerly bought, and cookt with curious care,
And dainty sauces; thus with art we strive
Our appetites to kill, and to revive:
We of our bellies Gods do make, and thus
Are gluttons beyond Heliogabulus.
No drink contents us, but the richest wine,
And strongest beer, which we swil in like swine,
Keeping no mean, but quaffing round about,
Til all the wine's in, and the wit is out.
No clothes content us but the richest stuff,
And cost^iest die, else it is not gay enough;
Nay, it is nothing worth, unless the fashion
Come like Queen Sheba, from a foreign nation.
We change our habits like the moon, our shapes
With Proteus, and are made the Frenchmens Apes.
No living will to us contentment yield,
But we must still be laying field to field,
Wishing this Lordship, purchasing that Farm;
If money wanting be, then force of arm
Shall make it ours, or subtlety of wit,
One way or other we will compass it.
No teaching now contents us the old way,
The Layman is inspired every day,
Can pray and preach ex tempore; he Priest
With all his learning is despised and hist
Out of the Church, and some have lately fed,
He should be shortly brought to beg his bread.
We Have nothing of the golden age, unless
That Gold's our Grace, and Gaine's our godliness;
Not manners now, but money makes a man,
Yea many think it makes a Christian;
As if none were religious but the rich,
And the poor body damned were for a witch,
Do see my Muse the world turned upside down,
The Prince on foot, whiles mounted is the clown;
The beggar now a purchaser, and he
That was worth thousands, brought to beggerie?
Do thou behold all this, and can be mute?
Come take thy bow and arrows, aim and shoot
The sharpest of them, cast thy keenest dart
At this mad age, and strike it to the heart;
Come dip thy pen in vinegar and gall,
And never leave til thou have vented all
Thy just spleen on it: if it still grow worse,
Let it expect not thine, but Gods great curse.
To a Gentlewoman that was extremely troubled with the Toothache.
I Grieve and wonder so great pain
You should from one small tooth sustain,
That you can neither eat nor drink,
Nor a^l the night scarce sleep a wink;
Yet to your comfort, this I Will say,
That to hell pains it is but a toy,
A pleasure, if compared it were
To what the damned suffer there.
If in one tooth such anguish lies,
What torments from that fire arise?
This in a night or two is past,
But that does infinitely last:
In this, one member aches, no more,
In that all members over and over:
In this the body does but smart,
In that the soul too beats her part.
Think then that this is all the hell
Which you shall feel, and you are well.
Upon a Passing Bell.
Hark how the Passing Bell
Rings out thy neighbors knel,
And thou for want of wit,
Or grace, never think on it,
Because thou yet art well.
Fool, in two days or three,
The same may ring for thee;
For deaths impartial dart
Will surely hit thy heart,
He will not take a fee.
Since then he will not spare,
See thou thy self prepare
Against that dreadful day
When thou shall turn to clay,
This bell bids thee beware.
Upon the setting of a Clock-Larum.
O What a drowzie lump of flesh is man!
Whose life being no longer then a span,
Great part of that short span is past away
In sleep, so that it is hard for us to say,
Whether we live or no; for whiles that we
Repose our selves, dead to our selves we be,
Without all motion and intelligence,
Till this shril Larum quicken our dulsense,
And make us living souls to the day arise,
Like Adam when he opened first his eyes.
Yet this sleep's short and sweet, if we compare
It to that other wherein many are
Profoundly steeped: a spiritual sleep in sin
The major part of the world is drowned in;
That but the Body's nap we know to be,
This the souls everlasting Lethargy,
Unless God waken it; to that intent
He has to man a treble Larum sent;
His Word first from his Prophets mouth did beat
A Parley, and from sin sound a Retreat,
Saying, Thou sleeper wake, attention give
To what I say, hear and thy soul shall live;
Let not thy sins turn day into black night,
Rise from the dead and Christ shall give thee light.
And left this Larum should not be of force
From this dead sleep in sin to raise a Course,
He sets a second that with secret art
Besides the ear, pierces the very heart;
His spirit it is, and when the other fails
To rouse the sleepie sinner, this prevails.
But if his ears and heart be so fast barred,
That neither of these larums will be heard,
Then sounds a third, Gods judgments pouring down
Upon his head, and making it ring noone,
Flashing like lightning, rattling too like thunder,
Parting his soul and body far asunder,
Til so from sleep in sin he fall at last
To sleep in death, and in the grave is cast,
From which he shall not wake before he hear
The Archangels dreadful larum in his ear,
Saying, Arise ye dead, to judgment come,
And from Christ's mouth receive your final doom.
Scylla and Carybdis.
TWo gulfs there are 'twixt which it is hard to sail,
And not be shipwrackt: here profaneness stands
With all it is brood of vices at i^s tail,
There superstition with its numerous bands
Of false traditions; 'twas the main intent
Of our late Pilots between both to steer:
But froward fate, to seamen incident,
Made them mistake their way; for whiles they fear
To sink into the gulf of superstition,
They in the gulf of profanation fall,
And in the furious heat of opposition
Against Papists, are like to turn Atheists all.
So some of the ancient Fathers in dispute
Against one heresy, did too much bend
Unto another, and their arrow shoot
Besides the mark, thus mar what they would mend.
But cannot we keep in the middle region
Except we sink too low, or soar too high?
Is there no moderate temper in religion,
But we must either scorched or frozen die?
What has the Church no habitable part,
Betwixt the torrid and the frozen Zone?
Nor has the Churchman learnt as yet the Art
OF the moralist, that virtue leans to none
Of the extremes, but in the center lies?
So does religious Truth, if we could find
It Is track out; but the fault is in our eyes
That will not see, or rather in our mind,
That will not keep the road and safest way
Which by the best and wisest men is gone,
But rather through unbeaten deserts stray,
Which lead to nothing but confusion.
O God, be thou out Pilot once again,
Or put some Pharos up, that by the light
Our ship the Church may sail safe through the main,
And not be swallowed by these gulfs in the night.
Upon Laymens preaching.
ART thou offended, because thou do see
Eldad and Medad both to prophecy
Within the camp, although they came not near
The Tabernacle, nor enabled were
Til the instant by the Spirit? Do not say,
Moses forbid them; rather wish and pray
That all Gods people Prophets were; for so
The meekest man on earth Moses did do.
But when an Ignoramus shall profess
Himself a Prophet, and inspired no l^sse
Then Moses or Elias, and pretend
The Spirit is on him, to no other end
Then to foment a faction, and decry
All learning in the University:
When that Mechanic fellows from their trade
Shall Aarons office offer to invade,
And mount the Pulpit, publicly expound
The Sacred Scripture, though they have no ground
For what they say, but merely what proceeds
From spleen or fancy; so they sow their weeds
In The surrowes of weak hearts, which grow apace,
Choking the good seed and the herbs of grace
Sown by the Ministers of God before,
It Is time, high time, that they be bid give over,
And that with Joshua we cry, My Lord
Moses, forbid them to abuse Gods word.
But if both we and Moses silent are,
And none the madness of these Prophets dare
Reprove, either the simple Ass will do it
(The vulgar sort) and spurn them with his foot,
Scorning to learn of those who nothing know,
But what they bring from shopboard or from plough,
Or else let them expect their doom to hear
From Gods own mouth (which the worst Judgment were)
These Prophets run, yet them I have not sent;
I have not spoken to them, yet they went
And prophesied deceits, even in my name;
I am against them therefore to their shame,
And will confound all those that lies do teach;
No more (my people) do you hear such preach;
But seek the word at their mouths who are well
Trained up at feet of learned Gamaliel,
Elisha's double portion do inherit,
Being called both by the Church, and by the Spirit,
Who can my holy mysteries unfold,
And forth their treasures bring things new and old,
Who can confirm their truths by strength of reason,
Mercy and judgment sing, each in their season;
That can their several portions give to all,
Humble the proud, and raise up them that fall;
Have milk for babes, and meat for stronger men,
Can teach both by their preaching, and their pen;
Prune the luxuriant, prop the weaker plants,
Have fords for lambs, and depths for Elephants.
The men thus qualified, are those I send,
To such, and only such you must attend.
Upon the contrary effects of Tobacco in himself and his friend.
IS it not wondrous strange that there should be
Such different tempers 'twixt my friend and me?
I burn with heat when I Tobacco take,
But he on the other side with cold does shake;
'To both it is Physic, and like Physic works,
The cause of the various operation lurks
Not in Tobacco, which is still the same,
But in the difference of our bodies frame:
What Is meat to this man, poison is to that,
And what makes this man lean, makes that man fat;
What quenches ones thirst, makes another dry;
And what makes this man well, makes that man dye.
So the same Sun we see, hardneth the clay
By his reflex, but melts the wax away;
So the same word of God does Saul convert,
And softneth his, but hardneth Pharaoh's heart.
What ere the difference of our bodies be,
Lord let the temper of our souls agree,
That so thy Word the same effect may have
On both of us, not to condemn, but save.
Upon a good year of Corn, and a quick harvest.
HAve we not had a fruitful year of grain,
Fair weather too to bring it in amain?
And shall we not an offering to him pay,
Who gives us richly all things to enjoy?
Did not the heathens show their thankfulness
To their Corn goddess Ceres, and express
The same by sacrifices of the best?
And shall we fail our thanks to manifest
To our true God, who bears the Christian name?
O let not us fall short of them for shame!
But what will he accept? What shall we bring?
A sheafe of wheat, or some such trivial thing?
That were but paying him in his own coin.
A single penny out of his whole Mine;
We should present the best we can devise,
A reasonable living sacrifice,
Our souls and bodies purified from sin.
That, o that is it which he delights in;
That is the Corn which Angels shall with joy
Reap, and into Gods heavenly Barn convey.
Upon his walking one day abroad, when sometimes the Sun shone warm, an
sometimes the wind blew cold on him.
THis emblem's forth the world aright,
Which now shines on me hot and bright,
Now it blows cold on me,
But never will constant be;
It Is just like the weather,
Hot and cold together.
One while it me with many favors crowns,
Anon it stabs me with as many frowns.
Why do I then my trust put in it,
Seeing it varies every minute?
I may go court the moon,
And stop her course, as soon
As bind the world to stay
My faithful friend a day.
If it be so inconstant, I intend
To seek out if I can, a surer friend.
But where is he? Not here below,
Where Sun does shine, and wind does blow,
But in the heaven above,
There do I fix my love
On one that changes never,
Being the same for ever;
It is my God who is so fast a friend,
That whom he loves, he loves unto the end.
What though sometimes he seems to frown,
And with rough winds to blow me down?
The fault's not his, but mine,
For he would always shine
On me; it is I that change,
My sins make him look strange;
Yet under his bent brow I may discover
Some smiling glances which betray a lover,
Showing that he desires no more,
But that I be as heretofore;
For it is his only aim,
To make me still the same
To him, that he may be
The very same to me.
Lord, let me thy unchanging favor find,
I shall not need the Sun, nor fear the wind.
Upon a dream, that he was writing his Sermon Notes upon his naked breast that
very morning that was the Anniversary of his Baptism.
THat on the High Priests breast plate there was wrote
Urim and Thummim, it was not for naught;
Amongst other ends, some thought it did imply
Soundness in's doctrine, in's life sanctity.
What e're it signified, his lips we know
With learning should, his heart with grace overflow;
Both which present him fairer far then all
The sparkling stones in Aarons Pectoral.
He of all Preachers surely is the best,
That writes his sermon first on his own breast;
He prints his Notes before he speaks them, who
What e're he teaches is resolved to do
Himself, and thus becom^s a double guide,
Doctrine on this, example on that side.
He that has Esaus hand, and Jacobs voice,
B^ilds with the one, with the other he destroys.
Lord, thou did first imprint thy Law within
The Tables of man's heart, and when that sin
Defaced had those characters, thou then
In stony Tables printedst them again;
Since they are broken, humbly I implore,
That thou would write them in my heart once more,
Never to be blotted out, that so I may
Both read them, and observe them every day;
So I thy holy Vessel shall impart
A taste to others, yet within my heart
Retain a favor to my self, and so
The way I point to others I shall go:
So what Saint Paul strove for, I shall enjoy,
Having taught others, be no Castaway:
And as thy Law is written in my mind,
So in thy Book let me not fail to find
My name inscribed with thine own sacred hand,
Which shall indelible for eve^ stand.
But why upon my Christning day this dream
Presented to my fancy? 'Twas a Theme
Fit for the day, for when the soul is made
Pure by that washing, then a ground is laid
For Gods handwriting; it is like Virgin wax,
Which only his Divine Impression lacks.
My God baptize me once more with thy blood,
And since thou do not find me, make me good.
Wash my soul clean, and that I may be known
To be thy Child, O seal me for thine own.
A Soliloquy upon the Circumcision, commonly called New-yeers-day.
Was It not enough that God himself became
Man like to me, and in all things the same,
Excepting sin alone; but he must be
Under the Law, and circumciz'd for me?
O ecstasy of love! which for my sake
The Son of God the Son of man did make;
Make him, an infant, shed some drops of blood,
As the first fruits to that more liberal flood
That flowed in a full tide, from every part,
His hands, his feet, his side, his head, his heart;
Whereof a sovereign balm he did compound
To heal my wounds, and make my sick soul sound.
What present, O my soul, have thou to pay
Thy God? What New-yeers gift this New-yeers day?
Give him thy self, who gave himself for thee;
A better offering there cannot be.
Do somewhat like him too, and circumcise
The foreskin of thy heart; then sacrifice
Thy purer thoughts to him, and now begin
This day to live to grace, to dye to sin.
An other upon the Resurrection, commonly called Easter day.
THis day my Lord rose early from the dead,
Whiles I securely sleep in my soft bed,
Not dreaming what he did my soul to save
Which lay long dead, and buried in the grave
Of sin. Haste then my soul, and take new breath
From Christ, to raise thee from this spiritual death;
Up with the break of day, and break thy chains
Made by thy sins, and wash away thy stains
In that pure fountain which was opened wide,
And runs yet fresh out of thy Saviors side.
He rising left his grave clothes all behind,
Do so by thine, and banish from thy mind
All thoughts of putting them on any more,
But rise as gold refined from its ore,
Never to contract more dross from earth again,
Clear and unspotted as the light remain;
So when that Christ to judge the world shall come,
Thou shall not tremble at the day of doom,
But boldly stand before the judge, and hear
The final sentence published without fear;
To thy eternal comfort he shall say,
Good servant, enter thou thy Masters Joy.
A Colloquy upon the Ascension, commonly called Holy Thursday.
The SPEAKERS. ANGELS, CHRIST, APOSTLES. Angels. Who Is this from Edom comes,
with garments di'd
From Bozra? Di'd in blood, which from his side
His deer side issued'? Wast not he that late
But three days since was crucified? What state
He marches in? The clouds his Chariot are,
And on the wings of the wind he rides: it is rare,
We never beheld the like unless it were
When once a fiery Chariot did bear
The Prophet hither, which we wondered at;
But this a greater wonder is then that:
That Prophet di'd not, but alive was caught
And by the power of God to heaven brought;
We saw each wheel supported by his hand,
Yea, we assisted by divine command,
By special commission being sent
To wait upon him all the way he went.
Besides, when he the Heavens mounted had
Amongst his fellow Prophets, he was glad
To take his Seat; but this man has the grace
To sit above us all, and take his place
At Gods right hand, to him all knees do bow.

Christ. Cease, cease your wonder and I Will tell you how
And why this is; know I am God and man;
As man I cannot do 't, as God I can:
As man I died, and lay three days in the grave,
As God I rose again, mighty to save
My self and others from deaths greedy jaws,
From sins inthralment and the devils claws.
I trod the wine press of Gods wrath alone,
And of the people there was with me none.
I looked but no man helped, all from me fled,
Yet mine own arm mine enemies conquered
And led Captivity captive; now as King
Of Kings I come salvation for to bring
Unto my Church, and graces to power down
Upon her, and with glories will her crown.
In the mean time, do you descend with speed
To comfort my Disciples at their need,
Lo at the Mount of Olives yet they stay
Still looking after me: begone, away.

Apostles. Oh we have lost the sight of him, no more
Shall we enjoy his presence as before.
What will become of us who now are left
To the wide world, of our dear Lord bere^t?
O that we had the swift wings of a Dove
To fly unto the bosom of our Love?
There we should rest securely from all harms,
Embracing and embraced in his arms,
But what is this? behold another sight,
Two men or Angels rather, clad in white,

Angels. Leave gazing thus ye men of Galilee.
For this same Jesus you shall shortly see
Return again in the same manner as
You now beheld him hence to Heaven pass;
He Is gone but to prepare for you a place
Against the time that you have run your race.
Leave wishing too, for wishes will not raise
You to the mansions of those endless joies
Where he resides: but let your thoughts all bend
In heavenly conversation to ascend,
Follow his holy steps, for so you shall
Have your Ascension, body, soul, and all.

Apostles. We thank you for your counsel, and obey*
This having said, they all depart away.
The Angels to heaven, the Apostles homeward went,
Expecting when the Spirit should be sent.
And they endu'd with power from the Lord
To save the world by preaching of the Word.

Upon all Saints day.
SUch honor have all the Lords Saints, that we
Keep this day holy to their memory;
And reason good, for they examples are
To us in life and death of virtues rare;
For though all virtues in some measure met
In all the saints as lines in the center, yet
Some special grace in every one did dwell,
Wherein each one the other did excel.
Thus Abram for his Faith was most renowned,
Job for his singular Patience was crowned;
Moses for Meekness did all men surpass,
Elias for his Zeal most famous was;
David is for an Upright heart commended,
Josias for a Tender heart transcended;
John the Evangelist for Charity,
And John the Baptist for Austerity;
Saint Paul for his Humility surmounted,
When chief of sinners he himself accounted,
And least of all the Apostles, though indeed
For pains and parts he did the rest exceed;
Peter for Penitence the prize does bear,
Who for his sin shed many a bitter tear:
Now as their life to us serves for a light,
So is their death most precious in Gods sight,
By that we learn to live, by this to die,
By both we come to immortality.
Since then they are such happy guides, well may
We solemnize at least one annual day
Unto their honor, yet not guilty be
Of superstition or Idolatry.
When we observe this day, we do no more
Then reverence them as Saints, not them adore.
God's the sole object of our invocation,
They but the pattern for our imitation;
And it is our prayer always on this day,
That we their godly living follow may,
Til we with them at last come to partake
Of joys unspeakable for Christ his sake;
Whiles thus we celebrate this festival,
None can us justly superstitious call.
To Christ. A Poem of Hugo Grot. Sil. lib. 1. p. 10. Translated.
O Christ, which art the head of every thing,
From whom a better life then this does spring;
Thy Fathers measure yet unmeasured,
Whom (whiles that he himself contemplated
In his high mind) he streams forth light of light,
And sees himself in's equal image bright;
Like whom the world, and the worlds guardian, man,
Was made: but O, he suddenly began
To be rebellious, his high honor l^st,
And pressed with crimes (which him most deerly cost)
Becoming guilty of the greatest pain,
In this state lay, and had for ever lain,
But that thy Father his case pitying, did
Give thee, who with himself before wast hid
Under concealed light; eternal love
Unto his Church did him to mercy move.
His truth by dreams he will reveal no more,
Nor visions by his Prophets as before;
But willing now a living Law to make,
And lasting league with men; lo thou did take
A mortal body, and a man-like face,
Yet not begot the way of humane race
By filthy lust, but thou conceived wast
By power divine born of a Virgin chaste;
Though thou no purple had to cloth thee, then
B^ing newly born, nor bands of armed men
To compass thee about and be thy guard,
Yet Citizens of heaven keep watch and ward,
And divine Anthems sang about thy stal
More royal thus then any Princes Hall.
The beasts and shepherds thee incircled there,
Poor, but far happier then all Kings they were
In that they knew thee; thou a new come guest
Were by thy heaven to earth made manifest.
The Magi stood amazed, a star to see
Never seen before; how great (say they) is he
That Is born, to honor whom new stars appear?
Ye ^erie signs of heaven your light forbear,
Forbear ye wandering stars, and Charles his Wayne
To guide the Passengers upon the Maine,
For through the various waves of things below
And life's uncertainties, this Star does show
The way, not that which unto Babylon brings,
Proud in the Courts of her Ars^oian Kings,
Nor to the Palaces of Tibur stout,
Nor to Jerusalem's turrets, but points out
The Cottages of Bethlehem, and the door
Of shepherds tents; Jews seek your King no more
Amongst the Cornets and the Trumpets sound,
And the Arms wherewith man's fury does surround
Himself; ye know not, wretches as ye be,
How near a thing to heaven is poverty,
How sweet to suffer; tell the Parthians now,
Go tell the Romans, tell your Herod how
He Will make the blind to see, the lame to walk,
He Will make the deaf to hear, the dumb to talk,
He Will heal all plagues and sicknesses with ease,
By's word not herbs, and calm the raging seas.
Thousands he will with little food sustain,
Himself long time with none, and raise again
The dead, make water wine at his command,
And walk upon the sea as on dry land.
Let them whom jewels deck, let Martial men
Try if they can perform the like again;
These my poor Christ can do, nor does he cure
Bodies alone, but minds of men make pure,
Purges their breasts that are possessed with sin,
And heals the plague-sick world which we live in.
Thus a right way he takes, whiles those that stand
And mighty are, he pulls down with his hand;
Those that are weak and fallen he erects.
But look what stirrs in the heavens; What strange aspects
And strife of things; Whiles so great good in thee
Is recompensed with hateful cruelty;
Not by the Sythian, or the barbarous men
Of Afric, or the north Pole Citizen,
But by good Abraham's offspring, who alone.
Of all the nations was thy chosen one.
Such mischief black ambition can do,
Whiles't being incensed with pride and hatred too
It rages under feigned piety;
A simple fate thou did not perish by,
But as a thief thou di'dst, though innocent,
To undergo our sin and punishment.
The sins of all the world did lie on thee
Since Adam ate of the forbidden tree;
From that first hour to this they pressed thee all;
On us those bonds, on us those blows should fall.
Those sharp black thorns should prick our temple veins
The Sergeant should us drag to endless pains;
The nails should pierce our hands, the spear our side,
And we without delay be crucified:
But so it did thy Father please, and Thee,
To mingle Mercy with Security.
Boet. Met. 4. l. 1. Translated.
HE that lives quiet in a settled state,
And treads below his feet high minded fate,
That either fortune upright can behold
With an undaunted face, and courage bold;
Not all the raging threats of the sea, nor yet
Vesuvius smoking fires, when ere they get
Out of their broken Chimneys, nor the bright
Flashes of lightning which are used to smite
The highest Towers, til to ground they fall,
Can move this man, or trouble him at all.
Why do men so much Tyrants rage admire,
Since they want strength unto their fierce desire?
Hope for no good from them, and fear no harm,
So you their feeble anger shall disarme.
But he whose fears are great, or hopes are bent
To what is not his right, nor permanent,
His Buckler casts away, his ground he leaves,
And to enthral himself a chain he weaves.
The 5. Met. of the second book.
THe former age, but too much blessed
With fruitful fields, content did rest
Not with dull luxury, yet lost
Their hunger, staid with little cost;
A slender Chessnut them suffis'd,
They had not yet the way devised
To mix live honey with their wine,
Nor were they grown so proudly fine
In their apparel, as to stain
White fleeces in a purple grain.
On Sallets supped, sweet sleep they took,
And drink had from the running brook;
The lofty Pine was then their shade,
Not yet through deep seas did they wade;
Strange coasts the Merchant had not sought
For wares far fetched and deerly bought;
Then the shril trumpets did not sound,
Nor bitter hatreds then were found
To die their horrid arms with blood;
For how could fury think it good,
First to make War, when it could see
Nothing but deadly wounds to be
The pay of bloodshed? O that now
Our much corrupted times knew how
From their ill customs to return
To the ancient manners; but they burn
With love of gain, which is so great
It puts down Aetna's fires for heat.
Alas, who was it that first made bold
To dig those precious Perils, Gold
And richer Jewels, which would fain
Concealed from our sight have layne?
Upon the Right Reverend, And most Learned Dr. PRIDEAUX, late Bishop of
Worcester.
SInce Prideaux died, farewell the Muses nine,
Farewell all Learning humane and divine;
For why should we pretend to any part
Of Science, when the Genius of all Art
Lies dead and buried? Now to make a verse,
And think therewith to deck his golden Hearse,
Were like a boy to a Generals grave that runs,
And shoots off squibs in stead of greater guns,
To solemnize his Funeral; 'twould he thought
Done in a jeer, and he be whipped if caught.
Alas we cannot speak his praise, for death
E're since it robbed his body of his breath,
Has left us speechless, all tongues were his own,
All learned Languages to him were known.
He with deep judgment had more Authors read
Then others Indexes, and might be sed
To be a living Library, admired
By this last age, and by the next desired.
The University is in despair
To find a Successor like him in the chair;
His clear decisions he delivered there,
As Oracles divine received were:
His Arguments and Answers would admit
Of no Replies, so home, so sure they hit,
Preferment he never sought, it sought him rather,
First he a Doctor was, and then a Father
Of this our Church; we justly mourn his fall
Who was a Bishop Ecumenical.
His Diocese of Knowledge was so vast,
That throughout all the Universe it past;
Betwixt the Puritan and Papist he
Like a strong Rock fast fixed was in his see,
Against both Factions he did upright stand
Inclining not a jot to either hand;
But a sound Protestant he lived and died,
One of the Learned e're was of our side.
They that loved Learning and a Scholars name
Raise Pyramids to his immortal fame.
To his much honored Friend and Kinsman, Sr E. B.
WEre I to draw Griefs picture to the life,
I Would take it from you now mourning for your wife:
Arms folded, fixed eyes, and full of tears,
Repeated sighs, neglected clothes and hairs,
Pale face, no words but what are pumpt by force,
Small difference is betwixt you and a corse.
Sure it is not you, but your Ghost, come to tell
How much you loved your Lady, and how well,
That having but one soul between you two,
She being gone, you had no more to do
But vanish strait; such power has love to make
An husband pine away for his wifes sake;
Yet all this but of grief's the outward part,
I cannot lim^ the sorrow of your heart,
Nor can I see, nor can you show the pain
And anguish which you inwardly sustain.
Only I can imagine that a flood
Runs from the red sea of your own heart-blood,
That every time a tear falls from your eye,
A crimson drop follows it instantly;
That every sigh, like to an hollow wind,
Does but presage a sanguine showers behind;
That to your best beloved fain you would
Swim through both rivers of your tears and blood.
But stay a little, whiles the furious tide
Of your swollen sorrow flows on every side,
TO oppose it, were the next way to be drowned;
But when it ebbs you may behold dry ground,
And walk securely through that sea to the shore
In which you might have been over whelmed before.
Hark then, your Lady calls to you from far,
And prays you turn your grief for her, to care
Of your deer children, that, as Poets fain,
Minerva was the issue of Joves brain
Without a mothers help, so they may prove
The issue of your mind as of your love;
Thus for their being and their breeding too,
They Will owe a double duty unto you.
To his truly honored Lady, the Lady R.
MAdam, Though you have many changes seen,
Yet you are the same as you have always been;
Times work no more on you then upon heaven,
In all estates you are so serene and even;
Surely Copernicus opinion's true,
The earth's the only thing that moves, and you
As being of an heavenly constitution,
Unshaken stand in all this revolution
Both in the Church and S^ate; with you it fares
As with the Angels or the fixed Stars,
Which give their light and influence to men,
Yet are not soiled with their ills again.
You are as good and virtuous, nay more
Religious since those times then e're before;
For though that most grow worse by imitation
Of the Epidemick sins, are now in fashion,
It Is contrary with you, who do detest
All sin the more, the more it is professed;
And as when heat's with cold environed, it is
Hotter by the Antiperistasis;
Just so your Piety by opposition
Of others wickedness, receives addition.
And may it still to that degree proceed;
That you may never more perfection need.
To the noble Lady, and to him much endeered, the Lady M. T.
WE envy Shropshire now, since it of late
Does you impropriate,
Not letting us have the least share in you,
To whom a part is due.
We wish your Buckland house a Palace were
That we might see you there;
For since the time that you went hence away,
We not our selves enjoy.
In losing you we lose our better part,
And now we have no heart.
Or quick'n us with your presence as before.
Or else we languish, and can live no more,
To the no less honored Lady, the Lady P.
SOmewhat I owe unto your honored Name,
But cannot pay it, yet you may not blame
The Poet, but your self, as cause of it,
Since that your worth is far above his wit,
And either you below your self must fall,
Or else want his Encomium; for all
That he may say or write in your just praise
Will but eclipse your Sun and cloud its rays.
It Is true, he knows you not (which is his grie^)
But by report, and that has made you cures
Of all your Sex; within your Hemisphere
There Is none in competition will appear,
Your virtues raise you to so high a state,
They may admire but hardly imitate.
You need not blush, as if this were too high;
To write the Truth, I hope's no flattery.
Now ( Madam) if you please to cast a look,
Or spend some spare time on this little Book,
And in it any thing that is good do view,
Then challenge it, for it belongs to you;
What Is vain or worthless in it that decline
And pass it by I challenge that for mine.
To the eminent Scholar, and Honor of our Church, Dr. HAMMOND.
ALthough the times forbid you now to preach
In public, yet your learned Writings teach
Us how to live in these unhappy days,
How we should upright walk in slipperie ways.
You are our Oedipus, and do untie
The knottiest points in all Divinity.
Such is the power of your judicious pen,
It stops the mouths of all gainsaying men;
The Presbyter is routed and undone,
He flies the field since you the day have won.
At last your greatest Work you have put forth,
But I Am not able to express its worth,
So excellent it is, and like good wine
Commends it self, it needs no bush of mine.
Go on t'instruct the world, and with your light
Shine out to guide us in the darkest night
Of ignorance and Error, which will soon
(Unless prevented) make us grope at noon.
To the truly virtuous, and his most esteemed Cousin, Mrs. M. B.
A Learned woman the an humble too
May for a Miracle amongst us go.
She Is Mistress of all Arts, and of one more,
To show so little of so great a ^tore;
That woman which has more then common worth
Seldom wants tongue enough to set it forth;
But she that knows much with Sobriety,
Is somewhat like unto the Deity
Veild over with humane flesh, which seems to be
God manifested, yet a Mystery.
Much more she is indeed, then she will appear,
Her* inside's Velvet when her outside's hair.
Like to a vessel full of precious wine,
Or like unto a rich concealed Mine;
The vessel makes no noise, but pierce it, then
I^ liquor yields that chears the heart of men;
The Mine concealed, though rich, no profit brings*
But once discovered is a prize for Kings.
A miracle, a Mistress of all Arts.
A mystery made up of all choice parts,
A vessel filled with Nectar, a rich Mine,
All these you are, though you all these decline*
And make your self more then your self to be
By letting us not half your merits see.
Thus Jacobs Vision is made good to you,
When e're you sleep, you may the Ladder view,
Reaching from earth to heaven, made without hands;
At foot whereof Humility there stands,
Knowledge above upon the highest round,
All other Graces like the Angels found
Ascending and descending up and down,
To court you here a while, and there you crown.
This makes us somewhat jealous, and to fear
Lest by this Ladder they attempt to bear
You soon to heaven, and leave us in the night
Of ignorance when we have lost our light.
Stand still in our Horizon then, we pray,
Like Joshuahs Sun, and double make our day;
For you impart a greater influence here
Then when you shall be fixed in the highest Spheer.
To the Right Honorable, the Lady M. C.
WEalth, Honor, Virtue once combined
To make one perfect of the female kind,
At length they met with you, and did protest
To go no further, but set up their rest
Within your arms: those now that mean to share
In them, must borrow what you please to spare:
You superrogate, and there does lie
Such store of them in your rich Treasury,
That you may well afford so much as will
Some meaner persons in good measure fill.
The after droppings of a Catarackt
Will raise the lesser brooks that water lack't,
The gleanings of your Vintage will go near
To make small Vessels run over once a year,
Thus unto others you enough may give,
Yet in all fullness you your self may live.
Upon his losing his way in a mist.
I Thought I could not go astray,
So perfectly I knew the way:
Yet in a Mist I missed it, and
Erred now on this, now on that hand,
And till the fog was by the Sun
Dispelled, I in a maze did run
And ride as if'twere Fairie ground,
Or that the Puck bad led me round;
So whiles I want a heavenly light
The day's to me as dark as night,
Which way I go I cannot tell,
Whether it be toward heaven or hell;
But this I know, that there is odds,
I tread the devils track, not Gods;
For Gods way strait and narrow is,
The devils broad and hard to miss.
O Sun of Righteousness then shine,
And soon disperse this mist of mine,
Lighten the darkness of my mind,
That I the way to heaven may find.
To two Parties going to Law about small matters.
LOok how the steel forces with several knocks,
Fire from the flint into the Tinder-box,
So do you smite each other, till you force
Gold from your own into the Lawyers purse.
O how like foes they brawle on either side,
And yet like friends your money they divide,
Leaving you bare as an Anatomy.
All that you get you may put in your eye,
And never see the worse; then take from me
This Counsel freely, and without a fee,
Agree between your selves, and make an end,
Do you to him, he to you condescend.
Thus whiles you both unto each other yield,
You Will both overcome, and losing with the field.
To an envious and malicious person.
WHy envi'st thou thy Neighbor, can thou tell?
Is It 'cause in Wealth or worth he does excel?
That will not make thee richer then thou art,
Nor him the poorer, but twill vex thy heart;
That will not make thee better, nor him worse,
But blessing bring on him, on thee a curse.
Or why malignest thou thine enemy?
Is'^ 'cause he has done thee some injury?
That will not mend the matter, but incense
Him to a second and more high offense,
Adding of wrong to wrong. O then be wise,
And do him all the good thou can devise,
So on his head thou shall heap coals of fire,
And softly melt his heart to thy desire.
So may thou make thy foe to be thy friend,
And whom thou can not break, thus gently bend.
To the common Drunkard, falsely called a Good Fellow.
CAnnot friends meet but they must drink to excess?
Must all your mirth conclude in drunkenness?
Accursed be he brought it in fashion first;
Before ye were content to quench your thirst,
And not exceed three or four cups at most;
Now you carouse till all your reasons lost,
And like to overheated Dutch men, ye
Drink till ye fight, and fall to snicker snee.
He that invites his friend t'a drunken feast,
Keeps out the man and entertains the beast:
A feast it is not, but a base Bacchanal,
Where the beast man a Sacrifice does fall.
Worse then a beast he is, for no beast will
Be made to drink a drop more then his fill.
But man his belly makes a tun, his brain
A hog, and drinks till up it comes again,
Vile man, whom God next to Angels did create,
Below a Bruit thus to degenerate!
For shame give over this most unmanlike sin,
Which too long has thy daily practice bin,
Redeem thine honor drowned in Ale and Wine,
And thy soul settled on the Lees refine:
When thy debauched life thou shall correct,
Thou happier days in England may expect.
Upon an old man holding an Infant between his arms of his own begetting.
HEre Natures contradiction behold,
The extremity of Ages, young and old,
The two first Books of Moses, Genesis
And Exodus bound up together it is,
May sitting in Decembers lap, the Spring
With Au^umn joined together in a ring.
Youth in the bud new started from the womb,
S^akes hands with age now dropping in the Tomb,
The worlds beginning and the end together,
The day and night, Sunshine and rainy weather,
Nonage and dotage, generation
Met with corruption, and the Creation
Of The child the dissolution proves to be
Of The father, who destroyed himself whiles he
Begets a son, and like the Phoenix, from
His dust and ashes does another come.
To one that married a very rich, but a very deformed woman.
WHo is it that says it was not love
Which you unto this match did move?
'Twas love, but love of money sure,
That thus to wed did you allure;
'Twas not the beauty which does lie
In your wives cheek, or lip, or eye,
Or any other part that shines,
Save only in her golden Mines.
It were the Angels in her chest
That first made love within your breast,
There sit the Cupids, there the Graces
Reside in those red and white faces.
In having one wife you have many,
Each bag a wife is, how then can ye
Choose but be rich? for such as these
Bring put to use will soon increase,
Nor will their b^^u^y fade, for they are
At fifty more then fifteen fair,
As pure good me^tal, as refined
An age hence, as when they were coined,
Provided you keep them in bands
From falling into hucksters hands.
If Pleasure be not, Profi^'s in
Your match, Poligamy's no sin.
In a free S^ate you may be bold
To marry every piece of Gold,
Though they so numerous be as will
The Great Turks vast Seraglio fill.
Yet take my counsel, look well to them,
For many chances will undo them;
They may be called in by the State,
And valued at a lower rate;
They may be rounded and defaced,
Or with worse metal be debased;
They may perhaps suffer a rape,
Be plundered from you; should they escape
These Accidents, yet wings have they
Like Cupid, and will flee away,
Leaving you little else behind
But your sad choice and sadder mind:
For when your money's gone, your wife.
Will stay to vex you all your life.
His opinion concerning disputations in the Country, where the Major part of
the Auditory are Illiterate persons.
It Is seldom seen a popular dispute
Does any good; you may perhaps confute
But not convert a heretic; he will,
Say what you can, hold fast his error still.
Besides, the vulgar Auditors do weigh
All arguments as their affections sway,
Not as their reason, and think that the best
Which with most noise and eagerness is pressed;
So they adhere unto the worser side,
Or go away much more unsatisfi'd
Then they came there, like some young Conjurers spel,
Raising more devils up, then he can quel
Or lay again; like Bees, the common rout
Will swarm about your ears and buzze you out,
But humme the Factions up, and lowdly cry
On your Antagonists side, Victory.
Forbear then such disputes henceforth to move,
For fear they should the Churches ruin prove;
These points are fitter for the Press or Schooler,
It is the best way not to answer fools
According to their folly, which will rise
Higher by opposing, let alone it dies.
Upon his late Ague, or the new Fever, as it was called.
WHat a strange thing's this Ague? which does make
Me like an earthquake first with cold to shake;
Then like mount Etna burn with fervent heat,
And by and by dissolve into a sweat?
Sure it is some Cacodamon, by his art
Insinuating himself in every part;
Now in the head, then in the back it lies,
Sometimes in the stomach, sometimes in the thighs,
Now like a Soldier whom nothing can fray,
He sets upon me boldly at midday;
Then like a thief steals on me late at night,
Or early e're the approach of the morning light.
Shame of Physicians it is, for all their tribe
Cannot a certain remedy prescribe.
Faustus or some such Conjurer would be
The better Doctor in this cure, for he
Might by his magic charms perhaps expel
This freezing, burning, swea^ing spirit of hell.
If then it will no other way be gone,
I will turn Conjurer, but an holy one,
And with my prayers to heaven exorcise
This evil spirit thus; Let God arise
With healing in his wings, and first begin
To heal my souls disease and sickness, sin,
Then let this great Physician apply
A salve to cure my bodies malady;
Thou that did legion with a word expel,
But speak the word, thy servant shall be well.
The Accident.
WAs it by negligence, or accident,
That in my sickness as my servant went
To warm my bed, some ashes she let fall?
Neither perhaps, but 'twas prophetical,
Foretelling that I must to ashes turn,
And shortly be enclosed in my urne.
And if that providence has so decreed,
Welcome in the name of God, let Death succeed
His elder brother, Sleep, and then give way
To Life again, such as the saints enjoy.
Now on my grave I think, and yet not quake,
Since thence as from my bed I shall awake;
When I lie down in dust I do not die,
But take a nap, and rise to eternity;
My soul shall reassume it is dust again,
And in a blessed union still remain.
Upon his Recovery from his Ague.
WHat shall I render unto thee my God?
Since thou have with thy rod
In measure me corrected, to prevent
A sharper punishment,
That I may not condemned be at last,
And in the lake of fire and brimstone cast?
Seven violent fits I had, to show that I
Am mortal, and must die:
But then such was thy will, I had no more,
Thou Lord did me restore
To health, and having brought me near the grave,
Declaredst then thy mighty power to save.
How much thy mercy does thy justice pass?
A sinful man I was,
Seven times a day I have offended thee,
Yet thou forgavest me;
Yea though my sins exceed the stars of heaven,
Yet thou my plagues reduced have to seven,
Alas, all seven do scarce to one amount;
Justly I cannot count
Them altogether half a plague, they go
But for a stroke or so,
And only serve to let me understand
They come not from a judge, but fathers hand.
A wise and tender father that does smite
In mercy not in spite,
Not to avenge himself, but me to amend,
Which is the chiefest end
In all his chastisements: he will not break
The bruised reed, not quite overthrow the weak.
But having humbled him, most gently then
Raises him up again.
O Lord, do so by me, and show thy strength
In my weak state at length,
That like a Tree on both sides rock't by the wind,
I may grow strong in body and in mind.
Stronger in both to serve thee, and to give
Thee thanks that yet I live;
And let me use this my recovered health,
Not to increase my wealth,
Or spend it on my lust, as is men's fashion,
But to thy glory and mine own salvation.
Upon a great shower of snow that fell on May day, 1654.
YOU that are weather-wise, and pretend to know
Long time before when it will rain or snow,
When 't will be fair or foul, when hot or cold,
Here stand and gaze a while, I dare be bold
To say, you never saw the like; nay more,
You never heard the like of this before.
Since Snow in May, you may hereafter make
A famous Epoch in your Almanac.
Prodigious it is, and I begin to fear
We have mistook the season of the year;
It Is Winter yet, and this is Christmas day,
Which we indeed miscal the first of May.
Summer and winter now confounded be,
And we no difference betwixt them see,
Only the Trees are blossomed, and so
The Glassonbury Hawthorn used to do,
Upon the day of Christ's nativity,
As Cambden tells in his Chorography.
The youths for cold creep in the Chimneys end,
Who formerly the day did sprightly spend
In merry May-games; now they hang the head
And droop, as if they and their sports were dead.
Perhaps some superstitious Cavalier,
That loved to keep his Christmas, will go near
To make an ill interpretation
Of this, and cal't a judgment on the nation
For our despising of that time and season
Against the ancient custom and right reason,
As he conceives, and since we will not allow
One in December w' have a Christmas now,
But we a better use may make of it;
And though not to our minds the Weather fit,
Yet to our souls convert the same, and thence
Extract this wholesome holy inference.
From this unseasonable change of weather
Without us, what is within us we may gather;
When in our hearts the Summer should begin,
And graces grow, it is Winter by our sin,
All frost and snow, nothing comes up that is good,
The fruits of the Spirit nipt are in the bud.
Our May's turned to December, and our Sun
Declines before he half his course has run*
O thou the Son of Righteousness display
Thy beams of mercy, make it once more May
Within our souls, let it shine warm and clear,
Producing in us yet a fruitful year.
Let it dissolve our snow into a shower
Of hot and penitent tears, which may procure
A blessing on the Nation, and at last
A General pardon for all faults are past.
The Conclusion. To my dread Sovereign And deer Master, CHRIST JESUS, King of
Kings.
THou King of Kings, and Lord of Lords,
I owe my self and all I have to Thee,
My Muse no tribute now affords,
But what first comes from thine own Treasury,
A leaf of praise
Is all that I can raise.
And yet that leaf is taken from
Thy Tree of grace thou graftedst in my heart,
Accept it then, since it does come
From that stock which to me thou did impart;
It is thine own,
To all the world be it known.
I do confess the ground in which
It Is set, is poor, and long has barren been,
For how alas, could it be rich,
When naught but thorns and thistles grew therein?
O let thy grace
Above my sins take place,
And in my heart the upper hand
Let it still have, a happy victory,
That I thy Champion may stand
Undaunted against all that opposes thee:
So whiles I live,
I shall thee praises give.
Or if whiles in this Vale I stay,
To praise thee well will be too hard a thing,
Then to thy holy hill convey
My soul, where I may Hallelujahs sing
In an higher
And better tuned Quire.
FINIS.

