An humble APOLOGY FOR LEARNING AND LEARNED MEN.

By Edward Waterhous, Esquire.

He that walks righteously and speaks uprightly: He that despises the gain
of oppressions, that shakes his hands from holding of bribes, that stops
his ears from hearing of blood, and shuts his eyes from seeing evil: He
shall dwell on high, his place of defense shall be the munition of rocks, bread
shall be given him, his waters shall be sure. Isa. 33. ver. 15, 16. Quis unquam
me adversus Ordinem illum, vel coram audivit disputantem, vel clam susurrantem?
Quem unquam de Ordine illo, nisi cum gaudio vidi, nisi cum honor suscepi, nisi
cum reverentia allocutus, nisi cum humilitate adhortatus sum? S. Bern. in Apol
ad Willerum Abb. (...). Just. Mart. Resp. ad 22. ^ ad Orthodoxos. London,
Printed by T. M. for (...) G. Bedell, and T. Collins, at the middle Temple^
(...) Fleet street. 1653.

The Authors Preface.
I Am not so fond as to think that I deserve better, or my Reader will allow me
more favor then usually men do to those whom the Press makes public, and
their censures unhappy; nor can I distrust the blessing of God on my honest
meaning, but that he will incline some, whose ingenuities correct their
passions, to excuse me in what I have done, and engage themselves to take Fire
from my Spark, and thence to kindle their nobler flames of Love to, and Zeal
for Religion and Learning. What other men's motives are to write, I skill not:
mine, I am sure, is only to honor God, serve the Church, show my self loyal to
my conviction, and to testify to the world that nothing in mine opinion is so
great a security to the main-guard of Religion, as well to provide for her
out-ports, and lines of learning. So long as these unblemished incitements
command in chief, I may with more courage confront the Censurer; Erasmus
lessons what well becomes men to learn, Civilitatis est quod scriptum, est
commode interpretari; but if they list rather to carp at what I have done, then
do what they are, or at least think themselves better able to perform, let St.
Jerome reply on them for me, Aut profer meliores epulas, and me conviva utere,
aut qualicunque hac coenula nostra contentus esto For truly, I have so mean
thoughts of my self, that I cannot but wonder what should move me to write, if
love did not; since in Tertullians words, I propose not, Ut tam instruam
eruditos, quam excitem Lib 1. advers. Marci.
paratos.

I know there is little congruity betwixt the Author and the Argument, magna
magnos Aptarionus viribus debet. S^nec. epist 108. 1 Chr. 11. 25. And
Demosthenes says, (...), etc.
decent; and fit had it been for some of the first three, to have encountered
the bold defiancers of Arts and Artists; but since they prefer that of the
Livius lib. 7.
Historian ( Neutiquam placet quando nulla res cogit fortunae se committere)
before this so necessary and noble a Service, I have adventured into the Ocean
of view though in a storm, accounting that of old Claudius to Appius true,
(...); resolving to defy Dionys. Halyc^rnass. lib. 11. p. 696. Epist. 109. ad
Damian. and Rogatianum.
my Censurer in S. Je^omes words. Legunt qui volunt, qui nolunt abjiciant*
eventilent ap^ces, litteras calumnientur, magis vestra charitate provocabor ad
studium, quam illorum detractione and odio deterrebor.

And truly, to my shame I publish it, that at first I was somewhat unpleased
with the Importunity of my thoughts this way, conceiving it the Road to
displeasure, and a Voyage of Shipwreck; but as with the Prophet of old, so was
it with me; the Resolution to abstain from Good Psalm. 39. 2.
words was Pain and Grief to me; for by the assistance that I had from God, in
its Composure, I saw that somewhat in it might be useful, had it the Cookery of
a richer Wit, and readier Pen.

This is my comfort, I am no Boutefeau, I endeavor no quarrel with Antiquity,
Order, Piety, but rather resolve to take the reproach of them upon me;
Speciosum pro Justitia acceptum Petrach.
vulnus; all that I prefer, is, That God may be honored by those Gifts which
he has given to men; and that the Foot may not say to the Head, I have no need
of thee; nor piety be thought exclusive of Learning, nor any Age happy without
Learned Men: For as he said, Tacit. Hist. ^. 3.
Dissolutionem imperii doces, si fructus quibus Respublica sustinetur,
diminuuntur.

There is no subject more seasonable, none less turbulent then is this; for it
asserts, whatever is a Foundation, and it shatters, what brings Foundations out
of Order, and therefore can be reproached by none but those who misuse Liberty,
and mistake Reason, or whose Opinions like B^ yes, rise and sink with their
parties; to whom sober Truth is troublous, and against which they cry, as once
the Devils did to Christ, Art thou come to torment us before our time? To this
there is no other reply to be made then silence, they do not veritatem
quaerere, Lutheres.
sed gloriam and triumphum; for they are satisfied with nothing but with
wanderings, till they lose, with Dinah, their mental modesties, and become
Prostitutes to him who leads into evil, and there leaves them to perish without
mercy rescue them.

This let the world know in confutation of their mistakes; those who are
Godlily Learned are no such men as some represent them: Nor do they so much
covet to know, as to live answerably and exemplarily, S. Cyprian has long ago
vindicated them, Nos qui Philosophi Ser. 3. de bono p^ientiae.
non verbis sed factis sumus, nec vestitu sapientiam, sed veritate preferimus,
qui virtutis magis conscientiam quam jactantiam novimus, qui non loquimur
magna, sed vivimus quasi servi and cultores Dei, patientiam quam Magisteriis
coelestibus discimus, obsequiis spiritualibus praebeamus.

I know he that intends by Apology to do good by persuading men to be good,
must not hope to prevail by falsehood and fury, ( Perfidi and ruptores Tacit.
annal. 2.
pacis ultioni and gloriae sunt mactandi;) but by gentle and honest prudence,
so allay the wild fire of wit, that it flame not too furiously, but carry with
its edge somewhat of a tender and velvet touch; Therefore have I (by the
assistance of God) so avoided all unnecessary tartnesses, that those who
quarrel with me, must needs confess themselves guilty of somewhat by me
reproved; and those who are sober, not find themselves tempted to any contest
beyond that, how they shall be what they seem, and grow better then they are.

If any thing written by me offend those that are godly and wise, I shall take
their reproofs as a precious balm, and entreat them to consider that in many
things we offend all; and if it be my frailty to err, it becomes their piety
to Lips. lib. 4. polit.
forgive, ( Non cursum eundem tenere oportet sed portum;) and when they read
me, I would counsel them to remember what Saint Jerome says, Scio aliter me
habere Apostolos, Sanctus Hieron. ad Th^oph. advers. Johan. Hieros.
aliter reliquos tractatores; illos semper vera dicere, istos ut homines in
quibusdam aberrare.

To conclude, If what I have written please Senec. 1. de Clem.
and prevail, I shall be glad; Recte factorum verus fructus est fecisse, nec
ullum virtutis est precium dignum illis extra res ipsas; if not, I have what I
expected; It Is hard to kick against the pricks; so God have no dishonor, nor
Learning discredit, I care not what becomes of me: Mihi pro minimo est, ut ab
illis judicer qui dicunt bonum malum, and malum bonum, ponentes lucem tenebras,
and tenebras lucem, libens excipio in me de trahentium linguas maledicus, and
venenata spicula Blasphemorum ut ad ipsum non perveniant, Lib. 2. de consider.
as Saint Bernard clegantly; That (amidst the censures of good, and calumnies
of bad men) shall be my comfort which was the Prophets: My judgment is with
the Lord, and Psalm. 49. 4.
my reward with my God.

E. W.

To the Honor of God.
An Humble APOLOGY For LEARNING And LEARNED MEN.
IF ever it were fit to salute the World with a tract calm and serious, if ever
it became truth to contest by sober and harmless Rhetoric for its birthright,
then may this plea not be preposterous, nor its design unwelcome to those who
are qualified to the proportion of its project. I am no Amphipyros, I carry no
firebrand in my Pen: To plead for, not to exasperate against Truth, or to set
the World on fire by uncivil and exprobratory sarcasms; do I attempt this Work.

There are too many, whose rapes on the innocence of paper, make the Press
almost execrable, and render the modest World resolute against publishing
things in their own nature noble and useful, lest what was by them Christianly
intended a brazen Serpent to heal, (through the misconstruction of peevish and
uncharitable censoriousness) should be termed a fiery Serpent to sting; This
inconvenience singly, upon mere prudential grounds, would have deterred me
from penning this Apology, were not the honor of God, duty to Truth, and love
to Learing much more swasive with me, then vulgar discouragements: yea, did not
the noble Presidents of former times call me (since abler pens will not) to
engage in, or rather humbly to endeavor attenuation of that quarrel, which (I
hope) is causelessly revived, against the Muses.

It is, and ever has been the Policy of Satan, to disturb truth, and by that
to foster the success of his diabolick practiques: his experience in these
methods of mischief, tells him the high advantage that thereby accrewes to his
Kingdom, and the progress thereof: One while he raises war against her, and
summons all those that hold of him in capite, to attend his standard, hoping by
professed hostility to suppress the very being of truth, and to chase it into
the wilderness to solace it self there with want and obscurity; like that
Athenian Themistocles, who banished Aristides, called (...), the just, and
after all his employments of note, reduced him to a condition unable either to
support himself alive, or pay his bearers to the grave: Thus did he by Christ
and his holy Apostles, their successors, and the primitive Martyrs; against all
which he raised virulent and sanguinary persecutions, accusing them of faction,
disloyalty, vice, and every thing that was odious and fameless.

The falsehood of which criminations, certified to the consciences of many
civilized heathens, as well as Christian writers, put them upon Apologies, and
lenifying discourses, which (to the Powers then in being) they with great
success directed; and by which, Christianity found much relaxation and relief,
from the cruel and insatiable persecutions of Ethnic Tyrants. Vide S. Hier.
Justin. in Apolog. p 32. 41. Sozom. Hist. Eccl. lib. 6 c. 33. 36.


On these accounts did Methodius and Apollynaris write against Porphyrius,
Johannes Grammaticus against Proclus, Justin Martyr to the Roman Senate; and to
Antoninus Pius the Emperor.

Themistius the Philosopher in the time of Valentinian, Hist. Magdeb. Cent. 2
c. 3.
Quadratus and Aristides to the Emperor Adrian, and sundry others; no age
being so obcaecated and deserted by God, but afforded a propitiator, by whom,
if Truth got not into favor, yet it was preserved from utter extirpation.

And because force could not effect without the consort of fraud, and God had
so moderated powered Rulers, that they thought fire and sword ill effects of
Politic Government, therefore Satan attempts to beguile those Princely
Natures, into actions as conductive to his design, though less clamorous; and
this he does by withdrawing those favors of Grandees, which invigor'd
Learning, and nourished men of deserts and worth, hopeful to attain the
effects of such munificence* and by appreciating things and persons more
tralatitious and vulgar. Thus, though Jupiters thunderbolt does not hit
Aesculapius, for restoring Hippolytus to health, yet sad it is to see Agatho a
base Minstrel, outshine in favor all the Philosophers of his time.

That as Julian the Apostate, to extirpate Sozom. Eccles. Hist. lib. 5 c. 5.
Theodor. lib 3. c. 7.
Christianity, did disgrace the Orthodox Bishops, decorate any with the honor
and office of Priesthood, make away Church Maintenances and Church Privileges,
forbid Christian Schools, and places of Learning for instruction of their
youth, permitted not the Christians to meet together, not to have benefit of
Law, any share in Government, or any degree of Dignity; nay to lay load on
their shoulders, gave command to the Jews (...). Sozom. l. 5. c. 21.
to build again the Temple at Jerusalem; not out of love to their Religion, but
on purpose to grieve the Christians, and vex their Souls, while they saw their
precious Savior by them dishonored: so does he by these artifices project the
dishonours of Learning and learned Men, that in the dark of ignorance and decay
of arts, he may form and complete that monster, which like Crobilus invited
guests to his lewdness, and robbed them, so invited, of their purses; or as the
Lamiae, by their beauty court comers, that they may devour Apud Dionem Chrysostom.
them: and though for this cheat he may have specious pretensions, yet this
beautiful Epona, may, as Fulvius Stellus his Epona, have but a Mare for the
Mother, which is but an inglorious genetrix.

That as was anciently said of Eucrates (a crafty Vias novit quibus effagit
Eucrates. Eras. in Adagiis, and Aristophanes in Equitibus.
Sycophant, that would do any thing for an advantage) Eucrates has more tricks
then one, no trap will easily take him: so may we say of this Serpent (the
Devil) whose agent every Godless Man is, He knows how to be an Angel of
Light, to deceive (if it were possible) the very Elect.

Truth, and Learning its hand-mayd, have ever been the objects of the Devils
fury, and for many thousands of years he has labored by his Instruments, the
denigration, if not the total extirpation of them. Anciently, when God was
pleased to reveal truth from Heaven, and speak to Men by Visions and Dreams,
when he conducted holy Men to holy things by infallible impartment of his
Spirit, and by calling to them, This is the way, walk in it, then Arts and
Sciences were as useless as milk is to grown Men, or crutches to persons
vigorous and agile; Then was God all in all to Man, there needed no Library but
that of his discovery; no study, but to hear what the Lord will say: then was
not Man directed to those mediated helps of languages, arts, methods,
disquisition, converse, God miraculously supplying his Saints, according to
their necessities and his dispensation and good pleasure toward them. But when
the World grew old in sin, as in age, he left them to labor out their way to
life and light, and to see the toil sin had exposed them to; while, as nothing
naturally grew in the Earth, but weeds, briars and thorns, without cultivation,
so in the mind nothing of true celestial and virtuous tendency could be or
abide, without the polishment of art, and the labor of searching after it.

It Is confessed, the Penmen of holy Writ, both Prophets and Apostles, had much
of the mind of God revealed to them, which was in order to their work of
compilement and ministration, to which God has appointed them: upon which
reason our Lord Jesus chose poor illiterate Men to be his Disciples; knowing
that the power of Heaven was to perfect their instruction, and that with God,
it was as easy to make as find Men learned; and to teach us, that arts and
tongues barely, without supernatural grace, do not enable to Apostleship: but
when they were to be left in the World, and sent abroad to preach to all
Nations, then had they gifts of tongues; and art, August. lib. 2. de Doct.
Christ. Bulling. lib. 2. ad H. 8. p. 83.
against which no gainsayer was able to stand, as is well observed by holy St.
Augustine, and after him by learned Bullinger.

And when once the Scripture was compiled, and a curse denounced on any that
should add to or detract from the words of that Prophecy, Revel. 22. v. 19.
Then was the Church to see through the glass and prospectives of Arts, and by
the ministration of those helps which God has appointed, to the ends of
informing the ignorant, convincing the contrarient, and being all things to all
Men, that they may gain some.

And therefore as then it was a grand piece of Atheism for any man to
disbelieve Revelations, and to practice contrary to the direction of them, so
is it now no less a degree of superstition for any man to wave the authority of
Scripture, and depend on Miracles and Enthusiasms; forasmuch as God has
assigned his written Word for guide to the Church, and bids us search that, as
the Norma Fidei, and regula Morum, whereunto we shall do well to take heed, as
unto a light that 2 Pet. 1. 19.
shines in darkness; to the understanding of the formale externum or letter of
which, Arts and Tongues are necessary, as the assistance of the Holy Ghost is
to the formale internum, or genuine sense of it.

It is not my drift to engage in the conflict 'twixt truth and error, or show
the several pitched fields that in all ages have been fought between them, nor
yet to assign those Generals, who in chief have commanded on those parties;
that were a work large, and perhaps useless to my purpose: My aemulation is to
propose Learning and Learned Men, as the Horsemen and Chariots of any Nation,
and to discover that without them a People can expect nothing but Barbarity and
Bestial Vulpinariness: for as our Countryman Pitsaeus says, The More men are
sunk in In prooemio relationum rerum Anglicarum p. 23 homines quo magis and
ignari, and a bonis literis and disciplinis alieni, eo propinquius ad agrestem
and belluinam vitam accedunt: nam nisi illas animi potentias quibus a belluis
distinguimur liberalibus scientiis excolamus, omnis earum virtus perit, and
brutis animantibus similes, imo in multis deteriores evadimus.
ignorance, and estranged from Arts and Sciences, the nearer come they to the
life of Beasts and Savages: for unless the powers of the mind, by which we are
distinguished from bruits, be by liberal sciences ordered and modified, all
their virtue and nobility will degenerate into not only a likeness to, but into
a degree of rudeness beyond beasts. Hence is that applicable of the Poet

-- Didicisse fideliter arts,
Emollit mores, nec sinit esse feros.
Art thoroughly learned does Brutish Man refine
From his base Oar, to some what more Divine.
And if Stratonicus the Piper said true, in calling Morbida civitas ubi mortui
ambulant.
that a diseased City where dead men walk, then surely may I not dread terming
that a decaying and languishing State, where ignorance prevails, and arts and
artists are under hatches and surprise.

Learning and the knowledge of arts is the special gift of God; and that which
differenceth Man from Man, yea Man from himself, correcting those exorbitances
which naturally are habituated to us, and being connatural, would soil the
pulchritude of the reasonable Soul: therefore Philo Philo libr. de Septenario
and Festis, p. 1178. edit. Morelii. (...), etc.
the Jew brings in Moses, Gods deputy, exhorting those to Philosophy, Who
aimed to enrich their minds with reason adapted to Rule, that being true in
allusion to Learning, which the Rabbis deliver of the tree of Knowledge, that
it was made to accelerate that reason, without which Adam and Eve were Created;
Learning working much change in Men, and making them less sordid, then
naturally (as corrupted) they are: which Socrates Ne Zopyrum ridete, hujusmodi
enim Naturae essem, nisi Naturam Philosophia superassem.
assented to, when he justified Zopyrus a Physiognomist, who took upon him to
judge by the countenance what the manners of Men were, and what virtues and
vices they had in their minds; the People hearing him speak somewhat of
Socrates unworthy (as they thought) of him, derided him; but Socrates cried
out, Despise not (...). Dialog cum Tryph. Iud. p. 168 Edit. Sylburgii.
Zopyrus, For had not Philosophy made the change, I had thoroughly answered his
character: Yea, and what is more, rendering Men more like to their Maker, and to
him more acceptable, as is notably expressed by Justin (...). Dialog cum Tryph.
Iud. p. 168 Edit. Sylburgii.
Martyr, In earnest (says he) Philosophy is the greatest good, and to God most
acceptable, as that means whereby we are both brought and commended God; and
those at length are only completely happy, who adorn their minds with it.

The rational powers of the Soul and mind, improved by art and actuation, the
Holy Ghost livelyly expresses (as I humbly conceive) in that 20. chap. of the
Proverbs verse. 27. by the Candle of God in a Man; that as the Candle discovers
what things are, so Man's Learning and improved reason show what Man is: the
word there rendered Spirit, is said by the Learned specially to signify (...)
animam rationis participem, which the Greeks call (...); and not the sensitive
part which they express by Vide Pagnin. in verb.
(...); and therefore Plotinus makes Reason, the proper orb of the Soul; and
says, the Soul ought to be busied in, and evidenced by its acting of Reason.
(...). Ennead. l. 5. p. 498
For this Reason has God imparted to no mortal being but Man, who being Lord
(next under God) of this World, he has endowed with a ray of Temporary
Divinity, being created after the Image of his Maker, Righteous, Intelligent,
little lower then the Angels, Crowned with Honor 8. Psalm. v. 5.
and Dignity, having in his compagination somewhat of the perfection of both
Worlds; In Reason sharing with his Maker, and in sensation and vegetation with
his fellow creatures of all stations and forms.

The Holy Story originates skill and knowledge of arts, from God, he the Parent
of them; in Man they are only per participationem so far as he imparts them,
and no further. In 36. Exodus v. 2. it is said, Then wrought Aholiab and
Bezaleel, and every wise hearted Man in whom the Lord put wisdom and
understanding: The word (...) signifies Pagnin. in verb.
Sapere: est mentis, non palati; noting a certain knowledge both of Humane and
Divine things, and therefore the Hebrews called every art and science (...),
and every artist (...): and Plato acknowledges the supremacy of Reason and
(...) etc. Plato in Parmenide p. 1115. edit. Ficini.
knowledge to be radically in God, while he says, If you grant any thing to be
partaker of Divine knowledge, you allow none but God to have supreme knowledge.
Now this tree of knowledge God never transplanted out of the nursery of his own
essence till he created Man; then he placed it in Paradise, as judging the tree
of knowledge emblematical of, and consortable with him that was the creature of
knowledge rational and disquisitive: God is called the God of Wisdom; and he
that gives understanding, 2. Prove. v. 6. 29. Deu. v. 29.
by him are secrets revealed, and without his aid and blessing all humane
industry is vain and infructiferous: yea while the Conglobations of Heaven and
Earth dure, there will never want instances of his incomparable and matchless
Art.

And certainly, from this Divine and Architectonick Artist, did man first take
encouragement to attempt, and receive power to perfect parts of art; the finger
of God in man's Soul, pointing at such emanations as were suitable to the
proportion of his creation, ordering the conception to precede the operations,
the hand following the formative power of the fancy. Thus God making the world
for man's sphere of motion in this short and military life, propensed his Soul
to all those tendencies, which chiefly complete the Harmony of its being, and
fit it in many things (immunity from sin and sorrow, possibility of enjoying
God face to face, and aeternity excepted) to a conformity to the upper Region
Heaven, to which it is a tributary, and in which only it shall be perfect and
complete.

Thus because order is necessary to preservation, as is heat to life, and some
must obey as well as others Rule, God so ordered the distribution of his gifts
and moral endowments, that the Ruler should have proportions transcending
others, as far as the Sun lesser lights; that by clear conviction there might
obedience be yielded as a due, and yet the persons so Ruled understand their
security included in such resignation, without which there would be unavoidable
confusion: for a Ruler should be like Cato, universally complete, fit for
counsel and conduct, Optimus Orator, Optimus Imperator, Optimus Senator; which
ternary of complements concludes all.

And such anciently Rulers were, and so ought still personally to have been,
had they been soli in regimine, and taken no assistance in government from
other persons, (to rule alone, and perhaps by their own wills, being originally
their prerogative and office) else should they have highly sinned against God
and their People by vain and ignorant judgments, which sometimes they might
have occasioned: but since they now do by counsel their great actions, and
assume others to advise with them, their personal errors are drowned in their
cathedral abilities, which can neither do, nor ought to receive wrong. Now
because Rulers ought to be tam Mart quam Mercurio, ex utroque Caesares, Men
fitted to Peace and War, therefore pleased it God to indulge men various and
different geniuses, by which, as by silent Oracles and Divine inspirings, they
should be carried on to works of all Natures, proper to the life, increase,
riches, tuition, and fame of Man. To some he gives a heart like Solomon; large,
as the sands on the Sea shore, understanding from the Cedar in Lebanon to the
Hysop upon the wall, all points of nature, great and small, as is said 1 Kings
4. v 29, 30. fitness to government of all sorts, so that whether to formation
of Laws, punishment of offenses, remunerations of merit, or any other exercise
of intellect, they infinitely abound: to others he has vouchsafed strange
activity of hand, and mechanical contrivance, to frame things for life and
defense, for delight and correspondence, that thereby amity of mankind may be
promoted, and one man depend upon another: so that all Learning, whether
Noetick or Manual, of book or hand, proceeds from God, who is as truly parent
of the one, as of the other.

But though all Learning be from God, yet not all equally honored by him, the
double portion of his blessing has ever followed the birthright. Art is first
minted in the mind, before exert in the hand; and those parts of Learning that
are speculative are most sacred, and have ever been in esteem where John of
Leydens, Knipperdollings, Hackets, Copingers, and such turbulent Spirits have
not misguided lewd people to the subversion of legal and sober Constitutions,
and disgrace of warlike and orderly Conquests.

All good ages have accumulated honors on astellanus in lit. lib. 3. part 2ae.
cap. 14. ^ seq.
Learned Philosophers, and noble Sages, submitting to their Government, Laws,
Prescripts; and opposing no humor or pet of their own, against their Counsels;
The Jews (in the infancy of time) took their written Laws from Moses (who is
4. Deuteronomy. 44. 45. verse.
said to be Learned in all the Learning of the Egyptians:) This is the Law
which Moses set before the Children of Israel: and v. 5. These are the
testimonies, Statutes and Judgments which Moses spoke unto the Children of
Israel. So 2. Chro. 23. c. v. 18. Also Iehojada appointed the Offices of the
House of the Lord by the hand of the Priests and Levites, etc. as it is written
in the Law of Moses. So 3. Ezra. v. 2. As it is written in the Law of Moses the
Man of God. So 9. Daniel 11. Mal. 4. v. 4. To which add the texts out of the
New Testament 2. Luc. 22. When the days of her purification were come,
according to the Law of Moses. So our Savior 7. John 19. Did not Moses give
you the Law? Yea the Jews own testimony ratify it, 8. John 5. Moses in the Law
commanded us, etc. By all which it appears, that the Jews took their Laws from
Moses the Learned.

After them the Caldaeans took Laws from their Astrologers and wise Men, from
whose counsel they also looked for deliverance from all dangers, as appears
from that of the 47. of Esaias. v. 13. Where God tells them, Thou art wearied in
the multitude of they counsels: Let now the Astrologers, the Star-gazers, the
Monthly Prognosticators stand up, and save thee from these things that shall
come upon thee. So did the Egyptians from their Magicians and Enchaunters; and
so did the Indians from their Gymnosophists; the Celts and Britains, from their
Druyds, the Greeks Vide Sabellicum Orat. 7* de origin ^ and incrementis
Philosophi^.
from their seven wise Men, yea and the Romans from the Greeks. So famous did
Learning make Men and Places, that the ruder World dawning toward the bright
noon of literature, sought to those that sat in the light, for direction how
to rule wisely, and obey heartily. Upon this ground did Faunus King of Italy
invite and highly Origo Gentis Romanae annex. Dionysio Halicarnasseo.
Halicarnass. lib. 1. p. 26. edit. Sylburgii.
reward Euander the Arcadian his coming into his country, and teaching them the
use of Learning, and Laws: and long after this, upon the same grounds did the
People of Rome send Sp. Posthumous, Ser. Sulpitius. A. Manlius, Ambassadors to
the Greeks, to crave Laws of their wise Men by which they might be Governed;
yea, and at this day all the wel-ordered Nations of the World use learned Men,
and few others, in Embassies, Treaties, Counsels, Judicatories; accounting them
fittest to Rule, who, with the good man our Savior Mat. 12. v. 35. Mat. 13. v.
52.
speaks of, bring out of the good Treasure of their hearts, things new and old;
having minds enriched with Learning, rather then Natures enraged with fury. The
necessity of such persons, and the honors done them, encouraging Men of noble
Births and Spirits to addict themselves to Books, and rare Indagations of
Nature; as appeared in Tully, who though he derived himself directly Quidquid
nobilitatis fortuna eripuerat, id long accumulatius ei restituit bonarum
artium Disciplina. Patricius de Inst. Reip. p. lib. 6.
from the Volseian Kings, yet gave himself to Oratory: and the Son of Iuba the
King of Numidia, captive to Julius Caesar, who was so Learned, that he was
numbered amongst the greatest Writers of Greece; and how-ever bad fortune had
robbed him of his riches and liberty, yet had it paid him doubly, in plenty of
knowledge.

Let me add one Laurel more to the Learned's Crown: The Laws made by learned
men, Antiquity owned and received as from the command of the Gods, accounting
only those men fit to converse with the Gods, that were in a sense Gods to
Men; Thus Minos the Cretian is said to converse with Hallicarnass. l. 2. p.
122. edit. Sylburgii.
Jupiter, and in his presence to compile those Laws, which after he gave the
People: and Lycurgus the Lacaedemonian, to have command from the Oracle at
Delphos; and Numa to consult with the Goddess Aegeria, that the Laws might be
more willingly admitted and obeyed, as made by the Gods themselves: nay in a
kind, by a civil (...). Idem eodem loco.
Non obstante, excepting them (so learned) from being bound by Law, as other
men (of less magnitude) were; as appears in that carriage of Archytas the
Pythagorean his Citizens to him, whom they would choose seven times their head
Governor, though the Law forbad any other that office Diogenes in vita ejus
lib. 8. p. 617. edit. Step.
and honor above a year: so truly was that a Maxim amongst them, that that
Kingdom was most happy where Philosophers ruled, or where those that ruled,
were ruled by Philosophers.

Learning then has a fair descent, it is of no late Plebeian origin: and though
I assent not to learned Pliny in his opinion, qui aeternas literas arbitratur,
as I find him quoted in Patricius, lib. 2. de Repub. titulo 1. unless he refer
it to God. As descended from the Father of lights, so it is veteris prosapiae
and multarum imaginum, the prime accomplishment of the World rational, as light
Elementary (the first Born of Gods Creatures) is in the World common; and it is
worth the noting (as if God would by special design honor Learning as the
grand refiner of Nature from its faetid oar) that those whose service God used
to convey it to succeeding times, were not irefull Cain's, rebellious Cham's,
oppressing Nimrod's, no nor proud Politic Babel-builders; but holy Men, famous
for sanctity, uprightness, mansuetude.

Adam the first Man, King, and Priest, was the protodoctor of all mankind, he
taught his Children; Seth his Son, taught his Children; and they ( Josephus
tells us) being wel-born and holily educated, Lib. 1. c. 4.
first found out the Nature of the Heavenly bodies, their orders and
influences; and being forewarned by their grand Father Adam, that the flood
would come, that would destroy all Letters by them invented; they like true
Men, erected Pillars of Stone, and engraved Letters on them, by which those
whom God should save alive, might be instructed.

Afterward Noah grew famous (the second Pineda de reb. gest. a Solomone p.
195. c. 27.
parent of mankind; for from him came all the World after the flood) and was
the grand Professor of Learning; Josephus tells us, that in reward of Noah and
his Sons piety and commendable Antiq. c. 8.
Industry in searching after Arts (useful to Men, and honorable to Godward)
which Arts were Astrology and Geometry, God gave them long life.

Berosus the Caldean, and after him Middendorpius, Lib. 3. Antiq. Lib. 1. de
Acad. Italiae.
assert Noah to have lived in Armenia first, then in Italy, to teach Laws
Divine and Civil, Rules of Morals, and the true Worship of God. Polydor Virgil
out of Philo, makes Abraham the Lib. 1. c. 6. Antiq. de Invent. rerum.
first Inventor of Letters, ( Qui Moysi antiquior, says he) who was more
ancient then Moses: and surely Abraham might well be in the time of Noah, and
so far before Moses; for Noah outliving the flood 350. years Genesis 9. v. 28. and
Abraham being born after the flood 294. years, Atque aeb eodem verissimam sidem
and rerum Divinarum Humanarumque Sapientiam didicisse. Pineda de gestis Solom.
c. 27.
he might live 56. years with Noah, and from him and his, learn the true faith
and wisdom both about Divine and Humane things: and there is somewhat to be
yielded to this, if we value the Targum of Jerusalem, which reads the 25. Genesis
v. 22. where it is said of Rebecca, when the Children strugled in her Womb, And
she went to enquire of the Lord; it is added, in Schola Shemi Magni: now this
Shem was son to Noah; so that if Shem was alive in Rebeccas time, which may not
be doubted, and Abraham was so long before that, it may well be granted that
Abraham lived in Noah his time, and was a chief Agent in propagating Learning,
and the knowledge of God, according to the testimony that God gives of him, Genesis
18. verse. 19. I know him, that he will command his Household and his Children
after him, and they shall keep the way of the Lord, and do Justice and
Judgment. While Abram, (...).


The Learned have been very faithful to this father of the faithful, in
particularizing not only what, but also where he taught letters: Philo a calls
(...). lib de Abrahamo p 361.
him a Man Astrologique and Meteorologique, as much addicted to the Learning of
the Caldaeans, as parents are to their Children; Rabbi Ionathas Author of the
Targum of Jerusalem adds, that Abraham Vide Targum Hierosolymitanum. See Cor. a
Lapide on Genesis 21. 33.
taught Ethiques, about Virtue and the true Worship of God, not only to his
Children and Family, but also to Strangers whom he gave admission to.

Pineda (out of the ancients) specifies the place Lib. de gestis Solom. p. 197.
of his Teaching to be the Plain of Mamre; for in Genesis 13. 18. it is said, that
Abram removed his Tent, and came and dwelt in the Plain of Mamre, the Text is,
(...), in the Oaks of Mamre, which is in Hebron; Or amongst the Chestnut Trees,
for the word bears both translations; so 21. chap. v. 33. And Abraham planted a
Green-grove ((...) nomen universale) in Beersheba, another School of his: But
his chief School was that we read of in Genesis v. 6. the place of Sichem, unto
the Plain of More, (...), to the Oak Moreh, which St. Jerome translates
Convallem Illustrem, the famous or plentiful Valley; But the Hebrew Doctors
read it by Quercus monstratoris vel Doctoris, the Oak of the Teacher and
Shewer, and so also St. Ierom reads the word (...), 2. Joel v. 23. Be glad
then ye Children of Zion, and rejoice in the Lord your God, for that he has
given you the former Rain moderately: So our English reads it, but he reads it
after the Hebrew, dedit vobis Doctorem Iustitiae, he has given you the Doctor
of Righteousness, (...).

It seems that the Ancients ever delighted in shady places; and seated
themselves, upon places of plenty and security, woods and places of retirement
are very contributive to Piety and Study, popular frequentations divert the
minds of youth from what they should intend, therefore the holy Quia hac arbor^
nihil habeba^i ^sacratius. B^cman de orig. verb.
Patriarch chooses his abode and school in Querc^to and Nemore, and so did the
Druyds, (Our Ancient masters of Learning in this Nation) who herefore have
their names from (...) an Oak, because they judged nothing more sacred then an
Oak.

After Abraham, I find Job numbered amongst the Learned Teachers, who lived
about the latter end of the Patriarch Jacob, as Cor. a Lapide says, In Encomio
sapientiae p. 6.
and in Learning was profound, and for acquaintance with God, singular, as
appears by Gods Speech, Ezekiel. 14. 16. Though these three men, Noah, Daniel and
JOB were in it, etc. God expressing that though three of his high favorites
were in Jerusalem, yet he would not be entreated by them to spare it.

After Job, Moses is mentioned* a Man after Lib. 10. de praeparat. Evangel.
Gods own heart, to whom God appeared Face to Face; whom Eupolemus in Eusebius
says, to be the first Instructor of the Jewish Nation in Letters, this Man was
so mighty in honor amongst the Jews, for his converse with God, and the
miraculous power that he expressed in their Conduct out of Egypt, and Wander in
the Wilderness, that God concealed the place of his Death, least the People
should commit Idolatry to his Sepulcher. Thus all were Doctors, who first
seminated Learning in the world, by special instinct, and direction of God, who
would not have his Redemptor quippe humani generis, quia summi patri^ est
verbum, domi nus utique est omnium scientiarum. In 1 Reg. 1. c. p. 286. Tom. 2.
Church and people letterlesse and unarted, but according to their receptivity
and capacity, conformable to their head Christ Jesus; who being the Wisdom
and Word of the Father, is Lord and Doctor of all Arts and Sciences, as St.
Gregory truly notes.

Afterward, when the Jewish Polity came to be fixed, and they were in a
succession of Government; then they Erected public Schools of Civitas
literarum, sonat oraculum seu loquutorium Pagnin. in verbo.
learning, and appointed Cities which to those ends they privileged. In the
15. Chapter of Joshua, we read of Debir the City of Letters, or the Oracle or
Loquutory, whence the secrets of God were learned, and given; for so (...)
signifies: here, after Moses, did O^hniel teach, as Mosius from the Talmudists
instructs us; Adricomius Apud Pinedam de gestis Solom. p. 197. (...), civitas
libri. Adricomius in desc. S. Terra number. 41. in Trib. Simconis. Vide Zanchium
in oratione de Aperiendis in Ecclesia Scholis: an^ Tom. 6. Com. in Epi. Pauli
and Petri.
also tells us of Cariatsepher (which was the Debir before spoken of, as appears
15 Chap. Joshua, 15.) an Academy and University of Palestina, and that in it
arts were taught, and that it was abundantly furnished with Schools, and
Masters to teach them.

To conclude this head; It appears out of the holy story, that there was a
grand College at Jerusalem, in which the Masters of the Law resided, and those
that were inspired, as by name Hulda the Prophetess; for so we read, 2 Kings
c. 22. v. 14. from which as the fountain, all the other Schools grew; the
institution of which, as judicious Calvin observes, was, that there should ever
be a succession of learning and learned men Seminarium aliquod semper maneret
in Ecclesia Dei, ne destitueretur probis and bonis doctoribus.
in the Church of God; that no age of the Church should be without Doctors
learned and pious, every way accomplished to the Ministry.

And therefore says he, when God extraordinarily called any (to promulgate his
illimited and absolute power) whom he would send out as Prophets, then did he
qualify them accordingly, and gave them an humble ingenuity to put all their
authority and enablement upon a miracle; thus In cap. 7. Amos ver. 14.
did Amos, whom God called from a herdsman to be Prophet, c. 7 v. 14. openly
profess he was no Prophet, nor the son of a Prophet; that is, not a Prophet
ordinarily instructed from his youth in the Schools, to be an Interpreter of
the Scripture; but one extra propositum, by Divine call, and special
inspiration, which had he not made appear, he might (says Calvin) have been
exofficed for not having a call.

Thus, and by these worthies prenominated, has Learning been handed down from
heaven to the Jews, from them to the Celts, Gauls or Britans (for they are upon
the point all one in Antiquity). Our Samothes one of Iaphets posterity, being
about the age of the world 1910. a Teacher of learning, and Erector of Schools,
as I shall hereafter show, God willing: about which time also the Phoenicians
and Egyptians grew learned, and had Tandos and Memphaeos their Academies; to
which afterward many ages (as to that of Jerusalem) Pineda de gest. Solom. p.
197.
the Greek Philosophers and Poets, Orpheus, Musaeus, Melampodus, Pythagorus,
Plato, Socrates, repaired, and from whence imbibed those grounds upon which the
Learning of this day, and all times since, is, and has been founded.

By this the Antiquity of Learning, and the Nobility of its parentage is
evinced. It now follows that I should show its qualities congenerous, and
proportionate to its birth; Saint James has fully Jam. 3. 17.
defined it, when he says, The wisdom that is from above, is first pure,
then peaceable, gentle, easy to be entreated; It Is a Cornucopia, the general
Alms-giver; It has reduced natures tyranny into order and bounds; by this
Terpander played the Lacedaemonians out of a sedition Acts 19. 35.
into a calmnesse; by this the Town-Clark in the Acts, cooled the people out of
their uproar; by this Pysistratus gained power over the Athenians, the most
jealous people of their liberties that the world had; by this Cardinal
Bessarion persuaded the Christians in the East, to arm themselves against the
Turk, composed the differences between Platina in Panegyrico Bessarionis.
the Eastern and Western Churches, quieted that disturbance which threatened
the City of Bononia's utter ruin; excited the Germane Princes against the
Turks: By this did Hubert Gualter, our Countryman, work on the Nobles and
People of this land, after the death of Rich. Pits^us. in vita ejus ad annum
1205.
the First, to settle the Crown (contrary to their purposes) upon King John,
gaining him not only authority, but favor, in the exulcerated minds of the
people; By this in fine, eloquently uttered, have all great designs, either of
conquest or compact been effected; and without this, neither Hegesias his
discourse of the miseries of life, or Plato his immortality of the soul, and
the Elisium to be enjoyed after life, would have been so operative upon men,
who gave their lives (as it were) in tribute to their eloquence, and
incomparable discoveries.

Look, and read over the Journals of Antiquity; view the Diaries of time, and
you shall find learned men useful in their places and ages, noble advantages
to their Countries, their Chieftains to defend them, their Oracles to advise
them, their Orators to plead for them, their Physicians to cure them, nay,
their Musicians to recreate them, though popular charity has often been so
cold, and affections so inconstant, that want and misery have usually betyded
these Heroes; X^nocrates (...), etc. Diogenes in vita cjus.
the Philosopher was a famous man, so true of his word, that the Judges would
take his bare word, his voire dire, when others oaths would hardly pass; yet
this so gallant a man did the Athenians sell, being glad to be rid of him, nay,
desirous that their discourtesie to him might break his heart, and so they hear
no more of him. Cleanthes was kept so poor, that wanting parchment to write
Zeno's precepts in, he was constrained to buy a Diog. in vita cjus p 542.
it with money he earned in the night by drawing and carrying water, this doing
to support himself to read Philosophy to his Countrymen in the day. Socrates
the wisest man, by attest of the Delphick Oracle, that was of his time, whom
Plato Plato in Apolog. pro Socrate p. 16. edit. Ficini. (...), etc.
brings in as upbrayding the Athenians for condemning him, I have got this
great fame and renown for no other thing, but virtue: Yet the people will no
nay, but he must dye; and dye he does by their hands; but Eunapius observes,
that after the violent and inhumane butchery of (...). In vita Aed^sij p. 36.
Socrates, the Athenians never did any action noble or generous. Scipio Ingrata
patria, non habebis ^ssa mea.
Africanus, was so ill treated, that he cries out, O ungrateful Country, thou
shall have none of my bones. Tully complains of his hard fortune, when he says
to Philiscus, who seems to extenuate his misery, Does (...); Dion ^b. 38. p.
73. Edit. Leunclavii.
not ignominy and banishment appear great evils to thee? Is it a light thing to
live an outlaw, without friend, without country, a scoffing stock to insulting
enemies, and a dishonor to wonted friends? etc. It were endless to quote the
sundry instances of this nature that stories abound with; It shall suffice me
to mention a passage of Pope Aencas Sylvius Ep. 78.
Pius the Second, who expressing the changes. of people, says; The love of
ones Countrymen, Difficile monu men^um amor civium.
is a Monument, which Wise men rarely have; few of the wisest and bravest men
of the World dying, or being buried in (...) Plutarchus lib. de exilio, p. 604*
cait. Paris.
their own Countries, but fain to seek graves far from the places of their
births, and lives; being denied them of those whom they have deserved of, and
from whom they might well have expectect better pay.

Notwithstanding which ungrateful barbarity of men, the learned Tribe have
been supported to better hopes, and by the blessing of God, have lived to enjoy
the favor and auspicious Sunshine of Princely indulgence, (Kings growing their
nursing Fathers, and Queens their nursing Mothers); who, being themselves
learned, and bred by learned Men, so encouraged all Arts, by donaries and
expressions of largess, that no preferment or glory followed any course of
life, but that which was Philosophical and Bookish.

Thus did Constantine the Great (in whose praise Eusebius writ four whole
Books) settle on the Church, and on learned Men, all those congiaries, titles,
oblations, and other ways of support, which Apostate Julian afterward nulled
and converted into lay-fees; Thus did the Emperor Dion in vita ejus, lib. 81.
p. 814 edit. Leuncluvii.
Marius Antoninus Philosophus, settle great honors upon the City of Athens,
placing there at his own cost and pay, many Doctors in all Arts, to the benefit
of all Nations: and this he did not more by the Incitation of Cornelius
Fronton, Claudius Herod, Iunius Rusticus, and Apollonius Nicomediensis, men
famous in their times, and his Tutors, then from his own inclination, for he
was very Learned, and loved Learned men; So that the (...). Idem eodem loco.
Historian says; That many took upon them the outside and mask of Philosophy,
that they might be enriched by him.

The like munificence and freeness have all noble Spirits, and all Golden and
Silver Ages, continued and augmented to the Learned: In founding and endowing
houses for their cohabitation, furnishing them with Learned Men to teach Arts
in them, and liberally paying them therefore, exempting them from all Services,
Impositions, Sanctio de studiis liberalibus lata a D. Theodosio and
Valentiniano Imp. Cod. lib. 11. Tit. 18. and lib. 10. tit. 52.
quarterings of Soldiers, or entertainments of public Ministers of State; That
so they might the better settle to study and attend their vocations: And for
encouragements herein, what personal dignities have they collated on them? It Is
endless to mention those Myriads which all the Learned have, when only the
Civilians (men of great learning, and of honorable profession) are noted by
Ludovicus Bologninus to have 130 Cass. Catal. gl. Mundi, p. 365.
grand Privileges; and all men learnedly bred, and members of Universities and
houses of Law, are by consent of Christendom, as well as our own Nation,
accounted Gentlemen, and warranted to write themselves so, be their extract how
mean and ignote soever.

Add to this further propagation of learning, the vast Libraries, made and
dedicated to the Muses, by Princes and Princely Subjects, in all times; That
famous One at Jerusalem built by Alexander Bishop of that City, out of which
Eusebius says he gathered his History; That which Pamphilus the Martyr placed
at Caesarea, famous, even to the time of St. Ierom, That of the Emperor
Theodosius Junior, excelling that of Ptolomaeus Philadelphus; That (not almost
to be credited One) of the learned Emperor Gordianus, in which were 62000.
Volumes; Nay that, that, that Library in Folio in Pergamus, which Cass. Catal.
gl. Mundi, p. 586. Plutarchus in Antonio.
had in it 200000. Volumes; That of M. Galeatius, D. of Milan, built by him at
Papia; That of Lewis the 12. at Blois, with that in Orleance, and the two in
Paris, one in the King of Navar's College, the other in the Monastery of St.
Victor, That of Alphonsus King of Arragon and Cicily, of infinite quantities of
Books, in all Tongues and Arts.

That of Adrian the Emperor both at Rome and Athens, The Vatican, enlarged by
the Heidl^bergh Library thither carried.

The famous Libraries of Our own Nation, (though much impaired by Our late
unhappy Wars) That of St. James his, commonly called the Kings Library; That of
Oxford, commonly called Bodleyes Library; That at Westminster, commonly called
Sir Robert Cottons Library: And that other near St. Peter's Church, commonly
called the Bishop of Lincoln his Library. Syon College Library; The now lost
Libraries of our Cathedral and Collegiate Churches, Learned Bishops and
Praelats, University and College Libraries, in whose hands soever they be; Yea
particular persons Libraries. These all do conjoin to make head against those
impieties, which sway loose natures, to a despising of learning, or a vulgar
account of learned Men.

Now if any sottish person ask with Judas; To what purpose this waste? and has
an evil eye, because others have had good and benign aspects on learning, I
should think him worthy of no better reply, then that of our Lords, to the
repining labourer; Might not men do what they would, with their own? have they
not well chosen 20 Math. v. 15.
who honor God with their substances? do they not by their hospitality
entertain mortal Angels? nay, for these works of piety and charity, do not
they speak who are long since departed? I trow, they do, their works do praise
them in the gates, the loins of the learned do bless the memories of their
founders and benefactors. But were all other arguments waved (though sundry in
their place, God permitting, I intend to offer,) yet the Devils malice against
it, and his craft to beguile the greatest wits into his party, were enough to
prepare and purchase our beliefs of its necessity: the old Serpent fears
nothing more then the sword of the Spirit, which is the word of God, brandished
by a Master of the assembly; he cannot away with one brought up at the feet of
Gamaleel, who discovers his falsehoods and methods, and can decorticate him for
a Devil of darkness, while he has the garb of an Angel of light; his engines
are ever on work to keep men in ignorance; but if not that, to make them his
pensioners: he knows Fame and admiration, to be wise as an Oracle, and
consulted with upon all arduous affairs, answers the pride of Achitophel; and
he adapts a snare suitable to this enterprise, he puts in hard for every
purchase that is worth ought; he has so many Mercuries abroad, that no sooner is
any thing out of the thought and will, passed into the fancy, but he knows it,
and accordingly lies in Ambush: here he met with Tertullian, a sharp Wit, and
stole away his heart from the truth, making him become Hist. Magdeburg. Cent.
3. c. 4. p. 50.
a Montanist, corrupting the faith by many things which he delivered, not only
besides, but against that form of Doctrine which was delivered by Christ and
his Apostles: so also did he distort St. Cyprian, though God recovered him by
his Eodem loco.
grace, and (as I believe) gave him the sight of, and sorrow for his errors,
which he accepted of; and put a Spirit into him fit for Martyrdom, which he
courageously underwent: the like danger since befell St. Augustine, St. Ambrose,
and others of the ancient Fathers; But chiefly Origin, one whose light of
intellect was like that of the Sun, matchless, a great Wit, and (as it proved)
a great temptation to the Church, as Vincentius Magnum ingeium and magna
^mptatio, (...). Lynens. uscb. lib. 6. c. ^.
notes; for he was grown to such veneration, that no man of his age bore any
breadth but he; he encouraged his Father to Martyrdom, he converted thousands
to Christ, wrote Infinite Books, with noble art and upon noble subjects; yet at
length the Church gained nothing by this Lucifer, but scandal, and detriment;
for his authority being great, and God permitting Satan to traduce and tempt
him (for his greater good, I hope, he having much after-sorrow,) every humor
and conceit of his grew Dogmatical, and is it. (...). (...). 3. ^. 10.
was taken up as an article of faith, as if he had not been a man subject to
passions, follies, delusions, seducements, but a person immaculate, and
unerring, such as could neither deceive nor be deceived; But poor man, he met
with a Sophister of more subtilty and experience then he was, and his own
weakness beguiled him of that grace, on which only he ought to have rested;
and now he starts aside and grows like Salt that has no savor, fit to be cast
out as execrable. S. Ierom Suum, ob ingenii eruditionem, non ob Dogmatum
veritatem. St. Hyerom. cont. Ruffinum. Laudo Originem ut Interpretem, non ut
Dogma^isten; ingenium, non fidem; Philosophum, non Apostolum. Epist. ad
Pammach. Ubi been nemo melius, Ubi male nemo p^jus.
against Ruffinus, calls him, his beloved, for the rarity of his wit, not truth
of his opinions: and anon, I admire Origin as an Interpreter, not an Oracle; as
witty, not Orthodox; a as Philosopher, not an Apostle; yea this made that
common saying of him, Where he did well no man better, where ill no man worse:
But what became of this titubating, this touring mountain of snow? did he
outstand the warm beams of Divine grace? could he by his wit and Satan's to
help, steel himself into an obduration impenetrable? nothing less; God
recovered him, and brought him to notable remorse, and the better to humble
him, and Hist. Magd^b. Cent. 3. c. 10 p. 189.
abase the pride of his Spirit, reduced him to great poverty and want, as
Nicephorus relates it, and in that he dyed in the 69. year of his age.

Nor rests Satan here, his work is never at an end, so long as there are good
men to polish, and bad men to pervert: hence yet does he pursue his trade of
chaffering for souls in the Christian Church; how has he tampered with the
profoundest Clerks? with such as St. Thomas, Bellarmine, Cajetan, Baronius,
Suarez, and thousand others, men of all hours and sciences, like Viri omnium
borarum and scientiarum.
Saul higher by head and shoulders then all the people; what choice wits culls
he out, and bribes to his services! what a train of clients has he of the
curious frye, who trifle out their time in science falsely so called as the
Apostle says, in curious and vain enquiries after things uncertain and
diabolical, such as are magic and judicial Diabolorum inventa, lib. 3. c. 17.
Astrology, studies which holy Lactantius calls Inventions of the Devil!

I cannot, I do not depretiate natural Astrology as it is a piece of
Astronomick Philosophy, for so Aristotl^ reckons it, and divides it into (...),
referring (...), that is, to Astronomy, Analyt. Poster. lib. 1. c. 13. And so
Cornelius Agrippa considers them as one, c. 30. de Astronomi^: I grant it a
knowledge ancient, and laudably looked into, so our end be to honor God in a
modest observing the language of the Stars and Heavens: The Psalmist tells us,
That the Heavens declare the glory of God, and the Firmament show his handy
Work: yet I find the ancient Patriarchs and Prophets, skilled this something
like Learning, as Abraham, Moses, Daniel, etc. My only aim is, to decry
Astrology judicial, which I find stigmatized with brands of Infamy and
dishonor in all good ages, and all good authors; Platina notes of Richard,
father to Pope In vita Mar^elli, Astrolo^ peritissi^us, quam quam ^udiciariam
^versaretur.
Marcellus the second; that he was a most noble Astrologer, but a professed hater
of that which is judicial; And I desire to be pardoned if I use more liberty of
speech and fullness of reproof then ordinary, yea sharpen mine arrows that
they may stick in the hearts of the King of heavens enemies, Philosophiam veram
Sapientiam esse, eamque praeferendam Sacris litter is, lib. 3. c. 17
and make them confess, their wages and doings not to be good, while they
prefer a cunning man's co^sult beyond the advice either of God in his Word, or
his Ministers according to his word, being in this (in a kind) heathens, for
Lactantius tells us that they averred, That Philosophy was the true wisdom, and
to be preferred above the holy Scriptures.

As for judicial Astrology, and all other prestigiations, they have been
condemned in all ages, God defies them 47 Esaias, verse. 13. Thou art wearied in
the multitude of thy Counsels, let now the Astrologers, the Star-gazers, the
monthly Prognosticators stand up, and save thee from these things that shall
come upon upon thee. verse 14. Behold they shall be as stubble, the fire shall
burn them, they shall not deliver themselves from the power of the flame, etc.
And the converted Ephesians, Acts c. 19. brought in all their Magic Books and
burnt them as unworthy to be kept by Christians.

The ancient Philosophers decryed this, while they obtested against any
perfect, conclusive, necessary Science in us. Plato will allow man but barely
opinion, God only has science. Ptolomy Ficinus i^ c^m. in lib. ^. Enne^d.
Ploti^i. p. 124.
says, that judgment of futurities is a kind of Medium between necessary and
contingent, nor ought any thing to be affirmed certainly and exactly which is
future. In Metaphys. negat Astrologis esse credendum, quia neque cun^a
coelestia teneant, neque naturas inferiorum ad judicia necessarias, neque
nitantur demonstratione, sed experientia qua dam v^ vaticinio, probationibus
oratorieis atque (...). Ficinus loco praecitato.
Avicen denies any credit to Astrologers, because neither do they comprehend
the latitude of heavenly things, nor so much of the nature of inferior things
as are necessary to judgments, nor is their Art demonstrable: but they deal
upon experience and Vaticinie, and back their deceit with Oratorick and Poetic
fables and proofs.

And without doubt, could Astrologers foretell any thing certainly, there would
not have been such follies committed by them, as to their dishonor has been,
by the just hand of God; Nor would that famous Paulus Florentinus have Ficinus
apud Plotinum in Com. in lib. 3. p. 124.
been in the dark, who openly professed, that he calculated his Nativity, and
could find nothing of longaevity in it: yet it is known, he lived till 85 years
of age, which was five years above wondrous old in David's account.

The Fathers of the Church have been marvellously clamorous against them and
their fascinations: Tertullian is very sharp, and notably perstringes the
Simonian Heretics and Marcionites, Hist. Magd. Cent. 1. l. 2. cap. 5. Ne
loquendum quidem est de Astrologiis, non putant Deum requirendum, praesumentes
Stellarum nos immutabili arbitrio agi.
(who both used these Arts) adding, As for Astrologers, they deserve not once
to be named; they think God not to be consulted with, but that we are ordered
by the immutable influences of the Stars. And in his Book of Idolatry he is so
zealous Lib. de Idololatr. Post Evangelium nunquam invenias aut Sophistas, aut
Caldaeos, aut Incantores, aut Conjectores, aut Magos, nisi plane punitos.
against them, that he says, That after the Gospel was received, we cannot
find either Sophisters or Caldeans, or Inchanters, or Conjecturers, or
Magicians, but they were ever severely punished. Lib. 3. in Job.
Origin is not behind others in giving them the lash of his pen; and he smites
once for all: he calls Enchanters the Devils Seducings, the Devils pastime, the
dregs of Idolatry, the infatuation of souls, the Incantationes, Diaboli seduct
jones, Damonum irrisiones, Idololatriae fex, anima^um infa^uatio, atque Ordinum
scandolum, qui ad vana contenderint auguri^ ^o ipsis Dei visitatio recedit,
Ipsis sancti Angeli derelinquunt, cum istis Diabolus remanet, infatuans eorum
mentes, obtundens corda illorum, abstrahens a vero sensus illorum.
scandal of Orders; adding, that those who follow them are forsaken of God, and
the holy Angels, possessed by the Devil, who not only infatuates them, but
hardens their hearts against the Truth, and maks them reprobate to every good
word and work. Saint Augustine is very smart against them, as isntrumental to
beguile men of Truth, and to betray them to all evils, of Atheism, Idolatry,
profaneness, and what not, lib. 5. de Civit. Dei. So Saint Cyril lib. 10.
cont. Iulianum: Theod. quaest. 15. on Genesis: Esychius upon the 7. chapter of
Leviticus; and chap. 19. So Alchymus, Olympiodore, and Cassiodore, as I find
them quoted, Hist. Magd. Cent. 6. c. 6. with infinite others, which to mention
would be needless.

The ancient Councels, not only abroad, but at home, decree against this, or
any thing like it in any degree, as heathenish: So I find in the Synod of
Saint Patrick here, about the year 456. art 14. A Christian which commits
Spelm. in Conc. p. 52. Christianus qui occiderit, aut fornicationem fecerit,
aut more Gentilium ad Aruspicem meaverit, per singula crimina annum
poen^tentiae agat.
Murder or Adultery, or after the manner of the Heathen goes to a Witch, for
every such fault let him be enjoined, and accordingly undergo a whole years
penance. Yea, the Law of our Land punishes a Witch, or any one who converseth
with an evil spirit, with death. See Sir Ed. Cook, 3. part Instit. p. 44, 45.
And some of the Learned say, That as Augurie, Aruspicine, and all Sorceries, so
Astrologick predictions are made by familiarity of evil spirits; and that no
particular events can be foreknown by any, but by that unlawful compact: And
for this, besides strong Reasons, they produce the Authorities of ingenuous
Masters in In C^ntiloquio.
that skill, as Gauricus, who says, Fieri nequit ut qui tantum sciens est,
particulares rerum formas praenunciet: soli autem Numine afflati praedicunt
particularia: And therefore though there be difference in the Manner and Kinds
of Witchcraft, Divination, Southsaying, Fortune-telling and Astrology, as to
exact definition; yet they all agree in the end* which is, by vain and impious
means to know the future events of Men and Things: for which cause the
Scripture ranks them together Dan 2. 2. Magicians, Astrologers, Sorcerers and
Caldeans; and Tully condemns them together, as Lib. de Divinatione.
parts of one and the same pack, whereby the Devil seduceth man's curiosity to
dishonor God and his Truth, by adhering to signs of future events, good and
evil; which not warranted in the Word of God, ought not to be rested on by
Christians: For as the Schoolmen well say, Omnes (...) q 95 ar ^. in Resp.
hujusmodi observationes superstitiosae sunt and illici^ae, and videntur esse
quaedam reliquiae Idololatriae. See more of this in King James his
Daemonologie, cap. 3, 4, 5. etc. and therefore 'twas a good rule of Mariana,
while commending the study of Religion to a Prince, he forbids resting Mariana
c. de Religione lib 2. Ergo cum Principi religionis studium commendatum esse
cupimus, nolumus ut Religionis specie deceptus auili superstitione Majestatem
polluat, futuros eventus perscrutando aliqua divinandi art, si Ars est, and
non potius vanissimorum hominum ludibrium.
on specious forms of mysterious superstition, and on the Art of Divination (if
it be an Art, and not rather a delusion of vain men) as things which do
misbecome the Majesty of a Governor, and imbase the glory of Religion. And
therefore Cornelius Agrippa, after he has with great severity Cap. 22. de
Astrolog* Iudiciaria.
oppugned this Knowledge, and asserted both Picus and Firmianus in their
Arguments against it, says, Dignissima profecto Ars, quam olim etiam Daemones
profiterentur, in fallaciam hominum, and in injuriam Divinitatis.

And as Religion is (by these heathenish and indemonstrable Arts) dishonored,
so is the Civil Polity and Authority of the Magistrate hereby endammaged and
imperill'd: For such is the policy of Satan, and the corruption of our nature,
that we give more heed usually to Doctrines of Devils, then to the rules and
dictates of true Religion. And though the Scriptures be precise, that obedience
be given in all things according to the will of God, to those that are placed
over us, or permitted by providence to have power amongst us, and it rests a
duty on us, to give honor to whom honor, and fear to whom fear is due: yet
how easily will those bonds be broken, and that awe upon the conscience be
discharged, if men's recumbencies be on Prognosticators, and their Charms and
mentitious Presages? Many sad villainies may by the midwifry of this Impostor,
Dion in vita ejus, lib. 57. page 616 edit. Leunclavi^.
be perpetrated. Which is confirmed by Tiberius, of whom the Historian says,
That (...), etc. Calculating the day and hour of their Nativities; if he found
in them any thing excellent, or any good fortune, or likelinesse to attain the
Empire, he See more of this in Cor. Agrippa de vanitate Scientiarum* c. 22.
slew them. Therefore Tacitus calls them Genus hominum Principibus infidum,
credentibus fallax, a Civitate nostra semper prohibentur. Which the wise
Counselor Agrippa, forewarns Octavian hereof, while he says, Magicians are
not to be (...) etc. Dion lib 52 p. 491. Edit. Leuncl.
endured: for admit they speak some things true, yet oftener do they by lying
fool men into attempts dangerous and innovating.

I the rather enlarge on these hints, because I see a notorious mischief coming
in at this door; the insolences of the Astrologers and their Appendices being
not only great and bold, like the sin of Sodom; but also scandalous to Our
Religion, Leg^ Corn. Agrippam de vanit. Sci^ntiarum c. 22. de Astrol.
Iudiciar^a.
and much detractfull from the honor and success of it: For so bold are they
grown, that they court men from the Ordinances of Christ in the Church, to
their Dens of speculation, and fascinating Vaults; and with Simon Magus, Acts
8. bewitch men with their sorceries, perting themselves up, and priding over
the sacred Order of the Ministry under the disfavoured name of Presbytery: as
if it were a dead Alexanders nose, which they might wring off, and not fear to
be Dion lib. 51. p. 454.
called to account therefore: or as if they, with Pharach's lean kine, would
devour those beautiful midwives of Christ's formation in us, I mean the Clergy,
(or if that word displease) the Ministry: Whom to honor and preserve, not
only in a bare subsistence, but to an honorable latitude of Conspicuity and
fortunary grandeur, has been the virtue, and will (I trust) continue still the
honor of our Times, if we follow so good patterns, as former times have set
us.

Satan then though he often hits the white he aims at, yet not always; That
man that God takes charge of is sure to escape his craft: some In tuto
haereditas ponitur quae Deo custode servatur S. Cyprianus.
royal fishes there are that pass his net, the Church has sometimes a rich
crop of comfort from men, sent by God into her, and encouraged by his mercy,
from the power and favor of Princes, and rulers. Learning, though it be the
subject of Satan's malice, yet not of his conquest altogether: God poyses the
Spirits of men to serve him, with all their might, and to demolish those strong
holds of Satan, which exalt themselves 2 Cor. 10 4
against the knowledge of Christ: And when to learning and zeal, power and
puissance is added, then the work goes on smoothly; For Learned Rulers are very
persuasive and influentiall (...). ^lu archus in lib. ad Principem indoctum p.
780. edit. Paris.
to all their subjects, nay to the times in which they live, subjects coveting
nothing more, then to do and avoid, what thy see the wisdom of their Rulers,
allow or disallow; which made Plutarch, writing to a Prince, say, What
resemblance of light and luster, the Sun and Moon in the Firmament do give of
God, such light and luster of example, and of Divine influence do Princes give
in Cities: and this sequaceousness of people seems to be given Governors, as a
grateful acknowledgment of that peace, serenity and augmentation, which under
their good and virtuous government their subjects enjoy: hence that maxim of
Politicians that the foelicity of a people arises (next to the blessing of
God) from the learned inclination and peaceful reign of their Prince, Numa
(...). Dionys. Halycarnas. lib. 2. p. 123.
the noble Lawgiver and second King of Rome, who laid the foundation of all
the after Roman glory, is said in all his time, never to make out any warlike
expedition, but to finish his whole reign in peace, settling the best things
wisdom suggested: And the reason of this his excellent government, and great
wisdom in ordering matters to such advantage, is imputed (...). Idem eodem
loco.
(by the Historian) to his familiarity with the Gods, whom with great care and
devotion, he both served, and commanded others to serve after his example. So
the Emperor Adrian when he was to commend one to succeed him in the Empire, to
(...). etc. Dion lib. 69. p 796.
wit, Marcus Aurelius Antoninus Philosophus, he tells them he will name one,
beyond exception, noble, gentle, meek, prudent, who through youth will do
nothing rashly, nor through dotage carelessly, but will keep himself to known
Laws, and according to them rule: Nay the increase of arts and sciences, under
a learned Prince, (which like fair ways, attend hot weather) does invigorat
the fame, and advance the Trade and Manufactury of any people, strangers
accesses bringing and carrying much to the advantage of Nations: this is
evident in the time of Solomon, who was for his wisdom so frequented, and
governed his people with such success, that they throve beyond expectation; For
in the 1 Kings 10. chapter ver. 27. it is said of him He made Silver to be in
Jerusalem as stones, and Cedars made he to be as the Sycomore trees.

Not that I judge learning the only proper virtue and qualification of a
governor, unless I could hope subjects would be as sequacious of the lenity
that inclines to, as the poets faign the woods were of Orpheus his Music, or
were so enamoured of their Magistrate, as Israel for a while (and but a while)
was of their Moses, whom they hearkened to in all things, Josh. 1. 17. Yea, to
whom they said, as Ruth to Naomi, chap. 3. ver. 5. All that thou say we will
do; and of whom the Scripture says, They feared the Exodus 14. ult.
Lord, and believed the Lord, and his servant Moses: Such tempers in people
would make Government easy, welcome, to be wished for of all that are
qualified therefore, and lawfully called thereto.

But when People like a Mighty Inundation and Torrent, break in upon their
Governors, Rerum Hungar. Dec. 4. l. 9. Hungaros non clementia and impunitate
sed virga ferrea in obsequio continendos esse.
when what Bonfinius says of the Hungarians, That they are not to be handled
gently and tenderly, but severely with a rod of Iron, to be kept under; when
the Bramble will vie with the Vine; and the Vil'd with the Honorable; when
Pompey will not only have no Superior, but no Equal; when the high-shooe will
no Laws, but such as his ignorance contrives; and peevishness promotes: When
Pride will no restraint, Power must reduce what fairer Proposals will not
effect; which severity is as necessary in bodies Politic, as Physic in those
natural; distempers in both tending to dissolution, or, at least, to what is
worse Perpetual Animosities, and Inhumane Butcheries.

Power then, must sometimes be used, else Common Wealths will be in short time
Magna latrocinia, like Caligula his time, which was (...). Zonarus Tom. 2 p.
178.
said to be nothing but Murders, Mars his Scaffolds, whereon cruelty will be
acted, and Just Power be abused, if it in time take not care to justify it
self, and preserve well doers.

The only danger is least use turn that which which was of necessity, into
nature, and Princes Sacrifice only to the sword, as to Jupiter the deliverer,
Tanquam Iovi liberatori.
passing over Arts, as weak and pusil Engines and disallied to Imperatorial
successes, at which Postern may come in Tyranny, and rigorous cruelty; like
that of the Turk, whose military Janissaries and Bashaws, rule all in their
Clerklesse and cruel way; to abate the fear of which, as Arms have been
practiced but sparingly by true and Virtuous Princes, so has Learning still
been kept on and encouraged, as that which modificates, and attempers the
rigidity of Martial inclinations.

And therefore those that take the sword as the Hollirgshed. p. 1005.
mean and rule of their Government, writing their Laws not in Milk, as Edward
the sixth of this Land, said he did his; but as Draco did (...). Ari. de
Republ. l. 2. a^ finem.
his, in Blood; of whose Laws may be said, what the great Philosopher writes
of them, There is nothing in them worthy of remembrance, but their cruelty and
severity: Those (I say) that so carry themselves, are not to be allowed pious
Princes or good Governors, unless Nimrod were one, whom the Scripture terms a
In Scripturis Sanctis non invenin^s Sanctum aliquem venator^m. Sanctus
Hieronimus.
Mighty Hunter, chasing men by the fear of his Cruelty, almost out of their
lives, if not altogether: or unless Maxentius were one, whom (...), etc.
(...). Euleb. lib 8. c. 26.
(the Historian says) both the People and Senate greatly feared and accounted
him an Execrable Tyrant; yea, unless oppression be a Magistratick quality,
which has hitherto been disallowed in all times: For the Rule of Government
is, To give Authority to those who know the measure (...). Plutarch. In Reip.
Ger. praeceptis.
of Justice, and will discreetly proportion Distributions, according as time
serves, and necessities require, as Plutarch notes: and those that expect to
be beloved of their subjects, must rule rather in their hearts, then over their
bodies, and must purchase them (...), etc. Dion lib. 55. page 561.
by lenity and bounty: for as Livia the noble Wife of Augustus said
excellently, A man may be compelled to fear one; but to love him must only come
from persuasion, and by the courtesy we see he expresses both to our selves
and others.

The good Magistrate then must not wholly use the sword, no nor wholly disuse
it: arms and rigor do often good, where the triumph and aptness of people to
abuse liberty, forbids courses of more lenity. Some men there are that have
natures unfit for Rule: Government is seldom injured but when it falls into
the hands of a Saintlike man: An Edward the Confessor, an Hen. the VI. who more
mind their Beads then rigorous and high managings of the reins of Government:
who are more in their Oratories and Chapels, then in the fields amongst armed
men, then in Tiltyard amongst Cap-a-pe Cavaliers: who with Marcus Antoninus the
Philosopher and Emperor, (...), D^on (...)* p 813. (...). Leunclavi^.
though a Prince fortunate in Wars, yet one who joys not in Martial outrages;
but to avoid bloodshed, commands to fight in Masteries with blunt swords, that
they hurt not one another; and cries, God forbid that any of you ( meaning the
Senators) by your or my Decree should lose your head in my time: so meek, so
harmless, so good, so pious he was. When to such peaceful men (I say)
Government falls, it is apt to suffer high vitiations and affronts; yea, and in
short time to fall: For such is the hardiness of our natures, that we
trespass most, where we most may: and commonly the most pious and indulgent
Governors suffer most from those subjects whom they have with greatest
tenderness obliged: Rulers of soft natures being by the subtilties of persons
dissenters from them, divulged to be not qualified to Government, and so
fittinger to be attempted upon desperately, and probably to be prevailed
against more easily.

I Have now done with the general Preface: and come to my chief Intendment,
which is, to represent the condition of Learning and Learned Men to the view of
all my Countrymen; high and low, rich and poor, that they may all with me
address to God the Father of spirits, that he would so order and dispose the
hearts of our present Governors, that they may show themselves, if not adders
to (which I hope) yet preservers of (which I pray) Learning, and the Supports
of it, in all the latitudes and lawful degrees thereof.

And the better to promote this, which I apprehend an honest and generous
design, I shall take leave to present such memorials of our bypast barbarity,
as may render our restoration by Arts and Artists (with the blessing of God)
more acceptable to us. It is a trite and childish thing to make no search after
what preceded our own times, that the Nihil earum rerum scire quae antequam
nascereris facta sunt, hoc est semper esse puerum. Cic.
Orator says, for this neglect and supineness; the old Greeks were so
contemptible, that Plato brings in an Egyptian, deriding the Greeks for
keeping no Records of past (...), etc. in ^imaeo.
things, O Solon, the Greeks are ever Children, there is no old man amongst
them. His meaning was, they were so in love with themselves, that they thought
no time worthy viewing but their own. To avoid which censure, as our Nation
has been exact in keeping, so I shall be, to my uttermost, as faithful and
diligent in collecting and reciting such instances as are proper to my purpose:
which is to show the Antiquity of Letters, and Learned Men in our Nation, and
the advantages we have obtained thereby.

This Island of Britain, in the division of the Balaeus Cent. ^. cap. 1. Cass.
Catal gl. Mundi, p 560. Ex Beros. Called
world, is said to fall, amongst other parts, to Iaphet, third son of Noah: and
from him, as part of the Celtique Kingdom, to Samothes brother to Gomer and
Tubal, from Iaphet their common Father: from whence it was a long time called
Samothea: 1. part Holing^ p. 5. and 6
After Albion the son of Neptune invaded and conquered it, changed the name and
Government under which it had continued 341 years, under nine lineal Princes.

Under the name Albion it rested about 600 years, until the time of Brute,
which, as our Chronicles say, was about the 1116 year before Christ, and about
the 2850 year after the Creation of the world; then he gaining it, to show the
Sovereignty of his power, named it and the adjacent Island Britain.

It is probable that the Religion which Iaphet and Samothes brought, and
continued to teach here, was the true Religion which they were instructed in by
their Father Noah. This Samothes was very learned as well as ancient, and was
therefore named Dis, and his Divini humanique Iuris peritissimi, obque id
religioni deditissimi, test Secione lib. 22. success. Balaeus Cent. 1. cap. 1.
followers and posterity were accounted the most learned and skilful in all
Laws and Arts both Divine and Humane, that lived.

They gave letters to all people, not the Phenicians excepted (as is thought)
and also to the Greeks; for from us and our Ancestor Samothes did they learn
all their letters and Philosophy: This is confessed by not only Berosus,
Archilochus, and others, but also by Aristotle, who says that his Scholars
followed Aristotelis in Magico.
the Samothei, who first brought letters to the Greeks* and also by Laertius
Diog. Laertius in proaemio, (...), etc.
in these words, Common fame does think Philosophy to come from the Barbarous
(the Greeks called all other nations so) and names, the Celts and Gauls, as the
Authors, according to Aristotle, by us fore-quoted; and to this assents Clemens
Alexandrinus, Philosophy, Primo stromatum. (...), etc. p. 131. Edit. Grecae
Tred. Sylburgii.
says he, has wandered about in great request, anciently it was impropriated
to the Barbarous, and grew the darling of the Nations; at last it came to the
Greeks, the chief Masters of which Arts were Prophets amongst the Egyptians,
amongst the Assyrians Chaldaeans, and among the Gauls the Druydes and Samothei,
whom he allows to be the grand Teachers of all the rest.

After Samothes surnamed Dis (and for his learning worshipped as a God;) Sarron
one of his Cass. catal. gl. mundi p. 560.
race grew famous, whence the learned were called from him Sarronides: He was
the first as Berosus says, who opened Schools, and dedicated them to learning
in several places, both amongst the Celts Vt contineret ferociam hominum.
and Britains, and this he did that by these he might soften the minds of men,
and reduce them to manners civil: to him succeeded the Druyds; who were the
great polishers of the Nation, teaching them knowledge of arts, religious
ceremonies recording their Laws, and historical transactions from day to day,
and this continued to the Commentar. lib. 6.
time of Caesar, as he witnesses,

Nor did our Nation suffer under the diminution Lib. 3. Not. Hist. Ut dedisse
Persis videri possit. In vita Iulii Agric. Ingenia Britannorum, ingeniis
Gallorum anteferre.
or retrogradation of learning after their times; for, Pliny tells us, that our
learning was so great, that we seemed to be able to instruct and give rules to
the Persians; and Tacitus seconds it, that in the time of Vespasian and
Domitian, about the seventie year of Christ, the children of the British nobles
were so learnedly educated, that the Romans infinitely admired them, and
preferred the wits of the Britains before the study of the Gauls.

Nor let any think that the learning we have had so long from Iaphet and his
posterity, was only opticall; such as of the Stars and their influences, the
world and its circuit; or only natural, the skill of beasts, and plants, and
how to use and improve them; but it was also more politic and speculative: we
had much improvement of reason by excellent Laws and rules of life, by
understanding the uses and customs of Nations; skilled we were in languages;
for, besides the Samothei, Sarronides and Druyds, we had many notable Greeks
who came over with Brute, and here stayed teaching in public schools; and
Leland affirms that before Oxford was built, there was In vita Alfredi magni
apud Pitsaeum in prooemio. p. 25.
erected near it two schools for instruction of youth in Latin and Greek,
which were called Graecolada and Latinolada.

After Bladud the young Prince, earnest to promote Hardingus in Chronico lib.
1. c. 25. ex Merlino Calcedonio, and apud Balaeum cent. 1. c. 65
learning both in himself and others, repaired to Athens, there stayed and
studied, and brought back with him many famous Philosophers, whom after he came
to the crown, he placed in a School at Stamford.

The like schools did King Caradoe long after erect at Winchester, of which
holy Tathajus was President.

But most famous were the schools of Chester, Carleon, Ex Ross. vide Twyne
antiq. Academ. Ox^n. p. 8. Qui omnes arts liberales exact callebant and alios
adventantes docebant, Pitsaeus.
and Bangor, in all which were men excellently learned in all Arts, both sacred
and secular, but especially in those of Chester, in which (as I learn out of
Godfrey of Monmouth) in the time of Prince Arthur, which was about the year of
Christ 530, there was above 200. nay after Vide Balaeum cent. 1.
Bale 2500. Philosophers, who were excellently arted, and taught all comers.

By all which it appears, that not only learning and arts, have been in other
remote parts of the world, as amongst the Jews, Phoenicians, Chaldaeans,
Egyptians, Persians, Greeks, Romans, but that even from us they had much of
their litterature, and the rudiments of knowledge, and what of humanity and
glory we have attained to, we ought gratefully to attribute to those
foundations which were laid by those times, and since further (by the good hand
of God) raised to greater conspicuity since Christianity came amongst us.

We have hitherto seen what fruit the Tree of ingenious nature has brought to
the Harvest of the Muses, now we will summon in Christianity to bring in her
presentment.

And here (to the honor of God and our own humiliation) we must testify that
we of this Nation before Christianity was amongst us, were under as gross a
barbarity and rigor of Ethnique Tyranny, as the most savage Indian, nay, as
the worst of people, we worshipped Devils and not God, Dis, Saturn, Jupiter,
Mars, Minerva, Apollo, Diana, and Hercules, to whom we dedicated the Porches of
our Temples and Gates of our Cities, nay, Mela, Diodorus, Strabo, Pliny, Coesar
aver that we sacrificed men, inhumanely tortured strangers who came to us, by
stuffing them up in Images made of Hay, into which we put Dion. lib. 76. p. 66.
and. p. 703. (...),
wild Beasts with them, and set them all on fire, that we went naked, painted
our bodies, fed on raw flesh, at least on Herbs and Trees, had Women in common,
knew neither how to sow, or how to skill Trades, but only to lead a life of
rapacity; but it pleased God to bring us out of this Egypt into Canaan, by the
Spelman in Cons. p. 37. (...) Christianitatis.
conduct and instrumentality of our Christian King and Countryman Lucius,

Who to the honor of God, our nation and his own eternal fame, was the first
Christian King of this land, and is called by the Britains, Lever Maure, the
Prince of great renown, or the first fruit of Christianity, as being the first
that embraced the faith of Christ, and caused his people so to do; he came to
this Empire about the year of Christ 1791, and being observed to have a
singular sweetness, and debonnairnesse of nature, grew propitious to Elvanus
Avalonius, and Melvinus Belgius both British Doctors, who so effectually
wrought on him, that they in a short time converted him to the faith of Christ,
God preparing him by a good temper, and facility of constitution, to hearken to
their endeavors, and God also instructing them to a seasonable promotion of
his providence to so sacred an issue: the good King had now laid his hand to
the Plough, and resolved not to look back, his eye was forward, how he might
make his people participants with him in the blessing of baptism; he hears
that the Vt ipse and omnes ejus populi ad sacra Christiana possent admitti;
Spelman. in cons.
Churches succession was then in Rome, And to Pope Eleutherius he sends a most
humble and earnest Petition and Epistle, That by the Apostolic authority, he
and all his people may be admitted to the Church, and her holy things, and be
partakers of her Sacraments and Rites.

The Pope or Bishop of Rome understanding this, kept Jubiles, answered his
desire incontinently, and with his two spiritual Fathers (who carried his
request, and their own praise) returned (as Abb^s Westminster. ad an. 187.
joint in Commission) Phagan and Dervian, two of the Roman Clergy, from whom
(by the Pope so authorized) he and his People received the sacrament of
Baptism, and embraced the Faith of Christ, which was about the year after
Christ 180. which Kingdom of ours thus converted, was Balaeus Cent. 1. c. 36.
Baronius ad ann. 306. nu. 16
(according to Sabellicus and others of no less authority) the first that
universally embraced Christ in all the world. So that the first Christian King
( Lucius) and the first Christian Emperor Constantine) that the world had, were
Britains, born, bred amongst us: and Nostros fuisse, and in Britannia
procreatos, natos, educatos: optimo jure in Domino tanquam de magna
benedictionis praerogativa sancte gloriari debemus. Pitsaeus.
this we ought with all holy triumph, and glory to God, to mention as a high
Privilege; as run the words of Pitsaeus, our Learned Countryman.

No sooner did God call this noble King to his Worship, but he gave him a heart
to honor God, by adorning Religion with what was necessary to its prosperity,
and increase. He therefore builded many Churches, for entertainment of people
to Spelman in Epist. ad Concilia Britannica.
partake of holy Mysteries, and them separated from common to religious uses.
He constituted Episcopal Sees, erected Religious Houses, and endowed them with
liberal maintenance, and that they might with more security be inhabited, gave
them large Privileges; and by this and other his right worthy acts, was
preserved the true Religion, and British fame, till about the year 400 which
was near two hundred twenty one years after his first coming.

Afterward about the year 400 I find the name English mentioned; for then the
Angles came Balaeus ad ann. 616. Vir san^ qui cum splendore generis omnes
virtutes, omnes meliores scientias habuit conjunctas. Pit saeus in ^at script.
ad ann. 616. Beda l. 1. c. 26.
Pagans into this Land. About the year 616. I read them baptized by the command
and example of Ethelbert the fifth King of Kent, and the first Christian King
English: a man he was of no ordinary endowment, having with high place, all
virtues and noble sciences matched. Venerable Bede tells us, that at the
instance of Augustine the Monk, this King made Canterbury a Bishops See, and him
Bishop and Primate there, builded several Churches, commanded the People to
frequent them, and the Priests to pray, preach, and sing in them, Endowed many
Religious houses about the years 598, and 605. the Charters to which, and the
Privileges by them passed, are evident Spelman in consiliis p. 114, 119, 120,
121.
in stories. He also builded the Church of Saint Pancras. See Ethelwerdi Hist.
c. 2. About the year 700 great was the company of learned men Facile nationes
omnes superaverint Angli, eruditione, pietate, zelo, Pits.
of the English race; yea, so numberfull, that they upon the point excelled all
Nations in learning, piety, and zeal, and within a century grew so holily
ambitious, that their own Country could not limit their Zeal, but they must
out of a Divine charity visit Germany with the Faith; that they did, and they
made not more have then good speed, God wonderfully cooperating with them; so
that in short time, they converted almost all Germany, founded many Monasteries
there, and sundry Cathedral Churches, setting Archbishops and Bishops in these
their new erected Diocesses.

The like in France did holy Alcuinus about the year 790, when being employed
by Offa, King of Mercia, Ambassador to Charles the great, upon composing
differences between the two Crowns, and settling things for their mutual good
and peace for the future, he grew into such request with the French King, That
he was taken for the (...) Cae^aris deliciosum praec^ptorem assumptus sue^at.
most beloved Tutor of Caesar, who from him took the Institution and Method of
Learning; and not contented with the narrow fame of Tutor to that Noblesse and
Eminentissimo, addicted his study and time to the ordering and regulation of
public Civil affairs; in which he gained so great love with the People, and
esteem with the Prince, that no request was denied him that his modesty could
make, or merit promise him to obtain: His mind more fixed on Art then Air,
called on him to write his memorial on the Marble of some Monument sacrated to
Learning. First, he moves the King to Found the Schools at Paris, which he
ordered after the manner of ours here, and placed Scotus, and others his
Scholars whom he sent for out of England, students there; and so Transplanted
the Flowers of England into France: In Franciam transtulit fl^res Britanniae.
The same did he exhort the Emperor to do at Pavia in Italy, where he placed an
Academy, Johan* Scotus being the first Professor there: So that we may cry out
with the Poet,

Quae regio in terris nostri non plena laboris? What Nation of this earth, has
not by us been made
A Learned Nursery of Wits, and seat of Trade?
Now grows Our Nation to its Zenith: Fame is no friend to continuance; the
Verticle is near, when Admiration from abroad, and Luxury at home, threaten our
Change: Riches and Returns carry Assailants beyond Fear and Friendship, to Hope
their Anchor No sooner are we the Pearl, but the Saxon Merchants lay all at
stake to purchase us. They Arm and Transfreight, and about the year six hundred
eighty nine obtain the Rule over us. A deboyst and fierce Nation they were,
Naturally given to Ingurgitation and Venery, to spoil and blood; yet God so
overawed them, that their Kings were very pious, and perswadable by the holy
men of these times, by whose advice many Religious works, and equitable Laws
were from time to time made, yea, and old Laws preserved and refined, as is
evident in the Memorial of their Laws, collected by Master Lambard, and
revived by my Noble friend Sir R. Twisden.

What they did (to the shame of after times) is worthy honorable mention,
their end being godly, though perhaps in time without their privity, their
charity was abused. King Inas, one of them, built the famous Monastery at
Glassenbury, and the Cathedral Church at Wells: Another ( Kenred) is commended
to be devout toward God, and good to his Country: He builded the Bid.
Holingshed. p. 1. Polydore.
Abbey of Evisham (though Egwin, after Bishop of Worcester, have the name.)
Offa, King of Merica, a third of them, granted the tenth part of all his goods
unto Churchmen, and to the poor. He builded the Abbey of Bath, and placed
Benedictine Monks in it, and after the Church at Hereford, with great Revenues.

I pass by Ethelbert, and his Charity and Religion, because I have mentioned
them before, and intend no repetition, but an addition of one most Christian
speech of his Son Ethelbert, who lived but a little while, and dyed by
treachery. The more great (quoth he) men are, the more humble ought they to
bear themselves; for the Lord puts proud and haughty men from their Seats,
and exalts the Humble and Meek.

Ethelred, King of Mercia, a fourth of them, Ingulphus. p. 486. Edit.
Savellianae.
gave large possessions to the Abbey of Croyland; Pro amore coelestis patriae,
for the love he bore to heaven. They are the words of the Charter, confirmed by
Kenulph, an. 806.

A fifth of them, Kedulph, built a great Church at Winchcomb in Kent; and
founded an Abbey also there, highly honoring the Church and Churchmen.

Add to these, Alfred, who is said to Found (at least to repair) the
Universities of Oxford: and sundry others, who were so devout, that they left
off their Crowns, and abjured the world, thinking nothing too good for him that
had laid down his life for them.

Nor did they do less honor to the Reverend Bishops, and Churchmen of their
times, then became them to do to Fathers, who carry an Invaluable Treasure in
earthen vessels, and are good 2 Cor. 4. 7. 2 Cor. 5. 20.
Ambassadors to woo us to be reconciled to God; For all their actions, and
judicial administrations, were by their counsel and consent. We read of
Dustane, Ethelwold, Osward, Swithune, Adelstone, and many others, sole
Favorites in their times: Nay, we read not in all these times of Rule and
misrule (both changes falling out under the Saxons) that any persons were
empowered to meddle with Church men, or Church matters, but only Church
Governors; but rather that the Clergy, and all their Privileges were kept
inviolable; No secular power to enter upon them, nor no Taxes to be levied on
them or their Tenants, unless (says the words of a Charter) to Ingulphus. p.
486. Edit. Savell. Nisi in extructionibus arcium v^l pontium, quae nulli
relaxari possunt. Sub poena perditionis dex^ri sui pedis p. 487.
the building of Castles, and Bridges (which are for common defense, and cannot
be remitted to any) but that they shall rest in their houses as in a Sanctuary,
or in mine own chamber; and if any of his Ministers of Justice shall disturb
them, he does it at the peril of the loss of his right foot: these are the
words of the Charter. So good (in short) were these times, that I think the
Learned may truly say, as our Lord did of Nathanael, Behold true Israelites in
whom there was no guile; and as the Jews did of the Centurion, Luke 7. 5. They
loved our Nation, and built us Churches. John 1. 47.


But God purposed to give us over to be spoiled by strangers; and therefore
sent the Danes, like the plagues of Egypt, to blast and encumber us. They
quaffed down the wealth and plenty of the Nation, accounting this spot of earth
but a despicable nothing to satisfy their voracity; like the locusts in Egypt,
they overspread the whole land: 'twas an ill wind brought them hither, and a
most severe judgment of God continued them here: they are needy and numerous,
and must be in action, their work is to ruin every thing of beauty and order:
No place, no condition, no Sex prescribed against their fury: They came by
command of no law, but necessity; and they would abide here upon no fairer
terms then Will. There was no fear of God amongst them, nor no terms to be
treated upon, but such as money bought (for help by Arms was not possible.) Had
it not been for Siricius, the second Archbishop of Canterbury, they had been
so long uncompounded with, that the whole Nations ruin had undoubtedly been
perfected. He (good man) knew that Apollo's golden beard must be given to Mars,
and therefore advises composition with them, which is made, ten thousand
pounds paid, and they no more to trouble us. But at the instance of their
interest, they grew faedifragous, fell like lightning within a short time upon
us, amused the people, and purchased a second contribution of sixteen thousand
pound,

Qui timide negat, rogare docet. Which paid, they rest not: Hell and the Grave
ever cry, Give, give, and having got coin, they proceed to gain the Country:
They thought we had Mines of Money, who were so cheaply courted to part with it
without any capitulation, being like so many Doso's, who answer, I will give to
every demand.

They come in afresh, are offered money, refuse it, besiege and take
Canterbury, put to death the Archbishop Elphegus; and soon after, under the
conduct of Swain, so havoc and waste all, that they seem rather to be devils
then men; so many Melamons, turned from men into Lions: Which gives me occasion
to cry out with the Poet against such rude Soldiers, and undisciplined
strangers,

Nulla fides pietasque viris qui castra sequuntur. Those that the Camp do
follow, must
Live less to Virtue then to Lust.
For Truth and Piety in them
A Toy is thought, no Diadem.
Thus rested the Nation hurried and chafed all the time of the Danish
concussion, till Knute settled it, (who with much prudence, and in testimony of
his sorrow for those abuses committed by his Predecessors and Countrymen)
repaired decayed Churches and Abbeys, built many Religious houses, and
Churches. His Wife gave most noble, and priceful Jewels to the Church at
Winchester; and he built many Churches, and Principem decet studiosos
sapientiae viros in amicitiae possessionem vocare.
honored Churchmen extremely, using their counsels in matters of high
importance, as Athelmare Archbishop of Canterbury, and others: He made also
good Laws, and did many things very worthy, and well might say with the
Philosopher to any that should upbraid him for a rude and loathsome Dane, My
Patria mihi dedecus, tu dedecus patriae.
Country is a shame to me, thou art a shame to thy Country.

Power (like all things alated) seldom rests long in any continued Line; It Is
in perpetual motion, wandering from one Master to another, and concentring in
none but God, from whom it first Emanated: for all power is from him; Just, Qua
efficiens; Unjust, qua non impediens: and his Justice is as eminent in bearing
with men's Usurpations, as his Mercy in assisting their Rights: the Danish
insolency was gained by the good fortune of their Ancestors, and their manly
resolution broke through all disanimations, which seemed to publish any
impossibility of success; their power settled in Knute (the best of that breed,
and the greatest Monarch of that line and Nation, for he Holignshed 1. part 7.
book p. 181.
ruled our England, Denmark, Norway, Scotland and part of Sweden;) expired in
Knute the second, called ordinarily Hardeknute, who was a true p. 189.
Dane in lewdness and tyranny, and under whom all manner of oppression was
uncontrollably acted; so just is the judgment of God, that Male parta, male
dilabuntur.

Ex male quaesitis vix gaudet tertius haeres. Now the vogue of the Nation was
for the Saxon Holingshed 1. part p. 186.
line, the great men and people choose Edward one of the sons of Ethelbert
(who before was feign to fly into Normandy to his Cousen Duke William, with
whom he was when chosen to the Crown). This Edward was a noble Prince and
religious, called Edward the Confessor: his Laws are notable, he was a Clerkly
man, and they say Compiler of our common Laws, or rather restorer of them.
After this man's departure out of life, the Kingdom was in disturbance, by Earl
Goodwin and his Sons; Edward the son of Ironside prepared to obtain it:
Harold got most power, and only gave battle to Duke William the Norman, who
had the promise of K. Edward to be his heir, if he dyed issuess, and as much
from Harold to assist Holingshed 1. part lib. 8. of the Hist. of England p.
196. 197.
him. Upon this occasion, the Duke hearing King Edward was dead without child
and that no Declaration was by him made touching his succession, sent
Ambassadors to Harold now in possession on of the Crown, to mind him of his
promise in his extremity: Harold returns answer in the negative, Crowns are
not easily come by, nor ought to be courted away upon cheap terms: he is no man
at all, that will not venture his molehill, to gain the mountain of Kingly
power. 'Twas notably said, potentiam qui consecutus fuerit, nemo tam Hist
Bohem. 63
facile deponit quam damnat, Aeneas Sylvius. They are both resolved, one to
hold what he has, the other to gain what he expected to have; their forces
meet, join battle and Duke William proves Victor.

Now comes Change, crowded in a new upon the Nation, like waves in a disturbed
Sea: New Lords, new Laws feared, I, and for a while it proved so; but the
wisdom of Duke William gave continuance and peace to his power and conquest,
though he altered the favors and fortunes of particular persons, yet he
continued the old customs, at least for the most part, and gave them
assurance, that the fury of blood warmed, once over, there would be a
cessation of all rigor, and an aim at a just settlement; which was promoted
by nothing more, then by conserving the rights of the Church, and the reverence
due to Churchmen.

And therefore our Stories do mention the Bishops and Clergy in high
veneration in all reigns, nay in the troublesome and impious reign of King
John, who for that they reproved his profuse dissolute, and cruel carriage to
his Subjects, hated them with a more then Vatinian hatred, yet did many eminent
Clergymen keep places of favor and greatness. I will (that the truth of this
be not thought an obtrusion on the credulities of people) specify some few of
those many religious men, both Prelates and others, which have been eminent
Favorites and Officers in the several reigns of Princes from the Conquest;
that men may see, to love and consult with the Churchman, has been held both
the piety and policy of former times.

In the time of the Conqueror,

I find Stigand Archbishop of Canterbury a favorite.

In William Rufus his time, Lanfrank of the the same See.

In the time of Henry the first, Roger Bishop of Salisburie, Protector of the
Land in the Kings absence in Normandy.

In King Stephen's reign, Thurstan Archbishop of York, and Cardinal Robert
Pulleyn, great both with the King, and Mawd Fitz-Empresse.

In Richard the first's reign, Joseph Exon Archbishop of Bourdeaux, Richard
Canon Comes ejus individuus (says Pitsaeus) to the holy Land, Hugh Bishop of
Durham, chief Justice of the North parts, William Longchamp Bishop of Ely
Chancellor.

In Henry the second's time, Thomas a Becket Chancellor, Sylvester Giraldus
Bishop of Saint David's, and Daniel Eccles of his Privy Counsel, Gilbert Foliot
Bishop of London, Baldwin Archbishop of Canterbury, and Hugh Bishop of
Durham, Ambassadors into France; and the Bishops of Ely, Winchester, and
Norwich, principal Justices of his Courts.

In King John's days, Gray first Bishop of Norwich, then Archbishop of
Canterbury, and Lord President of the Council; also Peter Bishop of
Winchester, after Governor to Henry the third.

Temps Henry the third, Gray Lord Deputy of Ireland, Stephen Langton
Archbishop of Canterbury, and John Derlington of the Privy Council.

Temps Edward the first, Hugh Manchester and Walter Winterbourn, the one
Ambassador into France, the other the Kings Confessor.

Temps Edward the third, Iefferie Hardebie, and John Grandison of the
Privie-Councell, John Hilton his Ambassador to the Pope, and Thorsby
Archbishop of York, Chancellor.

Temps Richard the second, William Wickham Bishop of Winchester, Chancellor;
Waltham Bishop of Salisburie Treasurer; Thomas Cardinal the Kings Confessor,
and Richard Lavenham and Richard Waldeby his Favorites.

Temps Henry the fourth, John Colton Archbishop of Dublin, Stanburie Bishop of
Bangor, and Dr. Walter Hunt.

Temps Henry the fifth, Thomas Arundel Bishop of York, Chancellor; Stephen
Portington, Thomas Crawley Archbishop of Dublin, and Lord Deputy of Ireland,
Robert Mascall the Kings Confessor, and an Ambassador abroad, William
Linwood, Dr. of both Laws and Divinity, Ambassador to Spain, and Thomas
Walden Ambassador to Poland, and Delegate to the Council of Constance.

Temps Henry the sixth, William VVainfleet Bishop of Winchester Chancellor,
and John Love, Bishop of Rochester, both of his Council.

Temps Henry the seventh, Prudent, honest, faithful Morton, amicus certus in
re incerta, Archbishop of Canterbury, and Chancellor, one worthy of whatever
his Majesty had to give (for he loved much); Fox Bishop of Exon, Ambassador in
Scotland, Fisher Bishop of Rochester, Alcock Bishop of Ely, and Dr. Henry
Hornby; all in great esteem.

Temps Henry the eighth (this was the squinteyed time, when a stranger coming
over hither, cried out, Bone Deus, qualis religio in Anglia? hic suspenduntur
Papistae, illic comburuntur Antipapistae!) Even in this time many Bishops and
Clergymen were in high place; Fox Bishop of Hereford, Longland Bishop of
Lincoln the Kings Almoner, Aldridge Bishop of Carlisle, Leigh Archbishop of
York, West Bishop of Ely, Warham Archbishop of Canterbury, and Chancellor
Ruthall Bishop of Durham; all or most of these of the privy Council, Gardener
Bishop of Winchester, Ambassador into France, and Dr. Pace Dean of Paul's,
Ambassador to most Princes in Christendom.

I say nothing of the five last reigns, as pregnant of favors to the Church as
any preceding them, our memories excuse their recital here, and so long as the
book of Gods remembrance is kept, their kindness will be had in mention before
God. That which is the most pertinent conclusion, to this I shall borrow from
that very worthy and judicious Knight Sir Henry Spelman, That amongst the many
Chancellours of England, there has been no less then 160. Clergymen, amongst
the Treasurers 80. almost all the Keepers of the Privy Seal, all the Masters of
the Rols, till 26. Hen. 8. all the Itinerant Justices, and Judges of the
Courts, till Edw. 3. time, Clergy men.

Now God forbid the Clergy and faithful Minsterie should in these big looking
times of reformation, grow contemptible, who have in all times hitherto,
whether of peace or war, born away a very great share of worship and
valuations but if the days of visitation are come, and the days of recompense
are come, wherein the Prophet is counted a fool, and the spiritual man mad, as
the phrase is, Hosea cap. 9. v. 7. If the Messengers of God are with the holy
Apostles made a gazing stock, both by reproaches and afflictions, Heb. c. 10.
v. 33. Then may they safely cry with the woman in the siege of Samaria, Help O
King 2 King. 6. 26.
of Saints, and with the Kingly Prophet David, My God, make have for my help,
Psalm. 71. v. 12. and in those cries assuredly they will be heard, and the time
will come, when that promise shall be fulfilled to them, All they that are
incensed against thee shall be ashamed and confounded, they shall be as
nothing, and they which strive with thee shall perish. 41. Isa. v. 11.

Let no man condemn this humble interposition either as unnecessarie or
unseasonable, for truly it highly becomes any Gentleman who has had his
breeding from a Clergy man (as most persons of any quality in this Nation have
had, Tutors in Universities and great houses being for the most part of this
Tribe) and who knows what the use and pleasure of Learning is, to employ his
utmost interest in mediation for them, as the great instruments of literature,
and instituting youth; for there is no Parent that in generation does so much
to the Child's felicity, as does the Tutor in his cultivation and nurtriture;
the Fathers of our bodies may leave us honors and riches, but they cannot make
us pious, wise, valiant, civil, intelligent, eloquent; these (next the blessing
of (...). Dion. lib. 69. p. 789. Edit. Leunclavit.
God) grow from institution, conversation and example of our Instructors. 'Twas
well said of Diony sius to Helidore, Caesar can give thee honors and wealth,
but he cannot make thee an Orator.

Experience of this made all ages eye with gratitude and veneration, their
Philosophers and religious men, as eminent benefactors, and devote themselves
and theirs to their service and acCommodation.

Philip of Macedon gave more thanks to the Gods for Aristotle (in whose days
his renowned Son Alexander was born) then for his Son and heir then born,
because he hoped that by his education under so renowned a Ut se dignus
evad^ret, and successione rerum suarum. Patric. Senensis de Institut. Keipub.
Tutor, he would become so learned, that he might be worthy to be his Son,
and to succeed to his Commands. Ut non sibi tantum saltem Pericli vivere
vellet, quem consiliorum socium in Rep. optaret.


Pericles the great Athenian Prince so doted on his Master Anaxagoras, that
being sick, he went to him and prayed him to be careful of his life, if not
for his own, yet for Pericles sake, and the better to counsel him how to rule
wisely.

Did not Dionysius the Tyrant send for his Master Plato in a royal vessel,
riding to the Seaside to meet him in his triumphing Chariot, bringing him into
the City, not like a Philosoper, but a Conqueror? Did not Alexander honor
Phocion, I lutar. in vita Phocionis page 749. edit. Paris. Gr. and Lat.
and do all by his advice, when he was present with him?

Was not that the best time of Nero, wherein his Master Seneca, and Burrus
Captain of the Pretorian (...) Dion lib. 61. p. 690.
bands, were, as powerful, so most wise and learned? Had not Octavian his
Mecoenas, and Agrippa, by whom he was guided and counseled? Had not Trajan his
Plutarch whom he loved as his other self? Did not Scipio Africanus honor his
Master Panaetius, and give to Polybius the title of his Companion at home and
abroad? what think you? Had Domitian good regard to Quintilian the Orator,
when he committed his Nephews to his care? Was not Charles the great Quintil.
Instit Orat. lib. 4.
in love with our Alcuinus, when he took him into his bosom, and owned him to
all the world as his beloved Master?

Yea, was not Learning in high account when Anacharsi magno Philosopho.
Craesus the Lydian King, sent a solemn Embassy to Anacharsis then at Athens,
under the name of the great Philosopher, with mighty presents, and an Epistle
from the King, in which were these passages, That he desired to correct the
barbarous Ego and gentis meae barbaros mores corrigere cupio, and Rempub.
videre emendaram exopto, exercitium etiam quo ipse utar, honestam expeto,
aliamque aulae meae Occonomiam desidero, quaedam denique ad vitam meam
pertinentia communicare cum viro sapiente cupio, quorum nihil nisi te praesente
potest confieri: nunquam enim laudabile quicquam nisi interventu perficitur
sapientiae.
manners of his people, and to see the Commonwealth reformed, to be principled
to live well, to regulate the Court, and to do other matters of import, which
cannot be effected without Thee; for nothing truly laudable is feasible without
the assistance and Ego strabo, calvus, claudus, distor^us, nanus, niger,
gibbosus, etc. ege Epist. apud Guev. in Horol Principum edit. Lat. i^. 1. c.
44. p. 201.
interposition of Wisdom. And a little after adds, Though I am squint-eyed,
lame, bald, distorted, dwarfie, black, crump-shouldred; in fine, a monster
amongst men; yet (they are his very expressions) these deformities are toys to
those more real blemishes of my Mind; for that I am so unhappy, to have no
Philosopher with me; for he only lives the life of lives, who is propped up
by wise men.

There are more Instances of Archelaus, Antigonus, Pyrrhus, Kings infinitely
tender of, and Viri omnes bell^ cosissimi. Guev. Ho^ol. Prin lib. 1c. 47 edit.
lat. p 212.
noble to Learned men: But take one for all, Ptolomaeus Stoter, the Eighth King
of Egypt, whom Historians call, Literarum and Literatorum amantissimus: This
man bore away the Garland from all the other 11 Ptolomies, Men more warlike;
and One gives the reason, Non propter victorias Idem.
bello partas, sed propter scientias studio comparatas.

These in stead of many more, render Philosophers Tanquam Virtutum Imagines,
and Regnorum uorum Columna.
and learned Men, under what name soever accountable, as the Images of Virtue,
and Pillars of Kindgoms and Governments. And God forbid, that those who are our
present Governors should less favor Learning and learned Men, then former
Powers and Governors have done: or think any so worthy their ears or hearts,
as those that are (as it were) the soul and life blood of Commonwealths:
Without which Tribe, to live were to die, and to be happy were to be
miserable. For as the Philosopher said, Nihil majus deorum immortalium munere,
Simp Epist. 29. Guev. p. 204
hominibus datum est, Philosophia.

And if Learned men are so to be loved, then surely are the Clergy (as the
great Conducts of it) to be appreciated: They, They are, and ever have been the
great Luminaries in this our Sphere, the grand instruments of our conversion
from Paganism, of our reputation and glory throughout the World. Who converted
this Nation to Christianity from Paganism? was it not the Clergy? Who moved our
converted Kings and their pious Subjects to build Churches and endow them, to
make good Laws for their preservation and reverence? was it not the Clergy?
Who taught the people Letters when they were ignorant, and sought after, and
home brought Arts of all Natures, to the maturation of our repute, was it not
the Clergy? Who have been good Counselors, Treasurers, Judges; yea, and if
need were, holy Martyrs, to dye for, as well as live in the true Religion? have
not the Clergy? Turn over our Chronicles; for I speak to Englishmen, and shall
make use of English Authority to confirm what I write on this Head. Vide
Pitsaeum in vita ejus ad annum 1146.


Was not Alfred excited to build Schools at Oxford by Neot a learned
Benedictine? And did not Cardinal Pulleyn (who fled the distractions of King
Stephen's time) return to Oxford? and there (moved with compassion to see the
desolate Schools) as it were restored Learning (almost lost) to life again, at
his own costs and charges; calling for Professors and Masters out of all parts
of the Kingdom, He himself also laboring with them. Who enlarged the
Universities, by building more and more Colleges to the small beginnings
sacrated to the Muses, but Clergymen? I will particularize their bounty, that
those who would tear them in pieces, now they think there is none to help them,
may read and blush at their ingratitude and impudence. There is hardly in any
of both the Universities a College, but has either had a Clergyman for its
Founder or Amplifier.

I will begin with my Mother-University, quae habet ubera vere vino meliora,
and fragrantia unguentis optimis, in holy S. Bernards phrase.

The first College that I find built in Cambridg, Cambridg
was S. Peter's College, about the time of Ed. 1. by Hugh Blasham, first Prior,
then Bishop of Ely; who endowed it nobly, and completed it about the year
1284: After in Edward the Second his time Robert Litlington, and Robert de
Aylsham, and John de Felmingham made additions of two Buildings to it: all
Clergy men.

The College of S. Michael, on part whereof Trinity College now stands, was
built by Henry de Stanton, Canon of York and Wells, about the year 1324.

The College now called Clare Hall, quondamque University College, was founded
by the Body of the University in Anno 1326. Richard Baden Vicechancellor.

S. Benets College, built by the Order of Benedictines, in Edw. the Thirds
time, about the year 1350, and their Statutes confirmed by Tho. Lisle Bishop of
Ely.

Trinity Hall begun by diverse Priests, but finished to completing by William
Bateman Bishop of Norwich.

Gonvile College, begun by Edward Gonvile Priest and Parson of Terrington in
Norfolk, and a great sum of money left by him to Doctor Bateman Bishop of
Norwich to perfect it.

The College called anciently Domus Dei, but since added to Christ's College,
was begun by Will. Bingham Pastor of S. John in London.

Queens College augmented much by Andrew Ducket Pastor of S. Butolphs in
Cambridg, and Principal of Bernards House.

Katherine Hall founded by Robert Woodlark Dr. of Divinity, Chancellor of the
University Anno 1475. and Provost of Kings.

Jesus College founded by John Alcock Bishop of Ely Anno 1497.

S. John's College anciently was a house of Canons regulars, founded by Nigel
Bish. of Ely about 1130. and in an. 1280. temp. E. 1. Hugh Balsham B. of Ely
joined the secular schol. to the religious men.

Yea, was not the liberal Endowments of Lady Margaret Countess of Richmond,
on that University and the Professors thereof, given at the request and upon
the recommendation of Fox Bishop of Winchester, and Fisher Bishop of Rochester
her Executors; to whom she by Will left great sums of money to perfect that her
charity?

Lo the Clergy's bounty to Cambridg; They have One blessing more for Oxford,
like the field which the Lord has blessed. Oxford.


Their Mother College, University College restored and augmented, if not wholly
built by William Bishop of Durham, in the time of the Conqueror.

Merton College by William Merton Bishop of Rochester, Anno 1276.

Exeter College and Hearts Hall, by Walter Stapleton Bishop of Exeter, Anno
1320. Oryel College, and S. Mary Hall were founded by Adam Brian, Edw. the
Second his Almoner, An. 1323.

Canterbury College added to Christ's Church by Simon Islip, Archbishop of
Canterbury, about Anno 1553.

New College and Winchester College buitl by William Wickham Bishop of
Winchester, about the year 1370.

Trinity College first founded by Hatfield Bishop of Durham 1370.

Lincoln College by Richard Fleming Bishop of Lincoln, an. 1420. and enlarged
by Thomas Rotheram Bishop of that Sea, anno 1479.

Gloucester College, built by the Monks of the Order of S. Benet, after added to
S. John Bapt. College,

All Souls College begun by Hen. Chichly Archbishop of Canterbury.

Magdalen College built by William Wainfiet Anno 1460.
Bishop of Winchester.

Brazen Nose College built by William Smith 1516.
Bishop of Lincoln.

Corpus Christi College by Robert Fox Bishop of 1518.
Winchester.

Christ Church her princely Foundation laid by Card. Wolsey Archbishop of York
in an. 1540.

And to sum up all, Did not the late Archbish. of Canterb. Dr. William Laud
make a Princely addition to S. John Baptist's College, of which he was once
Master: and no less august addition to the renowned Common Library? It Is known
he did, and his Memory will be kept amongst the Learned for it. These public
(to omit their private charities to their kindred, and places of birth (to
which they have in no age been wanting) proclaim them worthy of all good
maintenance, and of so much of that luster to boot, as may render their Persons
more venerable, and their Doctrine (while according to Scripture) more
prevalent with the people.

I say then, the Clergy are the great Masters of Learning, and the most
notable Advancers of it. I do not exclude all others from the honor of any
Discovery or Bounty they have made or expressed. I know, we of this Nation have
had in all times as learned a Nobility and Gentry, as any Isle in the world has
or ever had. Our Annals tell us of some of the Laity, that for their own
pleasures have been versed in Books, and Ba'aeus Cent. 1 cap 36.
Writers of Books: Constantine the Great wrote many noble Tracts: Henry the
First, surnamed Beuclark, wrote much, made many pious and excellent Laws:
Henry the Second was a learned Prince, and much addicted to regard learned Men;
Petrus Blesensis says of him, Illos judicare solebat, quos constituit aliorum
Iudices: Richard Canon for his Learning and Writing, grew most dear to King
Richard the First, and was his Companion to the holy Land.

Edward the Third, not learned only to his Sibi ad oblectamentum, sed aliis
ctiam ad emolumentum. Pitsaeus. B^laeus ad annum 1440.
own delight, but to others advantage.

Ralph Glanvile and Henry Bracton, very learned Writers in H. the Thirds time,
and chief Justices.

Chaucer and Gower Poets, the refiners of our Language in anno 1440.

Humphrey Duke of Gloucester son to H. 4. a learned Prince, so commended by Pope
Pius the Second.

Of him our Story says, that he was the Moecenas of all the Learned in
England, France, and Italy: neither did any of that degree repairing to him,
depart unrewarded.

Fortescue, Chancellor to Hen. 6. a learned Man, and great Writer. John
Harding, a great Writer in anno 1461. Tiptoft, afterward Earl of Worcester in
1471. Dudley temp. Hen. 7. Fitzherbert chief Justice temp. H. 8. a grand
Writer: Sir John Bourchier Governor of Calais temp. H. 7. Sir Thomas More, Sir
Thomas Elliot, Anthony Cope, Will. Salisbury, Sir John Reyes, grand Writers,
temp. H. 8. Io. Leland, Sir Walter Raleigh, Sir Fr. Bacon, Mr. Seldom, Sir
Henry Spelman, Sir Edward Cook, the incomparably learned King James, who was
thought the Merlin and Phoenix of Regality.

There are others whose Works are like Mary's Spikenard, very odoriferous to
learned nostrils; yet they must have no mention here because of their
magnitude. But these, how many soever we may judge them to be, are but one of a
City, and two of a Tribe, a few to the hundreds of Writers of Clergymen; which
John Bale, John Pits, Hollingshed, and our other ancient Records mention, whole
volumes would be filled with the bare mention of who they were, and what they
wrote. Yea, if to them we should adjoyn the elaborate published Labors of the
Reverend Bishops, such as Babington, Andrews, King, both the Abbots, Davenant,
Prideaux, Hall; the glory of this last and worst age, that aged, learned and
constantly devout, the Archbishop of Armagh, together with the many orthodox
Presbyters, who have worthily and learnedly written on arguments of all
natures. What has been published by the Laity, would be but a molehill to their
mountain, like little David, a dwarf to their mighty Goliath of labor and
charity, to enrich and propagate Religion and Learning. And yet though they
have by the blessing of God been the instruments of our conversion from
darkness to light, from barbarousnesse to civility, from obscurity to
eminence, from disturbance to Order, from key-coldnesse to zeal, from self-love
to charity and sympathizing with others the Saints of God in their sorrows;
There are some, nay too many, like undutifull children, would pay them in their
old age with scorn, denying them that reverence which the Apostle says is due
to them for their 1 These. 5. 13
works sake, and that support which is by the law due to them; or at least,
curse their basket and their store, which we ought to bless, as Moses Deuteronomy.
33. 11
did.

Alas poor Churchman! what have thou done, thus to deserve a wound in the
house of thy friend? Whom have thou injured, that thou art denied almost a cup
of cold water, though thou ask it in the name of a Prophet? Who was more
charitable then thou? who less scraping then thou? who more knowing then thou?
who more generally beneficent then thou? Did ever any intelligent people put
out their own eyes, let out their life blood, curse their Physicians, quarrel
with the bounty of Heaven in filling their barns, and making their cups run
over? I trow no. Yet would these return this evil upon the Churchman, who is
the common life and soul to us all.

And herein I do protest such men are highly unreasonable, as well as impious:
the Cynick said Diogenes.
of the Megarians long ago, what I now may say of such of my own Nation, Better
be their Horse, Dog, or Pander, then their Minister; they will feed and
pamper their Stallions, and Running (...). Dion. l 59. p. 650. edit. Leunclavii.
Horses, and Dogs, like Caligula, who was so addicted to his Horse
Incita^tus, that he would cause him to feed out of golden vessels, and out of
such to drink, swore to his health and good fortune, promising he would make
him Consul, if he lived long enough; or like Nero, and Heliogabalus, who prized
no favorites but Leachers, and thought no honor too great for those who
(after his Master Seneca, and Burrus, two virtuous men, had deserted him) were
most in his delight. These I say, men will keep to high food, and large
allowance; but the Minister he must to short Commons, nay, to live upon
nothing: they expect Christ should by a Miracle feed his Ministers, as once he
did the People, with five loaves, and a few fishes, without Mat. 14. 19, 20.
assistance from them, or any contribution to their needs.

In this truly they are partial, and in a sort unjust; for they preserve to
themselves the fortunes that either their Parents left them, or they have by
honest industry, or by other means either of gift, descent, or other ways
accumulated to themselves, and think him their enemy, and take up the dagger
against him that would but endeavor to abridge them of what is, or they
conceive to be their right; but to the Clergyman, to whom his Tithes, and
rights Spiritual are due upon as good a right of Law and property, they deny
all they can, and think it their duty so to do, and not to do it a folly.

I am no Churchman, nor the son of a Churchman; I have no profits or
advantages from Church lands; I own no obligations laid on me by Churchmen,
more then those of charity in common with others; I am of the Layty,
unconcerned as to profit and loss in the Clergies weal or woe: what I write is
out of pure justice, and real conviction, to quit my self from all tacit
cooperation in so gross a mistake, as this (without flattery) seems to me to be.

There are many that deny the distinction of Clergy and Laity, and will have
all one in Christ, with whom there is no respect of persons, accounting these
distinctions popish, and Antichristian. And why Popish and Antichristian?
Because (forsooth) practiced, and allowed in the Church of Rome, as if every
thing requested there, were ea ratione, to be rejected here; Because there is
Order, there is learning, there is succession, there is preferment, we must
have none here; nay, as if the Scriptures were less Canonical or Divine for
their reading or alleging it. Or the Creed, Decalogue, Lords Prayer, Epistles
or Gospels not authencick, but to be cashiered use or credit amongst us,
because received and used by them.

It does not follow that every thing in the Church of Rome must be
Antichristian, because the Pope, who is head of it, is thought Antichrist, and
the Church Antichristian; no more then it follows that a wasted man must get a
child unhail, because he himself is consumptive. We see in experience vigorous
bodies begotten by Sires weak and spent, and bounteous actions done by persons
avaritious and contract; yea, restoratives extracted from rank poisons; and why
may we not grant things truly Christian, possible to be conveyed by hands
Antichristian; Judas is a Disciple, though a Traitor; Arius may be a true
Presbyter, though an Heretic, and the Pope a true Bishop, though Antichristian
as to those Tenants and Positions of Pride and Policy which are Mat. 27. 35.
inconsistent with the simplicity of the Gospel, and the growth of godliness.

We must acknowledge Christ's garments, though in the hands of Jews, who cast
lots for them; what ever is of Christ, his Sacraments, his Government, his
Doctrine, is precious, though it be as the Ark in the Cart of the Philistims,
who torment and hurry it to force their own credit from 1 Samuel 6. 7.
it: the vices of persons deflower not the virtue of things sacred, no more
then the putrid breath of an Orator the eloquence of his Oration: Heretics may
give lawful baptism to infants, Non ideo non sunt sacramenta Christi and
Ecclesiae quia eis illi^ite utuntur non haeretici solum sed etiam omnes iniqui
and impii: sed tamen illi corrigendi aut puniendi, illa vero agnoscenda and
veneranda sunt. Cont. Donat. l. 3. c. 10.
though not lawfully; and holy Orders may be given by Heretic hands to valid
purposes; for as S. Augustine says, The Sacraments of Christ and the Church are
not therefore null, because Heretics and wicked men use them unlawfully, but
are to be acknowledged with high honor, though the abuses of them ought to be
punished. We ought neither to be more scrupulous then Christ and his holy
Apostles, and servants of old time were; nor more riged to the Church of Rome
then they were to the Scribes and Pharisees, nay, to the heathens, with whom
they sat and conversed with mildeness and moderation, observing their comely
orders, and complying with their harmless civil customs, yea affirming their
authorities, though they were bad who managed them. The Scribes and Pharisees
Mat. 23.
sat in Moses his Chair; Christ commands their authority should be owned; and
the Apostles and Fathers never taught any thing contrary to the charity of thus
doing, only we must have a care of not following Joseph, while his living in
Egypt teaches him to swear by the life of Pharaoh; we may not Genesis 42 15.
comply with men to break the peace 'twixt God and our own Consciences: wherein
our right hand or Mat. 18. 9.
eye offends us we must cut it off, and pluck it out. If the Roman Church build
upon Christ (the 1 Cor. 3. 12.
Foundation) stubble and straw; if in stead of making way for Christ, and
casting down what is in opposition to him, she casts rubs, and makes his way
rough, so that the wheels of his Ministerial Chariot go slow; if she run after
strange Lovers, Pr^. 2. 17.
and forsake the guide of her youth; if she consult not with the spirit of
Truth, but with the Enchantress of worldly Pomp, and Mundane greatness, then
have we cause to separate from her communion, Rev. 18. 4.
that we be not partakers of her sins and punishments; but then must we not
deny her to be a Church, nor many of her Administrations true; Augustinus
contra Don. l. 3. c. 10.
because though she be separated a vinculo charitatis and pacis, yet is she
adjoined in uno Baptismate, being not against Christ in all things, but with
him in some things, and those essential; cum Christo quatenus Christi
administrat Baptismum, cum Christo quatenus doctrinam de Trinitate, de Lib. 2.
de Minist. Angl c. 13. ad sinem.
person Christi, and multis aliis articulis Orthodoxe docet, as Mason
learnedly notes: and therefore since the Church is the Congregation of Gods
Elect, and the election of God is secret, Charity commands me to be tender of
censure; the Lord knows who are his. For ought I know, there may be, nay I
believe there are many precious jewels in the Roman Church whom God has
registered in the book of Life, and therefore we ought not to have an ill eye
upon all the Brotherhood, because Simeon and Levi, twain of them, were brethren
in evil; but to pray for them, that God would bring them into the light. And
since the Church of Rome may be Antichristian, and yet do many things that are
Christian, and according to the Scriptures, and Tenants of the Fathers, let us
not in a mad frenzy reject every thing that comes from them, unless we think
our selves wiser then Christ, and holyer then his Saints, who by faith and
patience inherit the promises. Nay, let us rather join with them, wherein we
may without offense and error, that so they may see not obstinacy, but
judgment; not opoposition, but conscience keeps us from a through uniting.

Except then our complainers can ground their Exception against the distinction
of Clergy and Laity upon better premises then these of Popish and
Antichristian, because brought in (as they pretend) by popish men and times, I
shall think their scruples but like Adam's fig leaves, the Palliadoes of
self-will and contradiction, as his was of nakedness; and I wish them as well
ashamed of their niceness, as he was of his disobedience when he hid himself in
the Garden amongst the trees, Genesis 2. 8.

As for the Office of Ministry, it is not (as I humbly conceive) of Humane Ac
primum quidem a statu an^e Legem, a statu sub lege, a statu sub geatia, semper
enim reperio certa hominum genera fuisse a Deo ad hoc officium delecta, non
autem licuisse cuiquam se obtrudere. Z^nchius in quartum praecep^um loc. 4. q.
1. Thesi. 1. p 717.
or Civil constitution, but of Divine and Supreme Ordination, flowing not from
Aarons Priesthood, but the Eternal Law made by the Majesty of Heaven, and wrote
in the Tables of man's heart from the beginning; God the great Maker of all
things not only ordering the whole world of mankind to attendance at large on
him, but also the best and choicest of them to be his special train, to whom he
gave his own portion for Maintenance; this appears in Melchisedeck, who
hundreds of years before the Levitical Priesthood was settled, received Tithes
of Abraham, as he was Priest of the most high God, and See the quotati* i^ M
(...)* Synedria Iudae^rum p. 11. 12.
this not as many of the Ancients (to whom I do reverence, and in opposition to
whom I would not be understood) say, as a requital of that honor which
Melchisedeck had done him in giving him bread and wine, but as instructed by
God, and specially required to take that as the Res Dominica, substantia, and
Dei census, or Lords Rent which Abraham was to pay in, in ackowledgement to him
who was the supreme Majesty, and by whose power and permission he was then a
Conqueror over those Kings and Armies which disturbed the holy seed.

Now because God knew that in time devotion Deuteronomy. 32. 15.
would flag, and Ieshurun spurn with the heel against his Maker when he was
fat, therefore God (in probability) conjoined the Kingly and Priestly Office in
the same persons, to wit, the Patriarchs and Heads of Family, that both might
seem to accomplish the end of God, the Priesthood sanctify the Kingly Office,
and the Kingly Office secure the Priesthood, that as the one has right to
receive, so the other should have might to compel what is due to be paid from
the greatest contrarient.

Mistake me not, I intend no controversy; I am to offer my thoughts as an
Orator, not to dispute as a School-man; I shall leave debates to Theologues; It
becomes me only to evince the reasonableness, and necessity of a Ministry,
from what is obvious to me in Reason and Authors. So ancient is the Vereor enim
ne quod in Scripturis de Melchisedec de quo dicitur fuit Sacerdos Dei
altissimi, cujus nec Pater, nec Matter, in Scriptura nominatur, nulla origo ejus
explicatur, etc. Idem nobis in Sacerdotis munere accidat, ut licet maxim
quaeramus, nullum ejus principium inveniamus, nullum oreginem, Cardin. Polus.
lib. 1. ad H. 8.
Office of Priesthood, that a Learned man of our own says, That as
Melchisedeck, Priest of the most high God, in Genesis 14. is said to have neither
Father nor Mother, neither beginning nor end of days, so may it fall out in
search after the Antiquity and dignity of Priesthood, that we shall not find
out its Original and first Rise, it being Primaeval and beyond mention of
Record; yet in the holy story I read that before the Law there was a Seldom. c.
1* p. 5.
Priesthood, the Patriarchs were of this; In the Law there was a Priesthood,
Levi and his Posterity in their Families were of Veteribus ordinarium ut qui
reges essent, iidem etiam Sacerdotio fungerentur, Bertramus de Politia Iudaica,
page 26.
that: thus amongst the Jews. And to this for a long time was appended ths
Office of Government, and Civil distribution. So careful was God to entrust
power in pious hands, that he took away all fear of their abusing it out of the
peoples minds, and gave them a lesson by what they saw in the Temporary
Priest, to expect with admiration the Eternal Priest and Lawgiver, Christ
Jesus, who should be completely furnished to all purposes of power and purity,
that he might perfume their Sacrifices, and prostrate the enemies of his
Church, and this only in a Spiritual way; for his Kingdom is not of this
world. But a Ministry he has ever had since his departure, and I am sure ever
will, so long as his Word abides, which says, The Gates of Hell shall not
prevail against the Church.

Nor did the Jews and Christians only set apart persons for holy employments,
giving them Privileges, Tyths, and Honor, but the very Heathens did thus,
perhaps from the instinct of Nature. The Egyptians chose their Priests and
Kings from amongst Philosophers. Alex. ab Alex. lib. 2. cap. 8. The Greeks
Kings and Priests were both one. And we read of Iethro, Priest of Midian; Rex
Anius, Rex idem hominum Phoebique Sacerdos. Mendoza in viridario. p. 295
and of the Priests of the Philistims, of Baal, Molech, Ashtaroth, and other
mentioned in holy Writ, and profane stories.

In our Nation while the Samothei, Sarronites, or Druydes continued, they had
great Privileges; their persons and all that repaired to them were exempted
from all secular Services and Taxes, all Laws made, and Judgments stood to,
which they declared; the best of every thing offered to them.

Plutarch says, That the Laws did enjoin reverence and Honor to Priests, and
holy men, because they impart the holy things of the Gods not only (...).
Plutarchus in lib. cum Princ* Philos. disput. p. 778.
to themselves, their children, friends, and families, but to all men
indifferently. And Plato brings in Socrates affirming, That amongst the (...).
Plato in Polit. p. 530.
Egyptians no man could be a King (...), unless he were a Priest; and if any
man got Rule, or by Usurpation obtained the Kingdom, he was compelled after
such obtainment to be Priested, that he might be what the Law required, both
King and Priest.

Romulus, the Founder of the City of Rome, Empress of the world, set See
Mendoza in Viridario, p. 295.
apart Priests, and highly privileged them. So did after him Numa his
Dionysius Halycarnassus, lib. 2. p. 92. l. 2. p. 123.
Successor; and so did all times downward that were orderly, observing the
Maxim of Plato, which surely he (...), Plato de legibus l. 6. p. 860. Edit.
Ficini.
had by Tradition from the Jews, as well as by dictate of Nature, Not to remove
or change those Priesthoods which were ancient and preserved by our Progenitors.

From the times of the Apostles, Christianity held the Order of Priesthood or
Ministry, sacred. And those Emperors and Princes who were good and virtuous,
did their Duty to them as their Spiritual Fathers.

Socrates tells us, That the Emperor Constantine Hist. Eccl. l. 1. c. 5.
the Great would not sit down in the Council of Nice with the holy Bishops
there convened, before they besought him to sit: and Sozomen affirms, That he
refused to Lib. 1. cap. 1. 6.
give Judgment against the Clergy; (...).
and when the Arrians brought Accusations against the Orthodox Bishops, he took
and burned them, not permitting their publication, saying, These Accusations
will have proper hearing at the last day of Judgment: Yea, Eusebius testifies
Lib. 3. c. 13, 14.
that he would make great Feasts for the Fathers of the Church, set them down
with him at the Table, largely reward them when they departed, command
observation of their Canons, Socrat. l. 1. c. 6.
kiss the wounds of those Bishops and Presbyters that had been tortured, and
lost their eyes in times of Persecution, and would often say, If he saw any sin
committed by a Priest, he would c^ver Hist Eccles. l. 1. c. 10, 11.
it with his Imperial Robe. So writes Theodoret.

What Honor has been done the Church since, appears in stories: Emperors,
Kings, and Princes did take their Crowns from the hands of the Clergy (for
such Bishops were) receive Institution from them, pertook of the Sacraments of
the Church from their hands, made them of their Council, and Closet, employed
them on Embassies, and other high affairs of State out of pure love and zeal,
and out of experience of their fidelity and fitness, and not from that
pusillanimity and manless subjugation, which by many in our Age scornfully is
called Priest-riddenness as I may so say, their term being Priest-ridden when
they express a man addicted to the Clergy.

Truly I much bemoan the distemper that is hereby notified; this our evil eye
argues strongly our evil heart that causes us to decline: for no Age or Nation
of the world ever was so much in the dark, as not to have and nourish those
that attend their Religion, says Cardinal Pool, and H. 8. lib. 1. Many covet
earnestly the Clergies Maintenance, their Support, but not their sweat, not
their labor. They have a nearer way to the Wood (as the Proverb is) Invident
honori; invideant and oneri; apud Salustium. Id tibi relinquo ut plorandi
causam semper habeas, and ridere etiamsi velis nequeas. Marcus Aurelius ad
Commodum.
then by Arts: they cry up the Spirit, and cry down the Prophets, to whom the
spirit of Prophecy is peculiar, and after a kind subject; and thus unawares (I
hope not of maliciousness, wickedness, that is in the design of Satan, and his
Instruments) they destroy the (...). Eusebius l. 6. c. 1.
Church and Religion too; for that was wicked Maximinus his charge to his
Officers, Not to put any to death but only the Rulers, and Pastors of the
Church, as the only props and propagators of the Gospel, as Eusebius records it.

And here I humbly beg the Pardon and Charity of my Countrymen while I write
a little modestly, and with all submission in behalf of the ancient and
venerable order of Episcopacie, not to raise up any Devil of division, or to
cast any Odium upon the Government under which I live; Qui se pracipitavit,
sustinere se cum velit, non potest. Cicero Tuscul. 4
I defy the uncivil and impudent Practices of those whose Language is, Master,
call for fire from heaven, of whom that cannot be said that the Apostle says
of Michael the Archangel. who in his contest gave not a Railing accusation; my
words shall be Jude 9.
soft and few, considering that in multitude of Prove. 10. 19.
words there is vanity.

It is a Government ancient, used and continued in the Church ever since the
Apostles times, a government which God has honored with success to all
spiritual and holy purposes; under this the Church of God throve, and from this
came forth eminent Champions to defend the Truth against both Paganism and
Heresy, and to settle the minds of Christians in it by their dying for it. In
the times of the Heathen Emperors, to be a Bishop, and a Martyr, were terms
convertible, Martyrdom being annexed to that Office, none going to Pot but the
Bishops, which many understood Eusebius. l* 6. c. 21
to be the meaning of S. Paul, He that 1 Timothy 3 1.
desires a Bishopric, desires a good work, that is, Martyrdom; and those that
entered upon the charge of Presiding, were sure to be called to account, nay,
ordinarily to dye for their Zeal.

There are sundry instances in Eusebius of Symeon, Ignatius, Polycarpus,
Pothenus, Alexander, Philaeus, Anthimus, Tyrannion, both the Sylvanus's, Peleus
and Nilus, Peter of Alexandria, Phileas, Hesychius, Pacuvius and Theodor, and
multitudes of Bishops more as well as Presbyters and other holy men that
suffered shortly after the Apostles times, besides those since in all places,
which to rehearse would be infinite.

And therefore though the Passion of many of the Vulgar be such, that they
think Primitive Episcopacie (conserved and continued much in our late, but now
Discontinued Church Government) and the Roman Papal Hierarchy to be under the
same condemnation, and both Antichristian; yet the learned and moderate of the
Reformed Churches, abhor the foppery of such conceits, and confess our Polity
to be productive of more Energical and Powerful Preachers, more conscientious
and holy Professors and Believers, then any Church in Europe under any
Government had, or has; and have to that purpose both sent their Novices
hither to learn the Method of Preaching and Literature in our Universities, and
also received our advice in the Weightiest Matters of Doctrine, as Oracular,
and such as ought to be stood by.

And therefore they of the Separation who decry our Ministry as Antichristian,
because it is of Episcopal constitution, and the Orders conveyed by those hands
Antichristian, had need resolve defiance to Reason and Conformity to other
Churche^, and their Doctors, or else they must stand single in their Antipathy
to us, while we keep close to our Original Episcopacie, and strayed not from
the Rules of Purer times; for Calvin justifies the Primitive Bishops and their
Instit. l. 4 c 4.
Canons and Councels; and speaking of the Popish Bishops, says, If they were
true Bishops, I would l. 4. c. 10.
yield them authority in this thing; he means not true in regard of Ordination,
but true in order to their Conversation, did they live and preach after the
holy example of Primitive Bishops, as you shall see after, lib. 4. cap. 5.
where he describes the Popish Bishops. The like respect did the Gallican Church
declare in An. 1562. Martin Bucer, and the German Protestants in Anno 1541. So
Iunius in his Exercitations upon Bellarmines Book of the Clergy; but Goldastus
Tom. 2. Constitutionum Imperialium.
most largely and with incomparable ingenuitie, the Learned Zanchy in ^. 45.
Not. 2.
his Commentary upon the Fourth Col. 731, 732. Sub Thesi, multiplex est
Ministrorum Christi five Ecclosiasticorum (...).
Commandment, where largely he asserts Episcopacie to be the most Ancient
Church Government, to be not contrary to the Holy Scriptures, but Contributive
to Order and Calvin lib. 4. cap. 5. Sect. 13. ubi Episcopi rudes vel plurimum
afini sunt, qui ne quidem prima and plebeia fidei rudimenta tenent, aut
interdum pueri a nutrice adhuc recentes; and si qui Doctiores sunt (quod ^amen
rarum est exemplum) Episcopatum nihil aliud esse putant, quam splendoris and
magnificentiae titulum, ubi Ecclesiarum rectores non magis de pascendo grege
cogitant, quam suitor de arando.
Peace, and to Edification of the Church: And as much does the Learned
Bochartus confess in his late Epistle to D. Morley; and therefore when any of
the Learned Reformists speak against Episcopacie, it must be taken as against
that of Papacy, where the Bishops for the most part are wild and ignorant,
being children not yet taken from Nurse, nor instructed in the first Rudiments
of the Faith, or if they be more learned (which he says is rare and unusual)
then think they the Office to import nothing but a Title of Greatness and
Splendour, where no greater care is had to see that the Pastors of the Church
feed the Flock over which they are set, then a Tailor does of the season in
which it is fit to plough.

The Learned then agree in a pure Evangelick Primitive Episcopacie, which
arrogated not Domination over the Lords Heritage, but served to ends of Order
and Piety, and such an Episcopacy (as to the Main) I hope I may without offense
to the People of God say ours was: and this I Infinuate not only to prevent
the Advantages that our Adversaries will take hold of to our Reproach, but also
to justify those many holy Martyrs, Bishops, and Presbyters, who ever since
our Reformation, yea, in the Bloody days of Queen Mary, lived and dyed in the
Approbation and Justification of it, and did not Abjure it, or their Orders
from it. I do not, nay, I cannot defend the Encroachments, and Illegal
Innovations of some late Men, and Times, whose forwardness to Transcend the
Bounds of Policy, and sober Piety, by Rigid Exaction of Obedience in things
not Warranted, nor agreed to in the Councels of the Church and State, has
brought such a Rent amongst us, that it has left no room for Charity, nay, it
has made all Government in the Church almost Execrable. But I pray Favor for
the Constitution, and the worthy Officers in it, that It, and They may not be
Traduced, lest the Reproach of them fall upon Christ, and the Religion which
has by it been preserved and propagated, and by them written for.

For although many out of Zeal to their own opinions, and perhaps from heat of
Opposition lanched out into the Ocean of Argument in the rough Storm of their
Passion, and would make the Port of their own Ambition and Selfwill, resolving
by the strength of their Wits to force the same belief on others, which they
took to themselves; yet, the Sober, Grave, Pious, and Temperate of the Clergy,
both Bishops and Presbyters took great heed to their ways, that they offended
not with their Pens or Tongues, and ever kept close to Legal proceedings, and
to the Customs of this Church, and the consent of the Orthodox, saving only
in Rites, which being Adiaphorous, did not break our Unity with other
Protestant Churches. Hence was it that when Disputes about Government were,
they distinguished between things and things, yea they claimed not the Entire
Government from Christ, and his holy Institution, lest they should place a Ius
Divinum in the Hierarchy, and condem, the Government of other Churches; but
they warily considered in Episcopacie what was Ministerial, and what was
Honorary; what was Essential and what Ornamental; what was Ministerial in
Episcopacie, our Bishops confessed they held in Common with other Presbyters
from Christ and his holy Apostles; to Teach, to Distribute the holy Sacraments,
with all other parts of Ministry, was equally valid whether done by them or
other Presbyters, according to that of S. Ambrose, The Orders of Bishops and
Presbyters is one Lib. de dignitate Sacerdotali.
and the same; both are Priests; to which agrees S. Ierom in his Epistle to
Nepotian and Evagrius: So the 35. Canon of the Council of Carthage; 2a. 2ae. q.
184. art. 5. Lib. 4. Did. 24.
Conform to which is S. Thomas his Determination, and that of the Master of the
Sentences, who both say, That Quantum ad nomen non distinguebantur Episcopi and
Presbyteri, sed quantum ad rem, hoc est ad scisma vitandum.

I meddle not with the Controversies handled betwixt the Learned Blundel, and
the no less Learned and Nobly accomplished D. Hammond. Let the world read and
judge them: My drift is only to purge the Bishops of England, as Constituted by
Law, from all the supposed Arrogation of Powet and Dignity in concreto, from
Christ; as if they had placed a Ius Divinum on the whole Body of Government,
which ought to be acknowledged a mixed Government, partly Divine, and partly
Civil; what in it is Ministerial, they with other Presbyters claimed from
Christ and his Apostles, and their Successors, yea, and presidencie too they
are thought to have had by the same Authority: but what was Civil, to wit their
Baronies from the Favor and Indulgence of their Princes, who to express their
Zeal to God, and his Gospel, did Dignifie Religious men with outward Luster,
and endowed them and their Successors with Revenewes proportionable, requiring
of them acknowledgements of this their Bounty. Hereupon in the Parliament of
Carlisle, 25. Edward 1. It is Declared by the Bishops and the whole Peerage,
and Parliament, That Sacrosancta Ecclesia Anglicana in statu praesulum infra
hoc Regnum per Angliae* Regem and ejus Progenitores ad populum in Lege Dei
instituendum, hospitalitatem colendam, Elymosynam erogandam, and alia
Charitatis opera exercenda fundata fuisset. Cook De Iure Regis Eccles. Report.
5. Part.
the Estate of Prelacie in the holy Church of England, was founded by the King
and his Progenitors within this his Realm of England, for the better
instructing of the People in the Law of God, the advance of Hospitality, and
Works of Charity, and other Christian Offices. The same has been adjudged and
declared in Edward the 3. his time, and ever since they were called
Elemosynarii Re: gis.

And therefore unless Kings when in power, when Fontes honoris and praemii,
nay, unless Parliaments conjoyning with them, and corroborating their Acts,
were powerless and invalid, which is foppery to utter, there was no fault in
Clergymen (being Subjects, and upon advantage to their Spiritual Function as
this was, and was intended) for taking this Office and Honor, and they thought
not to be either disregarded or molested therefore, but rather pitied, it being
torment enough to them to lose their Livelihoods in their old age, and to be
acquainted with want who are unfit to labor, and ashamed to beg; since
therefore it has pleased God to permit Suspension of this Sacred and Venerable
Government here, I do humbly beg the Ages Ingenuity, if not to pity, yet at
least not to help on the sufferings of those Aged Fathers, and Worthy Doctors,
who are humbled by it; that to do, were absurd in the sight of men, and
execrable before God, who by his Prophet Zachary in the first of his Prophecy,
v 15. says, I am very sorely displeased with the Heathen that are at ease; for
I was but a little displeased, and they helped forward the affliction. My
practice shall ever be to Mourn over my Spiritual Fathers, as the 1 King. 13.
29. 30.
old Prophet did by his fellow Prophet slain by a Lion; for it is sordid to
Triumph over the Ruins of others; and noble to answer all Insultings, as the
Emperor Charles the 5. did a Malicious Prelate of the Papacy, who craved
leave of the Emperor, then being at Wittenberg, that he might dig up the
body of Luther there entombed in the Church, but the Emperor answered, Non gero
bellum cum mortuis. Wolphius ad ann. 1556.
No such matter, I have no War with the dead; for as the Orator Est sine
dubio and hoc dignum odio, persequi hominem fortasse infoelicem. Quintil. Decl.
165.
says well, To contest with him that is already Mastered, is altogether to be
abominated.

Episcopacy interred, What remains to Learning but the Universities and Tithes?
Two things strongly by some aimed at, but I hope more strongly guarded by the
Law, and those powers that have the Distribution and Care of it.

The Universities of England shall need no other punishment then what Amotion
of Church Honors and Preferments will occasion them: who is there that in this
Interstitium will dispose a Son to a College life (in whom he sees any
Nobility of Wit, and after-Hopes) when as but bare Commons, and perhaps a
Country Cure, or a Petty Mastership of a House, is the Top of that Ladder
which he may climb to? Honos alit arts, Honor summons men to Achievements of
Fame: The Philosopher tells us, that Honor is the reward of Virtue, (...).
Aristot. de Moribus, lib. 4. cap. 7.
and it is given to the best men. Alas men of Gallant Emulations, and choice
Editions, will not cloy their souls with studies dull and Improlifique, as
Aeneas Sylvius wittily: Multorum virtus jacet, quia d^st campus ubi se
ostenten^. Epist. 60. ad Galeazium Comitem.
Many men's valor lies dormant, because they want a Field wherein to display
it: This is well limited by the Comaedian, where Blepsydemus proposes the
Question to Chremylus, Whether it were not prudent to bring a Physician into
the City, Chremylus answers him, (...). Aristophan. in Pluto, Act 2. Scen. 3.
Who now will be a Physician in the City? There is no Reward; nay, Art it self
is not much made of there.

It was the Honor and care of our Ancestors to incorporate Universities, and
erect Schools, and them to beautify and endow, not only to necessity, but
comfort and plenty; and it will be the reproach and shame of any time to
impair and demolish them, or suffer them to be impaired or demolished.

If they fall, they will draw the other stars after them, Rev. 12. 4. yea, if
this great Star fall from its heaven of regard and support, not only a third
part of the water (the people) will become wormwood, bitter and cruel, so that
many men dye by their heat and passion, but a third part of the Sun, Moon, and
Stars (to follow the Metaphor, 8. Rev.) will be darkened; farewell learned
Counselors, Parliament men, Soldiers; then comes the Woe, Woe, Woe to the
inhabitants of the Earth, verse last.

I need not say from them come the learned Preachers and Disputants, (many
think them better lost then found, better disbanded then kept in pay; they are
among the Supernumeraries, for a pinch and no more) but from them proceed the
Learned Physicians, a sort of men incomparably Learned, and at this day so
famous for all humane Science, that I think I may boldly say the College of
them at London with the several Doctors and practisers of Physic throughout
the Nation, are as knowing as the Physicians of any Nation in Europe, and as
well deserve honor and respect as any their Predecessors in that faculty; yea,
from them come the grave and knowing Lawyers, both Common and Civil, Men of no
Trite note hitherto, whose breedings for many years have been Academick, and
(for the most part of them) Generous. For our Laws were not heretofore written,
nor discoursed on by vulgar pens, or green heads, but grand Sages, Reverend
Bishops, learned Scholars. I find Egelrieus B. of Chichester, long ago a most
Vir antiquissimus and in Legibus sapientissimus incomparabilem habuit scaccurii
scientia^ and de eadem scripsit optime. Sir Edward Cook 1. part. Institut. p.
304.
expert man in our Laws, Nigellus, B. of Ely, and Treasurer to Henry 1. had
most incomparable knowledge in Exchequer Rights, and wrote thereof dexterously.

Bracton, Britton, and Glanvil, noble Writers, Pitsaeus ann. 1240, 1275.
skilled in the Laws, two of them said to be Doctors of the Civil Laws; and who
so reads the well composed year-books, the notable Abridgement by Fitzherbert,
the Reports by Sir Edward Cook and Sir James Dyer, the Commentaries of
Littleton, Plowden, and other the judicious Tracts and Arguments of Law (which
have been authoritatively published) will confess (if passion and prejudice do
not Obfuscate his Reason and Judgment) that the compilers of them were not men
meanly bred, or loosly seen in Arts, but opiparously accomplished: and were
there no other of that Noble Society to plead for Learning, there is one (
Seldom) whose pains and proficiencie will outlive to his Honor, and Students
profit, the Fury of all Gainsayers; so true is that of Plato, Learning and
good institution will make the Egyptians more wise and (...), etc. Vide
Platonem in Phoedro. p. 1240. Edit. Ficini.
Famous then their power; for it is approved the best prescript by which to
recover Wisdom and Fame.

Nay, from these come almost all Gentlemen of Parts and Quality, the ground of
whose after improvement and eminent Fullness is there laid: Without these we
shall have in aftertimes but Lean and Letterless Parliament men, Pithless
Justices, Hair-braind Governors: twill be a sad time when that of the Bishop
of London in Queen Mary's days of the Lords, may be said of Rulers with more
truth, Those Lords understand no Latin; Monstrum horrendum inform, 3. Vol.
Book Martyrs, p. 553
ingens, cui lumen ademptum; In a word, a general failing of Vital and Animal
Spirits, by which the Commonwealth should be actuated, and the glory of the
Nation preserved, which will not be if the Mothers breasts yield no Milk
wherewith to suckle her Babes. For my part I wish their Renown, and pray for
their continuance and increase. Peace be, O Lord, within their walls, and
Prosperity within their Palaces. Ps 122. 7.


And no less wish I to the Clergy and their yet left Portion, Tithes, or Legal
Maintenance, though this Pittance be everywhere Maligned and begrutched them by
some of the Covetous and ignorant Laiques of the Nation; as if forsooth, it
were Popish, Oppressive, and to be cast out with other parts of Church-Trash,
and useless Trumperie, as they call what I doubt they understand not. It Is a
loud cry they make, but to little purpose; The Orator tells us, That how much
easier it is to make then to heal a Tanto est accusare quam defendere, quanto
facere quam sanare vulnera facilius. Quintilianus Instit. Orator. lib. 1. c. 13.
Wound, so much easier is it to accuse then to defend; yet I hope the Arduity
will not be unconquerable, nor the defense of them be wholly waved (as I hope)
by those whom it immediately concerns, the learned heretofore giving great
helps to succeeding Bp. Montague, and M. Bunny.
endeavors.

I intend no controversy; I propose Cum contentiosis non est disputandum; non
enim emendantur, sed plus irritantur, quia non quarunt veritatem, sed gloriam
and triumphum, Lutherus.
no Antagonist but the Hydra-headed multitude, whom I shall answer as the
Archangel did the Devil, The Lord rebuke thee: I shall offer but a Widows
Mite, let it not be refused; while I come with my Turtle Dove let me be
received to Sacrifice.

Tithes as Maintenance are very Ancient, Gods quit-rent from mankind in
testimony of his Dominion and Sovereignty over them, called by the Ancients
Vectigal Dei, in the Old Councels, (...), The goods of the Church, (...),
Church Offerings, and Seldom p. 43.
of later times, Patrimonium Crucifixi, The Tribute and portion of God, the
patrimony of the Crucified.

They were paid, as is thought by some of the Learned, by Abraham to
Melchisedeck, King of Salem, and Priest of the High God, Genesis 14. 20. Not only
as an Honorarium quoddam, as some of the Learned aver, but according to Lyra, a
Due, Cui debebatur tanquam Sacerdoti, says he on that Text; and S. Paul to
clear that Tithes as Maintenance, were Moral and Perpetual, not So
Couvarruvi^s, variarum resolut. l. 1. c. 17 in M. Seldom, c. 7, p. 157. Hist.
Tithes.
Ceremonial and Levitical, neither Commencing, nor determining with the Jewish
Paedagogie and Priesthood, says, Levi also who received Tithes, paid Tithes in
Abraham; for he was yet in the loins of his Father when Melchisedeck met him,
Heb. 7. 9, 10. So then if Tithes were paid before Levi was, and paid after to
Levi as descending from that Priesthood which was Antecedaneous, and must be
perpetual (as to the main) to the end of the world: then are Tithes, as
Maintenance, no more Jewish and Temporary, then Scripture is, or any thing else
that was in use amongst the Jews, and ought to be in use in the Church to the
end of the world.

I apply not this to the Quota pars, the manner of decimation, but to Tithes so
far as they are maintenance, plentiful and proportionate to the Service
required from Ministers for them: I urge the Apostles Canon, I Cor. 9. 13, 14.
Do ye not know that they which minister about holy things, live upon the things
of the Temple, and those which wait at the Altar, are partakers with the Altar?
even so (says he) has the Lord ordained that they which preach the Gospel
should live of the Gospel: And if the Priests Levitital were to Live by their
labor and attendance, shall not the Priesthood Evangelical and perpetual
subsist it self upon the Gospel, and its Professors? that would be unreasonable
and senseless; for God requires no more then he gives; if he expect the
Laborers pains, he will think the Labourer worthy of his hire. So says our
Lord, John 10. 7. applied by St. Paul, 1 Timothy 5. 18. to the Ministers of the
Gospel, who who ought to be rewarded for their pains and travel, where he
says, The Scripture says, Thou shall not muzzle the mouth of the Ox that
treads out the corn; the labourer is worthy of his hire.

And were there no other Argument for Tithes as Maintenance, yet the Right of
them would be Evinceable out of the Rule of mere Analogy, and Proportion,
which the Apostle hints when he says, If we have sown unto you spiritual
things, is it a great matter if we reap your carnal things? 1 Cor. 9. 11. where
the Apostle by an Elegant ratiocination, convinces the Corinthians that their
contribution to their Teachers and the Apostles, is far beneath their deserts:
that still they are the Ministers Debtors: Why? we sow the seed of immortality
and life amongst you; we enfranchise you of heaven, and make you citizens of
the heavenly Jerusalem; you pay us but in corruptible things, as Silver and
Gold, with what is like your selves, mortal and impermanent; and does not the
disparitie between the Work and the Wages argue you still debtors to us?

In all Professions and courses of life there is a return of Labor, and a gain
ordinarily proportionate to the toil: the Merchant when he ventures a long
voyage, expects a large profit, and he has it, and well deserves it; a servants
wages, the price of his toil is his due, and 'twere injury to detain it from
him* a Soldiers pay is his due, and 'twere dishonestie to keep him (if we
could) without it; the Physician and Lawyer have Fees for their counsels, and
pleadings, and all Artists prizes for their Works and Wares, and it is fit they
should be contented for them: and must the Churchman be the only Capuchin or
Mendicant? Must he only live upon Alms and Charity? I confess it was wont to
be his advantage to have nothing, yet possess all things; there was a time when
Christians brought all they had and laid it at the Apostles feet, had all
things in common, contributed to the necessities of the Saints, had bowels of
affection, and were not only ready to open their purses to their Teachers, but
even (if need were) to lose their right eyes for them, Gal. 4. 15. Then, then
there needed no Imperatorial Edicts and Synodick Constitutions for Church
Maintenance: which is the reason why Agobard Bishop of Lions says, That before
his time there was nothing in the Holy Fathers, or in Synods Nulla enim
compulit necessitas, fervente ubique religiosa devotione, and amore illustrandi
Ecclesias ultro aestuante. Quoted by M. Seldom in his Book of Tithes. c. 5. p.
65.
publicly constituted about ordaining of Churches and endowing them with
maintenance: there being so great a fervor of devotion, and holy love to the
Church in peoples minds, that such compulsions were prevented by peoples
Free-wills.

But when corruptions of manners had ravished away the Worlds Virginity, and
turned men from fervently devout, into a churlish and penurious Tepiditie, so
that their Mammon was more dear then their religion, then was it necessary for
the Church to pray aid of powerd Patrons, whose awe should Principes Deus
sancta sidei Ecclesiaeque portectores esse v^luit.
redeem the Church from the thraldom of a Dependent maintenance; and at this
door (perhaps) came in the Concessions, and fixed Dues of the Church, which
since have been in use, and therefore in kind as well as in proportion been
counted due.

I have nothing to say for the incomes of the Papacy, for the Revenues they
politickly have gained to maintain their pomp and greatness; let Baal plead for
himself; what exceeds the Line of Tithes, as maintenance, I am to account
Eccentrique, and not to plead for, because it is the honey that Jonathan must
not taste.

Procul hinc, procul ite prophani. Tithes in the Christian world have been paid
many hundreds of years: Aventine (a good Author) tells us that Charlemain by his
Decree Hist. Mag. Cent. 8. c. 7.
recalled Tithes employed to secular uses, settling them where he thought they
ought to be upon the Church: And Charles the great left his Dominions, and the
people of them free from all Tribute and payments, save only such as were
payable to the Church in the right of Ut liber esset populus a Tributorum jugo,
caeterum Ecclesiis, and pontificibus jure decimarum obnoxious permaneret. Loco
ante citato.
Tithes. I forbear more Authorities, because the clowd of them in foreign
stories is so great, that to mention them were to swell my Apology into almost
an infinity of pages.

For their payment in this Nation for many hundred of years, there is ample
testimony in our Laws and Records for above nine hundred years; and therefore
they being Ultra memoriam Dyer. p. 46. 83*
hominis, are presumed to have a good Commencement, and may prescribe, had they
no Law but that of use and custom.

But there needs no plea of time and custom, where there is Legal and Civil
right to them by both Civil and Canonique Sanctions; for besides that of
Archbishop Egbert, who appointed, That every Priest should Ut unusquisque
Sacerdos cunctos sibi pertinentes erudiat, ut s^iant qualiter decimas t^tius
facultatis Ecclesiis divinis debite offerant. Spelman in Consil. p. 259.
teach those under his charge, that they ought to offer the Tenth of all their
Substance to the Church; and that the Priests ought to receive Tithes of the
people: Iornalensis tells us, Offa, King of Mercia, gave and established Hist
Jornalensis. Manuscript.
the Tenth of all things to the Church; the like is done in the general Council
at Winchester in Ann. Spelman. page 348.
855.

Amongst the Laws of King Decimas primogenia* and adulta tua, Deo dato.
Lambard. Saxon Laws. Edit. Twisd. p. 42, 45, 57, 62, 101, 102, 132, 139.
Alured, I find this, Tithes, the Firstborn, and Fatlings give to God.

So in the Laws of Edward, and Gunthrun the Dane, Ethelstan, Edmund, Edgar,
Knute, Canons of Elfric, confirmed by the Laws of William the Conqueror, and
ever since continued as an undoubted right of the Church, which every good man
is bound to defend by sober and warrantable means, and not otherwise; for Magna
Charta (which was but a Declarative Law) says, That the Church of England may
be free, and have all her Rights, that Cap. 1. Ut Ecclesia Anglicana sit
libera, and habeat omnes suas consuetudines and jura illaesa. Cook in Mag.
Chart. p. 3.
is, says the Learned Lord Cook, that all the Ecclesiastical persons shall
enjoy all their lawful jurisdictions, and other their Rights wholly without any
diminution or substraction whatsoever.

This Law called Magna Charta, was anciently Cook Proem. to 2. part. Instit.
upon Mag. Chart.
so sacred, that it was to be publicly proclaimed, not only in Churches, but
also at the Crosses, and most notorious places in Market Towns, and those
cursed that violated it, as Parisiensis relates p. 961. and 666.
to us.

Notwithstanding which there are many amongst us that openly protest against
Tithes qua maintenance, as burthensom, Popish, and to be changed as a great
grievance.

But I pray, Why burthensom, more then rent to a Landlord? The one, when time
serves, will be grievous as well as the other; were Landlords out of power as
well as Churchmen, there would be as loud an outcry against them, as against
the Clergy; the country-mans gain is his Religion; he can willingly, to save
Tithes, consent to the Ministers writ of ease; so his seed be seasonably in the
ground, and his crop brought home uninjured, he has his whole years wishes, he
is as well satisfied to take his ease on Sundays, as to go to Church; and his
profit he finds as good from land 5. miles from a Church, as from what is
nearer; he accounts every penie loss out of purse, that is paid for a few
prayers, and to hear a man talk an hour or two, and so forth (to use the
language of some of them); as if we were not commanded to honor God with our
substance, and as if to offer a corrupt thing, when we have a Male in our
flock, came not under the Curse, Mal. 1. 14.

Ah! this Gain is a Darling to Corydons; they care not to wrong the Minister,
^ay his Master, their Maker, so they may fill their Barns: which fact is
horribly execrable, as Detrabere aliquid alteri, (...) hominem hominis
incommodo suum augere commodum, magis est contra naturam quam mors, quam
paupertas, quam dolor, quom caetera quae p^ssunt aut corpori accidere, aut
r^bus externis. Itaque ^llendi (...) sunt ut Sacri^ ut perniciosi, ut furiae
^egetonis. Platina De optimo Cive Lib^. 1. Page 60.
Platina elegantly says, To withold that from a man which is his due, and for
one man to advantage himself to wrong another, is more contrary to Nature then
Poverty, then Sorrow, then Death; or then the worst evils that can possibly
come to us or ours; and therefore those that do such things, are to be
contemned and expelled all Humane Societies, as pernicious and Sacrilegious
persons, yea as the Phlegetonian furies. Thus he.

And as fond are men in this, as impious; for put the case this be gained from
the Churchman, yet will it be payable to some other body; it must issue out of
the Land; which we see in our Impropiations at this day to be true: for though
the Persons Recipients were altered, yet the Persons Solvents, viz. all
Occupiers of Lands, are the same, and I question whether Laymen will be betttr
Landlords then Clergiemen.

Be not deceived; remove but Tithes from their now Station, and the Tenant and
Occupier may have more trouble then he is a ware of; perhaps the Heaven over him
may be Brass, and the Earth under him may be Iron, as the Curse is Deuteronomy. 28.
23. or if not that (which he least fears) yet his fair crop, well above
ground, may be consumed with Locusts, as it is verse 42. and with Blasting and
Mildew, verse 22. Or if the mercy of God withold Justice from immediate
revenge there, he may have an evil Wife, Disobedient Children, a Disquieted
Family, Decaying Fortune; and if all these miss him, he shall be sure of one
that will buy his Tithes, and rake him to the bones to advance his purchase; or
to be sure, he may conclude of his Landlords raising Rent when his time comes
out, and not renewing but upon that consideration; for if the Tithes be
discharged the Land, the Landlord will advance the worth of those Tithes so
Antiquated.

Were it not much better even in Politic and Money-regards to continue payment
of Tithes, as wontedly, considering that of the Rabbis, Decimae sepes sunt
divit^is. Masoreth.
Tithes are the Conservatory of riches, and the Hedge which keeps them from
straying; and considering that it is the blessing of God that makes Rich, and
he adds no sorrow thereto. So says the Wiseman, Proverbs 10. v. 22. And
considering that the power and goodness of God is as much as ever to make men
now increase, as did those who with much devotion and integrity paid it.

And for the Popery of Tithes, that is fondly urged; for Tithes are no more
Popish then the Ministry, then the Scripture, then Churches, are Popish: what
the Church of Rome uses, or commands as a Church, is not therefore to be
rejected because she commands or practices it; that only which she does
contrary to the Scriptures, and practice of the Primitive Church, and the
opinion of the holy Fathers, Councels, and Synods, speaking according to the
wholesome form of Doctrine received, that is only to be rejected. The Church
of Rome was once the Beloved of Christ; when she grew more Politic then Pious,
Christ though he gave her over for his darling, yet did he not curse her as the
Fig Tree, Never fruit grow on thee more.

God forbid that we should so sin against Charity, as not to believe that she
holds many truths, which truths are never the less precious, because she holds
them; amongst which, this of Tithes, as Maintenance, is one: unless (to destroy
our Religion and Ministry here) they have quitted their former Dogma's, and
like the Camelion changing with every advantage; like Staphilus the Apostat's
Mistress, who (when he sued at Rome for a preferment, and it was answered that
it could not be given him because he was a married man) replied, Among the
Lutherans though she were my Inter Lutheranos mea conjux, Romae mea Coucubina.
Wolph. ad an. 1556. p. 666.
wife, yet at Rome she shall be my Concubine: meaning that he could dispense
with any thing for advantage. If this they have done, the Light in them is
grown Darkness; and to be revenged of our Ministry for their opposition to
their encroachments, have they complotted it. But whether they affirm Tithes as
due or not, I not much value; for the Apostles and Scripture maintains them as
honorable maintenance, long before the Mystery of Iniquity, or any Papal
Sanction for them; and since God commands the Ministers 2 Timothy 4. 2. 1 Pet. 5. 2.
of the Gospel to preach in season, and out of season; to feed the flock over
which the Lord has set them, it cannot be conceived that he should not appoint
them their Reward, who appoints them their Labor; for sure it is, the Judge of
all the world will in this, as in all other things, do right.

I hear the wiser and (I hope) the more conscientious of these Adecatists mince
their endeavors, not wholly to take away Maintenance from the Ministry, but
they would remove Tithes, and give the value of them in change of Tithes in
kind. I believe this rather a pretense, then a real Intention: for so long as
I know Covetousness is the Father, I am not bound to believe Truth the Child:
They that will be rich, fall into many temptations, 1 Timothy 6. 9. And God tells
us of people that stole, and did many abominations, Armat se ad latrocinandum
per Christi nomen. ^* Hieron.
and yet came with great confidence into his house, Ier. 7. 9. If gain were
not to be hoped for, this change would not be sought after.

But I pray tell me, Why must the Ministers Tenure be altered, while we of the
Laity keep our Free-holds unaltered? or why must he be put off with a new and
less Alimony, whose pains and hospitality will be expected as wontedly? or how
do we think he shall be able to provide for his Family, when he has not that
in kind, which will answer the necessities thereof? Alas! the tenth of the
revenue of the Land, what is it to the tenth of its increase? And whereas now
he has the blessing of God (who has said, that seed-time and harvest shall
never fail) for security of his Tithes, they being by the Law to be assigned
their Churchman equally by his Tithesman, before any of the owners corn be
carried forth; then he must depend upon the honesty and ability of the several
Farmors who are to pay it, and perhaps be put to suits for it, and be as much
troubled to gather in the Composition as the Tithes; it may be, meet with
insolvent people, who are as unable as unwilling to pay it. And thus they may
starve his body, who ought to feed their souls; and who faithfully gives them
spirituals, while, if they wholly deny him not, yet they clearly curb and
curtail him of his due: which Reverend Calvin notes, was the sin of the Jews,
for which God cursed them and the whole Nation, Mal. 3. 9 And that he makes
good from ver. 10. where God says, Bring ye all the Tithes into the
storehouses: Hence (says he) Hinc colligimus, non protinus negare ipsos
decimas Sacerdotibus, sed fraudulenter solvisse, vel dimidia ex part, vel ita
ut quicquid poterant sibi retinerent. In locum.
we gather, that the people did not wholly deny the Priests their Tithes, but
paid them fraudulently, by halfs, in part, not in whole, keeping back what they
could: counting the bread of deceit sweet, but afterward his mouth shall be
filled with gravel, as the Wiseman has it, Prove. 20. ver. 17.

The truth is, alter what in this kind is well settled, and farewell all. I am
of his mind, who said, Imperium si in parvo contemnitur, ex omni part
violatur: Cassiod. l. 2. Ep. 12.
Change the Maintenance, and the Ministry will not long last unchanged. Were it
not much better, if the Minister be worthy, (for I would have the Clergy
innocent, pious, peaceable, learned, exemplary to every good work) and the
people conscientious, that they would both agree, one to deserve, and the other
to pay willingly? But God help, when we think nothing too deer for a folly,
and a vice, but every thing too costly for our Minister.

Look abroad, and see what a Ministry small Allowances have left in the
Reformed Churches of France, Holland, Germany, Switzerland; I speak of the
generality of them; their Professors, and some few of the rest of them, whose
Fathers and Marriages or other casualties have left or made fortunate, are
eminent: But from the most, their Learning is lost with their Lands and Glebes:
God wot, they are fain to crouch to unlearned Men (who have wit enough to get
and hold wealth) almost in the language of Ely's sons the Priests, 1 Samuel 2.
ult. Put me, I pray thee, into one of the Priests Offices, that I may eat a
piece of bread.

And therefore I humbly beseech all those who are godly, of what way soever, in
the Prophets phrase, to hate this decrying of the Ministry and its Maintenance
as the thing that is evil, and opposite Psalm. 97. 10. Oportet quae sunt
inhonesta, non quasi illicita, sed quasi pudenda vitart. Plinius Ep. 18 l. 5.
to God, yea destructive to the Gospel; and that wherein the enemies of God
will be more gratified then in any thing besides* for take away the Office of
the Ministry, what ignorance, what barbarism, what mischief will ensue is not
easy to foretell: But this we may rest on, To decry it is to despise it, and
to despise the Ministry is to despise Christ: Luke 10. 16. He that despises
you despises me; and he that despises me despises him that sent me. Nay, it
is to fight against God, who has set this up in his Church, to give light to
them which are in darkness; and commanded us to walk by it* and not to wander
from it, because in the light thereof we shall see light.

Nor may we do worse by the Ministers Maintenance then the Ministers Office:
Christ now expects the multitude of Believers should feed their Teachers (his
Deputies) not upon Commons like John Baptist's, hard and mean; nor yet to
Gluttons excess or riot, but upon food convenient for them. Conceditur tibi,
ut si been S. Bernardus.
servis, de Altario vivas, non ut luxurieris, etc. It Is fit they should have
all decent necessaries for themselves and Families, that they may with less
distraction, and greater fervency watch over their Flocks, and prepare
themselves for their labor. Yea, I see no reason why they should not have
whereof to relieve the poor; since charity best becomes a Minister of his, that
went about doing good: And while to do this in some complete measure, the Laws
of this Land, and the custom of these Churches enable the Ministry, let none
of those that bend their knee to Christ, and love the truth as it is in Jesus,
comply Ephesians. 4. 21.
with tenants and practices of subverting the Ministry, and impairing its
Maintenance: for thus to do, would not only be a scandal to the Gospel, but a
means to provoke God, by way of requital and just judgment, to reward our
preying on him and his Rights, with a total ruin of our Civil property: For
men cannot look for a blessing upon what they have, if they rob him who is the
keeper and blesser of them and theirs.

This considered, The Clergy cannot be wronged, but the whole Subject must be
injured, nay Mal^dixi vobis, vosque fame and penuria afflixi, id est, quia pari
modo vos me configitis and affecist is egestate and fame, negando decimas and
oblationes: Itaque fug itis sacerdotes, and cultum meum evertitis. Corn. a
Lapide in locum.
God himself, so far as man can; for which he must expect the curse
prementioned Mal. 3. 9. Ye are cursed, this whole Nation: which Cor. a Lapide
expounds thus, Because you have (as it were) ^fflicted me with scarcity and
poverty, in denying me Tithes and Offerings: therefore to mete you the measure
you meted me, when you despised my Priests, and overturned my worship, I have
brought scarcity upon you, and made your Land bring forth briers and thorns in
stead of plenty.

And therefore unless Tithes, as settled by Law, yea and declared by sundry
Parliaments to Cook 2. Par. Mag. Charta. p. 639. et seq.
be due and payable, are preserved to the Church, and all men from whom they
are due, be compelled to pay them in kind, and according to the known and
usual manner, I shall think the Churchman but in a bad case, and Religion
unbefriended: yea, to Wolphius his tria admiranda, his three Admirables, One
Peter in Rome, One Unus Petrus in Roma, unus portus in Ancona, una turris in
Cremona. Foelix Clerus in Anglia.
Port in Ancona, One Tower the Cremona, I Will add a Fourth, (which without the
infinite mercy of God, and pious prudence of our Governors, I despair ever to
see) a happy Clergy in England.

I have been longer in vindicating the Clergie's right then I would, had I
skilled the contraction of what I have written into less room: and truly, when
I consider of what consequence it is to contest modestly and civilly for them,
I am ready to engage a little further; because they are the Master-pillars on
which the Fabric of Learning is supported. And how impossible it is for the
building to stand, when the principles on which it rests, are removed, let the
world judge: the holy Ghost tells us, when the Foundations Psalm. 11. 3
are destroyed, what shall the righteous do? And marvel not at this, that I
call the Clergy the Standards of Learning; No man can deny it, that has not a
perfrict forehead. If we have our Learning by study and education in
Universities, who are the first Instructers of us in Letters, our
Schoolmasters? Are they not men of Academick breeding, yea mostly in Orders?
who are (I am sure were wont to be) public Professors, Masters of Colleges,
Tutors, Lecturers in the Houses, but Divines commonly? To one of any other way,
I Will undertake one hundred of the Clergy: and almost all our Books of note and
elegancy, have they not been written by the Clergy?

I write not this out of flattery, I skill it not: It can be no booty for me to
court a poor Samaritan, or to pour oil into those wounds which are like to be
given him from his friend and his familiar: it is barely for the love of holy
Learning, by which we shall know God and our selves, how to live well and die
comfortably, that I write; and which I know to be the true end of Learning;
according to that of Aeneas Sylvius, who writing a penitential Epistle to his
Friend, he says, Old age urges on me, I will therefore prepare my Et quia
senectus adest, urg e^tque mors, cogitabo quo modo been moriar. Id enim est
deniqne recte Philosophari, id est scire, id est esse sapientem: Nam qui jura
novit and astrorum cursus, and pluviarum ventorumque causas, and argumentandi
rations, et mensuram terrae, and Carminis and Orationis vices, and onnem
harmoniam, is tamen nihil scit, nisi et mori sciat. Epist. 77. l. 1.
self to die: That indeed is true Philosophy, that is to be wise for eternity.
He that knows all Laws, sacred and Civil, the courses of the heavens, the
causes of winds and weathers, the subtilties of argumentation, the bounds of
the Globe, the influence of Poetry and Prose, and the universal harmony of
things created, (in which circle all Learning and felicity of intellect is
bounded) knows nothing, uulesse he know how to leave the world contentedly,
and to assure his soul, that death shall be not the beginning, but the end of
his misery.

Ah Learning! thou art a Jewel which deservest the Cabinet of an Alexander:
thou art a Bird of Paradise, which singest the choycest notes to him that
gives thee the charyest tendance: Thou, like a tender Vegetive, thrivest not
but in a good soil and a generous Sun; the shades of obscurity, like droppings
on Quickset, spoil thy growth: Thou delightest in no Throne but that of Ivory
in which thy Solomon sat; in no attendance, but men tongued like Angels,
footed like Hearts, winged like Eagles, hearted like Doves, without gall;
ambitious to match the craft of the Serpent to the innocence of the Turtle.
Thou have, in fine, whatever Nature can desire; for thou thy self art the
perfection of this Microcosm; which the Orator notably sums up, Qui and
sapiens, hic divitias Sabellius Orat. 7. de cultu et fructu Philosophiae.
calcat, honores contemnit, nullos fortunae impetus reformidat; idem est nullis
fortunae terroribus obnoxious, nullis servit cupiditatibus, semper beatus,
semper foelix, cui nihil deest, nihilque deesse possit.

There is no force conquers this but love: It can evade, if not ruin what
intends its vassalage; It hates nothing more then slavery; it is like other
Delicates, guilty of tenderness: It can die for desert, and live to gratify
received civilities: Unhandsome amputations, and rough touches, make it take
the wing, and post to Climates more benign.

And thereforee, Hear O Princes, hearken O Judges, consider O people of
England, what a blessing God has continued amongst you these many hundreds of
years, in giving you Learning, and learned Men of your own, who have been your
reducers from the power of Satan to God; from the scorn and contempt of
Ignorance, to the noblest Culmen of Art and true Science; from Cowardice to
Valor; from obscurity to eminence; from Barbarism to Civility: And do not
think that without Arts and Artists you can be happy.

For Commonwealths, being great Families of men, diversely addicted and
disposed, necessitated to amity, converse, and traffic with all Nations far
and near, more or less, must have Mediums proper to those ends, and
Instruments fitted to all words and works, both of Peace and War, both of an
heavenly and mundane composure: and this can no more be without Learning and
Tongues, then Fish can without Water, Birds without Air, Beasts without Earth,
or Vegetables without Sun.

Without Learning there will be no Priest, no fear of God in the Land: That
people must needs perish where the vision cease. A Pro 29. 18.
good Churchman, as a noble Cordial, is composed of many Rarities conjoined,
has all Arts to his completion; He must have knowledge in Tongues, how else
will he be able to read Originals, and thence Authors upon Originals? How else
will he be furnished, able to gain those that are without? Or how shall they
understand the message that the Minister brings, if the Bringer speaks in an
unknown Tongue? Christ the great Head of the Church, when he was to send forth
his Apostles to gather 1 Cor. 14.
his Church out of all Nations, sent his Spirit upon them to enable them to
speak to all Nations in their own languages, Acts 2. which ability of Tongues
is in Acts 10. 45. reckoned a gift of the Holy Ghost; for the Text says, They
of the Circumcision which believed, were astonished, as many as came with
Peter; because that on the Gentiles also was poured out the gift of the Holy
Ghost: for they heard them speak with Tongues. So Acts 19. 6. And when Paul had
laid his hands on them, the Holy Ghost came upon them, and they spoke with
Tongues, and Prophesied. Tongues are the Keys of Science, the inlet to
knowledge of all sorts: No instrument by God appointed to purposes of Piety,
and general advantage beyond Tongues: it is the Cradle, by* the help of which
we crawle to Maturity; the Letter ushers in the Spirit; therefore God has
placed in his Church, amongst other 1 Cor. 12. 28.
things, Tongues, yea and Arts too; else Tongues will but little avail: It is
the right ordering of Speech, and the orderly manner of transferring that we
have to say from our selves to others, which gives life to Language. Magnos
modica quoque Eloquentiae parit Fabiu^. ^. 12.
fructus.

The Holy Ghost makes wise as well as learned Penmen; Men that know how and
when, as well as what to speak: there are many Sophistries which the Devil
disperses to puzzle Truth, which will pass in the crowd of curiosities and New
Truths, if the man of God be not able to cast away the Tares, though it be
mingled with the Corn and come up with it; yea though it be a Diabolical spirit
in the body of Samuel.

It Is true, God can make the folly of man turn to his praise; he can convert
Stones into Math. 4* 3.
Bread, and by absolute power make an Ass reprove the madness of a learned, but
blinded Pet. 2. 16.
Prophet; Such was Baalam. But ordinarily his delight is amongst those that he
either finds, or makes really Learned: The Penmen of holy Writ were conducted
by the infallible spirit to Truth; but the Phrase and Dialect is various, as
was the degrees of Eloquence and Erudition in them more or less intense. Job,
Moses, Esai, Daniel, Solomon, S. Paul, are transcendently for the Cortex and
language of their Books, more sublime then are the other Prophets and Apostles,
though all their writings are equally infallible.

The holy Scriptures, like a goodly Garden, contains things for delight and
use; as a rare Cabinet it lodges jewels of all sorts and sizes, for all parts
and persons: it has Truths like Stars of all degrees; light and influences for
all seasons: it is the Queens daughter, not only glorious within, but covered
with garments of needlework, smelling with Myrrh, Aloes, and Cassia, Psalm. 45.
8. This is the light sprung from on high to visit us: this is the sword of the
Spirit by which Satan is worsted, and the Church defended: this Ephesians 6. 17.
is the Chamber of God (as it were) into which Esai 26. 20. compared wi^h Ps.
119 92.
the soul is Courted to her repose till the indignation be over. Hence may she
suck the milk of consolation: here see the beauties of holiness, and the
rewards of weldoing: Out of this ought she to gather her encouragements, and
from this not to swerve, though an Angel should preach to her other Doctrine
then what is therein revealed The Gal. 1. 8*
dignity of this, God not only commended to us by the admirableness of the
delivery, from his holy spirit to holy men, but also by his preservation of it
from those injuries which the malice of Satan, and his instruments, both
secretly hatched, and as far as they could, expressed against it: yea above
all, that ought to confirm Christian men in a high veneration of Scripture,
that our Lord Jesus owned Matthew. 5.
the then written part of it, quoted it, and gave us charge to search the
Scriptures, for they do testify of me, says he, Ioh. 5. 39.

This made the Apostles and their Successors in all ages to give notable
testimonies of their zeal to the Scriptures Reverence: Tertullian says, I
adore the fullness of the Scriptures, Adoro Scripturae plenitudinem, quae mihi
factorem manifestat, and facta. lib. contra Hermog. Necesse est nobis
scripturas Sanctas in testimonium vocare, sensus quippe nostri and enarrationes
nostrae sine iis testibus non habent fidem. In Tom. 1. Homil. 1. in Jer.
which show me clearly both the Creator, and the Creature: And Origin as
plainly, We must in all doubts take Scripture evidences, for without that our
senses and enarrations will have no credit: 'twould be endless to summon in
the cloud of witnesses, which to this purpose are produceable; let the Reader
peruse learned Zanchy in his Tract de sacra Scriptura, and thence he will be
abundantly satisfied.

Now let no man wonder that the Book of God should be so precious in the
Churches eyes, since God has appointed it to be what ever is useful and
comfortable to her in her militant state in this world: it has comfort against
her dejection, Resolution of her Doubts, Arguments against her Opponents: It Is
eyes to her when in the dark, Counsel to her when in the wilderness, Courage
to her when in straights: It Is in a word, the via lactea, out of which Christ
the Sun of righteousness is discovered to arise to the soul with healing under
his wings, Mal. 4. 2.

This buckler, this Compass, this Pillar of fire, this Star the Church is
forced to use and follow in its conduct, against all those her pestilent
enemies that exercise her Graces of Faith, Patience, and Constancy; and did not
her Champions take up this sword of the Spirit, they could not chase away those
beasts of error that they are forced to encounter with (in the course of their
Ministry) after the 1 Cor. 15. 32.
manner of men; They, they, alas! who are the Messengers of God, are not ever
to meet with hearers ingenuous, mild, like S. Peter's, pricked at their
hearts, crying, Men and brethren, what shall we do? but often with Elimasses,
with the Disputers of Acts 2. 37. Acts. 13. 8. Acts. 24.
this world, with Turtullusses, subtle and intricate, mysteriously couching
their deceits, which by art the Minister of Christ must detect, and from the
holy Text arraign and condemn: if not, there will be great opposition, and
violent endeavors to hold what Satan has gained. Moses could not prevail upon
Pharaoh, till he had out-feated his Magicians, till the patnesse of the
Conviction assured Exodus 8.
them, God must be in that Rod which could effect such a Miracle; yea, had not
our Lord Jesus made way for his entertainment by signs and Miracles,
transcending the power of created being, and pointing at a Divine cause, which
produced such inexpected effects, his Ministry had been much eclipsed, through
the stiff and deliberated Morosity of the envious Jews, to whom he came, and
by whom he was refused.

And if it were so when he was in Flesh, Who spoke as never man spoke; what
shall become of the Ministers in his Church now? If Ephesians. 6. 13. 2 Timothy* 3 last.
they take not to them the whole Armor of God; if they be not thoroughly
furnished to all good works; if they come not as it were in the spirit and
power of Elijah; if they (like Apollos) be not mighty in word and in deed; they
will not only fall short of their work, but also of their Crown: For, To him
that overcomes, will I give to eat of the hidden Mannah, and a white stone,
and a new name, says Christ, Rev. 2. 17.

O the wisdom of God, who has so well suited his word to the purpose he designed
it! It is a Net fitted to catch fishes of all sorts and stations, Jews,
Gentiles, bond, free, high, low, young, old: There is not more variety in Art
and Nature, then there is with unspeakable art adumbrated in the holy
Scriptures; that God might reprove the vanity of all relyances on, and all
adunations with any thing which seems to stand in competition with his word,
for our belief and delight.

There is no Art, no Figures, no choice of those Rhetorical Flowers, which
surprise mortal curiosity into a pleasing vassallage, and make it Felo de se,
but is here amply matched, if we were not deaf when this voice of the Charmer
Psalm. 58 4, 5.
approaches us, If we would not shut our eyes against the light that would
enlighten us, and make us see the mercy of God conducting his Church to heaven,
by those waters of the Sanctuary which are pleasant and satiating, and which
make the soul never to thirst after the wisdom of the world, because it is
enmity against God.

Tell me, thou who art the most Critic and curious Wit, who deeply sinkest
down thy plummet to sound the Coast of Knowledge with greatest care and
sollidest scruple; Where have thine elixerated Brains been more nobly satiated
in Plato, Tully, Seneca, Plutarch, Aristotle, then they might have been in
Histories, Philosophy, Morals, Ethics, Logicks, Politics, Rhetoricks and
Poesies of the Prophets, Apostles, and holy Penmen? What more Variety, Verity,
Eloquence, rare Ecstasies of Devotion and holy Language in all that vast
Continent of Books, which men have in all Ages and Arts written; then in that
little Spot and Jewel of divine Writ? It is beyond any man's power to instance
any one Directory that may, or has conveyed that light to the Church, by which
we may infallibly walk, and by it be conducted to the light that is eternal,
as the Book of God does. If then the Text of the Preacher be so various,
sublime, copious, it becomes the Preacher to be and show 2 Timothy 2. 15.
himself A workman that needs not to be ashamed. Yea, well might Saint Paul
cry out, Who is sufficient for these things, without more then ordinary 2 Cor.
2. 16.
assistance of God?

The Minister then must be learned, that the Golden Censer may not shame the
wooden Priest: 1* Kings 7* 50.
The Word of God (that two-edged Sword) must not be dispensed by one who cannot
distinguish betwixt the Birthright and a Mess of Pottage: yea, so knowing
ought and must the man of God be, Genesis 25. 25.
and so carefully watch, that Leah be not put into Jacob's bed in stead of
Rachel; that false glosses and corrupt Traditions be not obtruded on Believers,
and the verities of God hidden under the bushel of politic designs and
carnal conveniences. This the Ministers of God must watch against, lest the
Scriptures be made the objects of every Sophisters cavil, and like deserted
ways, buried in the weeds of overgrown Atheism: then will the ways of Zion
mourn, while Heathens and Heretics play to the Harp and the Viol: then will
her adversaries be the chief, and her enemies prosper, as the mournful Prophet
has it, Lam. 1. 4, 5.

And as the ruin of Learning will bring ruin on the Church, so on the State;
no Minister, no Statesman: Learning is useful to both. A good and wise
Governor must read the Rules and practices of former Governors and Governments,
and from them pick and choose things of advantage to his own establishment, and
subjects peace and increase; which, without learned Tongues and Arts, or
learned Men to help him, he cannot do. Though we have many, with Narcissus, in
love with their own shadows, and enamoured with the smart and applauded
contrivances of their Wits (as they think) condemning all (for vanity and
emptynesse) which has not paid duty to their conceits; yet time will show, we
are no more born wise and intelligent here, then in other parts; nor no more
now then in former times: nay, well will it be for us, if afterages give us not
this Motto, They are wise to do evil, but to do good, they have no
understanding: which is Jer. 4. 22.
directly contrary to the Apostles counsel to his Romans, I would have you wise
to that which is good, Romans 16. 19.
and simple concerning evil.

Well fare former times, wherein Science and Learning was the only way to Fame
and Rule. Eloquentia alumnis suis venerandam quandam majestatem apud homines
conciliat. Naz. ad Vitalian.
Nazianzene tells us, That Eloquence was a ready step to estimation, and that it
fixed a kind of Majesty on all that had it. And Reges cum Philosophos in honor
habent, et se and illos ornant.
Plutarch seconds it, When (says he) Kings honor Philosophers, they adorn
themselves as well as those Philosophers. Princes and Philosophers have been
Synonima's, and those thought most meet to rule others, that had first
subjected themselves; which they found few men had, but Philosophers, whose
riches was in poverty and contentation: This made them acclamated to Plutarchus
ad Principem inerudit. p. 779.
no mean degree. Plutarch writing to an unlearned Prince, quotes a saying of
Theopompus King of Sparta, That Philosophical Learning dwelling in a Prince,
and as it were his Keeper and Counselor, takes away that power which exceeds
right, and disturbs the Body politic, as peccant humors do the (...), etc.
Body natural; and leaves only behind what is sound.

Ignorance and unletterdnesse ill becomes any man who bears the Image of God;
but worst of all a Governor. Vegetius to this purpose, Neminem magis decet vel
meliora scire, vel plura quam Principem, cujus Doctrina omnibus potest prodesse
subjectis. Veget. in Praefat. l. 1.
It befits no man to know more and better things then a Prince whose Learning
may profit all his subjects. And I have read of a notable speech, Rex
illiteratus est asinus Coronatus. I know the Vulgar are more in love with a
Ferreum latus, then an Aureum caput; and the Orator was safe enough, when for
his Cedat forum Castris, ocium militiae, stylus gladio, umbra Soli. Cicero pro
Muraen.
Clyent he said, Councels must give way to Camps, Peace to War, the Pen to the
Sword, and the shadow to the Sun.

It is Pardonable in the Barbarous Goths, to desire their Queen not to educate
her Son (and there to be King) Alaricus, learnedly, Lest Ne Regem inutilem
faceret ad res politicas. Procopius de Bello Gothico. lib. 1.
he should degenerate, and not prove a Devil of Ruin, as were the people of
that Nation; though they gave their request a better dress, That he might not
be unfit for Politic Manageries.

I have read indeed of a French complement to the same tune; the learned King
Lewis the 11. would have his Son Charles to be wholly unlearned: and under
Favor, he gives a Reason unlike his Character of Learned, That he might Plane
rudem esse voluit ne pertinax esset in Consilio. K^ckermanus polit. l. ^. p. 64.
not be pertinacious in Councels: but it fell so out, that his own ignorance
made him rely upon those, who to his great damage and dishonor misguided him:
it being in a kind unnatural for any man to choose that virtue in another, which
he has not in some degree first in himself; and almost impossible to Rule and
Counsel well, where the Laws and Methods of Government and Politic affairs are
not to an eminent degree Imbibed: Which occasioned that learned Lord Bacon to
press so much the necessity of Learning in all Statesmen, as that with which
they might serve to great purposes of good; For it is rare (says he) and
almost without example, that any State Vix exemplum adduci possit reipub.
infoeliciter administratae, ad clavum sedentibus viris eruditis.
was unhappily governed where learned men were at helm, and gave order for the
steerage. To this assents Prudentius, l. 1. Cont. Sym.

And as Religion and Government will be claudicated in the decay of Learning,
so will there be no expectation of men's abilities for the future to do those
necessary Offices to humane nature and humane Societies, either of
preservation, or restoration; the benefit of which is now every day found.

Physicians will grow scarce; we shall need no other enemies but diseases,
which will thrive like Sanitatis auctor Deus* Dei instrumentum natura,
utriusque minister Medicus. Rhodig. 29 c 11. Guev. p. 191.
Vermin in an unhabited house, whence they are never chased. Man's body, like
other compounds, will corrupt in time; the knowledge of proper Remedies and
Restoratives, lies in the Cause and seat of the Disease fore-known: Learning
must conduct the Physician to this; for without Tongues (under the lock of
which, all their Aphorisms, and Rules of Art are) they can but ghess at
Distempers, as Quaks do, and prescribe things no more proper to the cures of
them, then starving is to growth, poison to long life, or prodigality to
thrift; yea, the Hermetick secrets, and Occult qualities which Nature has in
her (and the use whereof is not to be deliniated in a short Panegyric) will be
quite estranged to us; if Arts be stifled, and Artists in stead of Honor and
encouragement, have no other recompense but censure, of Time and Money spent by
them in needless and impertinent Curiosities: Time was when Una artium medicina
Imperatoribus quoque imperat. P^in. 24. 1. Guev. 191.
And believe me, he that knows the Proficiencies every day made by our
Physicians, in discoveries of helps and cures, will not deny them their regard,
or think them deservers of it at cheap rates: they travel far, study close,
make many chargable and intricate searches into Natures work and way, that
thereby they may with more speed and certainty prevent her miscariage, and
surprisal by noysom and pestilential diseases.

The Body then is concerned to advance their interest, as are the Goods and
property of men to promote the Lawyers being, and well-being, which decay and
discontinuance of Learning will hazard. For a complete Lawyer must not only be
made up of Presidents and Methodick forms, like Country Curats, who have but
one or few Sermons for all Congregations and occasions, but instructed and read
in the body of the Law; versed in the subtilities of pleadings, and judicious
defenses; able to distinguish of Titles, and state, and resolve their niceties:
A good Lawyer must be every way accomplished, apt to Counsel, quick of tongue,
patient to hear, and prompt to remember and conceive the arguments of his
Opponent; knowing where Fallacies are lodged, and how best to redeem right from
her Wardship: and this well he cannot do without Tongues learned, and books
thoroughly consulted with.

There are many that follow the Bar, as the people did Christ, Only for the
loaves and gain of money, John 6. 26. being curious rather to accumulate Fees,
then Law; and more obliged to their Gowns and Calls to practice, then to
acquirements by study and Adaptations thereto in regard of Intellectual
abilities: these do so torment Science, and engender Monsters in practice, that
the noble profession of Law is grown a burden, in many men's opinions, not to
be born, while both such Clerks and such Counselors are Conjurati fratres,
sworn to make a Prey of their Clyents, and not to (as is their Duty) defend
both them and theirs from injury and oppressions. The encroachment of which
Vermin (for they are no other) ought not to Depraeciat worthy practisers (who
love Art for Arts sake, and gain upon worthy accounts.) For as all Callings
have their blemishes; so must not this be expected free, unless the Professors
of it could produce a Writ of privilege against vice, and a Charter for
virtue, and Immunity from what ever is opposite thereto; which I think they
will not affirm they can, since they are men, and so subject to like
infirmities with others.

Without learning then, neither Physicians or Lawyers of note will continue or
thrive; those two useful Professions will down: nay, what is more strange, the
Soldiers Trade will decay and lose its Reputation; for there is no Military
man of place, complete, but he who is in some measure, though to no high
degree, learned: for war can never be well managed without learning; that
teaches to choose fit methods of fighting and discipline; fit places on which,
fit times in which to fight; yea it states and assertains to men, the justness
of quarrels upon which to, or not to engage. History is a Noble Tutor to the
Soldier; it tells him that wind, weather, hills, woods, plains, passages have
befriended great achievements, if well closed with; and that rash motions have
lost noble Enterprises and their Engagers. As no man is wise at all times, so
not in all things: God who only made all, knows all; and so much nearer do we
approach him, as we well improve the Souls he has given us by intellectual
converses: A mere daring letterlesse Commander, can (in a rational way) promise
himself no more success In tota re militari nihil utilus, nihil clarius duce
erudito. Satisberiensis, 6. 15.
in his Enterprise, then a Mastiff can in his contest with a Lion; all he must
leave to the issue, which a wise man looks at through Mediums proper and
peculiar; as to Riches, by lawful industry, to Knowledge by Books, to Health by
abstinence, and to heaven by virtue and obedience. He that thinks a Veni, vidi,
vici, will do, had best consider whether the Ants industry may not defeat the
Eagles power; and a few well disciplined, threaten more then multitudes in
disorder; and good conduct succeed better, then numerous companies at random.

The wise man says, Ecclesiast. 9. 18. Wisdom, is better then weapons of war:
and verse 16. better then strength: And the son of Syrach, Wisdom 6. tells us,
That wisdom is better then strength, and a man of understanding is more worth
then one strong.

The Poets hinted this, when they bring in Agamemnon Homer l. 2. l^.
making the Conquest of Troy easy, if he had but ten Counselors like Nestor;
Policy effecting often what Force cannot, as is set forth in that feat of
Vulcan's, which Homer mentions, Od. 8.
where Venus being courted by Mars, and Vulcan jealous of his Mistrisse,
willing to know the utmost of their Congresses, and yet daring not to apprehend
them in midst of their pleasures, lest Mars by his power and puissance should
crush and ruin him, took up the resolution to fill the bed on which they
lustfully entertained each other, with snares and private chains and catches,
where in the Amorous pair, embracing each other, were caught, doing that by
Art, which he durst not aperto Mart attempt.

It is a vanity for men to hope to manage war well without learning, or Conduct
from learned men, as gross an one as for a blind man to boast of discerning
the least imaginable Attom, without Organ or Medium proper thereto. I know
there are many conclusive, that books Effeminate the mind, and by a kind of
softness so Incandorate See the Arguments in Mendoza. Viridar. p. 66. and 67.
it, that no good look is reserved for manly Acts, though they conduce to
self-preservation, which is most an end with the Ruin of others.

But this is rather a Calumny, then a just Charge on Learning; and therefore
ought not to have fairer respect with men, then the Viper had with S. Paul,
which he shook off unharmed. The Acts 28. 4.
Muses will receive no detriment from this broadside of Malice, because it is
managed with more Gall then Truth: Experience tells us, that the greatest
Actors and Actions that ever have been on this stage of earth performed, have
been by learned men.

Moses his Conduct of Israel out of Egypt in despite of Pharaoh, was a grand
action of spirit and manliness, done by him, not qua doctus, but qui doctus,
not as he was learned, but by him who was learned (as S. Peter in his Sermon
says) In all the learning of the Egyptians. And Aristotle tells us, That
Alexander, the worlds Conqueror, Lib. 5. Rhetoric.
was so bookish (according to his Tutoring) that he would never have Homer out
of his Ut terra cultu, sic animus disciplinis melior uberiorque fit, Fabius.
12. 6 Plutarch. in Alexand.
hand, or from under his pillow: nay when he was so far gone into Asia, that he
found no Books, he caused the works of Philistus to be sent for into Greece,
and with them sent for other Histories.

Julius Caesar, a great Conqueror, and as Hottomannus.
great a Scholar and writer, witness his Commentaries, in which, as one says,
In eis nihil a proposito alienum, nihil non ordine, ac loco, nihil non
magnopere necessarium admiscet. No less was Brutus, and Lucullus: Marcus
Censorius Idem Orator, idem historia conditor, idem juris, idem rerum
rusticarum peritissimus inter tot operas militiae, tantas domi contentiones
rudi saeculo Graecas litteras aetate jam declinata didicit. Quintil. Instit.
Orat. lib. 12. cap. 11.
Cato is by Quintilian said to be an Orator, an Historian, a Lawyer, a
Husbandman, skilful in all things, who notwithstanding his Military
employments, and those Domestic contests that so fully begirt him, was learnd
in that rude age, which had been buried in Barbarity, the Greek learning to
them lost, reviving in him what was their quondam Ornament, and teaching them
that nothing was to industry unattainable; the like Quintilian says of
Cornelius Celsus; and no less do Historians write of Julian Patricius de
Instit. Reipub. lib. 6.
the Apostate, Hannibal the great Carthaginian, and sundry others.

Our own stories are not barren of presidents in point; Albinus Governor of
this Land in the (...) Dion. l. 75. p. 851. Edit. Leunclavii.
time of Severus, is noted to be a most valiant man, and Noble Commander; and
Dion tells us, he excelled Severus both in birth and learning: King Edward the
Third was a Learned man, fit to Peace and War: Richard Duke of Gloucester, base
Son to Henry the First, is termed by Historians Belli pacisque artibus
florentissimus; the Aeneas Sylvius l. 1. Epist. 64
learned Glanvil, though a dextrous Writer and Lawyer* was Commander in chief
of Henry the Pitsaeus. ad an. 1230.
Third his Forces to the Holy Land, and with noble success managed his charge.
Harding (the Ann. 1461.
brave Historian) was so brave a Soldier, Et Martem semper ita coluit, ut
Minervam nunquam neglexerit* Perpetua Musis semper comitatus and Armis.

Arts and Arms at once conjoyning,
Both, in one, himself, combining.
The like instances are of Tiptoft Earl of Worcester, Henry the Eighth, Sir
John Bourchier, Sir Philip Sydney, Sir Walter Raleigh, with sundry others, who
by the knowledge of stories, and search after learning, have been stimulated to
do the utmost feats of Honor and Gallantrie, not only in right to themselves,
but in revenge to those past puissants, who endeavored to steal away the Crown
of Fame from all their Successors.

Does the Candle suffer from the Sun, while it keeps within its Orb, the house,
and invades none of the Suns Territories? Does the plaster that is provided
for the sore, poison any one, unless it be misapplied, and taken inward,
contrary to its designed use? Does a large estate and fortune naturally propend
to Prodigality? or a fair fall necessarily import Disloyalty? I trow no: there
are Instances pregnantly opposite to these Errors: no more does Learning
degenerate the (...). Plutarch. lib. Maxim. cum Princi. Philoso. est diput. p.
778.
mind from courageous Attempts. It does indeed, as the Moralist says well,
make men more Just, more Moderate, and more proclive to do well: but it in no
kind renders weak and pusill: It may by disuse make men less hardy; but it
will not eat out the Courage of a manly mind. Inconveniences of most kinds are
not Physical and constitutionall, but accidental and contingent: as there may
be a Judas amongst our Lords Disciples, so many a Saint in Nero's Family: God
often lets things fall out preternaturall, that we might admire him
supernatural, and leave the events of all things to that power which is
autogeneall and supreme, and is obeyed by Nature in all its dictates and
commands.

There is another Objection against Learning, which I find forwarded by many
opposites; That as great things have been done by unlearned as learned men: The
Turks Conquest over a part of Christendom, as well as over the Asian world,
confirms this: And say they, the providence and foresight of Men Learned, often
disanimateth their Attempts of things which event styles successful.

My Reply is, That no things so great have been done by unlearned as learned
Men: The prealledged Deliverances of Israel from Egypt by Moses their
Chieftain; the Conquests of Alexander and Caesar, were greater then those of
the Turk, if we consider the time in which, and the number by which they
effected them: Long time has brought the Turk to this height, and Armies of
infinite number; his ignorance in Policy, praying supply from much hazard of
Men, and expense of Blood. But yet the Turk is not letterlesse, nor does he
engage on actions without consult, or employ persons of no literature in his
Affairs: His Grandees are instructed by Doctors, called Hogea, not only in the
Turkish and Arabian Tongues, but in the Liberal Sciences, especially in
Astrology, and other parts both of Philosophy Grimston Hi st^ry Empire.
and Poetry: and then after fourteen years old, put into the Seraglio, to learn
Martial matters. I will not deny but that many men by mere natural parts, and
the wisdom of experience, may set out on Politic Affairs boldly, and with much
seeming gallantry; but on that stock, their proceedings cannot be far, nor
their credit in their Conduct durable; every intercurrent not foreseen or
expected, puts them to a loss, they consulting not with Books, those muti
Magistri, most faithful, least partial and erring, without which duly weighed
and consulted, Actions in ordinary are without advice, and therefore fatuitous,
be the success whatever it will; forasmuch as Reason ought soly to conduct and
accompany our Actions; and so far and no farther are they well done, as they
are conform to, not retrograde from Reason, which is improved and rendered
useful to us by Art. Hence is it that the Ancients more formidated Policy then
Power in an Enemy, and more watched a wary and wise then a valiant and hardy
Foe. The Historian says of Hannibal, that he despised Omnia audentem contemnit
Hannibal, nil temere agentem metuit. Lib. 2. de Bello Punico.
that Enemy whom he saw more active then prudent; whom he observed more ready
to fight, then to consult. And Tully tells us, That Arms in the Parva sunt foris
arma, nisi sit consilium domi. 1. Officiorum. Lib. 1. de Senect.
field, are to little purpose, if counsel be not in the tents among the
Commandry; and therefore he says, that great things are not achieved and
maturated by force or agility of body, but by prudence and subtilty of brain.
And the Poet, Vis consilii expers, mole ruit sua. Horat. Od l. 3*


Which considered, It is much to our commendation to eye our actions with
severity, and weigh them in the balance of judgment, comparing them* with the
stiff rule of Justice, and not conforming them to the crooked line of
Necessity, as if that could rectify or moderare the injury of any action,
which in it self is unlawful and villainous. This betrayed Pilate to deliver up
Jesus; for in Matt. 27. 24. to prevent a tumult, it is said, he delivered up
Jesus: And Mark 15. 15. to content the People: as if the necessity of curring
favor with them, could warrant a bad action. This was the mistake of Jason the
Thessalian Tyrant, who said, There (...). Plutarch. de Reipub. gerend.
praeceptis p. 818.
was a necessity that Injustice in small things should be allowed, where in
greatest matters Justice is intended to be kept. No, nor may we lean upon
Success, as the unerring definitive of good or not good: as if God had not
appointed these outward things to fall out alike to good and bad: or as if
wickedness in high Places Eccles. 9. 2.
and Persons, were not more vile and execrable then in Things and Men of more
obscure conditions. Alas, it is not who, nor what; but how, and to what and we
do, which denominates actions good or evil. Let Iehu boast what he will in
his success against Ahab's Family; yet 2 Kings 10
'twas self-love, not zeal, which put him upon slaughter of them. We are
nothing concerned in successes as to the prudent contrivance of Designs we are
engaged; and men may promise themselves success in things well disposed and
fabricated, if no superior Agent defeats, or Instrument that should assist,
fail us: But if God cross our Designs, and divert the concurrence of things
proper to our proposed end, then all proves vain and improlifique: And
therefore we must all say of the best and most sagacious Enterprises our wits
can contrive, or hands act, as the phrase is in Ezekiel, when the question was,
Can these dry bones live? Lord, thou know. Ez. k. 37. 3.
There is nothing more to be infallibly concluded, but that the Majesty of
Heaven will overrule all to those ends which shall most serve the
accomplishment of its glory.

And therefore let no man lay more upon the Foundation of humane Policy then it
will bear: Let Justice and Equity persuade us to do, rather (...). Halicarna^
de vit. Romans l. 2. p. 85
then Success and Advantage; the gains of Virtue will be sweet and durable,
when those of Sensuality and vanity will deceive and perplex: Villainy will
never felicifie any man, nor will a thrifty folly render him the repute of
prudent: Nostrum est agere, s^lius Dei est disponere. I will more eye the
Matter I am concerned in, then the procedure of it, because I am only
responsible for what I do, not for what becomes of me in doing it; for that,
whatever it is, (as Quando praest^tinus quod d^aimus, moderate quod cvenit
feramus. Cic. ep. 4. l. 6. Guevar. Ho* Princip p 410.
Tully says) must be born moderately. And those who think things determined
good or evil by success, and judge no further then outward appearance, had best
beware of the Atheism and irreligious Desperation that rears such Principles;
for when the heart is courted to believe nothing good or bad, but what is
fortunate or unfortunate, then relucts it the Counsels and restraints of Divine
Precepts, and conscientious checks, and flies only to a fond and blind Chance
or Oracle of Contingency, accounting '(...). Halicarna^s. l. 4. p. 234.
every thing that is prosperous good, and that is dejected naught; Faelix
faustumque scelus virtus vocatur. It Was a damnable lewdness of Aruns his wife,
who to enjoy lustfully her Brother, tells him that when a Kingdom is in
pursuit, small Evils (as she called them) were not to to be boggled at.

This leads then upon Designs in themselves rash, though sometimes by the
permission of God successful, as it did Regilianus, (the more bold then
Judicious Emperor) whose spirit being too great to buckle under the Command of
power, kindled toward an adventure of enlargment, either by loss of life, or
gain of Honor. Crowns (the Meta ultima of Humane Felicity) he judged not
Profferers of their service to Men irresolute; And therefore his Conclusion was
to try what Wit and Boldness would offer him as the Trump that should carry
the Game into that hand which held it. In a Bravado he makes a Banquet, and to
it invites his Fellow Soldiers; There he feeds them high; and they to testify
their acceptance, drink freely; In the midst of their mirth, One (probably
appointed by him) propounding whence the word Regilianus was derived, a
Grammarian by chance there, was asked of the Company to give the etymology of
Regilianus; who replied, Regilianus a Rege nomen ortum habet: Lege Carolum
Stephanum ad verb. Regilianus.
the Soldiery warmed with good liquor, cried out, Merito itaque Rex eris, and
so it passed for current, and he was Emperor: which was by means not probable
to such an end, no more then a Cockle-shell is likely to empty the Ocean.

O Ambition, thou art coccle in the goodly Corn of a virtuous mind; thou art
the wild Vine, which 2 King. 4. 40
bring death into the pot of fairest hopes; thou art the Harlot, whom
whosoever embraces, goes down to the Chambers of death; thou art Pro. 7. 27.
the Devil that courtest men up to the pinnacle of the Temple, that thence they
may be hurled down to irrecoverable ruin; They who are deserted by God, and
applauded by men, fall into thy snares: Thou have traps for thine admirers of
all sorts, all ages, in all Countries: There is none that thy madness
precipitates not, but he that is kept by the Keeper of Israel, who neither
slumbreth Psalm. ^ 2^. 3.
nor sleeps.

And therefore every man should look about him, to keep this fury from his
elbow, as the Virtutis pramia occupat ambitio. Veget. l. 2. Alexander orbi
magnus est, Alexandro orbis angustus est. Seneca.
great exciter to disorder and ruin: This put Alexander upon invasion of
others Dominions; his own bounds were too narrow to limit his emulation:
Alexander great in the world, thought the world a little ease, a cage to him.
This Ambition made Absalom rebel, Pompey fire Rome with quarrels, Herostratus
(an obscure fellow, that he might be remembered) burn the famous Ephesian
Temple: nay, it endangered a crack in the glorious Eutaxie of Heaven, which
could not be expiated but by the dejection of Lucifer that first Isa. 14. 12,
13* 14.
quickened it.

This is usually the companion of Changes; distracted times and alterations
produce this Monster: Those who think they deserve better then God knows they
do, and have less then they are (in their own opinion) able to manage, make
out to the prey, and rather will have it (as Simeon and Levi had reparations
for the indignity Genesis 34. 25
offered their Sister) by force, then not at all. To these, who would build
when God is demolishing, and plant when he is eradicating, that is applicable
which was said to Jer. 45. last.
Baruch, Seek thou great things for thy self? seek them not. It is a mercy
to the soul (more indicative of Gods indulgence) to be restrained from
accomplishing swelling Designs, then to have Kingdoms, Wealth, Learning,
Beauty, or whatever is the darling of this mutable and pompous World.

It was good counsel which Turktill Abbot Ignem vestrum custodite, apud
Ingulphum.
of Croyland gave his Monks, Keep that fire: Let (O man of God) this holy Lamp
of zeal never go out in the Temple of thy soul; cherish it with daily supplies
from that Ocean which is never dry, but abounds, and will increase thee, while
thou seek in humility to be enabled to a devout luster and calefaction of
others. True and well-ordered zeal will purify and purge the soul from all
restivenesse and stupid indifferency, and inflame it to a revenge on beloved
sins. On this score Moses abhorrs the golden Calf, Exodus 32. 20.
Abraham quits his Country, the Saints and Martyrs their lives; nay this to do,
did our Lord 2 Cor. 8. 9.
Jesus descend from heaven to earth, as he testifies, John 18. 37.

This is the ballast that keeps the soul from tottering, and losing way in its
steerage to heaven: This keeps it close to old truth, and Matt. 24. 23.
makes it mistrust new (as false lights) though they glister never so
amazingly: This carries the soul to Christ with earnest and vehement petitions,
to be kept safe amidst temptations: 2 Cor. 12. 8.
This will persuade the soul to esteem highly of holy Truths, and holy men, who
speak according Isa. 8. 20.
to the Law and testimony, and to reject whatsoever comes with Nicodemus in the
night, undiscerned and stealingly upon us, 3 John 2.
not daring to abide the test or the examen of Scripture: 'twill weigh glorious
Nothings (the Wens and Excrements of Religion) in the balance, and if they be
not weight, publish them to be light, matters of Deceit. 'Twill separate 'twixt
the Sheep and the Goat, the Chafe and the Corn, and in all things carry it
self gratefully to God, whose mercy, has only made the difference; for what
has it which it has not received? 1 Cor. 4. ver. 7.

Were this as much in deed as in word amongst us, we should not huckster it in
Religion as we do, nor could we thus dishonor the nobility of our souls, by
mean and vulgar regards of them; as in the looseness of our principles and
practices we not only seem, but really show we do, while we prefer our bodies
before our souls, our corruptible before our incorruptible selves. When we are
sick in body, we send for the most noted, learned and experienced Physician we
can meet with: No Quack, no Emperick, no barbarous Farrier-like practiser will
serve the turn: we cry, (yea and that wisely too) Best is best cheap: but in
Affairs 'twixt God and our souls, in the resolution of doubts about heaven, and
that conversation which must bring us thither through the Mercy of God, any one
serves the turn; Ioane (as the Proverb is) is as good as my Lady; the most rude
and illiterate most acceptable; rather choose we the Bramble then the Vine;
rather those that know nothing but pride and prattle, then those Bees of glory
(the learned Ministers) who are laden with honey, and would be glad to lodge
what they have plucked by the assistance of God, from the Flowers of Study and
Meditation, in the hives of humble Minds; who cry out, How beautiful are the
feet of those that bring the glad tidings of peace? which none can effectually
and authoritatively do, but those that are sent and set apart to the Ministry,
as the Apostle shows, Romans 10. 14, 15.

And if it be so, why are we thus? thus removed from our ancient stability, and
commendable Christian curiosity, that in stead of adoring God in his gifts of
Arts and Languages to Men, we cry up only those men, who, (like Egyptian
Temples, fair without, but within full of Cats, Serpents, Clem. Alex. Paedag.
l. 3. c. 22.
Crocodiles, and other inglorious Creatures) are full of scorns,
superciliousness, and what not? which may conclude them to be such as our
Savior approves not, though they seem in his Name to prophecy, but not cast
out Devils; no Matthew. 7. 22.
not that of Division, by which the Church is spoiled of her Unity, Order, and
External comeliness, yea many discouraged to continue in that Communion, in
which there is a kind of necessity to be always in dispute, or else to be
captive to vulgar Errors. And Who, in S. Ieroms words, can sleep secure, that
Quis unquam mortalium juxta viperam securos somnos capit, quae etsi non
percutiat, certe sollicitat? Epist. 47. De vit. Contuber.
bordereth so upon the Viper, who if he sting not, surely solicites and
endangereth our seduction? I know not what the Reason is, but both the Church
and her Ministry are unnaturally disowned by many, who if they live Christian
lives here, and ever come to heaven, may (next to the mercy of God) thank the
Church and her Administrations for their direction and instruction: She (as the
Father says well) carried them long in Illa te diu portavit in utero, diu
aluit and difficiliores infantiae mores blanda pietate sustinuit. Sanctus
Hieronymus eodem loco.
her womb, nourished them, bore the Petulancies of their infancy, cleansed
them from their filth: and yet they now cast dirt in that face which has often
kissed them with kisses of love, and hugged them in the arms of holy
discipline. It is a great unnaturalness for Christians to disown their
spiritual Fathers, who have begotten them to God by the Gospel. 1 Cor. 4. 15.

Whence! O whence is this blindness fallen Tanti vitreum quanti veram
Margaritam. Tert. ad* Martyr.
upon many of Israel, that they prefer Garlic and Onions before Manna; Beads
and Glassie bables, above Gold and Pearls? rather will they hear the
chatterings of Cranes, and clamours of Owls, then the sweet notes of
Nightingals, and birds of Paradise, which in their Music keep time and touch
sweetly, which speak not words more acceptable then upright; words of truth, as
the Preacher has it. Eccles. the last, v. 10.

I hear these cracklings of thorns, every day bold to persuade men from hearing
Ministers, to hear men of the Spirit (as they call them:) these (say they) are
taught of God, not Heathenishly learned, after the rudiments of the world. Our
Lord Jesus feeds amongst the Lilies; he converses with the poor and humble;
he despises not the day of small things; he has looked upon the low estate of
his servants: there is a holy Teaching and Unction (say they) which the Learned
and great ones of the World know not; the god of this world has blinded their
eyes that they cannot see Christ through the thickets of profane Learning, and
unprofitable speculation: thus do they with the Pharisee condemn wisdom which
is justified of her children, and justify themselves to be vain, deceivers of
themselves and others.

For suppose Christ feeds among the Lilies, yet it is the Lilies of the valleys,
Cant. 2. 1. What is that to the proud and haughty? who cry, stand off, I am
more holy then thou? Isai. 65. 5. whose mouths drop not sweet smelling Myrrh,
Cant. 5. 13. but utter proud swelling words, speaking evil of those dignities
which they ought not to think upon without honor. Are these the Frons, oculi,
vultus persaep^ mentiuntur, oration vero saepis sime. Cicero Q. Fr. Ep. 1.
Lilies of the valleys, the poor and humble, whose hearts are so lifted up in
them, that they despise their Mother, and smite their brethren and fellow
servants with reproaches, and injurious falsehoods, boasting of an holy Unction,
while they prove themselves without natural affection, truce breakers, ashamed
of the Baptism and Covenant which was made betwixt God and their Souls by the
Ministry, which brought (as it were) God and them together? If this be the way
of God, if this be the path of holiness, which the redeemed of the Lord Esai
35. 8, 9.
should walk in, then is the learned and holy Ministry of the Church at a
loss; then is Christ and his glorious manifestations hid from them; then are
they yet to seek what the good and acceptable will of God is: then may they sit
down in Romans 12. 2.
sackcloth and ashes, mourning to God in the Prophets words, Thou have deceived
us, O Lord, Jer. 20. 7.
and we were deceived: But if to preach the words of Truth and soberness, and
not to speak things Jer. 14. 14.
of naught, the deceit of men's hearts, be to honor Christ, and not to betray
him with the Courtship of Hail Master, and the civility of a kiss, then are
the faithful Ministers of Christ secure; then may they comfort themselves, that
their witness and reward is in heaven, and their labor not in vain, what ever
their usage here be; for as the Father said well, Gratias Deo; lingua Petiliani
non est ventilabrum Dei.

O my soul, mistake not thou thy way by leaning (in the least degree) on these
dangerous, though specious fallacies, which are strong temptations to those who
have no foundation of God in them; but stand thou fast in the Truth revealed to
thee, and listen not to any voice (besides the word) which says to thee, Lo,
here is Christ, Lo, there is Christ; for many false Christ's shall arise with
lying wonders, and strong seducements, Mat. 24. 5, 23, 24.
which thou art not to believe or follow: be thou studious of thine own duty,
and thy Makers will, according to the discovery of which do thou walk: Look
unto the rock whence thou art hewn; to the hands that instrumentally polished
thee to be a stone in Gods spiritual building, the Church: bless the womb that
bare thee, and the paps that gave thee suck, Luke 11. 27.
and set thou thy seal to the Truth of that Ministry by which thou were first
admitted into, and since confirmed in the Church: Look not upon the wanderings
of men whom thou love, and from whom thou hopest to have received assistance
in thy Christian course to heaven; those that forsake thee while thou keep
close to God, are happily parted with: Comfort thy self, O my soul, That
greater is he that is in thee, then he that is in the world; that thy
companions, the 1 John 4. 4.
glorious company of the Prophets and Apostles, the noble army of Martyrs, the
holy Church, Ministers and Professors, who continued steadfast, and would not
be corrupted from the simplicity that is in Christ, transcends these trifles
which 2 Cor. 11. 3.
are but children of a day, (and as the Orator says, Ficta omnia celeriter
tanquam flosculi decidunt, Cicer. 2. Offic.) that are ever learning, and never
come to the knowledge of the truth: that 2 Timothy 3. 7.
will not endure sound doctrine, but after their own lusts heap to themselves
teachers, having itching 2 Timothy ^. ^, ^.
ears, that turn away their ears from the Truth, and are turned to fables: and
though (O my soul) it suits with thy holy Calling to be cautious that thou err
not, rather then curious in overlooking others: yet join thou the wisdom of
the Serpent with the simplicity of the Dove, and be diligent to mark those well
who despise government, and have forsaken the right way; who 2 Pet. 2.
are wells without water, and clouds that are carried with a tempests least
with them thou receive the reward of unrighteousness; and it had been better
for thee not to have known the way of righteousness, then to turn from the
holy commandment: Yea (O my soul) remember the love of Christ ought to
constrain thee to love him and his, which thou can not more unfainedly do and
evidence then by proclaiming to all the world that his Spouse, the Church
Militant, and that part of it in this Nation, and in Communion with it, is fair
and lovely; yea her Ordinances more fragrant then all spices, Cant. 4. 10. And
though some may Carp at her, and say to thee, What is this beloved of thine
above other beloveds? do thou reply, As the Lilie among thorns, so is my
beloved among the daughters; Cant. 2. 2. Non tibi displiceat ejus conversation
quae te sponso suo virginem consecravit. Epist 47.
for it becomes thee in S. Ieroms words, Not to be offended with her who
consecrates thee to Christ a chaste virgin.

Truly it is a great Corrosive to me, to hear the blasphemies and bitterness
that are uttered against this once Renowned Church, which because she was
gloriously decked with the jewels of her Espousals, richly clad in the Tissues
of Learning, and frankly Endowered, is traduced for a pompous Harlot, who more
seeks to corrupt men, and make them drunk with the wine of her fornication,
Revel. 19. 2. then to commend the bounty of her Maker and Husband, who took her
vile Garments from her, and covered her with the rich robes of his holiness,
merit, mercy. Ah Lord! that such thoughts of heart, such evil speaking should
be in Christians; that the gold of the Temple should be thought to profane the
Temple; that the Tongue of the Learned, which our Lord Jesus says, he received
from his Father, Isai. 50. 4. should be undervalued in the Members of Christ,
which are by him set in the Church to gather his Elect; that any should be
offended with Ministers, because great Clerks, profound Artists, versed in
books, skilled in Tongues! sure none can justly be pettish at these, but such
to whom Christ Jesus himself is become a Esai 8. 14. Romans 9. 33.
stumbling block and rock of offense: and his Ordinances (much adorned by well
used abilities) the savor 2 Cor. 2. 16.
of death to death.

I am not of that belief that Christ can be against himself; that he who gave
gifts to men, and those of Arts and Tongues, will disown the plant which he
himself planteth, or say, That spot Deuteronomy. 2. 5.
(such many men count it) is no spot of his people. I know that God looks not
always upon Eliab's, 1 Samuel 16. 27.
the fairest and highest stature; great parts ill used, are so far from
pleasing him, that he by them is provoked to curse them, as he did Coniah,
Write these parts childlesse: this wit unprosperous to Ier. 22. last.
bring it self to heaven: let this ear never be open to hear the voice behind
it, This is the way, walk in it. But this is no argument that parts and
learning, qua such, are rejected, or that a man is in favor with God because
he is letterless, and unarted. He that refused the blind, and lame, and sick
for Sacrifice, because not fit to be offered Mal. 1. 8.
to a Governor, much less to his Highnsse, will sure take greater offense at
the minds deformity, and say to those that offer strange fire in the Censers
of their own presumption, Number. 3. 4. Who required these things at your hands?
Esai 1. 12.

It was Ieroboams sin and shame to Consecrate Priests of the lowest of the
people, nay, whosoever pleased to be a Priest was consecrated. 1 Kings 13. 33.
But the Holy Ghost tells us there was a sad issue followed this his
profaneness, This thing became sin to the house of Jeroboam, even to cut it
off, and to destroy it from off the face of the earth: And I pray God it be not
an evil (from the punishment whereof neither power nor policy shall relieve us)
that we are no more zealous for this Ordinance of God against those that
endeavor wholly to bear it down, though it be of divine institution.

It is not so easy a matter to be a man fitted to the work of the Ministry, as
people imagine; there is much variety, many ingredients which ought to go to
the making up of this holy compound; there are Arts to be gained before we can
be fitted to instruct and reprove. Philo the Jew notes well, We cannot (...),
etc.
expect issue by virtue, unless we first gain consent of her Handmaid: and the
Handmaid of virtue is Art, in which we are liberally to be brought up; for as
grand houses have their through-fares before we come to the rooms of State; and
great Cities have suburbs before we approach the high streets; so are the
Liberal (...). Philo. lib. de congres. quer. erudit. gratia p. 425.
Arts to be attained before we can attain virtue; for indeed they are the way
to virtue, and the paths appointed to lead us to those Paradises: yea and there
are Calls to be obtained, and Church-Gifts and Power, without which there is no
authority to preach, whatever their abilities may be to teach and instruct in
private. And I clearly believe no learned man in the world dare so defy his
own knowledge and conviction, as to arrogate the Office and Honor of Preaching
without the Call of the Church, and the power of Mission expressed upon him:
for as the Heathen said, Quis est tant a confidentia qui Sacerdotem audeat
violare?

I do not deny the modest, and perhaps useful exercise of the gifts of God in
men; nay I professedly approve them, so they jussle not out things of higher
concernment: I would not have Hagar extrude Sarah, nor the son of the bondwoman
inherit with the son of the freewoman: Ishmael Genesis 21. 10.
must give way to Isaac, because he is the son of the Promise: I can bear with
the humble and modest exercisings of persons godly and knowing, so it be in
private places, on fit days, and in fit manner, and draw no disrespect upon
Churches, Sabbaths, Ministers, all which by unseasonablenesse and insobrietie
of such things may be endangered; and provided that men's pride in their
abilities do not besot them to a vituperation of what ever bears not their
image and superscription.

It is not men's Elaborate prayers, and expoundings that are excepted against;
holy Exercises are in themselves commendable, and to be encouraged: Moses will
not forbid the Prophecy of Eldad and Medad, but wishes that all the Lords
people were Prophets, and that the Lord would put his spirit upon them, Numb.
9. 29. The Church of God has no power (that I know of) to forbid such fire in a
sacred breast from flaming out in fruits of honor to God, and good to men.
This only is to be condemned, that those men who have some gifts, and think
they are rich in them, having need of nothing, when alas they are blind and
naked, Rev. 3. 17. make Calves of those gifts they have, and by them tempt the
people to Idolize them and their gifts, yea and to contemn the Ministry and
Ordinances of the Church, crying up themselves as the instruments that brought
men from Superstition, into the glorious light of Truth and liberty of the
Gospel.

Thus they thrust their sickle into another Harvest, and reap where they sowed
not. Alas every man is not a lawful Labourer in the Vineyard that breaks
through the hedge, and toils therein, without and against the leave of the
lawful Master of the Vineyard: No man in the Church is to do any thing but he
that is a Churchman, upon penalty of presumption. Good intents do not warrant
bad actions; nor do ready Wills always argue just Calls. The Priests only
were to touch the Ark; What had Uzza the Levite to do with it? 'Twas enough for
him to touch the bars of it^: though the Ark was agitated to and fro, yet had
he not warrant to take hold on it: He should have minded the Ministration he
was appointed to; but his care out-runing his Call, his life was taken away.
God struck him with death, who first assaulted him by a bold presumption.

It Is a wonder to me that any man should think his own Arrogancy warrant for
his actions, especially in matters of the highest and most important
consequence, whereas in secular and civil affairs, not a man's own word, but his
Superiors authority and qualification enables him. Who dares take upon him to
raise Forces, lay Taxes, levy Contributions, punish offenders, or negotiate
with Foreign States, but those who are the designed Officers thereto? and yet
in the matters of God, in the dispensation of his holy Vid. S. Hieron. Ep. 103.
mysteries, every man will be a Priest and a Prophet, as if it were pardonable
only to be disorderly in Religion, and as if God had connived at lawless
Liberty, where the danger of miscarrying is most fatal. The Apostle speaking of
the Priesthood, says, No man takes this honor upon him, but he that is
called of God, as was Aaron, asserting thereby, that Aarons Priesthood was not
by his own assumption; he was not a Priest because he would be so, but he was
so because God called him thereto, and honored him thereby: yea our Lord
Christ's Priesthood and the glory of it, was from his Father, who said unto
him, Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee, which Heb. 5. 5.
Priesthood of Christ continuing in the Churches Succession by virtue of that
of our Lord to his John 20. 21.
disciples, As my Father has sent me, so send I you, is also to exclude all
men from Lawful officiating who are not Called thereto in a Church Order, and
by Church hands. And if Uzziah, a great King, and a good man in the sight of
God, 2 Chronicles. 26. transgressed against God in taking the Office of the Priests
on him, Why shall we think they of a meaner degree may?

And therefore let not the people say of the Ministry of this once glorious
Church (which some men would rejoice to see with Christ Jesus on the Cross,
exposed to shame and torment) as the Rebellious and Idolatrous Israelites did
of Moses when he was in the Mount with God, Exodus 32. 1. As for this man Moses,
we know not what is become of him, crying out for gifted men (as they call
them) in opposition to their learned Ministers, as they did for their molten
Calfe: let them not venture Eternity upon the Prescripts of blind Guides, who
have no better warrant, no other Credentials to entitle them to Church labor
then their own impudence, having a yearly and a monthly faith, a faith of
times, not Gospel, Fidem annuam and menstruam, fiaem temporum non Evangeliorum.
as Turtullian elegantly; on such to trust, is to build on stubble and straw,
and lean on Egyptian reeds which will falter and deceive us in our greatest
need, being like those Flores horae which I have seen, very pleasant, but dead
and withdrawn in a trice: for this to do, were to provoke God to remove our
true Teachers into corners, and to make the word of Life a dead letter to us,
To make the Gospel hidden to us, as to those that are lost. 2 Cor. 4. 3.
For my part, my repair shall be to God and his holy Ministers in all spiritual
doubts and disconsolacies, and from them I shall never be ashamed to receive
correction and instruction. I am of his mind who had rather be a Member of the
Church, then head of the heathen Empire: I admire those Ages most which had
greatest devotion to the Church, and condemn that wherein the Clergy is
decried. I love to see Solomon's throne guarded with learned worthies: smile who
will at the decay of Schools, and scorn of Presbyters, mine eye shall pity, my
tongue shall speak, my pen shall write for them: yea, were I as happy as
Solomon was for wealth, I would make their tables be full, and their cups to
run over. This were indeed to help the Lord against the mighty, the mighty
Goliahs of Rome, who by this way of vilipendency, hope to give our Clergies
flesh to be food for the birds of the Air, whose triumphs rife from the
Churches viduation, from her learnings contempt and prosternation.

Hence are thy Jubilies, O Church once beloved, but not now beloved; hence your
Ovations; O children of the Papacy, to see the Protestant Clergy miserable and
poor, and blind, and naked; to see them hopeless to out live the wilderness
of hardship, and probable to dye issuelesse, if no after-springs should grow to
disquiet you, is much your interest.

This evil to deprecate, and as far as in us lies, to prevent, were indeed to
help the Lord against the mighty hoasts of Atheists, which are come forth to
revile the armies of the living God: these no less mischievous then the former,
subject faith to reason, and proclaim the Ministry, and all Church
administrations, secular deceits, and subtle frauds invented upon rules and
designs of state policy. What Calderinus said of the Mass, that say they of
Churches, Sermons, Sacraments, Let us go to Eamus ad communes errores. Wolph.
ad ann. 1477. p. 890.
the common errors: these dispute heaven, hell, Scripture, conscience, severity
of life, into mere nullities, giving them no better footing then civil
symbolizing with people amongst whom we live, and with whom converse; and
making them obligatory and restrictive to us (as we understand them, or as
others may, to whom by contrary living we are to give no offense) not allowing
them that power and Energy which God has imprinted on them, and which are
experienced to be in them by the attestation of the Saints and Martyrs who have
found these working on them to a grand provocation, of holy caution, and
circumspection, checking them when they were ready (as it were) to engage in
actions displeasing to God, and detractful from the honor of their holy
profession.

It is a sad and inglorious note of ingratitude they justly deserve, who make
the Clergyman their Butt to level at; such are directly contrary to that of
the holy Apostle, Magna munera sunt reverentia honoris and humilitas
subjectionis quia dum rectoribus nostris and intus per humilitatem subdimur,
and per exteriora obsequia for is honoris reverentiam exhibemus, munus eis unum
praebemus a corpore, aliud a cord. S. Greg. l 4. in 1 Reg. 11.
To have those that labor in the word and doctrine in double honor for their
callings sake: did they mind this Canon, they should give them hearty and
humble reverence; the one from their bodies by courteous demeanours, the other
(and better) from their hearts, by cordial love and effects of friendlinesse:
whereas now (to our shame we may confess it) many are so far from reverence to
them as Ministers, that they use them not civilly, as men born and bred well,
but rather as persons spurious, and rejectitious, whom their Families and
Allies have disowned, and who ought to be set at table with servants, and fed
upon Husks and Offals. A madness, unnatural, unreasonable! the very Heathens
judged the Priesthood so sacred, that none were fit for it but the best.
Romulus, the founder of Dionysius H^licarn. l. 2. p. 9^.
Rome, when he appointed Priests to attend the gods, ordered them not from
amongst the vulgar, but those that excelled others in virtue and blood, rich in
estate, and of comely person: And the Romans when they thought of sending an
Embassage to Marius, to divert his course from Rome, the ruin whereof he
threatened, and toward which he was on march with a potent Army, decreed, That
it should be of the Priests and (...). (...). l 8. p. 510 Edit. Sylburg.
holy men, as of those who are of all others most noble and eminent.

Divine Plato gives caution that as we should not sin against God in word or
deed, so neither against Divine men; and he adds the reason, stocks and stones,
birds and beasts, beauty and strength, power and policy, are nothing to these;
(...). Plat. Minos. page 567. Edit. Ficini.
Of all things a holy man is most honorable, because he not only bears the
image of God, but as the Apostle says, is the temple of the holy Ghost. Yea
Philo tells us, That the Law equalled Priests in Majesty and honor with Kings,
lib. de Sacerdotum honoribus. page 832.

O Lord! that Heathens should condemn us in a thing so just and necessary! that
vice should so putrify the Age, that no carriage is thought fit to use to the
Minister but what is rough, and full of unkindnesse; that men choose rather to
follow a multitude to do evil, then a John Baptist, though a burning and
shining light; that the example of a Radbod, a Duke of Friesland who when he
was persuaded by S. Vulfran, a famous Bishop about the year after Christ 718.
to be baptized, and had one foot in the water, asking the Vbinam plures majorum
suorum essent in inferno, an in paradiso? etc.
question, Whether more of his Ancestors were in hell or in heaven? to which
was answered him, In hell most, according to that of our Lord, He that
believes not, is condemned already, withdrew his foot and heart from Baptism,
saying, It Is equal and Satius est uti plures quam pauciores scquar. Haraeus
annal. Brab. Tom. 1. p. 30.
more reasonable to follow the most then fewest) should be more attractive then
the sober counsel of an Apostle, and the practice of civilized Moralists and
Heathens, who durst not treat them at any rate beneath reverence.

I am loath to bode ill to my Country and these times; but surely this injury
will not be passed over lightly by him who is said by the Prophet to forbear
Israel, notwithstanding their Apostasy, Idolatry, and Oppression, till they
despised his Messengers, and abused his Prophets; then his jealousy 2 Chronicles.
36. 16.
broak forth, and was not to be quenched with prayers, tears, oblations; no,
the first fruits of the body could not expiate this sin of the soul; It was a
trespass horrid, a Crimen laesae majestatis Coelestis, which would not be
satisfied for without death. Cautum debet facere non sequacem error alienus,
Casiod. l. 7. And I wish those black mouths which vomit out their malice and
fury against God, Religion, Government, the Church and her Servitours, do not
in the anguish of their souls on their deathbeds (if not before) cry out as
that great Parisian Doctor did from his beer, when brought to be buried.

Parcite funeribus, mihi nil prodesse valebit;
Heu infoelicem, cur me genuere parents?
Ah miser aeternos vado damnatus ad ignes.
Forbear your tears, they cannot now prevail;
Accursed wretch, that ever I was born,
Beshrew my parents that did me entail
By sin to hell, before I saw the morn!
I the rather note this, because I judge it one of the Ages crying sins
Stentore clamosiora, to disrespect the Clergy; alas bring but the persons of
the Clergy into contempt, and their Ministry will be ineffectual. A poor Clergy
will cause a base Religion: God keep the Churchmen from depending on his
hearers for maintenance; 'twill be but the bread of sorrow, and the water of
affliction 1 King. 22. 27.
that is voluntarily given him by the people. Alas we do not do by the
Minister, as Phaortes the Indian King did by his gods, chiefly the Sun, when
Apollonius Tyanaeus asked him, What wine he Quantum Soli sacrifico, tantum vini
bibo.
drank? his answer was, Such a quantity I my self drink as I sacrifice to the
Sun: we can think no revenue too great for the Layman; every pittance too much
for the Minister, which is the observation of Judicious Calvine upon that curse
Mal. 3. 9. 10.
wherewith the Jewish Nation was cursed for robbing God; Tunc avaritiam
dominatam fuisse apud eos, ut quisque propriis commodis addictus negligere^
Templum and Sacerdotes.

And truly did not a more then ordinary blessing of God lengthen out the
Ministers in-come, and miraculously augment it while it is decreasing by
expense, one would wonder how their families should be kept, children provided
for, books bought, and other necessaries had out of their allowances and dues;
and when they have so little, and that so laden with charges and Taxes, will
men not only cast an evil eye on them, but turn a heavy hand against them! God
forbid we should so sin against God, and against that Canon which says, While
we have time let us do good to all, especially to the HOUSEHOLD of faith. Gal.
6. 10.

I am confident our Governors will never account Tithes, as it is Church
maintenance, among grievances, but rather hold themselves bound to express
that to the Church and Churchmen, which Aristoxenus the Cyrenian did to his
flowers, moisten them with wine, and honey, and perfumes, not only that they
might smell fragrantly, but put forth vigourously: give them countenance and
comfort, and shame those by their Christian example who are contrary. And I the
rather hope it, because there are many of our Rulers that comfort the Timorous
Clergy as Joseph did his brethren; be not afraid, we fear God; and while they
do this, they dare not discourage our ministering Ioshuahs, but encourage them
as they did their Chieftain Ioshuah, Deuteronomy. 1. 28. the words is (...),
strengthen him against oppositions, fortify him with courage devoyd of fear.
(...)
The Hebrew word signifies not only a comforting, but such an one as is to
prevailing and overcoming: so is the Root rendered, Judges 1. 28. 2 Kings 3. 26.
Ier. 20. 7. Genesis 41. last. God would have all men do according to their
opportunities, and places: the sword of power in the Magistrates hand, is to
defend the sword of the Spirit in the mouth of the Ministry. I read of but two
swords in Luke 22. 38. which our Lord says are enough; if the people have a
third, it is like Melchisedeck, without Father or Mother: and perhaps they will
say to God and the Church, as Levi is said to do to his Father, Mother, and
Brethren, (but in a much worse sense) Non novi nos, as not seeing nor
acknowledging Deuteronomy. 33. 9.
them. If the Magistrate be so stressed that he cannot protect those that are
pious and peaceable, the Lord help: I can but mourn for the endangered, if not
altogether slain of the Daughters of that people.

And if the Clergyman grow ridiculous, and be rejected, then farewell learning,
farewell peace, farewell piety: I think they were never in being in the world
without their instrumentality. The Romans held the extinction of the Vestal
fire a sign of the destruction of their City, (...), be the cause thereof what
will. Dyonysius Halicarnass. lib. 2. p. 128. There was a time when Israel was
without a teaching Priest, and without the Law, and the true God, 2 Chronicles. 15,
3. but that time was v. 5. said to be no time of peace, but of vexation, and
nation was destroyed of nation, and city of city, for God did vex them with all
adversity, verse 6.

It is a strange stupidnesse and ingratitude that many are under; they least
value those who are most bounteous to them. Other Artists study to accumulate
wealth, and gain estates: the Clergyman may say as Demosthenes did to his
Athenians, My Councels and carriages are not such as will bring me to riches
and greatness, but such as will make my neighbors and Countrymen thrive; such
as are often hurtful for me to give, not them to receive and imitate. Are the
clouds ill stewards for the earth, when they lodge the vapors attracted from
the earth, to disgorge them down upon the earth in fruitful and seasonable
showrs? Truly I think the Clergyman most an end spent his Tithes where he had
them, and often on those from whom he received them: seldom left he a son
vastly stated, or honorably allied; his hand was too often in his purse to
keep it full, he (most an end) cares not for to morrow; Sufficient for the day
are the sorrows Matthew. 6. last.
thereof.

Mistake me not, I am not a man so transported with love to the Ministry, but
that I can see and lament the flatteries, follies, crafts, contentions of some
Ministers, and wonder that they are not ashamed to call him Master, who is
Peace, Truth, Wisdom, Justice, Bounty, Unchangeablenesse, while some of them
are contentious, faedifragous, (...) etc. Plut. in l. virtutem doceri posse.
vain, rash, injurious, avaritious; nay one while this, another that, and at no
time what they should be: I have not so subjected my self to them yet, (nor
ever will I by Gods leave) as the servants of the Scythians did, whose Masters
put out their Servants eyes that they might yield better obedience to them: I
can blush to see the personal Errors of many of them progging up and down, and
plotting how to lay foundations of outward greatness; how to strengthen their
designs by multiplying friends amongst great men; how to make their lives
pleasant to them by feeding high, affecting gentile fashons, coaching it to al
quarters, while their brethren (not less worthy, nor greater sinners then
themselves) are in want, heaviness, restraint, wander about in mean attire,
with wan looks, and empty bellies, being destitute, afflicted, Heb. 11 37.
tormented, and their own Cures and charges are neglected, they Non-resident,
loving any place rather then their own homes, and any business beyond that of
their calling, not considering that of the Apostle, No man that warreth
entangleth 2 Timothy ^. 4.
himself with the affairs of this life, that he may please him who has chosen
him to be a soldier: nor Oportet diligentius muneri suo consulere quam
facultatibus. P^. l. 7. Ep. 18.
yet that of the Heathen, Men ought rather to attend their duty, then their
gain and advantage.

It is one of the great cavils that people make with Ministers, That they
Preach what they Practice not; that they live not lives of Self-denial,
Patience, contempt of the world, but trade in the merchandise of Pomp, Fury,
Rigidnesse; that they spend their times in Talk, Visits, Solicitings, and not
in their Studies, not in duties of devotion; not in holy watchings over their
flocks; that they give God that which cost them naught, their sudden thoughts,
immethoded discourses, and slovenly Sermocinations; that they Preach and
Repreach the labors of other men new vamped, and care not how they run their
Ministerial course, so they perform what contents their giddy Auditory, not
answering their own consciences which cannot but check them for doing the work
of the Lord negligently, Ier. 48. 10.

I confess these dead flies cause an ill savor in Eccles. 10. 1.
the ointment of our heavenly Apothecaries, who ought so studiously to preserve
their Reputations, that Envy it self should have nothing to carp at: Lights
ought to burn clear; Salt to keep its savor; else the one is fit to be
snuffed, and the other to be cast on the dunghill. A Spiritual man taking
thought for to morrow in that forbidden sense, Matthew. 6. 34. ( Laboring for
the meat that perishes) how he John 6. 27. Mat^h. 20. 21.
may sit in this world at the right hand of power and greatness, be clad in
purple, and fare deliciously, seems to me a great Soloecisme, or contradiction.
It Is a good note of Casiodore, The generous mind makes after the loftiest Prey;
Eagles wind not the Generosi animi est optare quod summum. l. 1. 27
wing after Sparrows and flies; nor will he who is in pursuit of a Kingdom,
descend to think of a petty Coppy-hold: Small and wodden stuff are for Swains
and Hinds to look after; the brave Housekeeper looks to his Plate, his Coin,
his Evidences, as those which must keep up his Port, and render him
conspicuous. Those who think of the recompense of Reward, of the glorious wages
which follows work well done, have no conversation here in vain delights, and
pleasures; dare not encumber themselves, lest they lose the one thing
necessary: they do rather think how to augment Nobilissimi civis est Patriae
suae augmenta cogitare. Cassiod. lib. 3.
heaven, and to Enlarge the Empire of God in the Souls of men; how to profit
the Times in which they live by good counsel, holy example, earnest prayers,
multiplied tears, then how to enrich themselves, or Nobilize their Families.
The Orator tells us, That to be useful to Majus est certeque gratius prodesse
omnibus quam opes magnas habere. Cicero lib. 2. de natura Deorum.
Communities, is more noble and generous then to accumulate wealth: And truly
where ever I see a Churchman carrying the bag, and begrutching the duty and
charity which God calls for from him toward his flock and the poor (God having
enabled him to perform them both) I shall think of Judas, who thought much of
every thing that fell besides his own cup.

But let no man be offended though wicked Saul be among the Prophets. Christ
had one Judas 1 Samuel 10.
in his family, Noah one Cbam in his Ark; the Church may have some Prophets who
are not the Lords people; those that are such, carry their condemnation with
them; their consciences will lay load on them: There are many stripes prepared
for servants that know their Masters Luke 12. 47.
will and do it not. The faithful Ministers of Christ cast not in their lot,
have not one purse Prove. 1. 14.
with these miscreants; they do not fish in troubled waters, sell the Truth,
make merchandise of faith and a good conscience; they dare not say to unlawful
practisers, Go, and prosper; nor 1 King. 22. 15
forsake their stations to avoid opposition; they have heaven in their eye, and
a necessity is laid upon them to be true to the trust God and his Church have
deposited with them; and if times come that they mnst give a reason of the
Faith that is in them, they will do it boldly, effectually, perseverantly; and
in so doing they are gainers in Tertullians opinion. It Is (says he) a good
exchange Negotiatio est aliqua amittere ut majora lucreris. ad Martyr.
that for a little lent and ventured, returns much. And those Ministers that
thus endeavor to do and suffer, can in no sense justly deserve any charge as
covetous, negligent, humorous, active in disturbances; for they knowing the
harvest is great, and laborers few, have no leisure to be at every nod, and in
every corner, at this triumph, and that Hearing; they are up early and late;
consult with Authors ancient and modern; read books Divine, Moral, and Natural,
search out Tongues, and their Criticismes; supply their ministerial charges
with their own labors; are eve^ seeking how they may serve God acceptably, and
at the last day say to their Master, Behold, Lord, here am I, and the souls
that thou have given me, as the return of my prayers, preachings, studies, and
example of holy life.

If the Sea have water, if the Elements have Air, what if the Cistern, what if
the bladder want them? If there be true Evangelical endowments in many
Ministers amongst us (as blessed be God, yet there are such so qualified) let
us allow them regard, and not take offense at their failings as men; wherein it
is infirmity and weakness that causes them to step awry, let every man have
his grains of allowance ready, and his ignosce too, since as Pliny well says,
There was no man yet whose virtues Adhuc nemo extitit cujus virtutes nullo
vitiorum con^io laederentur. Plinius in Panegyric.
did not border upon vice, and was not harmed by that neighborhood: and for
their sakes that with Moses stand in the gap, and are eminent in holiness and
learning. Let our Indignation be turned away from those others, that are not
alike furnished, provided they be not scandalous.

And so long as God makes them Instruments, to give light to those that are in
darkness, let us not cast them away as Reprobate silver, though their Light be
set in the Dark lanthorn of frailty: But remember what our Lord Jesus said of
the Matthew. 23. 3.
Scribes and Pharisees who said but did not; All whasoever they bid you
observe, observe and do. For that they preach well, is our Comfort; that they
live ill, their Condemnation; the first is Ours to grow by, the latter theirs
to groan under; the first may bring us to sight of sin, the latter will exclude
them from the blissfull sight of God; for as the Candle that gives light to
others, wastes it self, and at last departs with a stink: so is he who speaks
to others with the tongue of men and Angels: and has not Charity to his own
soul, in seeking to save himself as well as those 1 Timothy 4. last
that hear him.

For those Ministers then who are lucifugae virtutum, Trees without fruit,
Hives without honey, barren wombs and dry breasts, that sterve all which depend
on them and their Ministry, that are a shame to their calling, and a bane to
the Church, do I not engage my pen; God forbid I should dishonor the Church
by writing for, and presenting to men's respects, sons of Belial who know not
God, as were Elyes sons, 1 Samuel 2. 12. I apologize for the worthy Ministry and
Ministers, by what names so ever they are known to us: and if I were called to
characterize the Minister of Christ, for whose honor I so much contest, I
would do it thus and no otherwise.

He prays for peace, because he knows what Psalm. 120. 7. Psalm. 122. 8.
an evil War is: He loves concord, because he sees the sad Issues of
Dissension: He cries to God day and night, that he would have mercy Isai. 62.
1. 2.
upon Zion, because he knows the Devil has nothing more in his envy, then
the Churches growth and continuance: He gloryes more in a holy power of
forgiving, then returning injuries; Luke 6. 37.
He obeys his Masters commands, rather to pray for persecutors, that God would
convert, Matthew. 5. 44.
then confound them: He does not curse his Governors Eccles. 10. 20.
(no not in his thoughts) because he knows that God commands he should
pray 1 Timothy 2. 1. 2.
for those that are over him. He dares not listen to the worlds delusions,
because he knows the John 10. 5.
servant of Christ hears not the voice of a stranger: He is Patient under
Crosses, because he knows it is the will of God, that through Acts 14. 22.
many tribulations he must enter into heaven. He is humble, because he reads
Christ the inviter to it, and the example and rewarder of it: Phil. 2. 8.
When the world reviles him, he takes up the Cross and follows Christ; not
reviling again, 1 Pet. 2. 23.
but committing the judgment to God: When the World applauds him, he cries out,
God forbid Gal. 6. 14. 2 Cor. 11. 30.
that I should glory in any thing but Christ's sufferings, and mine own
infirmities: If Riches come come in, he sets not his heart upon them: If
Poverty come, he prays for contentation under it, and a sanctification of it
to his soul. He is more ambitious to enjoy God, then himself; and to Psalm. 22
11, 19.
master himself then to Conquer Kingdoms; He knows it is his duty to preach the
Gospel, and he Watches all opportunities thereto, dreading nothing more then
to be found not so doing: he conforms 1 Cor. 9. 16 1 Cor. 9. 20.
himself in things lawful and indifferent to the times wherein he lives, that
by being all to all, he may gain some; He dishonors not his master, by lying
against the truth, or suffering James 3. 14,
sin to go unreproved, as time and place serves: He is more pious then
politic, rather covetous of the recompense of reward, though he suffer
affliction with the Children of God, then to enjoy Heb. 11. 26.
the pleasures of sin for a season: He is valiant for the truth, but not
factious; Precise, but not rigid; cheerful, but not loose either in discourse
or action. Put him in prison, he is Christ's freeman, and can say, The Lord is my
help, I will Heb. 13. 6.
not fear what man can do unto me. Court him to take the preferments of the
world, and he replies Matthew. 6 24. Gal. 1. 10
No man can serve two Masters; and if I am the servant of Men, I am no more the
servant of Christ: If troubles come on him for the gospel, he joys that he is
counted worthy to suffer for Christ: If his 1 Cor. 4. 12 Acts 5. 14.
Friends and Kindred forsake him, because he will not part with his integrity,
he says with the prophetic King, When my father and mother forsake me, Psalm.
27. 10.
the Lord will take me up; and if they close with him to advance his
prosperity, he is jealous that his conversation in Heaven should be lessened by
his Multiplied Comforts here on earth. If he lives in good times, he endeavors
to live to the latitude of such a Concession; Ten Talents lent, must have ten
of increase; he grieves at nothing more then his hard heart, his frail nature,
his erring foot, his impure hand, nay this Tempting Devil; with which at all
times and in all places he is disquieted. In fine, he resolves nothing less
then his own ease and honor, and nothing more then to do and suffer the will
of God; and yet in doing his utmost to account himself but an unprofitable
servant. Luke 17 10.


And now tell me, is not such a subject, such a Minister and Churchman worth
respect? One asked a Thessalian, who were most grateful and welcome to his
Countrymen? his reply was, (...), ^ut. lib. de liberis educand.
Men who were peaceable, and declined Wars. Truly I think men of the
predescribed temper, are most fit for darlings and favorites; And if the
Churchman here characterized be such (and those for whom I plead are or ought
to be such) I cannot but conclude those miserably to blame, who hate 1 King. 22.
Micaiah for his plain dealing, and think Eliah the troubler of Israel because
he reproves the coldness of those who are not valiant for the Truth; for as
Saint Ambrose says, the more any man desires Quanio magis quis Deo servire
desiderat, tanto magis in se excitat adversarios. S. Ambr. in Psalm. 118.
to serve God, the more will be his adversaries.

I know there are many will say, that my Character reaches few of the Clergy:
Were they such as they should be, (cry they) we should honor them, and think
nothing too much for them. Charity believes well: But I rather think, were men
such as they should be, they would reverence the Messenger for the Master and
Message sake. Let Gehazi be as bad as he will, yet Naaman 2 Kings 5.
will honor and reward the Prophet Elisha's servant.

I know there are men who make the priesthood contemptible: but are there not
many who can say with Samuel, To whom have we done any wrong? testify against
us: and with Saint Paul, have endeavored to carry consciences void of offense
Acts 24. 16.
both toward God, and toward men. And if God would have spared S^dom for a
very few righteous in it, well may the Clergy be pardoned their supposed
errors, for the many thousands of holy men of that Order, who have converted
Millions to Christ, and yet do live in their Works; yea, and I hope in the
hearts of many men in Power amongst us.

But if the bounty and beauty of the work be not invitation strong enough, let
us remember, very Moral men will be evidences against us at the last day:
Theodosius counted Beneficium se putabat (...) augustae memoriae Theodosius,
cum rogaretur ignoscere. S. Ambr. in Orat. in exit. Theodos.
himself highly presented to, when he was moved to forgive an injury. And no
better evidence of this, then by honoring and obliging them that injure us; so
that such as run may read our favor in their fortunes and influences. Which
was Rufus his Argument to Augustus Caesar, whom he had enraged against him, and
from whom he now petitioned pardon; Nemo credat, O Caesar, to gravissimam post
acc^ptam injuriam, mecum in gratiam rediisse, nisi magnum aliquod mihi
contuleris beneficium. Apud Mendoz. in Vi. id. p. 141.
No man (Caesar) will believe thou art reconciled to me, and have received me
to grace, unless thou grant me a great benefit, and dignifie me.

This to do, is to follow noble Emperors, yea, the King of Kings, and Lord of
Lords, our great General Christ Jesus, who died for his Enemies, and prayed
their sin might not be charged on them: yea this to do to his little ones, his
Disciples, his Ministers, is to make Christ (with reverence be it written) a
debtor, Pro. 9. 17. and to have him our Christum debitorem habere potius est,
quam omnia possidere; qui pro frusto panis regnum largitur. Nazianz. apud Guev.
in Hor. princ. page 49.
debtor, who for a refuse crust of bread gives a Kingdom, is better then to
possess all things, in Nazianzen's opinion.

Me thinks, I hear one bethinking me this motion, and taxing me as too bold to
crave this boon for the Clergy, while the gifted men (a^ the term is) who are
all honey and no gall, al^ gold and no dross, all beauty and no deformity in
their eyes, stand competitors: as if I were injurious to beg away the childrens
bread for Aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel, and me^ without God in the
world, who are formallists* worldly wise, enemies to free grace, and branded by
such like Insinuations.

Truly, were the Ministers such, I would confess their Charge, and plead
guilty: But when I know the contrary, I cannot but wonder at the agreement that
they would make 'twixt Christ and Belial in one tongue; while with the same
mouth they bless themselves and all of their own way, and curse others,
perhaps (I am unperemptory) not less holy then themselves.

To this Objector I shall answer in the words of God himself, Genesis 4. 6. Why
(Man) art tho^ so wroth? why is thy Countenance changed? why look thou upon
thy brother as one born out of due time, as one to eat of the husks, when 1
Cor. 15. 8.
thou think the fatted calf little enough for thee? What have thou which
thou have not received, 1 Cor. 4. 7.
not only from God, ( from whom every good and Jam. 1. 17
perfect gift comes) but from men, perhaps those whom thou despisest, to whose
Ministry, Writings, Discourses thou owe what thou have? Do thou do well to
be angry? to rage against, and revile those who have with the Phoenix, spent
their lives to beget the life of grace (if any thou have) in thee? How can
thou without shame (in S. Ieroms words) accuse that Cook as Tu autem cum
conditum ab eo cibum devores, ^ur insulsum argues conditorem? Ig^iculo tuo
eccle^ia sua lucet, and lucernam ejus criminaris extinctum? Oculos tibi
praebet, and caecus est? C. 1. advers. Luc^ranos.
unsavory-handed, from whom thou tookest thy wholesome diet? or how can that
Church be dark, at whose lamp thou lightest thy farthing candle? or that eye be
blind which gave thee light? If Christ be formed in thee, if the life of grace
has its perfection in thy soul, if thou art one with Christ, as thou say thou
art, and those are that thou preferrest; Who were isntrumental in this work?
Was it not the Minister of God who applied the corrosives of the Law, and
cordials of the Gospel to thee? Did not his hand conduct thine eye to such a
Menace, and such a Promise? And did thou not heretofore, when thou wast as
much thy self as now, bless God for him, and rejoice under the wings of his
Ministry? Whence then comes the change? while he continues the same, why
alterest thou? while he opens his treasure to thee, and bids thee welcome to
his fat things, why do thou nod the head, and bend thy fist? why look thou
upon him as reprobate silver which the Lord has rejected? Does Jer. ^ ^0.
this manifest Christ in thee, and not rather sin reigning and precipitating
thee into ruin? Do not boast thy self, that in Christ's name thou have
prophesied: if the Devil and evil Spirit of pride be not cast out, there is
nothing of Christ in thy soul; His soul which is lifted up is not upright in
him. It Is not great words, devout looks, Hab. 2. 4.
that makes a Christian: to live what we believe, is to walk to well pleasing;
for as Justin Martyr excellently, If shows (...) etc. in Resp. qu. 5. ad
Orthodoxos.
and semblances were true proofs of Virtue and Holiness, Christ would never
have reproved those as unworthy his familiarity and acceptance, who said, Have
we not in thy name prophesied, and in thy name cast out Devils, etc.

I will not follow the method of many men, to right some with the wrongs of
others. I will exhort, rather then recriminate: Those which have most of Christ
in their lips and lives, shall be the Saints in my Calendar. If the Gifted men
(as they are called) are more holy, more learned, less leavened with pride and
uncharitableness, less versed in craft; if they are more in Fastings,
Prayings, Watchings, Weepings, Charity; If they discourse with more evidence
and demonstration of the Spirit; If they forgive more thoroughly, converse with
God more closely then the holy Ministers of the Church do, or can, then let
them be owned as the living Temples of the holy Ghost.

But if they which are good amongst them, are as errable and imperfect (not to
say ought else) as others: yea, if they do not abhor, and declare against
persons, (...). Dialog cum Tryph. Judaeo. page 241. Edit. Sylburg.
who in Justin Martyrs phrase, teach blasphemies and untrue things, under the
name of divine Truths, when as indeed, they are but the obtrusions of Satan
upon their impure heart: If they persist in disesteeming and undermining the
Ministry, which they ought to honor as Christ's Ordinance, and the Churches
glory and comfort; if they show not a better warrant for their singularity,
then yet they have; Let them pardon us, if we follow them not, though a
multitude; and I promise them, they shall have my prayers, that God would (if
they be not in it, which they better know, who say they have the Spirit, then
I) show them what is his good and acceptable way; That Is all the harm I wish
them, that shall be all the Vinegar and gall I Will give them. As for their
outward prosperity, that they gather and increase, that they can do great
things in the world, that they are Harbingers to make way for Christ; these are
no arguments to move my veneration of them. Optatus tells us of men in his time,
who filled Lacerati sunt viri, tractae sunt Matronae, infantes necati, abacti
sunt partus: nulli licuit securum esse in possessionibus suis; etiam itinera
non possunt esse tutissima. Optat. con^ra Parmen. l. 2. c. 3.
Africa with blood, permitted no men to be quiet in their possessions, infested
the highways, rifled Matrons of their modesty and lives; yea, terrified men by
their Letters and Threats, and all under the name of those Qui se duos
sanctorum jactabant; Were they ever the better because they had a stiff gale
of wind in their sails? or was not their case more desperate. by how much the
world tendered them, and they were in the calm of outward prosperity? Is not
that true in a spiritual Quiet iora tempora Romani pauperes habuerunt. 2.
Contr.
sense, which Seneca said of the Romans, their quiet times were most poor, and
less plentiful; Is the soul ever leaner then when fed with royal dainties?
ever better then when commoning Dan. 1.
on pulse? then when in stripes, in imprisonments; 2 Cor. 6. 4, 5.
in tossings to and fro, in afflictions, distresses, necessities? is it not a
mistak to judge the Marriage betwixt Christ and his Church provable by nothing
more then by the Churches riches, by her comfort in outward greatness? as
Tacitus pleads it in another case, Non aliud Annal. 4.
probis quam ex matrimonio solatium.

I will not accuse prosperity, because it is a gift of God to those that are
good, and use it aright; Nor will I applaud it, because I read it often a
judgment and snare to men, who misunderstand Gods finger and intendment in it:
Every thing is as it is used; and though it be the Devils part to accuse, not
mine: and more my delight to follow Christ, in healing Malchus his ear then
fierce Peter in cutting it off with his keen sword, yet shall I not decline
this declaration in general, that I judge men more by their operations then
orations; the praise of virtue arises from the motive to and manner of its
working; every crasie body creeps abroad in the Summer, who dares not peep out
in the winter; Prosperity is no surer mark of a good man, then bulk is of
courage: Low statur'd Zacheus stood firm in Christ's approbation, when
self-confident Peter Prove. 7. 14.
recidivated; the harlot boasts of having peaceofferings Sordidae vestes
candidae mentis sunt indicia; vilis tunica contemptum saeculi probat, Ep. 4. ad
Rusticum.
with her, when Rachel is in heaviness. I will judge truth by her ragged
clothes, and clouted shoes. Saint Jerome is right, when he says, Mean raiment
argues a precious mind, a soul above the world, though contemned by it; to sit
on Thrones, judging, and not here rather be judged, is somewhat besides
Christ's promise; Iudicatos lego Apostolos non judicantes.
the truest judgment we can give of truth is from her agonies and passions,
which is notably set forth in that answer which Saint Anthony is said to make
to the Devil, who appeared to him in the likeness of our Savior, in his
transfiguration: Non credam te esse crucifixum, nisi vulnera haec conspicio.
O, quoth he, I will not believe thee to be my Savior, except I see the wounds
on thy side: It shall be my course to mistrust that way, and those persons, as
least making to Christ and his glory, who partake with Babels builders, in
raising Towers as high as Heaven, and who glory in externity of goods and
greatness; there is a story of Saint Martin, or plain Martin, (choose you
whether, I am content) One time the Devil appeared to him, clad in purple, and
richly be-decked, yet in the likeness of our Savior, (as says the story) and
spoke to the holy man, Martin, own thy Savior, Agnosce, Martine, quem colis,
Christus ego sum descensurus ad terras; prius volui me tibi demonstrare. Cur
titubas credere, d^m me videas? Christus ego sum.
whom thou worshipest; I am he who first manifest my self to thee. Martin made
no reply; the Devil said, Martin, why doubtest thou to believe me thy Savior?
whom thou see to be him and none other? O, quoth Martin, Christ Christus non
dixit in mundana gloria and decore regio se adventurum. Wolph^us Hist. Memor.
p. 112. Tom. 4. p. 113. 214. 272. 443. etc.
said not he would come in Kingly apparel, and worldly glory.

I know there are many godly and learned, that are of opinion with those of
Saint Ieroms time, that Christ should personally reign upon earth a thousand
years with his Saints in all worldly pomp and glory; yet since many Counsels
have condemned that opinion as dangerous, if not heretical, and Saint Jerome
himself not only In Epist. ad Hebid.
writes against it, but concludes it Iudaicam and fabulosam opinionem, I may be
pardoned, if I mind the Saints to wait till their Master come, and not to begin
with the world before their time, (that is) not to affect sole domination here,
till Christ who is their head does appear; then the children of the
Bride-chamber shall only appear with him in glory; whether in the body, or out
of the body, I cannot tell. In the interim, let them and us all expect in the
world tribulation, and account it the preparatory for glory, the Ordeall by
which our faith, patience, courage, constancy must be tried: and let it not
seem hard that we meet with fiery trials, considering that it is the will of
God that his must contend with Principalities and Powers, and wickednesses in
high places, in their own Delicatus es fra^er si and hic vis gaudere cum
seculo, and postea regnare, cum Christo. Epist. ad Heliodor.
souls, and affections. He is too delicate a Christian (in Saint Ieroms
judgment) who would rejoice with the world, and after reign with Christ; the
lesson of every Disciple is to take up the cross, and to deny ones self, and
to follow Christ, to the enterment of all earthly solaces.

To be elevated then with swellings of worldly greatness, is little to the
commendation or comfort of a true Saint; nor to be dejected, and among the pots
any argument of divine disapprobation. Hodie ille, cras ego, is a good Motto
for all men who are subjected to vicissitudes; joy and sorrow are Natures
Twins: though the one come sooner then the other, and stay longer in the world,
yet God will not ever frown; light and comfort is sown for the righteous: his
own happiness laid up in Christ should suffice him. Quid Ser. 41. in Cant.
opus est peregrinorum fucos adhibere colorum, cui propria, and tanquam innata
sufficit pulchritudo, as Saint Bernard sweetly.

Forbear then, O ye pretended Seraphims, your eager and shrill notes of
execration; abandon that self admiration; If ye have that comfort and
communion ye pretend, ye have enough: What is it to you, if Christ will have
his Ministry, and learning her handmaid tarry and not John 21, 22.
see death till he come to judgment? if your vessels are full, you have your
portion, be content with your wages; if ye be empty, why do ye so aggrandize
your selves? why are ye Impropriators, as it were, of Gods Spirit? the
gleanings of Judges 8. 2.
the grapes of Ephraim, are beyond the vintage of Abiezer; that which the
Church and her learning possesses, will enlighten men through this world
warily, into the other and better world, where parties, and names, and
schisms, and blasphemies shall cease.

In the mean time, Lift up your heads ye learned ones, who are the oil in the
ages lamp, Stars in Cass. Catal. gl. Mun. p. 389.
the Firmaments of the times; no weapon formed against you shall prosper; no
power, no policy shall suppress and subvert the being of Art; God has given
it an immortal Seed, which shall receive no ruining detriment by mortal power.
There will never by the mercy of God, be wanting some who value learning above
life, doing by it, as Caecilius Metellus did in the conflagration from which
the vestall Nuns fled for fear, by the holy things which were (...). Diouys.
Halycarnass. lib. 2. p. 126. Edit. Sylburg.
cast into the flames, running even with violence and impatience to their
rescue; yea, nourishing in their breasts a hope once more to see learning the
way to honor, and learned men higher, as was Saul, by Constantius Imperator,
quod fere vix, au^ nullo sanguine obtiuendu^ ^rat, eloquentia patravit. Aur.
vict.
the head and shoulders, then all the people: Valor. Max. lib. 8.
Verbis facundis ira, consternatio, arma cedunt. For surely the victories of
eloquence are most incruent, and most perfect, doing that by way of persuasion,
which is not without much hazard and loss effected by invasion.

I hear, me thinks, many crying, who will show us any good? who might soon
receive answer, would they repair to the Philosopher; He, He, like the Sun is
generally useful, Lustrate oculis immensa terrarum spacia qua surgunt ad
Arctos, qua cedunt ad meridiem, qua tendunt ad ortum, qua spaciantur ad
occasum; cerniter eam molem crebram domibus, frequentem urbibus, regnis, ut ita
loquar constipatam, totam eam Sapientia suo clypeo regit atque tuetur. Mendoza
in virid. page 195.
like the clouds universally beneficient; Look over the world from East to
West, North, to South; and the goodly order and improvement that you see; the
noble Kingdoms, the vast Cities, the sumptuous houses, the great husbandry,
the strong holds that are to be found, are but the effects of his rules and
preceps, so that well may the learned be called (next under God) the bucklers
of the earth, as the Phrase is, Psa. 47. 9 without which in Sidonius his words,
multitudes of Ego turbam magnam literaria artis expertem maximam solitudinem
appello. lib. 7. Epist.
illiterate men are but solitudes, and signify no more to comfort and content,
then the wilderness where no water is to plenty and abundance.

Let then others glory in their triumphs, and trophies, in their obnubilation
of bodies coruscant, that they have brought fear upon Champions, forced
contributions from the Herculesses of manhood; let them boast, their wills are
laws, their names are renowned, and their sons shall be made Princes in all
Lands, yet in spite of them, and their wrath, we of the bookish Tribe shall
live to laugh their folly to scorn, who think any thing praise worthy which is
not victorious and Gloriam non debet sequi virtus sed ipsa virtutem. Aug. lib.
5. civit. Dei. Ideo sapientiam accepit homo ut adversus nocentia fragilitatem
suam muniat. Lact. Opif. 4.
generous, not moderate and diffusively good: for as Saint Augustine says,
Virtue must not follow glory, but glory virtue, as the more worthy; and
therefore has God given man wisdom, that by it he may guard himself against
those harms which assault his frailty. And till such days return, learned men
have cause not to be ashamed of any thing but men's dullness, and declinings in
returning them stones for bread, and Serpents for fishes; that the diligence of
Themistocles, the Matthew. 7. 10.
continency of Socrates, the modesty of Scipio, the Cass. Catal. glo. mundi. p.
389.
purity of Cato, the gravity of Frontonius, the faith of Fabricius, the
mildness of Ulysses, the piety of Titus, should not be followed; nay that
those who endeavor to civilize, should be disanimated, and not encouraged.

Have we more light then former ages? are we upon those Giants backs, and yet
can we not see a disparity betwixt our tempers and theirs? they esteemed
learned men terrestrial Deities, taking laws from them as well as from their
reputed gods. We read of Philolaus giving laws to the Theban, the Magi to the
Persians, Saleucus to the Locrians, Hippodamus to the Milesians, the
Gymnosophists to the Indians, Zoroastes to the Bactrians, Plato to the
Magnesians, Phaleus to the Carthaginians, the Caldeans to the Babylonians,
Phido to the Corinthians, Zamolxis to the Scythians, Charondas to the Turians;
as of Ceres giving laws to all mortals; Minos to the Cretians, Apollo to the
Arcadians; nay, we find them liberal of honor and gifts to learned men. I
read of Alcibiades his bounty to Socrates, Archelaus to Euripides, Publius
Volusius to Julius Calidius, Augustus to Gallus, Vespasian to Saleius Bassus,
Stertinius to Martial, Gratian to Ausonius, Theodosius to Prudentius, Phalaris
to Stesicorus, Darius to Democedes, of Matthias King of Pannonia to
Monteregius, of Laurentius Medices to Hermolaus Barbarus, of Robert King of
Sicile to Petrach, and all learned men; of Ptolomy to the 70. 'Twere infinite
to recite the instances in all ages. See that learned Civilian Bocerus, and the
forequoted Lib. de privilege. doctorum.
Cassanaeus Catalog. glo. mundi. p. 352 353.

And not only did they honor the persons, but the pictures also of learned
men, accounting them ornaments to their Libraries; Cassanaeus tells us that the
Ancients thought it part of their perfection, to have the portraiture of
Aristotle, Pytharas, p. 390.
or any great Philosopher, and that Asinius Pollio judged nothing rare in his
Library but Varro's Image. In a word, so highly did they set by learned men,
that many Nations (if Mendoza do not deceive me) chose Kings from the conclaves
of Philosophers. The Egyptians who were the worlds Seminaries for Arts, ascribe
all to learning, as to its Patroness and augmentor. That took Egypt from the
breast, suckled it while young, polished Sapientia est quae primum natum
excepit, impolitum effinxit, crescentem nutrivit, adultum auxit, senescentem
excoluit, matura jam annorum canitie ruiturum quam diutissime conservavit.
Mendoz. in virid. p. 199.
it when of riper years, expatiated it when grown to middle Age, and prevented
the decay of Oldage. The Assyrians magnified learned men; what they concluded
was judged certain, what they commanded just, what they forbad evil; yea, what
they foretold Divine and ominous, that they accordingly subscribe to.

Nor were the Persians behind the rest; for though Herodotus, a noble writer,
tells us nothing of the Magi in sole command, but upon one only time when they
gained it by craft: yet Mendoza commends them, as accounting nothing in a man
so princely as Sola sapientia erat quae viros genere ignaros, condition
servos, fortuna miseros, valc^udine in^irmos, aetate juvenes, corporis habitu
invenustos, ab infima plebecula in regiam dignitatem vendicabat.
wisdom and learning; therefore (says he) where ever they found those, there
they chose, though the men were of obscure note and quality, poor and
fortunelesse, of weak bodies, young years, unbeauteous; and those as Governors
honored.

But above all, the Greeks honored learned men with sole rule, in so much that
Quicquid honoris, quicquid gloriae, quicquid utilitatis, hoc imperium
comparavit, potius civium doctrinae quam militum armis tribuendum.
the fame of Greece grew rather from their excellent wisdom, then great
strength, from their wise Sages, then potent Soldiers; and so did the Romans
too, and no Nation did the contrary; so true is that of Alexander, I had rather
Plutarch. in vita ejus.
excel in knowledge, then be potent in Armies.

These civilities and tokens of gratitude did former Ages express to learned
men, not more out of ingenuity and candor, then necessity: experience telling
them, that without their care and counsel, neither peace nor war could well be
managed: and therefore them to honor, and with them to close, was to make a
Virtue of Necessity.

For who but these have been Lawgivers, Counselors and Rulers at home,
Ambassadors abroad; demanded detained Rights, mediated upon breaches made, or
prevented them that they be not; Solicited Leagues offensive and defensive,
treated upon and effected compacts upon marriages and alliances? it would be
endless to nominate the good offices they have done for their Countries, what
hazards they have undergone, what defenses they have made, what storms they
have kept off, what gainful adventures they have promoted, what staples of
trade, honor, increase, they have settled; in short, they may well be termed
the Fathers of their Countries, the Sine qua non's, without which, Realms and
Commonwealths would import no more then Polyphemus his Statue, which wanted its
right Eye and beauty.

And therefore those that would exclude learned men from Rule and Government,
should do well first to declare their Project to make a Mutiny in the Universe,
and put an arrest upon intercourse, to disturb the venust Eutaxie of this
Globe, and design invasion of the Sun, Moon, and Stars, yea of their Maker, and
to dethrone him; which when they effect, I will fear the utter ruin of
Learning and Learned men; but not before.

The Sun indeed may be darkened, and the Moon withdraw her light; the Stars of
heaven may fall, and the foundations of Science may quiver through the
Earthquakes that men's sins and passions may occasion, but the world Rational
and Intellectual is founded upon the abiding Pillars of Gods love and
faithfulness, of his stability and power, as well as the world Elementary; and
the power and policy of men, furious as Attila, and crafty as Borgia, shall
never dissolve what God first deserts not.

Let it be the Learned man's care to honor God, and to do good, and in well
doing to wait upon him, and verily Etenim non solum docti esse volumus, sed and
docti and boni, quales omnino sunt qui recte quidem verbis sed multo rectius
moribus and vita philosophantur. Sabel. Orat. 7. de cultu and increment.
Philosophiae.
he shall inherit the land, and be fed, Psalm 37. 3. Yea let it be his
Emulation to excel men in virtue, as well as in Speculation, Oratory, Craft,
and Sublimenesse of capacity, and there will be no fear but this bow of
Jonathan will abide sure.

Think not, O Powers and People, that they can despond who know God sits
upon the Circle of the earth, and rides upon the heaven Esai 40. 22. Deuteronomy. 33.
26.
to his peoples help, under whom are his everlasting arms, and to whom he is a
Refuge, who sees the tendencies and tempers of men and things, settling them
(after their tedious and discomposed march through all the points of this
Compass) in the North point of his Glory! can they give over their confidence
who know God has appointed them a strong City, and Salvation for walls and
Bulwarks? whose enemies are more Esai. 26. 1.
Ants for industry, then Eagles in power; that the wounds they receive are more
from the taunts of female and acide tongues, then the rebukes of sober and
well-stated reason, who consider that Revolutions of persons and Governments
are usual, and ought to be prepared for, and submitted too, that time spares
not the best men; The Patriarchs, where are they? and the Prophets, do they
live for ever, Zach. 1. 5. Nor the best governments; They all wax old as does a
garment; by this Canker which frets out their life and luster, Est omnium
potestatum finis nec Romanum imperium fine fine datum est, quod sic jam videtur
aegrotum ut de sepultur a magis quam de medico sit captandum. Ep. 81.
all things in this Hemesphere (being compound, discontinuous, lubrick, and
crying to vengeance, Thrust in thy sickle and reap, for the time is come, for
the harvest of the earth is ripe, Rev. 14. 15.) come to their period. That
ingenuous Pope, Pius the Second, from hence fore spoke an end of the Roman
Empire, which in his time was sick, and near unto death, so that there was more
need to prepare its grave, then call for its Physician; and therefore weighing
these things, the learned cannot but resolve with the Church, Micha the 7. Quod
sapienter speravimus, perseveranter consectemur. Columell. in proaem.
to bear the indignation of the Lord, because they have sinned against him,
until he plead their cause, and execute judgment for them. In this God we
hope, and for this visitation in mercy we will wait, though the figtree shall
not blossom, neither shall fruit be on the Vines, though the labor of the
Olive should fail, and the fields yield no meat, the flock be cut off from the
field, and there shall be no heard in the Stalls, as the words are, Hab. 3. 17.

Know this, O Powers and People, we of the bookish race are not so vain to
trust in a shadow, Psalm. 39. 6.
or disquiet our selves in vain; we put not our trust in Chariots or Horsemen;
we will trust in the Name of the Lord, and not fear what man can do unto us;
Quisquis meliora sperat levioribus S. Ambros. in Psalm. 118.
nunquam frangitur; we will (with the favor of God) persist in our Race
through Arts and Sciences; and our God pronounce Labor in vain on all those
Actions which shall in any degree hinder this honorable and Christian
Resolution; and be they restrained by God, who with Sanballet and Tobiah,
discourage this endeavor: We will not build, as Nehemiahs consorts did, Nehem.
4. 17.
with swords in our hands, (they that thus take up the Sword, may perish by the
Sword:) holy contests must not be with Swords and staves (those were the
weapons of Christ's apprehenders) but with Prayers and Tears, the Spiritual
weapons of Christians war-fare; Non armata Aug. de Civit. Dei.
patientia, sed potentiore patientia: and if these will either convince, or
prostrate our accusers and opposers, we will not be wanting to our selves; and
though with Haman they plot our destruction, yet will we not sin against God in
ceasing to pray that the iniquity of their hearts may be forgiven them. We
will not say despairingly, with Esai's Eunuch, We are dry Esai 56. 3, 4, 5.
trees, because we desire to choose the things that please our God, and take
hold of his Covenant, and therefore hope to have a place in his house, and a
name better then of Sons and Daughters; we will expect honors and employments,
when the waters abate, and the Ark is settled on her Ararat; we are ill
Salamanders, better Doves; we live not in, nor thrive not we dissentions; Peace
is our Nurse, and Concord our Sphere to move in; we can make Panegyricks to
Peace, and endeavor to Amphionize the severities of men; we can skill to charm
venomous beasts by the Magic of our Eloquence.

Carmina vel coelo possunt deducere Lunam;
Carminibus Circe socios mutavit Ulyssis;
Frigidus in pratis cantando rumpitur anguis.
By Poetry the Moon's from Heaven brought;
Ulysses mates by Circe temper taught;
The Snake of's poison robbed, surprised and caught.
For as that exquisite Politico (who knew what he said) once wrote, Eloquence
Magna res est facundia, and si verum fateri velimus, nihil est quod regat orbem
quam elequentia, quoniam quicquid agimus in Repub. persuasi ver bis agimus, and
illius in populi sententia manet, qui melius novit persuadere. Aeneas Sylvius
lib. 1. Epist. 64.
is the great Dominator and Sovereign of the world; for what ever is done in
Government, is by soft persuasion; which he that best skills to use, will
soonest attain his ends. We can rejoice more in our Oratories and contemptible
obscurities, then in Palaces of Marble, beds of Ivory, Walks of State, or
Parks of Pleasure; we can live on short Commons, and with mean clothing, and
think our selves rich if we may keep our integrities; Caeterum juxta miserias
hujus Temporis (they are S. Ieroms words) and ubique gladios Epist. 4. ad
rusticum Monach.
saevientes, satis dives est qui pane non indiget; nimium potens est qui
servire non cogitur; we dare not say, we can encounter with banishment*
confiscations, nay death it self; but we pray that Gods grace would be
sufficient for us, that if we be brought before Rulers and Governors for his
sake, and the cause of Learning, we may witness a good confession, yea quit
our selves 1 Timothy 6 13.
like men rationally, and as Christians conscienciously; for we have believed,
therefore have we spoke and written; yea we hope that the worst evils that can
befall us, will not make Nunquam deserit Deus nisi and ipse prius deseratur. S.
Aug.
us turn the back and not the face, but rather comfort our selves in God, who
never forsakes those that do not first forsake him.

Do not, O do not, we beseech you, mistake us, as men so wedded to our wills,
that because we cannot be what we would, therefore we cannot submit to be what
we may, gratifying men with no more of our compliance then will keep our peace
with God, and with no less then Religion and discretion allows us: yes, we can
bear and forbear, by the grace of God, we can want and abound, yea and be
accursed too for Gods, Religions, and Learnings sake. The Mallem secund apurpur
a rubere quam prima. Card. Richlieu in Testament.
Purple of pomp must give way to that of Martyrdom. 'Twas a heavenly speech of
S. Ierom, which we desire to make ours, Unusquisque suo sensu ducitur; quid
desideramus Epist. 4. ad Rusticam.
urbium frequentiam? mihi opidum Carcer, and solitudo paradisus est.

This is the true effect of sober learning, and divine Philosophy; It makes men
stout, but not Rigid; valiant, but not foolhardy; patient, but not stupid;
retired, but not Cynical, contented, but not careless; silent, but not
wrathful; free, but not uncircumspect; and therefore if after Plato's time
there be a great Dearth of knowledge (...). Eunapius in pr^oem. p. 14.
and humanity, as a Common Plague, let it be attributed to the bad Raigns of
such Monsters as Nero, Galba, Vitellius, Otho, and not to the activity of their
wits, who were too tender to stay in Climates and Coasts where those Herricanes
Raged.

And if any of the rougher world prefer our Room above our Company, crying Si
venire isti recusant, adveniant quotquot sunt Diaboli. Fincelius apud Wolphium
in mem. p. 590.
out with that Rich man near Gotlitz, who prepared an Entertainment for his
friends that came not; if they refuse to come who are expected, come as many
Devils as will, which accordingly happened (for immediately the Room was full
of them:) we shall pity and pardon their severity, accounting it our duty to
pray for those who despitefully use us, and to comfort our selves in this, That
when God shall appear to men by the Spirit of judgment, and by the Spirit of
burning, Isai 4. 4. and shall take the veil from before their eyes, showing
them the beauties of Learning, they will not continue snares and traps to us,
be no longer scourges in our sides, and thorns in our eyes, Joshua 23. 13. But
our tabernacle for a shadow in the day time from the heat, and for a place of
refuge, and for a covert from storm, and from rain, Esai 4. ult. For as
Ammianus said well, Inter vepres rosa nascitur, and inter feras nonnullae
mitescunt: and that this will come to pass, if God have any delight in this
Nation, (wherein he has a people nigh unto him, and precious as the Apple of
his eye) we very really believe, considering that there are many who wrestle
with God in prayer, and who endeavor to rescue the Times from that Censure
which Malo omnia plena sunt, pene periit innocntiae nomen. Advers. gent. l. 6.
Arnobius gives of his Time, All things and men abound in evil, the name of
innocence is almost perished: and considering also that God is able to turn
the wrath of man to his praise, and the remnant of wrath to restrain, Ps. 76.
10.

As therefore the holy Apostle wrote to his Corinthians, so say the learned to
their Countrymen, Our mouths are open to you, our hearts are enlarged; 1 Cor.
6. 11. 12
ye are not straightened in us, but in your own bowels. We bring you merchandises
better then those Prove. 13. 13.
of silver, and the gains of them beyond those of fine gold: ye return us
hatred for good will. Well, we will wait your retter tempers; for we have
learned Self-denial, Charity, Contentation, not only from the teachings of God,
but also from that Philosopher who tells Non refistere, sed obedire; non cupere
magna, sed exiguum boni consulere; non ulcisci offensas, sed ignoscere
injurias; non rapere alienum, sed dare proprium; non affect are gloriam, sed
sectari virtutem; denique discite nos odisse qua c^teri amant, divitias; and
amare quae caeteri odere, paupertat^m. Anachars. in Epist. ad Coersum.
us, That Philosophers learn not to Resist, but Obey; not to Return, but Remit
injuries; not to desire great, but good things; not to covet what is another,
but to be contented with what is their own, and of that not to be sparing: not
to follow Vainglory, but Virtue; nay, to learn Contempt of that which every
one admires, Riches; and to value what most men loath and deprecate, Poverty.

Remember this, O ye mighty ones; God permits you to share with him in a
Temporal Eminency, not only that you may live in ease, feed to the full, wear
soft Raiment, give Laws, gain Estates (though these in a good degree, and fair
proportion be due to greatness) but also, and more chiefly, that you might
honor him in ordering people to his glory, and the good of each other:
Isocrates said well, when he told those that had (...). Isocrates ad areopag.
Rule, That the care of the Common good was not matter of Profit, but Service,
not to thrive by it, but to advance others thrift under it: and Tacitus Non
Dominationem and ser* vos, sed rectorem and cives Princeps cogitet. Annal. 10.
avers, That a Prince should not think so much upon Domination and Servants, as
upon Government and Discant Principes quid sit sui officii; neque enim officium
principis est voluptatibus vel illicitis indulgere, etc. neque est
Ecclesiastica bona in adulatores and canes, in lupos rapaces, in ignavo^
afinos, in obscoenos porcos insumere, sed quodnam est officium paucis verbis
indicat Dominus cum illos vocat nutritores Ecclesiae. Orat. de Append. in
Eccles. Scholis ante Tom. 6.
Citizens: yea famous Zanchy, after he has reckoned up what they should not
do, not indulge their Lusts, not use lawful things unlawfully, not mispend
their time in idleness, and their Revenues on profitlesse Courtiers, not waste
the goods of the Church in gifts, adds this, as the sum of all their Duty
which God chiefly expects from them, To be nourishers of his Church: for then
do they come up Erant pris^i illi homines diis ipsis hospites, and convivae,
pro justitiae pietatisque merito. Pausan. l. 8.
to the frame of Antique Piety, when they are a Sanctuary (as it were) to
whatever is Gods; then deserve they to be honored, when they honor him who
has honored them, and expects they Prosi^iat cunct is qui univers^s celsior
inve^ur. Cassiod.
should be profitable to others, since they have places and opportunites to do
good to more then themselves. Herein shall ye, O Powers, do worthily if ye take
off heavy buthens, if ye let the oppressed go free, if ye deal out your bread
to the hungry, if ye hide not your selves from your own flesh, if ye put to
death Barabbas, and quit Jesus, if you dethrone Self, and crown him who is the
desire of Nations, the Wisdom of the Father, the Doctor and Savior of his
body the Church.

I will not flatter you, there are too many such pests about Grandees;
Perniciosa adulatio, perpetuum malum regum quorum opes saepius assentatio quam
hostis evertit, was Curtius his Note; Lib. 8.
and Seneca tells us, That friends never Non alibi magis desunt amici quam ubi
creduntur abundare. Senec. de benef.
less abound, then when they are most wanted, and where best deserved. Nor
dare I be so bold to counsel you, there is danger in being too venterous;
Armato nudum congredi dementia est, non temeritas; I have no plea but a
Suplicat Celsitudini vestrae, and I hope your own ingenuities will as Masters
of Requests help this Petition to a seasonable and effectual answer.

Where ever (says Guevara) Government is mild, Ubicunque juris clementia est,
habet locum precatio.
there can be no obstruction to Prayers, especially when they are for things
honorable to your selves, and safe* to the people. Praeclude I beseech you,
your ears (not against humble and honest Petitioners, they will desire moderate
things, and moderately) but against all rash, rude, irrational innovating
importuners; for as grave Claudius said in the Roman (...). H^lycarn. l. 5. p.
131.
Senate, They are not ruled by Judgment, but Passion. Phocion gave a notable
answer to the tumultuous Quaeries of the Athenians, who would know a Reason of
his Government, O (says he) keep your old Laws and Orders; and when I see you
(...). Plut in vit^ ejus. p. 745. Edit. Parisiens.
obey them, you shall know the motives upon which I made them; noting that they
were unfitting to be answered any other ways, who desired to dispute rather
then obey Government, for the conservation of which laws were made.

I know additions may be prudent, where commendable Traditions are first
adhered to, and Abolitions in some cases as Politic as Retentions: Lawgivers
are not ever tied up to humor Antiquity, where evils by such Symbolizing are
notorious and unavoidable. New mischiefs must have medicines new like
themselves; but it is not safe to put too far from the shore in a Cock-boat: to
be tampering with Physic when Constitutions are sound, the stomach good,
color fresh, and blood vigorous and pure: the Divine Philosopher tells us the
danger of changes in lesser things; (Music (...). etc. Plato l. 4. de Repub.
p. 34. Edit. Ficini. Pietatis est co^rccre infantiam criminis, ne juvenescat
augmentis.
had a great influence on Government heretofore) therefore he says, The change
of that is as dangerous as a shipwreck at Sea, because the Methods of that are
never changed without great changes also in civil affairs: and Casidore says,
It is a piece of piety as well as policy, to crush evils in their infancy, that
they grow not too stubborn to be dealt with. If ever you hope to keep things
from Anarchy within the smooth channels of Order, keep up, (I beseech you)
learning, and encourage learned men; they may be your Confessors, to teach you
the good way, wherein you shall find rest to your souls, your Physicians to
direct for your healths, your Lawgivers to settle your fortunes, your Judges
to keep your peace, your Historians to pen your Transactions, your Ambassadors
to treat with forraigners; in a word, your every thing that is honest and of
good report.

And therefore ye have good reason to suspect those of the truest Malignancy
and disaffection to you, who do not provoke you to do good while Nihil tam
malignum quam nolle prodesse cum possis. Tertul. ad Marcion.
ye have time; For nothing (says Tertullian) is so malignant, as that which
denies to do the good it can) but instead of commending learning to your care,
and her Professors to your affectionate Respect, labor to keen you against
them, as if they were the Moles that did mischief invisibly, Spots in your
Feasts, Hushai's in your Armies, Ionathans in your Families, faithful to
nothing but your Ruins and ill successes.

But, O Powers, turn I beseech you a deaf ear to these accusers; be not
overcome of evil, but overcome evil with your goodness; say unto these
suggestors, ye are offenses to us, and command them rather to be good
themselves, then to accuse others, or to smite them with the fist of
wickedness, whom the Lord hdth smitten: be ye ever of that noble (...) Marius
ad Minucium. Halycarn. l. 8. p. 507. Edit. Sylburg.
Generals mind who said, That love and hatred was not determinable by looks and
names, but by acts of amity and hostility: these fruits show the trees, these
effects the natures of their causes; and if any of the learned have been faulty
(as no doubt some have, and perhaps are thought more guilty then they are) let
them answer for themselves, they are of age; but let not learning suffer,
because some learned men may transgress, nor all learned men be blamed, and
stand in the Baildock amongst condemned persons; they know themselves too well
to be fellowed with the Dogs of the flock in any sense but to keep Wolves from
preying on sheep; that good office they are ready to do, and refuse no
Companions that study to preserve the good; and the like do they expect from
others, while they are Subjectio trahit protectionem and protectio*
subjectionem.
in need of Protection; and for that do they pay Tribute and Subjection: and
while they carry themselves worthily, if they have not at least protection,
they will not hold themselves well requited. Consider they are the noblest
friends, and most dangerous enemies imaginable; courtesies they receive
gratefully, and pay the Donors with the Marble Statues of their Wits, which
erect and inscribe (with notable zeal and acumination) their Memorials in every
mind they meet with, and give them Monuments in their Books and writings,
omitting nothing which may add to the fames of their Benefactors: the
consideration of which made Alexander (that great Conqueror) when he saw the
Sepulcher of Achilles, cry out, O fortunate young O fortunate adolescens, qui
tuae virtutis praeconem Homerum inveneris. Aeneas Syl.
man, who had Homer the Herald of thy praises! For surely next to a blisful
state in heaven, to leave a good name which like a precious ointment shall
trickle from the head to the foot of a family; and to be blessed for deeds well
done, and a good heart in doing them, is the greatest happiness. Optimum
quemque niti and contendere decet, ut post se quoque reipublicae profit,
moderationis scilicet justitiaeque monumentis. Plini in. Paneg.


There is no man but has some twiches, and titillations of Ambition, and would
fain be remembered to have lived a life of luster and use: great Actions have
their Roots in great minds; and where Virtues are great, there are expected
Returns not unlike: he said well, Si non pro fama, pro nihilo est demicandum:
all discouragements that hinder from purchase of that Garland, are repelled
with a Necesse est ut eam, non ut vivam; so long as Fame is no low-crested, or
sordid brat, but a child of true honor, men will venture for it; there is
somewhat of Self in the most abstracted mind, which least thinks of gain and
greatness; this the Poet confesses of himself,

Quid petitur sacris nisi tantum fama poetis? Ovid. 3. de art. amandi.

Hoc votum nostri summa laboris habet.
Fame is a Poets Crown, to which aspires
He, that gained, puts a period to's desires.
Alas, how had we been in the dark? What a Mare mortuum had this world been, if
histories and Poems (penned by learned men) had not rescued Worth from
Oblivion? It Is true indeed, the Poet says,

Sed famae vigilare decet; quis nescit Homerum,
Illius aeternum si latuisset opus?
If Homers works had never made him known,
Fame would him for a worthful Poet own.
But yet Fama mendax; there have been many forgotten by the injuries of time,
and the ignorance of letters, not less worthy then those remembered; there is a
Poet for this,

Vixere fortes ante Agamemnona Hor. l. 4. Od. 9.

Multi: sed omnes illacrymabiles
Urgentur, ignotique longa
Nocte, quia carent vate sacro.
Before Agamemnon was for valiant named
There lived those who for his Peers were famed;
But they forgotten, have in dust their Tomb,
For their fame Poets work's prepared no room.
To nothing is our nature more prone, for nothing do we contest with greater
Animosity, then to be spoken and written on with respect: It was one Reason why
God would have Learning preserved and propagated, that we might have somewhat
to allure us to do well, and deter us from evil, besides that of Heaven and
Hell; there are who make nothing of Virtue and Vice; who think the one not so
amiable, nor the other so formidable as they are made; these would be less
good, and more naught then they are, were not Fame and Infamy, the one hoped
for, the other dreaded, Incitations, and Restrictions. God commanded that his
Mercies should be written, that the generations to come might know it, and the
people yet un^orn praise his Name: Psalm 102. 18. And it is happy that we have
these helps to good; by this means do we know the will of God, the lives of the
Saints, their failings and perfections; yea by this do we read the Heroic Acts
of Alexander, Caesar, Scipio, Hannibal, Belisarius, the strict lives of
Socrates, Plato, Seneca, Cato, the Learning and Art of Aristotle, Archimedes,
Plutarch, Plotinus, the Reigns of Cyrus, the Caesar's good and bad, the Kings
and Chieftains of all times and Nations, the Progresses in Arts and Sciences,
the Methods of Politic laws and rules of Government, and Life; yea by this we
may read our own follies in the censures and misfortunes of former men and
times.

And therefore who ever contemn Learning and learned men, soldiers and such as
are valiant should not, because Wars are ill managed without counsel, and
counsel seldom is stanch without learning. Virtue may receive some weak
Virtus, etiamsi quosdam impetus a Natura sumit, ^amen perficienda Doctrina est.
F^b. 12. 2.
impulsions from Nature; but the vigorous, the full seas, and high tides are
from Learning; these make her Non minorem utilitatem Reipublicae afferunt qui
toga^i Reipublicae praesunt, quam qui armati bellum gerunt. Cicero.
terrible like an Army with banners. The Orator is our Advocate; Gownmen in
counsels (says he) are as profitable Eandem laudem forti^udo foro atque
castris meretur. Valor Maxim.
as Soldiers in the field: And Those who are courageous in the Gates, no less
worthy then others daring in the Camp. God in Isa. 3. 3. when he threatens to
take away from the Land things useful and necessary, ranketh the honorable
man, the Counselor, and the eloquent Orator with the soldier: and since the
Scholar (not to flatter, for he fears no man whose breath is in his nostrils)
is so just, to think those Commonwealths happy, Nihil firmius, foelicius,
landabiliusque Republica, in qua abundant milites eruditi. Veget. l. 1.
firm, praiseworthy, in which learned Soldiers abound; let him be answered in
gratulation, and this returned back as the Military Vote, Mutuis operibus, and
praemiis juvari Eumen. iu Panegyr.
ornarique debent, Musarum quies defensione Herculis, and virtus Herculis voce
Musarum.

And the rather do the Learned expect this from the Soldiery, because by
Learning their deeds of manhood are commended to Posterity, which without
letters would die, perish, and like snow before the warm beams of a piercing
Sun, squitter into nothing. This Pope Pius the Second pressed in Argument to
the Christian world for their enterprise against the Turk, in Epist. 131.
these words, Immo vero fortissimi milites, nullius quam vestri magis interest
studia literarum esse quam florentissima: Trahimur omnes studio laudis; and
quae laus vestra diuturna esse possit nisi literis consecretur? That this
consideration wrought with Scipio Major, is not to be doubted; for when he was
dying, he ordered by Will, that the Statue of learned Ennius the Poet should be
put upon his Tomb; as judging it Ex quo Scipionis illius morituri facto
colligere possumus, quam caros in vita Sapientes and Eruditos habucrit, utpote
qui majori sibi gloriae futuram (...) pauperis statuam, quam subjugatae
trophaeum and vexilla Africae judicarit. Gaev. 216. edit. Lat.
to be more honorable, and a greater evidence of his regard of wise and
learned men, to have that memorial of a poor Poet there, then the Trophies,
Banners, and Epitaphs of Conquered Africa.

And if the Soldiery prize that which is the proper possession of the dead, A
good Name, Eona fama propria defunctorum ^st possessio.
and hope to be famous after their inhumation, then must they not sharpen and
provoke, but gently supple learned men, by giving them all of the Sun and
comfort they may; at least, by not affronting them and their Science: they can
never pardon those who vow and prosecute their suppression. To keep them low,
is to make them desperate. Necessity (says Vegetius) is the forlorn Necess^as
quaa^m Virtutis est desperatio. Ve^. 4.
of Virtue, and summons men to march furiously under the banner of Despair,
putting them (with Samson) on actions of revenge, though in these they perish:
for as that wise Counselor said to Octavian, Who can wish (...); Apud Dionem
lib. 51. p. 469. Edit. Leunclavii.
well to him, by whom he is hindered to be noble, rich, powerful and learned?
and if once the learned Tribe be heated, and furiously provoked, they may with
the Ant, suck the Eagles eggs, though they dare not meet her in the field. That
Painter got nothing, who to pleasure his fantasy, reproached the deformities
of Hyponactes his body, which in a misshapen case carried a well-ordered soul.
There is no man so much an enemy to himself, as he who forces fame from
infamy; who is pleased with nothing more then with rage and ruin, till he
deserve and have that dismal blemish on him, which Jeroboam the son of Nebat
had, who made Israel to sin; or that Nero had, of whom Eusebius (...). lib. 2.
Eccles. Hist. page 49.
says, It must needs be a choice good, that was by him persecuted.

There is nothing so true a basis of honor, as Favet pietati fid^que Deus, per
quae populus Romanus ad tantum fastigium venit. l. 44.
Virtue, Truth, Lenity: God (says Livie) is a favourer of piety and faith, by
which the Romans advanced their greatness. And those who are irregularly
rigid, who are bounded by no laws but Will, and pleased with no moderation but
extremity, may do well to consider that of the Poet, Claudian.
Romani scelerum semper sprevere ministros: and view the brevity of their Power
in the Observations of wise men, who conclude, Imperia crudelia Guev. 457.
Edit. Lat.
magis acerba quam diuturna.

To all my friends I wish accumulation of good, and that from the deserts of
convincing by humanity, rather then destroying by force. I shall ever prefer
Absolom's Courtship above Attila's power, though both of them to their purposes
were abominable: And so does that learned Pope Pius the Second; An adversary
(says he) is more overcome with Facilius beneficio quam gladio vincitur
inimicus: non injuriae adjiciendae sunt injuriis, n^que mala malis cumulanda,
sed purganda primo contumacia est, post damna resarcienda, exi^de beneficia
^ubjungenda. Epist. 141. ad Episcop. Cracroviens.
courtesy then fire and sword; one injury ought not to make way for a second,
nor are evils to be multiplied; where Charity is broken by the first offense,
the old leaven is first to be purged out, then satisfaction given, and last of
all obligations of future amity to be studied. Thus he.

I like not the temper of Caracalla, (who delighted more in Magicians and
Juglers then worthy men); for when he (...) etc.
saw himself hated, he told the Romans (...). Zonar. Tom. 2. page 221.
plainly, that he had power to command his own security, though not their love;
and therefore did he less value reproaches, or fear danger by their disfavour.
My consent accompanies carriages like those of Julius Caesar, whose successes
Fortune so served, that he could no sooner wish then have, not see before
conquer his Foe (crying out, Teneo te Africa, victoriarum omen non aliunde quam
a virtute petens) yet was he more victorious by his clemency then Chivalry: He,
he it is, whom Vict is enim Pompeii liberis in Hispania, reversus in urbem,
cunct is omnino qui adversus eum arma tulerant, ignovit. Multos etiam
magistratibus honestavit. Aeneas Vicus in vita ej^s. p. 14. 15.
we read, forgiving all his enemies who were in arms against him, and honoring
some of them with Government under him. Next to him in this course of
overcoming by kindness, Eunapius Sardianus in vita ejus.
was Chrysanthius (Governor of Lydia under Julian) who so moderately carried
things, that no man could justly complain, that either his person or fortune
was in danger, further then in that misfortune which is common to worldly
things. Yea, all Politicians have more considered the effects of persuasion
then compulsion, and demeaned themselves so, that whoever had cause to
complain, learned men should not.

Let Domitian put Metius to death only for having the world painted on his
(...), Zonar. Tom. 2. p. 197.
chamber walls; and the Rhetorician, for declaring against Tyrants: yet will
good and sober (...). Idem codem loco.
Governors, rather carry themselves so wisely as not to deserve, then so
fiercely as to fear and frown on the reproofs of wise men. They who read
Orbasius Sardianus setler of Julian in the Empire, Marsilius Ficinus Oracle of
the Medicean family, and friend to him who laid the foundation of the Tuscan
greatness; Richlieu Omnipotent, as it were, of France, and the augmentation of
that Nations greatness by his counsel in his time; He that considers Morton the
diligent agent Hollingsh. p. 737. 746.
of H. 7. and what services be did to his Master, will readily yield, that it
is of great Concernment to nourish learned men; and that Governors do much
regard their own stability and credit in preferring them.

If any say they have been enemies to reformation, and so are hindrances,
rather then helps, I shall request them to veiw impartially, and to examine
proofs before they condemn: And withal to consider that all Learned men are
not of a mind, nor is Learning the sole cause why men dissent, but sometimes
Conscience which indeed is informed thereby, as it is the improver of the souls
reason: and if conscience be so tender in ordinary men, that when they can give
no reason, they vouch this plea, and are gently dealt with all and pardoned
their errors, and for the future admonished: Then why is not the same liberty
allowed learned men, as the excuse of their disagreement? If the learned qua
such, have opposed any thing of God, out of malicious wickedness, then let them
suffer as evildoers: but if they have but differed in matters disputable, if
they have done but what they conceived was their duty to do, they have not
deserved reproach. I am of Plynies mind, Errare me, sed cum illis sinant quorum
non seria modo sed etiam lusus exprimere laudabile est.

I will declare my self to all the world for one who approve reformation in
Religion and Learning, as an Act of piety and universal good; but truly, O
Powers, there is much heed to be taken in a matter wherein miscarriage is so
easy and fatal: Cassidore says omnia deliberata sunt robusta; and I have ever
judged things done in haste, fit to be repented of at leisure. In the Counsel
of Basil Consultation was had about reforming Religion, and the Counsel
concluded to begin with the Minorites, one of the meanest Orders; but the
Emperor Sigismund cried out, Non a Minoritis sed a majoritis. Take down those
Top-sayles of defyance, that are hoysted up against Principles of Art and sober
Science; polish off that rust and canker which Time and Impudence has forced
upon Religion and Art: Employ learned and unprejudiced Men to prepare things
for your deliberation and Authorization, and then there is hope to come to
Anchor, and to make a successful port the Haven of Truth and Honor.

Ignorant men though never so well*affected, never so conscientious, are as
improper discoverers of errors in Arts they skill not, as blind (...), etc.
Plotinus Ennead. l. 6. p. 53. Edit. Ficini.
men judge of Colors they never saw. Plotinus tells us that as by the eye the
beauty of any thing is perceived: which is the cause why blind men cannot judge
of beauty and not beauty; so likewise the beauty and excellency of Arts and
Sciences are truly known by those, and those only, who understand them: And
Guevara says, Ad agendum hortari illum qui In Horo' prin. Lat. p. 397.
quid sit agendum nesciat, ludibrii suspicione non caret. Ignorance as ill
becomes a refiner of Art, as want of Tools does an Artificer, or of weapons a
Soldier; and Precipitancy is as great an opposite to well doing, as
consumptions are contrary to strength. Peevish and partial men will neither
examine thoroughly, nor report faithfully, what posture Arts are in, what
inconveniences they have upon them, and what remedies are rightly to be
applied; they can readily carp and find faults to get and keep to themselves
employments, and to be of note in the eyes of men; but truly to deserve what
they have, is least part of their care. To these that of the Emperor Frederick
is very applicable, when Gaspar Schlikius had before him sharply inveighed
against Hypocrisy and Hypocrites: O, quoth the Emperor, Thou must go beyond
Ultra Sauromatas ergo and gla^ialem Oceanum tibi est eundum; and cum eo
veneris, non omnino carebit Hypocrisi locus, si modo and tu homo non Deus es.
Inter mortales enim nemo est qui non ex aliqua part fictus fucatusque sit.
Aeneas Sylvius lib. 1. Tom. de dictis and factis Alfonsi Regi^.
the Sauromatae and the frozen Seas, if thou will outgo Hypocrites: and when
thou have gone to the utmost period of this Globe, thou will not miss an
Hypocrite, if thou thy self art there, and art a man and not God; for there is
no man alive but has some spice of hypocrisy, and in some thing or other is
not the same he seems to be. To do then the work so as not to mar it, and make
the remedy worse then the disease, is the mark to be aimed at, and an endeavor
well worthy all men's good speed in the name of the Lord. Only I beseech you
that are engaged herein, remember what Solomon counsels, Be not over much wise;
Spin no finer a thread then will hold twisting; One over-shoot may ruin all:
Cave, deformes multabona uno vitio, as Livie well: There is need Lib. 30.
of much address to God by holy and humble prayer, and much self-denial, yea
composure and honest zeal; to do this wisely, will be a matter of great moment.
Qui been distinguit, been docet: There is a necessity of putting difference
betwixt things and words, art and craft, reason and sophistry, corruptions and
constitutions. It Is safe imitating the learned and prudent Numa, who in settling
the City of Rome, observed this method; Those Laws, Customs and Usages which
Romulus his Predecessor had introduced and settled, he continued inviolable, as
made by an excellent judgment: but if he discovered any new evil that they
punished not, that he wisely supplied. This (...), etc. Halycarnass. l. 2 p
124. Edit. Sylburg.
course is like to be successful in all Reformations, and commendable in
Reformers; but to destroy the Mother with the babes, to take away the
underpinnings, and not to shore up by somewhat able to carry the frame upon
which so great stress lies, is very dangerous, like errors in War, which admit
of no postentry: Inemendabilis est error quae violentia Martis committitur: and
the best issue it Valor. Max.
can have, is to make men detract from the honor of Governors and Government.
And if the happiness of former Merits and Munificence arose from the grateful
characters, and immortal sacrifices of praise offered to their Memories by the
Learned; they must expect little mention of renown or gallantry, whose Epitaphs
and Memorials are penned, not by encouraged and obliged, but by injured and
incensed Poets and Historians, who almost with Julius Sabinus are forced under
ground, Dion lib. 66. p. 445.
and fain to retire, being afraid to live in any conspicuity, who will brand
their age as Genebrard did the age 900. for unhappy. Infoelix saeculum hoc
dicitur (says he) exhaustum omnibus ingenio et doctrina claris, quod in eo
nihil dignum memoria posteritatis gestum sit; hoc ipso infoelicissimum, quod
Ecclesia sub Caesaribus esset captiva, sine ullo bono fere Pontifice* sine ullo
celebri Concilio. They are his words quoted by Wolphius in his Memor. Cent. 10.
p. 251.

I write not this (O Powers) as if they hoped by any thing which savoured of
menace, to gain what by mediation they despair of: They well know, Books and
quils are unlikely to prevail against Swords and Guns: Moribus potius
aestimemur quam Insignibus: Their aim is to conquer you by the gentle cr^, and
to persuade you that those who are wise and philosophical, cannot be so vile
and wicked as not to deserve somewhat Nemo in summam nequitiam incidit qui
unquam sapientiae haefit. Seneca.
like favor, at least security from disturbancy, and reproach; Hitherto they
have neither been gainers by things, nor yet mendicants in them; they have
suffered under the reproaches of superstitious, disaffected, malignant; this
they bear, and desire it may be heeded by them, as Gods Monition to them, to
walk circumspectly, not as fools, but as wise: all that they supplicate is,
that they may have as they St Cyprianus in Epist.
desire; Non de annis quisque suis, sed de meritis aestimandus, and be
accounted what their virtues and innocuous conversations represent them; all
other testimonies of respect (save only to preserve them in their persons,
professions, and rights, while they pay tribute to whom tribute, fear to whom
fear, and honor to whom honor belongs) they cannot look for; nay truly, they
want them not, unless ye want them too. For as Sarisburiensis said well,
Facilius est ut divitiae Philosophantem impediant quam ut Philosophiae quippiam
conferant; the friendship of wise men is as noble as that of great men.
Libanius (...). etc. Eunapius, p. 135.
thought it loss for him to hearken to Iulians honor and preferment; Rex
Philosophi amicitiam emere voluit, Philosophus regi suam vendere noluit, says
Valerius Maximus. All that they covet, next to a good conscience, is that they
be secured from ruin, and ye not dishonored by treading upon a worm, and
laying load upon a broken back; For nothing makes you more naked, and unlike
God who will not break the bruised reed, nor quench the smoking flax, then to
be in any degree hurtful to men harmless and scientifick. The piety of
Antoninus, the gentleness of Nihiltam deforme quam ad summum Imp^rium
acerbitatem naturae adjungere. In Antonino pietas, in Vero bonitas, in Marco
sapientia consecrata. Lamp.
Verus, the learning of Marcus, make them memorable, says Lampridius; and
grave Zanchy assures us, that the more godly and zealous Kings and Princes have
been in all Quo Reges and Principes fuerunt Dei and purae religionis
amantiores, illos etiam eo fuisse studiosiores reparandarum scholarum, and in
praeceptores, atque studiosos humaniores and benigniores. In Orat. de
apperiendis in Eccles. Scholis ante Tom. 6.
ages, and the more addicted to pure religion, the more studious have they been
to erect and maintain Schools of learning, and the more courteous and
bountiful to their teachers, and fellow-students; Pure and undefiled religion
before God, and the Father, is this, to visit the fatherless and widow in
their extremity, and to keep himself unspotted of the world, James 1. 8.

Those who intend to rule and live virtuously, cannot but contribute to the
preservation of learning out of selfe-ends and interests, had they no higher a
principle to walk by, because thereby have they the praise of their virtue
continued and transmitted to posterity. The Holy Ghost gives us the history of
gracious men, not only as a testimony of Gods efficacy and power in turning the
heart that is desperately wicked, into actings of devotion, penance, patience,
contentation, and readiness to follow God upon his Summons: but also to
encourage weak Christians against those reasonings which their humble and
serious censures of themselves (nay to their sadness) occasion, and under
which they may be long passive; and also to direct us to eye God, not
disapproving our attendance on him in order to the recompense of reward, the
Saints of God for the^r graces and notable qualities being kept fresh in memory
by the benefit of holy Writ, that we might be encouraged so to do, and assured
so to have.

Those who by ill doing, know themselves absurd, hated and execrable, who will
have their heaven here, being hopeless of it hereafter, may rage and endeavor
to rifle Learning, and to cut off the learned, root and branch: Nero, Julian,
Attila, the Priests of Jupiter, who think no means so true to their safety, as
to bath themselves in the blood of the Infant and tender Muses; (I allude to
that counsel given to Constantine while a Heathen, quoted by Zonar. Tom. 3. p.
5.) these, with other such monsters, recorded for their rapes, incests,
murders, luxuries, oppressions, which made them execrable, might endeavor to
stop the current, to corrupt the springs, to denigrate the credits of men, whom
they thought averse to them, and studious of censuring their courses; But their
labor was in vain, God will not have madness buried as Moses was in an unknown
place. His justice has condemned it shame here, and to torment hereafter, and
his counsel shall stand. Vespasian mist his mark, when he banished all the
Philosophers of his (...). Dion. (...). 66. p. 751.
time, because they spoke boldly against his vices and tyrannies; Mucianus was
too blame to give hm that counsel, which is branded more to proceed from
wrath, then wisdom. Bad men had need with Saul, get amongst the Prophets; the
presence of good persons sometimes honors those who are evil, and restrains
them from acts of stench, and ill-savour.

There have been courses taken to burn records; and the injury of time this way
has left us much in the dark. We read of an obdurate Pharaoh, who would corrupt
the midwives of Egypt to destroy the males of Israel, as they were on their
Exodus 1. 15.
birth into the world; Herod's tricks have been acted over and over upon
Innocents; but God has still reserved a generation who have with much verity
and exactness so effigiated the reason of this rigor, that no State or
private person of account and value can look upon them so doing, and their
actions so done, without abhorrency and execration, nor read the records of
them without magnifying those pens which give vices such mortal wounds:
Ruffinus has a note of the tongue Ad haec vulnera quae infliguntur ex lingua
inter homines medicus poene nullus est. Defens. lib. 1. adv. Hieronymum.
which here I will apply to the pen; No Physician can heal the wounds they make.

I will then keep a wathfull eye upon all things and words that are new, Qui
nova facit verba, gignit dogmata; I am not led by fashion, but reason, so far
as God has made me Master of it. If any be of those men's minds in Optatus,
Imago Lib. 1.
innocentiae est inter multos nefas admissum, I will not censure them, but
secure my self by praying God to keep that which is committed to his charge, my
understanding, will, and affections; I will never regard those Ranting lighs,
which put out the eyes of Arts, and persuade that Christ is more in Peter the
fisherman, and Amos the Herdsman, unlearned, then in Peter the Apostle, and
Amos the Prophet, called and gifted extraordinarily: I would not have that true
of us, which Seneca said, though to another purpose; authoritatem habemus
senum, vitia Seneca, Ep. 4.
puerorum, nec puerorum tantum, sed infantium, that as Christians of old, we
talk of Christ with much seeming reverence, and old truth we say we will
maintain, but yet prepare to welcome new lights, though not only besides, but
against old truths; I dare not condemn new things wholly, because I read There
shall be 2 Pet. 3. 13.
a new heaven and a new earth, wherein dwells righteousness; that is new
indeed, we will cry Hosannah to that, or with favor use the Churches petition,
O God make speed to save us, O Lord make haste to help us through bad, to
better times; nor dare I close with new things readily, and forsake the aged
paths, because God commands us to enquire for the old Jerem. 6. 16.
way, the good way, and we shall find rest to our souls. It shall be my
prayer to have John 14. 17.
that Spirit which leads into all truth; that Spirit is not a Spirit of blood,
boast, fury, delusion; Arnob. adv. Gent. lib. 2.
Nihil a Deo quod sit nocens aut exitiabile proficiscitur, but a Spirit calm,
soft, sanctifying; it calls to man to own God, and not himself; to love
others, and do good for his sake who is good, and does good; It calls to Passion
and Revenge, Vengeance is mine, I will repay, says the Lord: It stifles all
elevations to disturbance, with that, The servant 2 Timothy 2. 24.
of Christ must not strive, but be gentle unto all men, apt to teach, patient,
as Christ was, who submitted to, not rose against civil Governments; it bids a
man cleanse the inside of Matthew. 25. 25.
the cup and platter rather then the outside: rather be, then seem holy,
Zealous, un-byassed; it tells the soul. That God delights every member of Jesus
Christ should attend his station and thence not move; the Priest his Altar and
Ministration, the Soldier his command, the workman his task, and the
Tradesman his calling; Sarah must be in her tent, and Genesis 18. 9. Luke 10. 39.
the Disciples of Christ at their Masters feet; whatever else takes men up, is
besides their duty, let the excuse be what it will: Ibi vitiorum illecebrae
sunt ubi tegmen putabatur virtutum, In Eccles.
as Saint Jerome well.

I speak not against motions and new lights conform to the word of God; such
as are new in no sense but in that of discovery to particular souls; the light
is old, because founded upon the rock of ages, and the ancient of days, Who
was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be, world without end, Amen. That
it is new, is in order to men who before saw it not, though the word was nigh
them; Truth changes not, thou only O man, make the change. It may be when
thou saw less light, thou had more steadiness, yea, and more holy warmth
in thee; Is not now thy soul all eye? where is thy hand of charity, and thy
foot of perseverance? art thou not rolling on the troublous sea of temptation?
and does not Satan tempt thee by thine eye to admire the glory of the world,
and to follow what men and times will best approve? like one Menas in Zonar,
who was (...). Zonar. Tom. 3. p. 150.
ever of the strongest side, but seldom fast to any way: Take heed; there is a
Lion in this way; Christ, if thou belong unto him, will fetch thee home by
weeping cross; it were better for thee to practice that thou know, then to
know much and do little; Mary's one thing, is beyond Martha's many things.
Aristippus tells us, not those who eat much are most healthy; and (...), etc.
Diogen. in vita ejus.
the Apostle assures that not the hearers, but doers of the word are blessed.

It Is true, the hand of God is not shortened, his secrets are now as well as ever
with his servants; He may, if he please, take up an holy soul into the third
heavens, as once he did 2 Cor. 1. 2.
Saint Paul, and let him hear (...), those ineffable words; he may, if so he
please, talk with man, as once with Moses, face to face, or Exodus 33. 11.
as to the Prophets whom he specially inspired, and at whose prayer and
entreaty he manifested himself variously; no question but what God pleases, he
can do; but we must look to what he does, to that out-going of his in his
Ministry, and to those directions of his in his word; these revealed things
belong to us and our children for ever* and if in that unerring Law of God we
cannot find indulgence to new lights* and expectations of Gods infallible
Spirit, carrying his Saints, while in the flesh, contrary to Scripture, or
above, or besides it, either to the right hand, or to the left, then may we not
heed such new light, nor follow it; there is danger in going out of the way;
the Devil is plotting his own advantage by this delusion, Lutherus, Tom. 1. c.
8. de Versutia Haeret.
Discamus hoc esse proprium* artificium diaboli; Si non potest nocere
persequendo and destruendo; facit hoc corrigendo and aedificando; There was a
Prophet of our own once said, he never feared Popery, and I will add
profaneness, but at the back door of a reformation; this red Dragon waits
till the woman in the wilderness of this world be delivered of her child, that
he may devour it, Revel. 12. but God will preserve it, and cast out the Devil
which deceives the whole world, as it there follows, ver. 9. I know there
are some which count our reformation perfect, because they take liberty to say
and do their pleasures, to call Learning a mark of the beast, order and forms
an encroachment upon their Christian liberty: methods of devotion, readings of
Scripture, singing o^ Psa^mes, Conventions in Churches, Commemorations of
deliverances, confessions of faith beggarly rudiments, pieces of will worship
and carnal Gospelling; nay, accuse the holy Scriptures not to be the word of
God, and to have no better proof then the traditions of the Church, which are
errable, and full of improbabilities. These are the men, whom former ages found
(as Irenaeus expresses it) crying up themselves for perfect, and the seed of
election, having grace from above, as their (...). Iren. lib. 1. adv. Haeres.
p. 22.
due by virtue of that Syzygia, which is seraphicall, and not to be described:
and insulting over other men as idiots, formalists, unversed in heavenly
things, having no better evidence of their sanctity and interest in Christ,
then the common calculate of being in the Church, and of using ordinances, and
submitting to Church Fellowship: To these, if God forgive, we forgive their
pride, and will repay them in prayers, using the words of the forenamed
Irenaeus, That they may come Nos autem precamur, non perseverare ^os in fovea
quam ipsi foderum, sed segregari ab hujusmodi matre, and exire a Bytho and
absti^ere a vacuo, and umbram der^linquere, etc. adv^rsus Haeres. l. 3. c. 46.
out of the snare of Satan, and not* be drowned in that pit which they have
dug, but decline that vain shadow which has deceived them, and return to
the Church which is the Spouse of Christ, and so have Christ formed in them:
which if they refuse to do, and continue despisers of Gods holy things, we must
not bid them good speed, but obtest against them as against such as God and his
Church cannot be at peace with; for as Optatus says, What manner of building
can Quale potest esse aedificium quod de ruina construitur? Optat. l. 3.
that be, which is formed of Ruin? and what good Religion can that be which is
cried up, against, and to the dishonor of Scripture? Give me, O my God, to make
thy Word my delight in this house of my Pilgrimage, and not to forsake it,
though death and danger were threatened those who owned it: let me never be
further in love with any knowledge, then as it may advance the knowledge of
Christ, and make me humble as he was; this is the glory of a Christian, to be
humble in Greatness, poor in Riches, patient in Troubles, mild in Wrath, and
every thing which may call him (in a sober sense) Partaker of the Divine
nature, having escaped the corruption that is in the world through 2 Pet. 1. 4.
lust.

Sure I am, all the godly and learned will hate and explode all Tenants which
impair Scripture credit, or disparage Learning, the ordinary Key to those
Mysteries; they dare not cut off Samsons Locks, in which the Churches strength
consists, lest the Church complain she is robbed of her jewels, and without
them she be left in the dark: cursed be he that removes these ancient Marks:
and therefore S. Ierom expounds that place, Amos 8. 13. [ In that day shall the
Virgins pulchras Synagogas interpretantur, and elec^os magistros populi; and
paulo post, Ex quo intelligimus quando doctrina non fuerit in Eccle^ia, perire
pudicitiam, castitatem mori, and omnes abire virtutes. Hieron. in locum.
young men and fair Virgins faint for thirst] to be the beautiful Synagogues
wherein the knowledge of God was taught, and the learned Rabbis who taught in
them; adding, that when learned teaching cease in the Church, all modesty of
mind, and chastity of soul will determine; yea Virtues fly away by flocks
like Turtles from their Cotes infested by Polecats.

In truth, Learning is that great buckler which the Church uses to her defense
against Atheists, Papists, Heretics, Schismatics, out of whose snares she
cannot Extricate her self but by such helps. It is the Cherubim (as it were)
set to guard the Paradise of God against those that would Ruin her Order, and
supplant her Nursery: could the Devil but steal away these Roses and Violets,
these flowers of use, as well as variety, he would make a strong party against
Truth. S. Cyril of Alexandria tells us the use of Sanctos Mystagagos
pulchritudine intelligentiae resplendescentes, tanquam propugnacula impiis
s^tarum inv^ntoribus et scurrilibus haereticorum nugis obstitisse.
learned men in the Church, while he says, they stand against Sects like
bulwarks, and are the Rescuers of Truth from the captivity of Heretics, and
the bold intrusions of their Sophistries*

The knowledge of this makes Satan (as I before observed) busy to gain many
Proselytes of the learned Race, and them to chain fast to him, and keep ready
by him upon all occasions, and by them to lay load of scorn and contempt upon
those devout and precious souls whom he finds big with the honey of holy
affection to God, but not trimmed and rigged to a learned Argumentation or
Artly Contest; in this case he brands holy men with the terms of Ignorant,
Peevish, Litterlesse, as if the Conquest were got, when Cham Genesis 9.
could see the nakedness of Noah; or* the Kingdom 2 Samuel 16. 21, 22.
secured to Absalom, when he enjoyed his Fathers Concubines upon the house top.
Thus suffered Truth when the poor Waldenses and others gave it owning: thus did
the Pharisees deal by Christ. What? we the great masters of knowledge, skilled
usque ad apices literarum; who are as naturally versed in the Law, as fishes in
Water, or birds in Air, we be taught by a Carpenters son? telling Matthew. 13. 55.
the world by that, how improbable it was that he should be learned who had so
mean an origin and illiterate a breeding as they thought he had. The Mouths of
wicked men are never wider open, then when the Israelites must to Philistines
for edgetools; when they must fly to the fig leaves of an adversaries
ingenuity for Apology; the Champions of the Church being liker Moses for Zeal
then knowledge, when they say, we can dye for Christ, not dispute for him, as
the Woman-Martyr did in Queen Mary's days; O then (quoth they) a goodly
Religion, a creditable Truth, propped up by twiggs and rods of tender
persuasions, or holy motions and meanings, reeling upon the rencounter of every
blast. O (say they) show us a man of might, a Seraphick Dr. an illuminated
Schoolman of your way, a Scotus, a Hales, a Thomas, a Bradwardine, an Ockham;
this Reproach makes Rachel mourn, and importune Jacob for children; but when
God remembered the Church in her low estate, and sent forth Scholastic
Champions to defy these defiers of Truth, and to invade those Dominions of the
Intellect, Affection and Practice, which Satan had prepossessed, and now
claimed as his own, then was the Church like the Tower of David builded for an
Armory, whereon there hang a thousand bucklers, all shields of mighty men.
Cant. 4. 4.

And here to the praise of God, and the Renown of our late English Prelacy, I
do aver, that our Religion, the Protestant Religion, has received more Right
and Justification from the Clergy, of that judgment and Ordination, then from
any Protestants besides: I undervalue no Church, no Government whatsoever that
keeps Christ in it; no gifts in any man, who takes not out a Bill of Divorce to
Humility: I honor the least of Christ in any man; what ever sprig lodges the
smallest bird of Paradise in it, is precious: I look upon distinctions, and
ways of Separation, as things of humane intercourse, if not Diabolick
Inventions: Christiani esse desierunt qui Christi nomine amisso, humana and
externa vocabula induerunt. Lactant. l. 4. Guev. p. 90. especially when they
come in the whirlwind of an Enthusiasme, and not in the fresh and gentle gale
of an Evangelical simplicity, and an humble submission; but are poynted to
pierce through by force, what they upon less turbulent terms cannot work upon:
aut invenire sequacem, aut facere, to cut the Gordian knot if they cannot untye
it; like wild Empericks, who rescind that ligament which they cannot force
against nature to their pleasures. I can entercommon with any who hold
Essentials, and are not rapsodously confused, though I do to all the world
profess my double portion of veneration due to my Mother the holy Church of
England, and her Gospel-Government truly so called. I am not ashamed to own
her, though among the Pots, because yet shall she be as the wings of a Dove
covered with silver, Psalm. 68. 13.
and her feathers with yellow gold. Yet I confess I do not so admire her, as
to exclude all other Churches of Christ, a Christian and dutiful Respect: I
know, though she may be the most beautiful, and best beloved of her Father, yet
is she not the Isaac that only must inherit: God has his Churches in other
Angles and parts of the World, tender to him as the apple of his eye, and those
must share in the inheritance of his care, custody, blessing and increase.

I honor therefore their Customs and Rights, giving them the Right hand of
fellowship; and I thank God, I have seen some of them to my comfort, and
partaken here with others, Presbyterians, in hearing Sermons, and receiving
Sacraments; and from sundry Congregationists, or Independents, heard Sermons of
Piety and Comfort, M. Jer. Boroughs, M. Th. Good win, M. Owen, M. Lockier, M.
Sydrach Sympson.
for which I bless God and them, (and I wish there were less Animosity
amongst them, because I really judge many of both ways precious, and amongst
Gods jewels) though I have kept close to my Conviction ^s to the main,
conceiving Antiquity and the Practice of the Church (not contrary to Piety or
divine Precept) warrant enough hereto: and therefore take heed, ye Saints, of
what opinion soever (for Government) how ye censure one another: It was a witty
speech of Henry 8. That the Charity of Christians was lost in some men's being
too stiff in their old Mumpsimus, others too busy and curious in their new
Sumpsimus; me thinks, we should all jointly honor assemblies of Piety and
Order, in places and times convenient, be the persons convening of what form or
way soever; so long as Christ is in the Church, the glory is not departed from
Israel; while he makes no difference of Rich and Poor, Bond and free, Romans 3 11.
Jew and Gentile: I see no warrant for any exception; my prayer shall be to be
found worthy my Calling, and to judge none before the time, because God has
reserved judgment for his peculiar, Iudicabit autem eos qui schismata
operantur, qui sunt immanes, non habentes Doi dilectionem; suamque utili^atem
potius considerantes quam unitatem Ecclesiae; propter modicas quaslibet causas
magnum and gloriosum corpus Christi conscindunt and dividunt, and quantum in
ipsis est, interficiun^; pacem loquentes, et bellum operantes; vere liquantes
culicem, et camelum transglutientes. Irenaeus advers. haeres. l. 4. p 62.
and he will execute judgment (says Irenaeus) upon all those who make
divisions, who are wild, and have not the Charity of God in them, considering
more their own profit then the Churches Unity, and who for little and light
differences, rend apieces and divide the great and glorious body of Christ; yea
as far as they are able, kill the body of Christ, speaking peace, and intending
nothing less, straning at Gnats, and passing by Camels.

I wish the Church of England had not cause to complain of her Children, once
so, and I hope Sermon. 33. in Canr.
yet for the most part so, as holy S. Bernard did of the Christians of his
time, Pax a paganis, pax ab haereticis, non pax a filiis: Our late divisions
have more advantaged our adversaries, then all our Books confuted them: they
can laugh and grin when they see us turn our swords into one another bowels,
and every man (as it were) massacre his Neighbor, when the difference is but
for a Rite, and a Humor, which ought not to stand in competition with Charity.
Let me alter S. Ieroms words, but not his sense: Iungat amicitia quos jungit
Sacerdotium; immo non dividant verba, In Praefat. 115 od Cromatium and Heliodor.
quos Christi nectit amor.

Do men of Episcopal and Presbyterian, or Independent judgment differ in
Essentials? I trow no. I am sure they did not differ but only in Rituals, the
legal maintenance of which (til somewhat in place thereof had been orderly
introduced) might have (under favor) kept the Church both pure and peaceable;
and the overturning of which (by an over-sudden gust of popular Zeal) has made
it what it is, a Byword, and what it may be feared to become, a Chaos: for as
the Moralist says well, in ruinam prona sunt, quae sine fundamentis Seneca de
ira. lib. 1.
creverunt.

Tell me, O ye Sons of Levi, why, since ye have one Father, God, and come from
one common Mother, the Church, there is such contention amongst you? are ye not
Brethren? Tell me why you speak such different dialects? Is it not because ye
have forsaken the Rules of Gospel-discourse, which should not contaminate, but
minister grace to the hearer? Why are ye so evil-eyed one to another, that you
cannot look upon the Cups of gold in your brethrens sacks mouths, but ye must
arraign them of falsehood, and Spiritual theft, and make each other offenders
for words? Did Christ give you the Precept or President of Envying, Reviling,
aggravating injuries? Did he deny to do good to his enemies, to pray for his
Persecutors, yea to sacrifice himself for the world, and command you to follow
his example in love, holiness, meekness, patience? and can you hope to have
acceptance from him whose Dictates you disobey, and contrapractise? I know not
what the matter is, that Paul and Barnabas, Ierom and Ruffinus, Calvin and
Melancthon, the Episcopal, Presbyterian, and godly Congregationists may not
agree against that adversary and accuser of the brethren (yea I shrowdly
suspect the this many years makebate) the Jesuit* and the pragmatick Roman
Priest.

I think the world is not to seek what the judgments of sober Episcopal men
are, as to things Religious: their books and practices freely resolve all
doubt, if any there be; but yet I hold it reasonable to give a short Character
of such Principles as I my self and many others walk by, and from which, as I
shall not warp without Conviction, so to them, or any of them shall I not
adhere out of obstinacy.

First, and above all, we acknowledge the Unity in Trinity, and Trinity in
Unity, the Father God* the Son God, the holy Ghost God, and yet not three Gods,
but one God, whom to know is life Eternal, and whom to glorify is the end of
our Creation.

Next, we desire to adore and worship with holy Reverence and Fear, our Lord
Jesus, the King, Head, Priest, and Prophet of the Church, and to prostrate ^ll
we have and are at his most sacred feet, who has (we trust) washed us, and all
believers in his blood, John 12. 3.
and made us to him a chosen generation, (a Royal Priesthood) a peculiar
people, zealous of good works. 1 Pet. 2. 9.
We desire to give his Spouse, our Mother, the Church, all Duty and support; we
pray, her Priests lips may preserve knowledge, their lives Mal. 2. 7.
be holy, harmless, and unspotted, their Doctrine pure and unallayed by Error,
their labor constant and successeful to the gathering together of Gods Elect,
their maintenance liberal, and their influence on men strong and vigorous for
the Gospels sake. We pity, and disapprove a Minister who is not a burning, and
shining light; John 5. 35.
we suspect him who comes before he be sent, and utters Jer. 14. 14.
what he has not in Commission; who cries Peace, when God proclaims war, and
affixeth a pretended Revelation to a real Fascination.

We cry up Learning, not as if God could not act by absolute Sovereignty, but
because he is pleased to bid us seek after wisdom, and commands Prove. 4. 5.
and 7.
his Ministers to be thoroughly furnished, to instruct, reprove, correct, and to
show themselves 2 Timothy ^. 16, 17 2 Timothy 2. 15.
workmen that need not be ashamed: which we believe and know none ordinarily
can do, without the help of Arts, and skill in Tongues.

We honor the Calling of the Ministry, and persons of the Ministers, because
we know it is the will of God that his servants should Reverence that
Ordinance, to support which, the perpetual concurrence of God is promised to
the end of the world; and though the vessels that bring this treasure Matthew.
28. ult. 2 Cor. 4. 7.
be earthen, yet we profess them estimable for their Office sake, what ever
they (abstracted from their function) otherwise be; and we pray that the
Maintenance of the Ministry be continued; accounting it no puisne mistake to
alienate or secularize that which has been consecrated and designed by the
Charities of pious Christians, to Churches, and Church-mens uses, and confirmed
to them by the Laws and Customs of the Nation; remembering that of Solomon, It
is a snare to the man who devoureth that which is holy. Prove. 20. 25.

We pray for all our Parents, both Politic and Natural, that God would give
them life and love, that God would order them so to moderate the golden Rains
of Government, that they may be to us an occasion and Example of living in all
1 Timothy 2. 2. Ephesians. 6. 5.
godliness and honesty, and that we may yield them obedience according to the
will of God, and the station they and our selves are in.

We love Religion, and the power of godliness, not Verse 13.
as a cloak of malice, ambition, disorder, but as an armor of God, whereby we
may worst Satan, and glorify God in the example of a holy and blameless life
to men-ward. We are in Charity with all men (save those who deny Charity to
Christ and his Church, whose implacability to pity or pray for, were to offend
God, and disown Christ, because to encourage his adversaries) but yet our zeal
carries us not forth to terminate this guilt of impenitent adversation to
Christ on any person, whose heart because we know not, we dare not judge: and
therefore we desire to Matthew. 7. 1.
decline all Pragmatick censure, or rash Pharisaicalnesse; to muster up
personal Errors to the disgrace of any Profession which we cannot comply with;
praying rather for circumspection and holy wariness that we give no offense to
the Church of God, then insight into the failings of others, or opportunity to
divulge them; and resolving by the grace of God, to forgive and forget wrongs
done us, out of choice and conscience, and not out of necessity, and for forms
sake.

We believe the (...) of the Sacred Scriptures, and abhor all such dispute
about them which proceeds from vain curiosity or doubt of their verity and
divine inspiration; discussing things only to our edification, not to any
indifferency, much less diminution of their authority, or the Churches
fidelity.

We earnestly, and with all humble importunity deprecate grieving the holy
spirit of God by quenching Ephesians. 3. 10. James 2* 44.
his motions, or by lying against the Truth, or fostering any known sin
incompatible with his abode in the soul; nay we earnestly beg, that he would
ever lead us into, and keep us in all Truth; John 16. 13.
that he would persuade us to be holy, meek, gentle, wise, and such every way
as becomes the Members of Christ, who is in all points complete, being to his
Church, Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification and Redemption: We sadly groan
under the profanation of Christian Sabbaths, the Separation and Sanctifying of
which we believe to be Sacred, and to be observed strictly, without labor or
unlawful pleasure, though not to a Jewish severity, the Sabbath being made for
man; and works of Nature, Necessity, and Piety Mark 2. 27.
being lawful, nay fit to be done thereon; and we never did, nor never shall
repine at any Law which punishes sin, and promotes virtue, but bless God for
all means by which we may see God honored from our selves and others.

We lament the Overliness of Preaching, and the cheap value put upon those
Ordinances; people with the coy Israelites, nauseating the Manna that once they
prayed for, and rejoiced in; many Ministers imbasing themselves and their
Message by trite and impertinent discourses, without method, or any measure of
studied sharpness shunning so much what the Apostle says, he avoided the
enticing words of man's wisdom. 1 Cor. 4. 4. that they speak not the words of
soberness, but rave and range about the wilderness of Common places, and
delight in forms of impertinent words, as if to know nothing but a trace and
tone of tedious Hyperbolizing, and to crucify ingenious pains between the two
Thieves of idleness and wordly business, were to show ones self an able
Minister of the new Testament.

We wonder at the disuse of Sacraments, specially that of the body and blood of
our Lord, which in some places has not been given, or received this many
years, contrary to the Canons of the Church and Acts of Parliament, which
require them to be given and received thrice (at least) every year which being
the Sacrament of Confirmation, seals up the Soul of the worthy Receiver in
the comfort and assurance of Gods love in Christ, and the pardon of sins by his
Merit, and for his sake; and we bemoan the Non-residencie of Ministers (so much
heretofore condemned as contrary to Law, unless in cases extraordinary) their
partiality in doing their duty, some Preaching but not administering the
Sacraments either of Baptism, or the Lords Supper; others giving one Sacrament,
but not both; not burying, Vid. Cornel. Bertr. in Eccles. l. 3. c. 4. p. 193.
not marrying, not visiting the sick, nay not owning their sheep further then
to take of them their fleece: others not preaching at all, because they cannot
preach where and what they would; and manymost eminent worthies not daring to
preach, lest they should become a Rock of offense to those men who have men's
persons in admiration, and had rather hear no Preacher, then not one of their
judgment and party; so miserable is the Church straightened, that she may well
cry out, Lam. 1. 12. Behold and see if there be any sorrow like my sorrow.

We pity the fond zeal of carnal men and giddy professors, who begin well, but
are hindered in their way by wiles of men crafty, and by their own lusts regnant
in them, who have a clamorous Magnificat for Diana, and an Hosanna for Christ,
who are contented with nothing but discontents, changes, and every thing that
fights against the power of godliness, and proclaim a Treaty with all the
infernal Furies, the Devil, the world, and the flesh. And in fine, we pray for
Charity, which the Apostle calls the bond of perfection, and terms greater Col.
3. 14.
then faith or hope, because more durable, the grace that only accompanies us
to heaven, and there stays with us, and the grace that makes us live heavenly
upon earth, without which, all grace is but as sounding brass, or a tinkling
cymball, yea without which, the gifts of Prophesying, understanding mysteries,
and all knowledge, faith able to remove mountains, distribution of all we have
to the poor, yea martyrdom it self is nothing. 1. Cor. 13.

These and other things we profess to concur in with all sound Protestants;
and if this to believe, and thus to do, be to be scandalous, Popish,
disaffected, we would not be of good report, nay we pray we may carry this
Cross of Christ to our graves, and account this Reproach great Glory. We can
comfort our selves in these buffetings, revilings, contempts, as in the
sufferings of Christ which are to be fulfilled by us (as by the holy men of all
ages foregoing) members of his body the Church. Col. 1. 24. For Magna gloria
est de imis ad summa crescere, de infimo ad maxima pervenired, limo ad coelam,
and de servitute vocari ad regnum. S. Hieron. in cap. 5. ad Romans
as S. Ierom says, It Is a great glory to reach from earth to heaven, from dust
and ashes to a being of immortality, of Servants to be made Sons, and of
beggars heirs, heirs of a Kingdom, and that of heaven too, the most durable and
supreme dignity our nature is capable of. For we can (through the power of
Christ) wish our selves accursed for his sake, and resolve to be and suffer his
rebuke without smiting again, though we had power and command thereto* since
thus God has allowed Religion to be defended^, non saevitia, sed patientia;
non scelere, sed fide; and we hope, while we thus walk to Sion, with our faces
thitherward, we shall be suffered to pass safe; and if we fall with the good
man in the Gospel, into the hands of men cruel and inhumane, shall have Powers
(like good Samaritans) to restore what is unjustly taken Tributum pretium pacis
est. Orosius l. 5* c. 1
from us, and pour oil and wine into our wounds; yea we pray (though not for
preferment, not for gain by wording godliness) yet for permission to worship
the God of our Fathers, though after the way which some men mis-na^me
Superstition, Formality, Will Worship; not thereby intending Rivalry with any
other way of worship, but desiring to attend upon Gods discovery in the use of
that means which we are persuaded is according to the word of God written in
the Law and in the Prophets, and to which the judgments of many holy Martyrs
and men have given testimony; and this (we trust) your favor will permit since
to others (no more, nor no truer Protetestants then we) this liberty is
indulged as a means to propagate the Gospel; and since that of Casiodore ought
to be in the minds of Governors, Neminem gravare debet Imperium, quod ad
Cassiod. variarum. l 1. c. 6.
utilitatem debet respicere singulorum*

This (O Powers) is the sense of those who are well-willers to learning, who
would not have troubled the world with any taste of their fears and sufferings,
or defense of their innocence, did not their silence, amidst the many
provocations of bold and defamatory challengers in some sense, and in easy
peoples opinions (though not in Truth) confess them guilty; impunitatem
consequuntur mali, dum modesti tacent; yea did not they fear Crowns of thorns,
preparing (if some may have their wills) for their captive heads, for which
Crowns of gold and silver for a memorial in the Temple of the Lord, are (I
hope) appointed, as the Phrase is Zach. 6. 11. 14. so true is that of the
Orator, Nihil est tam sanctum quod non aliquando violetaudacia. Cicer. pro
Rossio.


For mine own part, I profess before God, Angels, and men, I am moved to this
service to the Muses, not out of Passion, not out of Vainglory, not to gratify
any party I Love, or displease any party with whom in principle I co^ply not,
these would be uningenious motives, and receive their defeat and brand to be
unproper foundations for so Christian a work; that which rouses me up, is that
glory of God, peace on earth* and good will to men (all which are propagated by
Learning) and the promise of God to own those that in a right and pious way own
him. I look upon the primitive Fathers and Christians, who thought not so
meanly of their faith and art, as to forbear owning them for fear they might be
lost with their party, or lie too open to the worlds knowledge of them. I love
a sober freedom in a cause that concerns whatever is dear to man, his soul, his
eternity, his fame, all which are in hazard, if Learning and Learned men grow
obsolete. Our Lord says, If the blind lead the blind, both shall fall into
Matthew. 15. 14. Luke 6. 39.
the ditch. There is nothing so great a spur to me, next the glory of God, as
the Presidents of former times, and the courage of holy men, who were more
ready to suffer, then deserve so ill requital (...).
of their integrity. Synesius tells us, nothing is more rhetorical then
sufferings: the blood of Martyrs was seed to the Church, and made their
persecutors turn admirers, yea sometimes sufferers: it is surely a great
distrust of God which makes men faint in a good cause; how much more
Evangelical and Christian were the minds of Polycarpus, Athanasius, Cyril,
Cyprian, Justin Martyr, Arnobius, Epiphanius, Luther, Melancthon, and all the
holy Fathers, and Reverend Bishops of the Church, who dealt with men, like
Solinus his Agriophagi, who fed upon Panthers and Lions, and breathed out
nothing but blood and wounds; then are ours? while we are to deal with
Christian Magistrates, well disciplned soldiers, and common people, who have
heard of Christ, and seem to cry a daily Hosannah to him. Why should we not
believe that God will protect, and men pardon, if not be persuaded to love
those who call to them, as Jonas did, almost out of the Whales belly, in the
language of the Disciples to their Lord and Master, Carest thou not that we
perish?

Who, O who knows the mind of God? perhaps God is now dealing with our
Governors, as with Artaxerxes, to contribute to the restoring of the destroyed
places of religion and learning. It may be not by might, nor by power, but by
his Spirit; by a jawbone, by rams horns, all the rampires raised against
learning, may with Iericho's walls fall down; and therefore it concerns us all
to wait the good pleasure of God, and to cast our bread upon the waters, to do
our duty, and by fair and gentle application, move all men to cast in their
portions of help, that so this work of piety may receive the less rub.

The truth is, O Eminentissimo's, God looks that ye should come to the succor
of religion and Learning, as Nehemiah did to the building of Ierusale, with
might and main, leaving no hoof of your power un-imployed in this noble work;
Learning in all times deserves well; and Docti ab indoctis tantum, quantum Deus
ab hominibus. S^obaeus apud Guev. p. 429.
the wiseman in Stobaeus tells us, that learned and unlearned men differ as
much as God and men do; they better deserve bounty, then Herodias her dancing
daughter; you that are Constantines think so, though Herod's do not; for one
Philosopher is worth a Kingdom; Solomon tells us, There was a little City, and
few men within it, and there came a great King against it, and besieged it, and
built great bulwarks against it; Now there was Eccles. 9. 14, 15, 16.
found in it a poor wise man, and he by his wisdom delivered the City: yet no
man remembered that poor man; then said I, Wisdom is better then strength: this
is confirmed also from the instances of Proclus, whose skill served Marianns in
his fight against Vitalian, and the Thracians, as did Archimedes his art defend
Syracuse against Zonar. Tom. 3. p. 46.
the Romans besieging it. And why worth a Kingdom? Because the beautifiers of
it; Dei munus est quod vivimus, Philosophiae quod been vivimus: Arrianus says
well, Philosophers schools were treasuries of Sovereign goods, more unfurnished
with counsels against all straights, and to (...).
all purposes of advantage and honor: who but these kept up the glory of the
Grecian Empire? who but these the fame of Rome, Italy, (...). Plutarchus in
libro deliber. Educ. p. 8.
France, Spain, Germany; yea, and our own hitherto fame? And who but these must
yet preserve us (next the mercy of God) from being the reproach and byword of
the world? for true it is, that he who is a Statesman and unlearned, will
easily err and be uncivil. Who secured Alexandria from the fury of Octavian,
when he took, and resolved to sack and fire it, but Arius the Philosopher? who
had security, and whose family was privileged the fate of Dion lib. 51. p. 454.
Thebes, but Pindar the learned Poet? What escaped the armed power of Cato in
his Expedition into Greece, but the Statue of Zeno? all but that went to sale,
and made money in his distress: and that he spared for the sake of Non aere
captus nec art, unam Zenonis statuam in expeditione non vendidit Cato. Plin.
l. 24.
him it remembered? What think ye, O Powers, and people of England? is not
learning fit to be favored, and learned men worthy respect, when one Socrates
corrects the Manners and Lives of so many men, after famous in the world? 'Twas
he (as the instrument in Gods hand) who reduced Phoedo from a rude Leacher to
become a Philosopher, Plato from a light Poet to a grave Moralist, Xenophon
from a trifle to become a brave Historian; Aeschines and Aristippus of poor
made rich, Alcibiades of ignorant learned, Charmydes and Thyages Ficinus in
Com. Coutin. Platon. p. 1173.
of wild, sober Citizens; Euthydemus and Mnemon, of cavilling Sophisters, true
wise men. See more effects of learning in Sabel. Orat. 7. de usu Philosoph.

No wonder then, Antiquity put such value upon them, accounting them the Stars
of their ages, the souls of their Government, Saviors to their Countries,
contending for their births, (as many now do for their graves, who shall
swallow them up first) and erected pillars and monuments to their memories.
Amongst those 49. which Textor mentions to have Statues of brass In Officina.
erected to them; most were Philosophers, and men of the long robe; nay, though
they were cynicall and tart, yet had their merits a due commemoration: The
Contrymen of Diogenes would In vita ejus.
not let the Cynique depart obscurely, but raise a Statue of brass to him,
thus inscribed,

(...)
(...)*
Brass loses of its weight in time; but fame,
After the Cynick's Death, preserves his name.
O Antiquity, how have thou surpast us, who think it our virtue to contemn,
not follow thy Vetera jampridem institut^ corruptis moribus lud^brio sunt.
Guev. p. 193. l. H^rol. princ.
commendable president? what compensation can we g^ve posterity for the stain
we their unhappy Ancestry shall leave on our selves, to be objected against
them. It was once said to the Jews by our Lord Jesus, Ye are the sons of those
that have slain the Prophets; let it be our honor to raise up these widows
children again: Nothing more reproaches B^ Morton, B^ Hall, B^ Brownrig, with
others.
our Religion, then that Bishops and Churchmen famous for piety and learning,
should be neglected and exposed to want: Let it not be told in Gath, nor
declared in the streets of Ascalon. That be far from us, to make those heads
bald, whom former * Plut. in vitis Oratorum. vit. x. p. 84. Edit. Paris.
times crowned with crowns of gold ( Demosthenes was four times crowned by four
several Grandees, Zeno by the Athenians, and Statius by Domitian) or those
purses empty which they filled. I read of the bounty of Alexander, who supplied
Aristotle with great sums of money to write his Natural History: and I wish I
could applaud any, or all of this age for like generosity to that renowned,
learned, matchless Archoishop of Arm^gh. He it is of whom that of Paterculus
concerning Augustus is true; yet no man considers his losses, age, and other
sufferings I must say as Anicetus Cyrenaeus did of Plato, Prosecto peccatu^
videri possit quod majori summa non juverim tantum virum.
Truly* it is a great fault, that we do not provide more liberally for him, of
whom, as Aristotle of him, I may say, This is the man whom all wise and pious
(...) esse illum q^m probi omn^s me^to debean^ et i^tari and commendare. (...).
gl. mu^di, p^rt 10. conside^. 7.
men deservedly ought to imitate and applaud. Did Isocrates sell one Oration
for twenty talents? Would* a private Citizen, Largius Licinius, have given for
Plynies Commentaries 40000 pieces of silver? Did Marcus Popilius sell a small
Annal for 16000 pieces of money? And had Oppian the Poet a piece of gold for
every* verse of his from the son of Severus? And does no man consider the pious
labors, preaching, writings and unspeakable toil, yea, the vaste sums that
this Leviathan of learning, (in his former prosperity and wealth, to the
advancement of religion, has expended? If Ablabius the Egyptian Philosopher
was thought worthy by Constantius to be compeer with his Son in Government; If
Dion Prusiens by Trajans favor was permitted to enter Rome triumphantly; If
Adrian and Anthony preferred the Historian Cass. loco prae^tato.
Arianus to Consular dignity, only for writing eight books of the life of
Alexander the great: why may not this famous Churchman and friend of God, (who
is often in the Mount of holy devotion, praying for us, who are in the valley
of this world, sinning and enraging one another) deserve to be honored and
supplied plentifully with what ever is proper to his place, merits, and piety?
Demetrius Phalerius never deserved his 360 Statues of the Athenians, better
then he does Memorials of the Church of God, in which he has been a star of
the first magnitude. Well, however we reckon, Tacitus arnal.
suum cuique decus posteritas rependit; though Omnia praete^eunt quibus homine^
in hoc mundo laetantur, atas, valetudo, forma, deliciae, opes, voluptates. Sola
nos si semel recepta fuerit usque ad mortem, sapientia comitatur. Aeneas Syly*
lib. 1. Ep. 4.
all things in the world do, and must fail; age, health, power, beauty,
riches, relations, pleasures, have but their times, and shall depart the stage
of time and life: yet shall wisdom be the immortal Herald of its subject, and
shall erect an Altar to memory, even in the minds of enemies, of whom it shall
be had in true honor, and those shall be ashamed who look upon learned men as
decayed Temples, which neglects have defaced, and time will hastily incinerate:
And therefore the Poet sang well.

-- Nascentem extinguite flammam,
Ne serae redeant post aucta pericula curae.
For as the Orator said, Plus proderit demonstrasse recta^ protinus viam, quam
revocare ab errore jam lapsos.

Me thinks, I hear our Neighbors from beyond the Sea cry out to us, in behalf
of learning and learned men; O England, is this thy kindness to thy friend?
Do thou thus repay thy Teachers and Statetists for their pains, care, study,
indefatigablenesse? Do ye thus reward the Lord, O foolish people and unwise?
The Lord who has kept you upon Eagles wings? who has set you as a beacon upon
an hill? who has fed you with the finest of the flower? who cast the net of
his Gospel in your British seas, taking into his Church you who were barbarous,
in the shadow of death, bringing you into the glorious liberty of the sons of
God, giving you a noble succession of godly learned zealous Bishops, Doctors
and Presbyters, who have preached the word in season and out of season, and
lived lives of holiness and exemplary charity amongst you? Can ye without
sorrow consider your misery and leanness, if your Teachers should be removed
into corners, and your scholars grow like the Mountains of Gilboa, upon which
the dew of greatness and support falls not? Come hither, and help us, Our
fields are white unto harvest, our Schools, Churches, Purses, are yours, only
be called by our name; Forget your fathers house, and we shall delight in your
beauty.

This, O this may come to pass, if God do not prevent it, but he can command
deliverance for Jacob, and bid our Governors as of old, Be ye a covert to the
outcasts from the face of the spoiler: and he will do it; (for they shall be a
willing people in the day of his power) and they cannot more glorify God in
any thing then in keeping learning (The King of Heavens daughter) in salva and
arcta custodia, then in treating her houourably, and putting a Ne exeat regnum
upon her, I hope God will put a Spirit into, and continue it in them to resolve
for learning, and learned men, as the people did for Jonathan, 1 Samuel 14. 45.
Shall Jonathan dye, who has wrought this great salvation in Israel? God
forbid. As the Lord lives, there shall not one hair of his head fall to the
ground: yea to offer their power and protection to her and hers. (...). Dion
76. p. 865


I never was like Bulas in Dion, who was so crafty, that he was seen and not
seen, taken and not held, such an one as no body could tell what to make of
him. I bless God, my aim was never to (...). Halicarnass. lib. 2. p. 128.
Edit. Sylb.
be more politic then honest. Times evil, like those of old, in which freedom
of speech and opinion was criminal, would persuade to silence; then perhaps it
would be prudent, (I say not pious) to hearken to Peter's counsels save thy
self; If I had lived in Rome when Appius Claudius did, I should have (...).
used his words, and bemoaned the age as he did, Woe is me, the piety of our
Ancestors is not seen in our manners; gravity is censured pride, justice folly,
valor madness, temperance, and modesty restivenesse, and those things (...).
Halicarnass. lib. 9. p. 610.
only admired which are of ill report, and which have ruined many powerful
Commonwealths: thus he* and then not without cause. And since I live in a time
(...) to be tree ^pray God keep it so, if it be; or make it so, if it be not:
Free, not to fury, not to uncharitableness, but to love and good works, free to
men pious and peaceable, free to Learning and Religion: (...). Epist. 4.
I may mind men of what Isocrates wrote, That freedom of discovery what men's
thoughts are, (so they do it submistively and without bitterness) is the
greatest sign of affection: Men are most bold with friends, because to them
most welcome. Time is Gods creature, and so are Men, who make times good or
bad: and therefore I publish to all men my censure, that so far I love the age,
as it is pious and learned; and the men of it, so far as they will suffer it so
to be, or reform it to be so if it be not. While this Land is as was Goshen, a
comfort to Jacobs, it shall be the subject of my praises: when it becomes (as
God, I hope, will never suffer it so to be) a Moriah, whereon Isaac the child
of Promise, Religion and Learning must be slain, it shall be the object of my
tears. I am of his mind, who preferred Discipulus esse malo sapientum
Philosophorum* quam rex rudium and barbarorum Anacharsis in Epist. ad Craesum.
to be a disciple of wise Philosophers, above rule over Nations rud^ and
irreligious.

The Lord deliver us from his Candlesticks remove, from a famine of his word,
from pride, vainglory and hypocrisy, from envy, hatred, malice and ignorance;
these will discourage Virtues from coming to unlade at our Ports; these will
force the trade of Arts from our havens: If Paupertatis est proprium quando
alia deficiunt exercere libertatem. Fab. Decl. 9.
Philosophers be poor, and prophets not esteemed in their own countries, they
will take the boldness to be gone without Letters of License, and to (...)
their for^es: Every Country welcomes Wise men, and every wind carries them to
their own Plantation: Quaelibet Patria ingenioso Patria. Moors and Affrican
Savages will give Sardinius entertainment, when his Countrymen will Matt. 13.
57. 1 John 11.
not endure him: Christ (refused by his own, to whom in love he came) has
sanctified misusage to all his: for if it were so in the root, it must be in
the branches: If they have called the Master of the house Beelzebub, how much
more shall they call them of his household? says our Lord, Matt. 10. 25.

My prayers shall ever be, that the glory of true Religion, and Learning, may
never depart from this Isle till Shiloh come to Judgment. Let those inherit
the wind they hunt after, who are taken with houses and vineyards, oxen, asses,
and household trash, not remembering the Afflictions of Joseph: I will think how
to live profitably in my generation, and die comfortably, when God shall
appoint my change; While I live, it would be pain and grief to me to say of
Learning, as Peter did of his Master, I know it Matthew. 26.
not: Much less will it become me to curse it, as that ground which brings
forth briars and thorns; Gebal, Ammon and Amaleck, the dreggs of men and
abjects of the people, will do that if they dare: I shall say, alluding to
that of Tully, Ne immortalitatem contra Doctrinam et Ne immortalititem contra
rempub. acciperem. Cicero.
Doctos acciperem. He who has his eyes open, must cry out with Balaam, How
goodly are thy Tents O Jacob, and thy Tabernacles O Israel! The Lord spread thy
gardens by the rivers side as the Trees of Number. 24 5, 6.
Lign-Aloes which the Lord has planted: and as Cedar Trees besides the waters.
But if God shall suffer men to grow cold in their loves, and to look askew on
men Learned, and nip their bud, then will their gray hairs appear, and men
shall cry out, How art thou fallen from heaven, O Lucifer son of the morning?
Then will Harps be hung on willows, the voice of Turtles be no more heard in
our Cant. 2. 12.
Land; Winter will then be upon us; gemmulas et pubescentes herbas interficit
et adurit nocentissimum Lib. 4. advers. Gent.
frigus, says Arnobius.

This straight yet we are not (blessed be God) put to; the tree of true
Learning is not felled, though the Ax be laid to the root of it; Paul's
prayers, to be delivered from unreasonable men, may speed as much as Peter's
sword; fair entreaties, Humble Petitions are more in fashion then Church
Censures; I will beg of God and our Governors, for the Learned, a writ of
Privilege, that they may be secure, and not the Chase of every spoiler; and
that they would grant that petition which they offer to them, as once was
offered to Jupiter,

(...) Plato in Alci biade l. 2. page 435. Edit. Fic^ ni.

(...).
Great Jove, the good thou have to give,
Whether we ask't, or no,
Let Us still receive; no mischiefs thrive
To work our overthrow.
This granted, and that suddenly too ( Affectio Sym. apud Gu^ var.
omnis impatiens etiam justae and legitimae tarditatis) I shall hope to see
good times again, and enjoy ingenuous companions here still; else England will
be no more terrarum decus, flos finitimarum, as of old was said: but a Nation
not worthy to be beloved; because a stepmother to her best and most beautiful
children, who will say to her as Marius did to Minutius, While our Country
cherishes us, we (...). D. Halycarnas. lib. 8. p. 507.
pay it love, but when it injures us, we forsake it; Not place, but Convenience
causes Love.

My hopes are, and prayers shall be, that God would keep Learning as the Apple
of his eye* that he would protect this his servant in the fire, and in Isa. 43.
2.
the water; that by the Golden scepter of Mercy and bounty, he would call this
Hester to her Ahasuerus; Esth. 5. 1.
and set her by him on the Throne, that he would preserve his Church, and be
unto* it a Sun to enlighten, and a shield to encompass; that out of the rock he
would make waters to flow: not bitter, like those of Marah; but Exodus 15. 23.
sweet, such as make glad the City of God. And this in his due time he will
do, ( For he has not forgotten to be Gracious, nor shut up his loving Psalm.
46. 4.
kindness in displeasure) yea he will return and leave the blessing of peace to
us, and to our Posterity; Without which, Conquests and Crowns, powers and
wealth, will be but men's vexations. No man envies the poor Cottager, the
hireling, who labors early and late, in wet and dry, day and night: the fat
Ox goes to the shambles, the Tall Cedar has the winds in his branches, the
priceless unicorn must to wrack, the good durable is that which is internal;
King Hezekiahs comfort, Isay 38. 3. Remember now O Lord, I have walked before
thee with an upright heart, and in truth, and have done that which is good in
thy sight; this will accompany men to all places, in all conditions, at all
times, and make them rich in poverty, civil in rudeness, patient under
provocation, at liberty when restrained, in comfort when distressed, owned when
neglected; nay conquerors when conquered. And a help to this is learning, while
it teaches us the knowledge of God and our selves, and restrains us (...).
Dictum apud Guev. p. 189. in Horol. princ.
from all those disorders, that our nature (without it unprepared) would break
out into.

I have read of many men who have repented their greatness, and deserted their
earthly Honors and Crowns: Philip the Second of Spain was wont to say, that
the best fruit Ad aliud nihil confert esse Regem, quam ut in morte poeniteat
fuisse.
of being a King, was to bring him to repent he was so: And the great Pope
Adrian the 6. had this inscribed on his tomb, by his own Hic situs est Adrianus
6. qui nih^l sibi in vita infoelicius, quam ut imperarat, duxit.
direction, Here lies Adrian the 6. whose greatness and Government was the
greatest burden he complained (...). Diogenes in vita Thaletis.
of: and of Thales it is said, he left the affairs of state to become a
Philosopher, and to contemplate; as accounting his life of action an
estrangement from himself: Our own stories tell us of many Kings and Queens of
this Land, who voluntarily, to enjoy a Religious and private life, have
resigned their Crowns, within the space of 200 years 30, at least, twelve of
whom have bin Martyrs for relgion, 10. of whom are Calendred for Saints: so
that in Capgraves words, It was a rare thing then to see a Mirum tunc fuerat
Regem videre non sanctum. Spelm. in proem. ad consil. Britann.
King and not a Saint. Yea, a learned Andr. in Fasc. Temp.
Man tells us, That he found more pious Kings of this Nation, then in any other
part of the world, though never so great; the cares, crosses and emulations
which attend Mundane honors being such as made them quere what Ease was, as
Pilate did what Truth was; and therefore no wonder if they bethink their lives
led in so unpleasing a wilderness.

But to all learned men Learning is so delightful, that no pleasure (no not
that of life) is like it. Eud^xus would be contented to burn with Phaeton, so
he might but take the figure and height of a Star, and Plutarc. lib. non posse
suaviter vivi, secundum Epic. p. 1094.
leave the knowledge of it to after-ages. Archimedes would not desist a
Mathematical Experiment to save his life: Few men have ever bedewed their
cheeks with tears, or accused their expense of time in searching after sober
and commendable Art. I have heard of some who (upon accident and special
occasions) have bemoaned their Learning: When a Favorite must die by warrant
of his unwilling Prince, then perhaps a Utinam nescirem literas may be heard:
when learned men have in their Studies propounded more their own applause then
Gods glory; more to know, then be good; then God may touch them, and they may
cry out as he did, Scientia mea me damnat; or in holy Isay's words, S. Aug. in
Conf.
Woe is me, I am undone, for mine eyes have seen the Isa. 6. 5.
King, the Lord of hoasts: I have seen his mercy love, power, goodness,
faithfulness, have had many discoveries of him, and much attraction from him;
but I more doted on words and flowers, on the curiosities of dispute, then the
beauties of real holiness: I rather desired to hear Ambrose the eloquent,
then Ambrose the holy; rather Paul brought up at the feet of Gamaleel, then the
Apostle of Christ, glorying in the cross, and accounting al things dross, and
dung in comparison of Christ Jesus; upon these accounts, and by occasion of
learning mis^sed, I have heard of outcries and bemoanings; but when God gave
grace to use these golden talents aright, where the gifts of Julian were not
accursed by his wickedness, where the souls, Dan and Bethel do not occasion
disobedience to God, 1 King. 12. 28. Where the beauty of them does not Amos 4.
4. and 8. ult.
make the heart fall in love (as did Solomon) with strange religions and vices,
deserting the true use of learning, (the knowledge and fear of God) there did I
never know or read any man blame his endeavors, or wish the time he has spent
in study recallable; But rather give God thanks, that put it into the thought
of his heart, by raising a structure of art, to adorn the Bridechamber of his
Intellect, the gallery of his Fancy, the parlour of his Judgment, the
entertayning room of his Conversation; nay such a man rather has thought
himself only so long to live, as he has lived in the discovery and gain of
Learning. Blush then ye stupid souls of this age, whose folly it is to bluster
against this divine quality, and rank of men, who would Numb. 23.
as willingly ruin them, as Baalam have cursed Israel, if God had suffered
him; who have their high places of Peor, and tops of Pisgah, from whence to
veiw and execrate the utmost quarters of the learned; who cry (as the wicked of
the Church) Down, Down with it even to the ground, let the name of Learned
perish, and let their seed beg their bread; who think they do God no service,
unless as Orosius wittily, Delubra omnia flagitio, dedecore, turpitudine, ac
immanitate contaminarent; Instit. lib. 7. p. 100.
who make the times such as Saint Bernard cries out against, O seculum nequam
quod Epist. 107. ad Tho. de Beverle.
solos tuos sic soles bear amicos, ut Dei facias inimicos. These are they who
are so far in love with themselves, that they think the world only made for
them; the learned Lord Bacon (that great Oracle of this age) describes them
well, Omnia (says he) ad se referunt, gerentes se De Augment. scient. p. 12. 2 Timothy 3. 8.
pro Centro mundi, a^ si omnes lineae in se suisque fortunis debeant
concurrere, de Reipublicae navi, licet tempestatibus jactata, neutiquam
solliciti modo in scapha rerum suarum receptus detur and refugium; These are
the Iannes and Iambres that withstand Moses, and persuade others by their ill
example to vilify and debase the Church, and its Ministry; and because they
have the lamps of Virgins, will by all means be counted spiritually wise,
though they have no oil on which to feed their holy fire and lights; no true
and saving knowledge, (for that makes the soul humble and patient) but a
running extaticknes, which no man understands but themselves; and a dislike of
Scripture words and ways, being above Ordinances, Governments, Relations, and
aiming at an universal liberty; to say and do what they please without
controu*le of God, or his Deputies on Vana est religio ^uae sceleri loum facit,
vim riminibus Sa^amenta non ddunt. In Hi^or. Bohem.
earth, Governors. I am of Aeneas Sylvius his mind, It Is a vain religion
which gives Patrociny to wickedness, the Sacraments of the Church are no bands
of iniquity, but conveyances of comfort. Let these beware; God will be visible
in his judgment on these Ranters, who because they are subtle, conclude
themselves not wicked; and because they seem to be good, think the world
believers them so. S. Ambrose Tunc culpa cavenda est, cum videtur habere
secretum. S. Ambros. in Psalm. 118.
against these lessons us well, When sin has a secret to hide it self in, then
is it (says he) most dangerous. To speak for Virtue, and live to Vice, is
vanity Non prodest verbis proferre virtutem, and factis destruere veritatem.
Sermon. de mortalitate.
in S. Cyprians judgment: Will not God to these appear terrible when he sets
their sins in order before their faces, and arraigns them for having a form of
godliness (pretending motions of his Spirit to do things against his word, his
worship, his Servants?) Will he not be to these, if they repent not, as he
threatens, Hosea 5. 12. I will be to Ephraim as a moth, and to the house of
Judah as rottenness? and v. 14. I will tear and go away, and none shall rescue?

Against these so loose, so litigious, so scandalous to God and good
Government, I beseech you (O Powers) strengthen the Church and her servitours
by your Countenance and unfeigned Zeal; fear not Goliath though he come, with
despite, Leo Epist* 3.
and all imaginable fierceness ( Principes multam nutriunt pestilentiam, dum
necessariam non adhibent medicinam.) The little David of Christian courage will
kindle against this Philistine, and encounter him: holy engagements for God,
like Aarons Rod, bud afresh, and return as Israel from the Philistines*, rich
in success: there is nothing more a Governors duty (as that wiseman said to
Numa) then to see that God be (...). etc. Apud ^lutarch. in Num^. p. 62
honored, and people Governed rightly, and made obedient to good Laws, and
good Lawmakers; and that the gentle carriage of those that Rule, may invite
them that are ruled to be gentle, after their example.

Let who will cry up multidudes, I shall not; for I find them disorderly, vain,
injudicious, cruel, like Rivers, sinking every thing that is solid, and bearing
up what ever is light; their traffic is in the nothings of bubbles, swellings
of waves, and bladders of words; and those Governors neglect themselves and
their people who do not answer their mutinies with punishments, and encourage
their obedience with justice, protection, and honest ease and liberty; but if
they desire more then is their due, or they know how to be happy with, let them
have that reproof (...). Theodoret. l. 4. c. 17.
which S. Basil gave Valens, the Emperors prattling Cook, Look you to your Pot
and Dress, that they be savoury; or which Alexander gave his mutinous rabble;
otherwise there will be no hoe with them, as the phrase is. Not that I think it
safe or honorable to rule with Rigor, but for that it is more to good men's
peace to have Government tite and stiff girt, and more to their content to
live where nothing, then where every thing is lawful: That noble grave Roman
Appius Claudius, gave gallant counsel to the Senate, against (...), etc.
Halycarn. l. 5. p. 331. Edit Sylbu^.
submission to the vulgarity, telling them of many Grecian Cities, who by
yiedling, had ruined themselves, and been a president of ill to the world,
while they suffered evils to grow through impunity: and assure them, that if
they resign the Government to the rude people, 'twill be all one as if the body
should rule the soul; and therefore he wishes them, (...).
not to perplex well ordered Government, not to change laudable customs, not to
take away fidelity, the firmest bond of humane societies (and that which makes
Halycarn. l. 6. p. 387.
us differ from beasts, who prey one upon another) but to stand for order, and
maintain that peace which just and wise Governors ought to labor for, and to
overthrow which, rude multitudes do ever aim; Thus he, and wisely to: for to
give people way, contrary to law, and judgment, is to make Power become their
Minister to spoils, furies, and inhumanities; and therefore every good
Magistrate should resolve if he perish, he will perish in doing his duty; for in
so doing, he may expect Gods Custody. While the Mid-wives of Egypt feared God,
they had houses built for them. Power and Honor is never better founded, then
when on true Religion and Zeal for God, on justice and moderate liberty to
men-wards: the Covenant of peace followed Phineas his zeal, and continued the
everlasting Priesthood to his seed after him. Numb. 13. 25.

I care not who knows my thoughts; I hate secret contrivements; Fauxes tricks
and underhand dealings are falsehoods in friendship, which ingenuity abominates.
Nihil veritas erubescit nisi solummodo Advers. Valentinianos.
abscondi, as Tertullian once said* I am for Government just and moderate;
Tyranny and Anarchy I equally hate, because I believe them equally abusive: I
am for grave Cato's, wise Solon's, divine Seneca's, quaint Tullie's; for men of
blood, fortune, courage, and learning, men fearing God, distributing justice,
that it may run forth like a mighty stream, and hating covetousness; for men
thus qualified will be most considerate of merits, most temperate in
punishments, most vigilant for Peace, most consultive in War, most faithful of
their words, less prone to revenge, less addicted to bribery, less
neglective of duty, less careless of trust then others, who being of
unpolish't education, are more rough and unmalleable, more confident, and less
intelligent; in a word, no men either love or fear I, as friend or enemy (much
less do I desire them as Magistrates) who are not devout to God, just to men,
and sober toward themselves; who have not wisdom and grace to manage Power
as God does, with justice, not partiality, mercy, not inexorablenesse; being
bounteous to all that walk within Rule and Compass.

And to these Powers, where ever in this Nation acting, do I in all humility
direct this my Apology, hoping by the good hand of God, not to be by them and
the sober party of my Countrymen, accounted worthy only of Mical's scoff, as
one of the vain fellows who shamelesly uncovereth himself, 1 Samuel 6. 20. but as
one who knows himself too well to be proud of any thing but his good meaning,
and who begs nothing in this transfiguration of things, but that Christ and his
Servants may have comfort and stability amongst us, that those who Rule would
fence the Vine, Learning, against beasts of Prey, and Foxes of spoil, who would
rejoice to see what yet remains of beauty and order, devenustated and exposed
to shame and dishonor; Qui veram gloriam expetunt, aliis Ci^. pro S^.
ocium quaerere debent, non sibi, was the Orators. I know there are many
Shimeis, and Doegs, multitudes filling every corner with their Demetrian
clamours, magnifying the Dianas of Revelation, and crying down Learning and
Learned men, as he and his Rabble in Acts the 19. did S. Paul, enraging powers
against them as perswaders, and turners away of the people from obedience; but
the folly of these men is made manifest to all men; experience tells us that
all is not gold that glisters, nor is a noble opposite less to be honored,
then a base friend.

Let me speak for the Learned, (better Clyents the world has not) yet now (God
wot) they sue in Form^ pauperum; silver and gold they have little, but Virtues
and Understanding (against which all their enemies shall not prevail) they have
by the gift of God, and their industry, and to maintain them they will be
resolute; The Orator said true, habet men's nostra natura Fablus.
sublime quiddam and erectum and impatiens superioris; and hard it is to make
the stiff knee of a Philosopher bow to the deceitful goddess of pomp, and
outward splendour; if he have done well, he looks to be accepted; if ill, he
will be convinced of it by Reason, and not yield himself faulty till he be made
appear so; and if he suffer by the will of God, and the pleasure of men, he
will do as Pupaces did (who being condemned to be beaten with stripes, because
his prisoner Andronicus was escaped) cried out to the (...) etc. Apud Nicetam
in Annal. page 66.
people that flocked about him, This is not my reproach but my comfort, that I
suffer for what every one ought to keep, his integrity. He that has a (...).
generous mind, and would live famous for goodness, dare not be so base as to
call good evil, or evil good, Stobaeus apud Guev. p. 209.
though so to do he were offered all the Kingdoms of the world and the glory of
them.

Pardon therefore, O Powers, some Learned men their dissents, others for those
men's sakes whom ye think and know Learned, and to whom ye do respect as to
persons well-deserving; considering that those who have provoked you most, have
not been more bold on you, then you and all mankind have been on God, whom we
provoke all the day long. And if when we were enemies (without Composition, or
Act of Oblivion) he made the Ezekiel. 16. 6. 8.
time of our pollution the time of his love; if when we were enemies he gave
his Son to dye for us, made Romans 5. 10. Ephesians. 2. 14.
him our peace who brake down the wall of separation, made us all one by the
blood of his Cross, (so that now Coloss. 3. 11.
there is neither Jew nor Gentile, but all alike to God, who walk as the
Redeemed of the Lord, and serve him uprightly) since these things, I say, are,
why should we of this Nation be worse one to another, and more unready to
forgive then God is? who (if we confess our sins) is faithful to forgive
our sins: the Text has another argument in it, If 1 John 4. 11.
God so loved us, we ought also to love one another.

Remember, O Powers, I beseech you in the bowels of Christ, what the holy
Apostle exhorts his Ephesians to, Be followers of God as dear children, Ephesians.
5. 1.
and walk in love, even as Christ has loved us, and given himself for us: a
more noble president ye cannot have then he who is the wisdom of the Father;
nor a more Christian work you cannot engage in, then Charity to your brethren,
then restoring them that are fallen by the Spirit of meekness: consider that
while ye are in the flesh, ye are subject to like infirmities as others; and if
Gal. 6. 1.
God restrain you, it is that you should prize him more, and pity those many
whom he suffers to miscarry. He that unto sinners sends line upon line, and
precept upon precept; he that waits that Esai 28. 10. Esai 30. 18.
he may be gracious; he that glories in the attribute of long sufferance
toward man, will Nullum laedit observata justitia. Cassiod.
not commend proceedings of Rigor from man to man. O let it rather be your
emulation to pass by many injuries, then lose the Opportunity of one
forgiveness.

Let the offending world have cause to apply that to your gentleness, which S.
Bernard does to our Lord Jesus: Quid Quid tibi debuit facere quo^ non fecit?
illuminavit caecum solvit vinctum, reduxit erro neum, reconciliavit reum Sermon.
22. in Cant.
tibi debuit facere quod non fecit? he has given sight to the blind, liberty
to the bound, reduced the erroneus, and reconciled the guilty. Yea let no man
be more bold to provoke, then you benign to bear, after the holy example of
him who suffered contradiction of sinners. Considerati judicis est, ignoscendi
potius quaerere causas, quam puniendi occasiones: Guev. 445. Ammianus. lib. 15.
think not, I beseech you, that herein I am too lavish of your respect, or
would expose you to the dishonours of rude and revengeful tongues. God forbid,
I should have any such thought; nay, in the presence of Christ, I have not; my
heart abhors so loose and degenerous a motion; I love to use humility and
prudent moderation in addresses to Governors: and since God commands to send
the Lamb (an emblem of mildness) to the Ruler of the land, Esai 16. 1. I think
it not amiss to offer this humble Petition to you, That you in your Philip the
2. of Spain would do no hing in gravioribus negotiis Reipub. quod Consilio,
quod appellabat conscientiae, examinandum prius non propo suerit. Lansius in
consult. Europae. p. 307.
judgments distinguish between those that sin of malicious wickedness, and
those who offend ignorantly; that you remember, much has been forgiven you,
and therefore you ought to forgive much; that you in all deliberations think
upon that great day, and that just judge, the sinful life, and the sorrowful
death of the best of men who has not greater mercy showed him, then he can
show to others. Alas the greatest offense against thee (O man how high soever)
Et errare homi* nis est, and ignoscere patris. Fa^ius.
is but against a mortal man, whose breath is in his nostrils; but the least
sin thou committest against God is infinite, not to be satisfied for with the
sorrow of thy soul to all eternity; yet behold thy Savior has satisfied for
that; and Non horruisti confitentem laro^m, non lachrymantem (...), non
Chananaeam suplican^m, non deprehensam in dul^rio, non sedentem in the onio,
non supplicantem Publianum, non negantem discipu^m, non ipsos crucifixorestuos
^. B^n. Sermon. 22. Cant.
if he has not rejected the confessing thief, nor the penitent sinner, nor the
humble Canaanitesse, nor the woman taken in adultery, nor the disciple at the
seat of custom; if he cast not away the devout publican, the denying disciple,
nay not his very persecutors, as S. B^rn. sweetly; then do not ye reject any
offer of doing, and receiving good at any time, or to any person or thing which
God offers you a season to take hold of, considering that of the Prophet,
Blessed are ye that sow besides all waters. Esai 32. 20. And this I humbly move
ye to out of charity, rather to your own souls then to offenders. For our Lord
Jesus tells us, That if ye forgive not men their offenses, neither will your
Father in Heaven forgive you your offenses, Matthew. 6. 15. This well becomes a
sober and Christian man to offer to you and you to accept from him; for there
is nothing that more dishonors Governors, Summi imperii moderatoribus, pia
and decora suadentes instrumenta sunt boni saeculi. Sym. Epist. 6. Guev. p. 196.
then to misreceive moderate addresses, which tend, by good and grave counsel,
to emendation. What ever makes men like God, is most worthy welcome; They who
would have Christ for their reward, must follow him in his race of charity,
meekness, moderation, easiness to be entreated: He ( God blessed for ever)
has a return for Cant. 6. ult. Luke 15. 23.
the wandering Shulamite; a kiss for the homecome Prodigal, an Euge for the
servant who has been faithful in a little; he values the mite Video barbam
and pallium, Phi losophum non video.
which a poor and humble soul offers to him, more then the rich oblations,
devout observations, proud boasts, and external breadths of the Pharisee* He is
not pleased with the Pageantries of politic Composures, Foris Antipater albo
utitur pallio, intus vero totus est purpureus.
and appearances of sanctity when there is under that mask a design to devour
widows houses, and under that sugured tongue, poison of asps: vox in choro,
men's in foro, virtutem non colere sed colorare. God is not always in the
whirlwind, nor in the Earthquake, nor in the fire of humane power, but in the
still voice of gentle persuasion; Turtures amat Deus, non vultures. And those
that will be his, must not be unlike him in goodness, in pardons and
praeteritions* of provocations: St Ubinam quaeso vestra prudentia, nisi in
Christi doctrina? unde vestra justitia nisi de Christo misericordia? ubi vera
temperantia nisi in Christi vita? Sermon. 22. in Cant.
Bernard has a good note; Where (O holy Souls) consists your wisdom, if not
in the teachings of Christ? whence your righteousness, if not in the mercy of
Christ? what temperance like that which is taught you from the life of Christ?
for then are services acceptable to God, when they come from a pure heart* and
faith unfeigned: the Philosopher, when he heard a sword praised that was taken
by an unskilful man from his friend, replied, The sword is good, but the hand
naught, (...). Apud Laertip. 405.
and unworthy to handle so noble a weapon: So when I see one as unholy as 1 Samuel 13. 9.
Saul offering a peaceoffering to God, I cannot but think of that speech of his
who cried, O heaven! while he pointed downwards.

There is nothing (O Powers) next to sincerity, a greater honor to men in
place then moderaration; noble natures are more afraid to be unthankful then
ruined; and choose rather to provoke power then goodness; Will not Abraham beg
for Ishmael the son of the bondwoman, Genesis 17. 18.
though cast out, and forced to fly; because united to him by the bond of
nature? and Israel pray for the peace of Babylon in their captivity, because in
the peace thereof they had peace? Believe me, no policy to that of candor and
liberality. The Throne of Christ (which endures for ever, and the Scepter of
whose Kingdom is a righteous one) shall be established by mercy, Isai. 16. 5.
To forgive, is the greatest conquest, because of our selves as well as others*
It was a noble speech of the Emperor Adrian, to one who before he got the
Empire, was his professed enemy, Be of good cheer, since I am Bon^ esto animo,
me Imperatore evasisti.
Emperor, I have contemned the thought of abusing power to revenge my self on
thee; and no less was that of Philip of Macedon, to Quid possum facere quod
fit Atheniensibus gratum; (...) respondit Democrates, aeque ac teipsum
suspendere.
whom when the Athenians sent a sawey message by Democrates; the King answered
only, Say what I can do acceptable to the Athenians; the Varlet Democrates
replied touchily, Nothing better then to hang thy self. The standers by
ruffling at the intemperance and madness of the reply; Philip caused silence
to be made, and cooly said, Go tell the Athenians, what patience Nunciate
Atheniensibus quas Philippus contumelias audit impune.
Philip has expressed in suffering himself to be dishonored, and his favors
refused; And whosoever reads the clemency of Caesar to Rufus, Porsenna to Scaevola,
Antigonus to his soldiers, Cato, Socrates, and Antisthenes the Scythian King
to those that smote them, cannot but wonder that such grapes of Canaan should
grow upon the crabstocks of nature, or our walls of mud and clay nourish so
delicious and pleasing Summer fruit.

These are strong inducements toward pardon, and unanswerable disswasions from
frequent punishing to exhaereditation, and loss of life; Debellare hosts
fortunae est, refocillare victos vere Panormitanus.
regium; but there is an higher principle for Christians to walk by, a more
illustrious President for them to follow; Christ the King of Saints, forgave
his enemies and prayed for them; the nails of his cross piercing his
Parricidalium mentium intuens vota, non tam clavorum acumine quam hostium
crimine pungebatur. Arnoldus.
flesh, did not so torment him, as the sins of his persecutors, and the
judgment that impended the Nation for crying him to death, who was innocent;
yea, he took not down the vinegar and gall that was given him, Matthew. 27. 34.
that no man should think him the Prince of peace, a harbourer of any
bitterness against Venena fellis evomuit, ne aliquis existimaret Christo
Domino, aliquid inesse amaritudinis, unde levissimam saperet vindictam. St
Cyprianus.
his enemies; his soul was affectionately expended in prayer, that they might
be forgiven, since they knew not what they did; And those only shall sit with
Christ on thrones, who follow him in doing works of charity, and who forgive as
they desire to be forgiven. This is the way to honor; by this is preparation
here made against the evil day. Fortune is mutable; and those only can hope
for friends in their adversity, who have in their day of power not despised the
small things of civility and pity: Nil habet fortuna melius quam ut possit,
Cicero.
nec natura melius quam ut velit servare; he deserves not to be owned when he
is in danger, who has turned a deaf ear to the prayers of Qui succurrcre
per^turo potest, cum non succurrit, ^dit. Sene^a de bene^.
the poor; since the Moralist says true, He that when he had power to help,
would not, destroys.

Hearken to this all ye, who have had opportunities to procure peace, and
prevent war, to save effusion of Christian blood, to forbid blasphemies against
God, and vexations of men: who might have saved many men's hearts from breaking,
and families from itrecoverable ruin; ye who have had the Sun and Moon of
Greatness standing for a long time still in the heavens of your families; ye
that have had life and death, weal and woe, your Pensioners; consider well,
whether you have done your duties; if so, it is well; You have your reward in
the peace of a good conscience; if not, you shall have your requitals, both
here and hereafter: for as he said well, They err who meditate on power,
Gloriam and imperium meditaris, peccas; non dirigenda alio arma sunt quam ad
tranquillitatem and quie^em. Ci^.
as their way to glory and supremacy, and not rather to procure the peace and
welfare of others; and shall only have cause to joy in so much thereof, as
they have improved to the honor of God, and weal of men; I do not deny
Christian Magistrates use of the sword, as well to the punishment of
wickedness and vice, as the encouragement of those that do well. I know there
are necessary severities which men in power do and may express in order to
preservation and public peace; the Politicians are generally for this; nay,
God himself uses this method: The Lord is not less known by the judgments
he executes, then the mercies he multiplyes on man. There is also much to be
said from the wisdom of this world, in defense of exactness in this case; the
Orator tells us, that as in bodies natural, In Rcipublicae corpore* ut totum
salvum sit, quicquid sit pestiferum amputetur. Cic. Philip. 6.
the amputation of one corrupted member, saves the whole from a Gangreen and
death; so in the Body Politic. The tie on Magistrates is not that they should
not punish offenders, but that they should not make men offenders who are not
so, nor proceed against men only for words, nor punish them with death, when
lesser punishments may reform, and not ruin them; but proportion to every one
such testimonies of their displeasure, as may render Rulers formidable; and
frowning on those that break the peace, and make other men hear and fear, and
do no more presumptuously. St Regia via judex in^edere debet, nec declinare ad
dextram molliendo judicium, ^ec ad sinistram exasperando supplicium. Aug. ad
frat^ in Eremo
Augustine tells Judges their duties excellently, They (says he) ought to keep
the high road of justice, not to turn to the right hand by overmuch favor,
nor to the left by over exact rigor: To which add that of the Civilians, Apud
Guev. in Horol. princ. Edit. Lat. p. 468.
Iudex debet habere duos sales; scientiae, ne sit insipidus; conscientiae, ne
sit diabolicus.

These cautions admitted, punishments may be, and are useful: yet Saints
should have a care how they are too busy with the weapons and artillery of
this world. If Christ's Kingdom be not of this world, then not theirs, if
Christ's and theirs be one: Nay, so long as he would not make use of Legions of
Angels, (which he had, and said too he had upon call) to defend his innocence
Mat. 27. 53.
against a lawful, though an ill-used Power: I see not what ground Christians
have to rest on that arm which he declined, or to use force in any way but what
is according to godliness and honesty: for otherwise to do, were to incur
Saint Bernard's censure, Omnes amici and omnes inimici, omnes necessarii and
omnes adversarii, omnes Sermon. 33. in Cant.
domestici and nulli pacifici, omnes proximi and omnes quae sua sunt quaerunt.

I know, it is the mode of men to indulge themselves and their friends: Acharnan
Lysimachus, Alexanders Master, would call himself a Phoenician (that is,
learned) Alexander, Achilles; and King Philip, Peleus; disdaining other men as
thimbles full of dust, and the goodly braveries of his Familiare est hominibus
omnia sibi igno^cere, nihil aliis remittere. Vel^, l. 2.
scorn. It is familiar to pardon faults to Favorites, while men out of their
Books, though never so worthy, cannot find mercy. This purple Robe, this
equipage of State follows men whom times and titles honor: In mine account
worthy men are not paid Chequer pay, if they receive less then the courtesy
of England, honor and estimation: Falsehood and Flattery are no good heads in a
Christians Alphabet, whom it more concerns to be pious and good, then politic
and great. The Maxims of this world are husks, fit for the King of Heavens
Prodigals, (who have expended their Patrimony of grace and interest in God on
vanities) to feed upon: This Babel which they have built for the glory of their
fancied Kingdom, they may boast of; the Lord give me that Wisdom that inflates
not; that Riches which corrupts not; that Power which abuses not it self by
abusing others; yea, the Lord direct me more to look to his glory in this and
all endeavors, then to mine own applause, or to that censure which worthy
actions have met with from worthless ages.

I confess, my expectations are to meet with few who will salute my Apology
with that fair language that Diogenes did the Harper, (...). Apud Laert. p. 395.
Persons of tender heads and sleepy constitutions are often offended at the
Bell-man, whom those more healthy like and cherish. To these I say, as our Lord
to his Disciples, (...). The Mark 14. 41.
generous and virtuous people and Powers of the Nation will consider, what
Agrippa the noble Counselor and Favorite of Octavian said to (...). Dion
lib. 52. p. 490.
him, Virtue only makes men equal to the gods; no humane Vote can deifie. If
thou be good, and rulest well, the whole Land will be to thee a Temple,
every City an Altar, every man a Statue erected to thy memory: For those that
carry things by Power, and allow Right little place in their Debates and
Conclusions, shall by all the Trophies they erect in public to their renowns,
be dishonored; and by so much shall the stench of the instances and records of
their infamy and demerits be more noisome, by how much more of time and
continuance it shall gain and conquer. And therefore if that Painter took great
care in the piece he drew for eternity, only upon account of a temporal fame;
what wariness ought those to express, whose eternity of bliss, as well as of
fame, depends upon the well managing of this moment? Rulers then are highly
concerned in the Art of weldoing; their opportunities are much to the gain or
loss of good. Fulgentius says, Conversio Potentum Epist. 6.
saeculi multum militat acquisitionibus Christi: and Cassiodore, Publici
decoris matter est men's Regentis. Variarum l 3.
If Rulers of a people cause them to err, if the light that is in a Nation be
darkness, how great is that darkness? Usitata vulgo sententia est juxta mores
Domini Familiam esse constitutam. Araob. advers. Ge^.
The Lord therefore who is King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, and has the
hearts of all men in his hand, accept this humble Tender of his servant, and
incline those who are in place to think upon and commiserate the decaying
Universities, the ruined Churches, the wandering Flocks, the impoverished
Clergy; and to mourn for the false doctrine and heresy, hardness of heart,
and contempt of Gods Word and Commandments, which every day increases amongst
us: that so God may in mercy restore us to our wonted beauty; and that promise
be fulfilled to us, In stead of the Thorn shall come up the Fir tree, Isa. 55.
ult.
and in stead of the Brier shall come up the Myrtle tree, and it shall be to
the Lord for a Name, for an everlasting sign that shall not be cut off.

I have now little to do, but to apologize for (...). I^ocr.
this Apology. Isocrates prepates me to endure Censures, and various opinions
of men; I write for Truth and Learning, not for error and ignorance: and in
Saint Ieroms words, Sicuti pedem S Hieronymus Ruffino p. 131.
offendimus, and sapienti Lectori frivolum esse videatur quod scripsimus,
culpam in Authorem refert. I know the Argument would require a Chrysostom, a
Tully, nay a Bacon's second thoughts; yea, a combination of Wits to do it to
the life: but woe is us, the antique spirits of Christians and learned men is
lost; Our fathers have eaten sour grapes, and their childrens teeth are set on
edg: This once glorious Church of England may say in the Prophets words, There
is none to guide her Isa. 51. 18.
of all the sons she has brought forth; neither is there any one that takes
her by the hand, of all the sons she has brought up. Amara prius in nece
Martyrum, amarior post in conflictu Haereticorum, amarissima Sermon. 33. super
Cant.
nunc in moribus domesticorum, as Saint Bernard of his time. Fear has so
possessed us, that we fly from the shadows of men, and desert our Colors, as
if the Muses were Gibeonited, and to stand for them were a ready way to ruin.
I am not more bound to believe times are bad, then that men are fondly
fearful. Did Athanasius forbear owning Truth, because the Arians accused him,
Theodor. lib. 1. cap. 26, 27, 28.
and had the Emperors ear to suggest their pleasures against him? Or did the
three children desist from worshipping of God, because a decree way past by
Nebuchadnezzar to worship the golden Image?

And why should we pretend fear to displease by using a sober freedom (not to
cloak malice, but own Truth) when no law forbids? No Governors (for ought we
know) frown upon freedom, of this nature, where it is not grossly abusive and
scandalous. If men that rave and rage like him in Lactantius, Qui lucem vivis,
terram mortuis denegabat, Lib. 5. c. 11.
take liberty to speak and write their opinions, though to the scandal of
Government, and dishonor of our Religion: why may not a sober Apologer be
permitted, who brings, with Aspar, his burden to cool the Conflagrations of
Z^nar. To. 3. p. 41.
fiery Wits, who love to see all in Confusion and Combustion, and think nothing
Eloquent or handsome but what is minted in the Bedlam of their Rages? My study
is to do good by gentleness, and to convince men by the soft and gentle music
of Love to see whence they are fallen, and to do their first works of order and
piety. I love that Genius of Marcus Aurelius, who was in all things most
moderate; In In hominibus deterrendis a malo, invitandis ad bona, remunerandis
Copia^, indulgentia liberandis; f^itque ex malis bonos, and ex bonis optimos,
Capitolinus de Marc. Aurel.
deterring men from evil, in exhorting them to good, in rewarding virtues, in
forgiving wrongs, making men of bad, good; and of good, best.

As I approve not any Reformation which produces (like that Craccvian Serpentem
vivum, and Infantem mortuum, qui infantis dorsum pene depaverat. In memorab.
ad. ann. 1494. p. 916.
woman in Wolphius) a live Serpent, and a dead Infant almost eaten a pieces by
it: so not any man or way which seems pleasing, and pretends fair, but carries
the embracer into Errors, and makes him eccentrick to civility, and a stranger
to that Church in which he was bred: I shall never be wanting to pray for the
useful and united Lamps of Religion and Learning, nor fear their Extinction in
this Sphere, till God give us over to a Reprobate sense, to work iniquity with
greediness, and to hate the light because it discovers what darkness we
admire: when that of Camerarius the Jesuit shall be true here, which he writes
after the death of James the 5. of Scotland, That there was neither Lay nor
Clergyman Ut nemo repertus ^it, aut Ecclesiasticus aut Laicus, qui au deret de
asserenda fide serio cogitare.
that durst adventure to own the Catholic Truth; Then will I account it a
dangerous time, and think to do Hist. Scot. l. 4. p. 272.
God better service in suffering, then in publishing mine opinion; when as the
Prophet Am^ ^5. 13.
says, The prudent shall keep silence in that time, The Ld Gen Cromwell
^acellor o^ Oxford, (...) Lieut. Genesis Fleetwood an other Judges and Parliamen
men, heretofore Member of the Universities.
for it is an evil time. But while Powers are in any degree moderate, while
they are as it were engaged by office and Education, to stand for Learning, it
seems rather to be a matter of Honor, then Hazard to contest for Learning, and
confront those whom we may call, as he in Caecilius ap^ Minucium. (...). Di^ l.
77. p. 853. Quid r^go is it faceret in dolor poenarum, qui Christum rubu it inter
flage^ verborum* G^e Mag. l. 29. in Job 38.
Minutius did, Lucifugam nationem and latebrosam. And if Antonius Caracalla, in
behalf of his Tutor Chilo, cried out to those that were destroying him, Do not
injurize my Tutor: There is reason why good men should call upon Powers, to see
Learning have fair quarter, and Religion be not passed away in the crowd of
Contentions; and he that loves his own ease better then general good, may
consider what S. Gregory says; What (says he) will he do at the stake, or on
the wrack, who is afraid to own Truth for fear of evil tongues? For mine own
self, I have this to profess, That I had rather fall with Learning, then
survive it, accounting it greater honor (as did the Jews) to perish (...) etc
Dio^. l. 66. p. 746.
with their Temple, then to have a fortunate condition accompanied with
brutishness. I hope never to see the Ruin of my Country; Navi fracta multi
incolumes evaserunt; ex naufragio patriae nemo salvus Cicero ad Herenn. 4.
esse potest; therefore pray I for the Church, as the Anchor that keeps all
together, as that which carries us into Gods blessings, and preserves us in the
warm Sun of his favor and protection: if God once pick his darlings from
amongst us, and bid his Ambassadors depart, then sad will be the condition of
this Nation; Gods wrath is not to be opposed by Armies and Navies, Councels and
Senates, but it may be averted by humiliations, and powerful invocations of
him. Moses his hand lifted up makes Israel prevail against Amaleck, and
procures God to look down with favor on his people. Let men dispute what they
will, and believe as they list, I must not approve any thing of dishonor to
the Truth.

Nor would I knowingly and willingly shave off the beards, and curtail the
garments of the (...). 10. 24.
heavenly Ambassadors, no not for all the Ri^hes of the Indies: the withering
of Ieroboams (...) 13.
hand may be a warning to all that maliciously harm the Ministry: I dread
nothing more then touching Gods anointed, and doing his Prophets him. Their
tears like Abels blood, cry aloud, continually, successefully; Nec vacui
gemitus quthus e coelo misericorditer respondetur; propter miseriam (...) 55. i^
inopum and gemitum pauperum nunc exurgam, as S. Bernard sweetly. Certainly he
that for his Prophets sakes reproved Kings, will not let pass (...). 103. 14.
unpunished the Reproaches and injuries done by Inferiors to his Ministers,
whom he sends for the good of his Elect, and for turning of sinners to himself;
and therefore since no man can be more a Christian in any thing then in
honoring those that bring the means of Reconciliation, let all good people
pray to God that he would make our Governors as once Peter was to Dorcas,
recallers of the Church and Churchmen (as it were) to life again. Say unto
them, O my God, Comfort ye, comfort ye my people: To the prisoners, go Isai 49.
9.
forth; and to them that are in darkness, show your selves. O let Rachels
tears be wiped off by the smooth hands of her Jacobs, who cannot but esteem
those she travels with, Benjamins, and mourn to see them Benonies, sons of
sorrow and contempt. That is a happy hand which makes Religion and Learning a
praise in the earth; and those deeds of Charity and Piety which we do in love
to God and his Church, shall only come Acts 10. 31.
up with Cornelius his alms in remembrance before God to our rejoicing: When we
remember Christ in prison, and visit him; naked, and cloth him; hungry, and
feed him, rejected, and own him (and this we do when we make his little ones,
his Members and Messengers the Objects of our care and bounty) then may we
comfort our selves in his Acceptance and Remuneration of us: then shall we be
bold to look evils in the face with a spirit like that of Conrad, King of
Almain, who encountering the Turks, comforted himself (...), etc.
and his Soldiers, That since the cause he undertook was Christ's, sure he was,
Christ would perfect what he had begun; and if he or they fell in the conflict,
would give them that reward in heaven which he has promised to all that love
him: and therefore he calls to them, Since they were a holy Army, (...), etc.
apud Nicetam. p. 36.
and a chosen company of Christians, that they should not love a mortal life
above an immortal Christ; and protests that he shall account death upon that
quarrel, the chariot of his remove and transport to heaven: thus he.

And till God give us of this Nation hearts to expend the Talents of time,
purse, parts, and power, that he has permitted us to have, while he comes to
take account of our Stewardships, they are all but snares to men, as was Achans
wedge to him. Till I have learned to count all things Philip. 3. 8.
dross and dung in comparison of Christ; to use the 1 Cor. 7.
world as not abusing it; to know my self but a servant 2 Cor. 5. 10.
who must account for what I have, or might have had more then I have; till I
find the power of Christ so vigorously acting in me, that I am dead to the
world and its pleasures, and alive only to my Savior and his holy commands,
glorying in nothing but in my subjection to him, and his Ordinances for his
sake: till I say, this gracious frame is set up in my soul, I shall not desire
great things, but rest contented with Agur's Prove. 30. 8.
wish, Remove far from me vanity and lies; give me neither poverty nor riches;
feed me with food convenient for me; and desire they may be consolidated (...)
me by the sight of Peace and Truth in my day (...) Isai 39. 8.
More then this I thirst not after, lest that be fulfilled in me which holy S.
Bernard Lib. 2. de Consideratione.
wrote to Pope Eugenius: Monstrosa res est, gradus summus, and animus infimus;
seeds prima, and vita ima; lingua magniloqua, and vita ociosa; sermo multus,
and fructus nullus; vultus gravis, and actus levis; ingens authoritas, and
nutans stabilitas.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 18. l. 8. r. Genesis 12. p. 19. l. 19. These for Thus p. 28 l. 17. dele
since. l. 29. for nothing r. little. p. 30. l. 23. r. yea. l. 24. r. something
like this. p. 32 marg. r. Cent. 3. cap. 4. p. 36. l. 2. hereof r. of. p. 40. m.
r. (...). p. 46. l. 24. r. 2100. p. 47. m. l. 2 r. 866. p. 48. l. 1. r. 179. p.
52. l. 3. r. endowed the Church. p. 53. l. 8. r. Ethelbald. l. 26. r. Gods for
good. p. 57. l. 15. r. Egelred. p. 60. l. 26. r. Cranlty. p. 61. l. 33. r.
England, and Keepers of the Seal. l. 5. r. master for majesty. p. 66 l. 14. r.
Had not. m. r. honestum. p. 65. l. 14. r. So^er. p. 73 l. 21. r. few for five.
p. 81. m. l. 1. r. (...). p. 83. l. 8. r. ad for and. p. 84. l. 23. r. kept. p.
91. m. r. (...). p. 104. l. 12. r. change. p. 105. l. 28. r. the Churchman. p.
108. l. 2. r. gluttonous. l. 13. r. competent. p. 109. l. 15. r. in Cremona. p.
111. m. r. Sabellicus. p. 135. l. 22. r. your for that. p. 146. l. 7. r. Numb.
11. p. 156. l. (...) cared. p. 167. m. r. suo Ecclesiatua. p. 174. m. l. 20. r.
cernitur. (...) l. 27. r. Pittacus. p. 177. l. 11. r. subscribed. m. r.
ignotos. (...) 6. m l. 19. r. Aperiendis. p. 195. m l. 1. r. (...). p. 202. l.
(...). distur^nce. p. 207. l. 12. de^e as. p. 242. l. 34. r. assures. p. 26.
(...) Pre^ates, in whose hands soever they be; University, etc. (...). l. 33.
r. face. p. 137. l. 17. r. sucked. p. 149. l. 26. for if nor. that ^ ^. p. 170.
l. 1. r. duces. p. 175. l. 14. r. virtuous. p. 182. l. 2. r. nor thrive we by.
p. 202. l. 6. for things r. changes. l. 12. r. deserve. p. 246. l. 13. r. for
those other. p. 229. l. 23. after the word true, add, Omnibus omnium aetatum
hominibus inducturus caliginem. p. 241. l. 5. r. belie^s.


