Licensed and Entered according to Order.

THE MYSTERIES OF MOUNT CALVARY Opened and Improved. IN A DIALOGUE BETWIXT
CHRIST and the SOUL.

Omnis creatura compatitur Christo morienti, sol obscuratur, terra movetur
Petrae scinduntur, velum templi dividitur; Sepulchra aperiuntur, Solus homo
Christo non Compatitur, pro quo tamen Solo Christus patitur.

S. Hieronymus in Mat. 27. Aut prodesse volunt, aut delectare Poetae,
Aut simul and jucunda, and idonea dicere vitae.
Horat. de Art Poetica. By J. V Rector of Woodston, in the County of Huntington

LONDON: Printed for Thomas Parkhurst, at the Bible and Three Crowns at the
lower end of Cheapside near Mercers Chapel. 1686.

THE MYSTERIES OF Mount CALVARY, etc.
SOUL. GRant me O Lord! thy Spirit from above,
That I may know the mysteries of thy Love.
It cramps my Reason, and it damps my Faith,
To read the stories of thy Life and Death.
Thou art my God; infinite Wisdom can
Best solve the point why God became a man.

CHRIST. Behold my Soul! God's a transcendent Sprite,
Love, Wisdom, Justice, Mercy, infinite.
Such is his Glorious Nature to the Eye,
Once to behold, is to behold and Dye.
Nor can a prospect of the Sun be made,
Ere grateful to the Eye but in a shade.
The Vail of Moses Face was as a Glass,
For to reflect the glory of his Face.
Moses Vail was my flesh, that pleasing shade,
In which Gods Attributes were all displayed.
Sin was conceived first by Virgin Woman,
Since Adam knew her not, and she knew no man.
By Virgin woman sin found entrance in,
The Virgin Woman's seed attones the sin.
The birth of sins controuled by my birth,
Since I was pure and spotless born of Earth.
Pure as my birth, my life hence qualified,
To expiate those sins for which I di'd.
Nor did my human nature less express,
Gods Wisdom equal to his Holiness.
'Twas Flesh and Blood that sinned; to make this good,
Thy sin I did atone by Flesh and Blood.
'Twas man that sinned, 'twas God that was offended,
Man di'd, God's satisfied, the quarrel ended.
God's peace with man's, proclaimed by my merit;
Man's peace with God's, procured by my Spirit.
I took thy nature, so imparted mine;
I was humane, that thou may be Divine.
I came from Heaven, to Heaven I plained the Rode,
God dwelt with man, that man may dwell with God.
When I for sin a Sacrifice was made,
Gods Justice like his Wisdom was displayed.
That mercy may be shown, God will be Just,
Either the sinner dies, or Jesus must.
At the same instant Mercy meant thy good,
Justice procured it, with the price of Blood;
Nor do thou read God ever pard'ned Vice,
Scarce with, but never without a Sacrifice:
For so the Jews in all their solemn Feasts,
To atone their sins they Sacrificed Beasts.
And when the Lamb was slain in the sinners stead,
The guilt passed over to the accursed head.
By these and other rites, it was inferred,
Sin was not strictly pardoned, as transferred.
David pursued with guilt, to the Altar flies;
His sin is pard'ned, but his Infant dies.
So Just is God, but yet so meek and mild,
He pardons sin, but punishes his Child.
Fear to offend, Justice being so severe;
Since that thy pardon too does cost so dear:
That God is merciful, thy sins do show it.
His blessed nature prompts him daily to it.
But since I paid so dearly for thy sin,
Justice it self does usher Mercy in;
So contrite Souls may in Gods Mercy trust,
Since God is merciful, 'cause he is just.
Buying thy Ransom at so dear a price,
Justice can never demand the payment twice;
Gods Love like to his Mercy's infinite;
Exerting all its powers with all its might.
Light ceases not to spread his Golden Bams,
Fountains would drain themselves in Silver Streams.
God cannot be less than the work of his hands,
His very Nature is what love commands:
Thy self unto thy self God gave thee once,
Ten thousand times thy self he gave thee since;
But when thy sin and misery he spied,
Took flesh, so gave himself for thee, and di'd
Thus love from Heaven discharging every dart,
At last he threw himself into thy heart;
Not only took thy flesh, and so thy sin,
But being man like thee, became thy kin.
What friendship e're was found in any other,
Of Friend, Physician, Advocate, or Brother,
All meet in me; nay I am more then this,
Thy Flesh, thy Life, thy self, thy God, thy bliss.

SOUL. Since 'twas my Lords blessed purpose and intent,
Within my Nature for to pitch his Tent;
Since that thy house, meat, grave, they were not thine,
The reason is (my Lord) thou would have mine.
Come Holy Ghost! and by thy spritely art,
Hover and breathe upon my barren heart.
Since the place sacred is where God will come,
Make my heart like unto the Virgins Womb.
Tho it is not pure, as knowing sin before,
Let it be Virgin, knowing sin no more;
Once in a Manger was thy Body laid,
But in a Jakes I blush to have it said.
Into a worldly mind thou can not come,
It Is pinching, narrow, and it wants room,
Nor can I hear thy sweet and secret Voice,
In a House filled with jangling War and noise.
Nor can thou dwell in a revengeful Breast,
The noise and hurry will disturb thy Rest.
Nor can my Lord an Habitation find,
Fit for thy Presence, in an haughty mind;
Self takes up the room, and fills thy space
Of residence, and scorns to give thee place.
Uncleanness does thy sacred spirit choke,
Bees shun the Hive, when driven out by smoke
Drunkards do quench thy Sprite, pure and Divine,
Who cannot keep his own, he cannot thine.
Nor can the God of truth e're dwell within
A naughty mind, where treachery has been,
Since it betrays him to each tempting sin.
Nor can a sin within thy Temple dwell,
No more than Heaven can e're accord with Hell,
What friendship has my God with Belial?
Why would thou condescend, Lord let me know,
Not to be made a man, but man so low?

CHRIST. Such was thy pride, daring with God to vye;
And I atton'd it by humility.
God envys none his happiness; to know it,
When pride atempted it, and did foregoe it,
Humility points out the way unto it.
Such is the Virtue of an humble Soul,
Coupling all graces, and secures the whole.
Blessed be the grace to which alone it is given,
To fetch God down to Earth, raise man to Heaven.
Such is its power and virtue that it can
Make man become like God, and God like man.
God greater than himself can never be,
Except in this, great in humility.
God and man courts this grace, Heaven is Gods seat,
He Is but one more, the humble soul is it.
When greatness does with goodness twist and twine,
What can be more Heroic and Divine.
What makes the Sun so graceful but his light,
Quickening the meanest object of our sight.
Never did Radient Pearl so please the eye,
As to behold an humble Deity,
Learn O my Child this blessed grace of me.

SOUL. Thy pardon Lord! methinks thy sinful Creature,
Should learn this lesson of his wretched nature.
Earth should be Earth, and Worms are ever found,
Like other insects, crawling on the ground.
Man to be lowly, is as if I said,
Man should be man, dust dust, a spade a spade.
How can man pride himself, and himself flatter,
When sin's his form, and nothing is his matter.
Poor and proud! is the greatest monster, seeing
None but it self can give it self a being:
Man's all is God, nothing's his own beside;
That which is worse than nothing, that is his pride.
Pride therefore is a sin of Monstrous birth,
Who Serpent like, feeds on the slime of the Earth.
Black spawn of Hell! Void of intelligence,
Got in the darksome night of ignorance,
Who like a Viper eats through's Mother's side,
Since nothing but a nothing genders pride.
So bladders swell and skip for want of poise,
And empty Vessels make the greatest noise.
When Fruitful Trees of young and early Birth,
Do end their teeming burdens to the Earth,
So Pearls in dark and deepest Earth are found,
And sweetest Violets trail on the ground.
My self unto my self do thou disclose!
Who knows not his own nothing, nothing knows.
Gods greatness and man's sin's so deep a pit,
Such as no mortal man e're sounded yet.
Who counts himself a sinful wretched man;
He is more wretched than his thoughts can span.
Lord let me know and feel my nothingness;
Then do thou fill this wide and empty space
With plenitude and riches of thy grace.
Since I am nothing of my self alone,
And nothing nothing has to bottom on,
Lord touch my heart as needle's touched with stone!
That it may point and fix on thee alone.
Why did my Lord and Savior think it best,
Before his Death t'appoint the Paschal Feast?

CHRIST. When once the Lamb was slain and every door
Oth' Jewish Tribes was signed with the gore.
The quick-ey'd Angel spied it out, and slew
The Egyptian Host, but passed over the Jew.
Then did the Jews conducted by the Hand
Of Moses, pass over safe to the promised Land.
Not that they did atchieve that land, till they
Had trac't their passage through the Ruddy Sea,
View how this rite was perfected by me.
I passed from Life to Death, by sinners slain,
I pass from Death to Life for sinners gain.
Look as the Lamb when on the Altar laid,
The owners debt was by the Victim paid;
And so the curse passed over the sinners Head,
And fell upon the beast slain in its stead;
I was that Lamb ti'd fast upon the Tree,
Gods Justice like the Angel fell on me,
The Egyptian's slain, the Israelite is free.
Passing from Life to Death, I made all good,
Passing from Death to Life is understood,
The way to bliss is by and through my Blood.
Thus knowing my departure to draw on,
I joined the Paschal-Supper with my own;
That both the Type and Antitype may meet,
And with a joint Salute each other greet.
The Paschal-supper did commemorate,
The ancient thraldom of the Jewish State.
The signal was a pure and spotless Beast,
Offered in Sacrifice of Eucharist.
Nor did they only Sacrifice a Beast,
But on that Sacrifice they made a Feast.
Thus on the Cross I gave my Flesh and Blood,
Both on the Table are become thy Food.
Here thou may quell thy hunger, quench thy thirst,
Feeding upon the Sacrifice of Christ.
Since thus for thee I gave my Life and Breath,
Forget not the memorials of my Death?

SOUL. Since that my Lord so freely did impart,
His Blood to me, sprinkle it on my Heart;
That so thy Justice may the signal view,
Making my sin the Egyptian, me the Jew.
Slay my First born! O thou Firstborn of God!
My mighty sins with thine Almighty Rod.
Drown these Egyptians in thy Sea of Blood,
Then through this Sea, (Lord) make my passage good
Unto the Land of Canaan understood.
Help me too, through this Egypt where I dwell,
A Land of darkness, thraldom, sin, and Hell
Snce that my Bands are loosed by thy Merit!
Guide me Lord, through this desert by thy Spirit;
Let thy Hand be my Covert and my Shroud,
Thy Law my fiery pillar and my Cloud.
Let truth that binds our words and actions fast,
Gird up my Loins, and clasp about my Wast.
Bind on my feet the Sandals of thy Word,
Which to my steps alone can light afford.
Give me the staff of Faith too, in my Hand,
My Foes to conquer, or at least withstand,
Thus fixed, I Will trace my way to the Holy Land.
Lest in this Pilgrimage I faint and pine,
I Will not forget my Viands, Bread and Wine.
My daily wants and needs do prompt me to it,
Thy Dying Words (dear Lord) commands me, do it,
And am I not a treasure to attend,
The living pledges of my Dying Friend?
Thy cursed Death (dear Jesus) should be mine,
And shall I balk the blessed fruits of thine?
Thy Cross I should have born, tho pressed down,
And shall I be compelled to wear my Crown?
Compulsion to a Feast seems very odd
Surely to such whose Friend and Food is God.
If that the Jewish Rites and thine accord,
I Feast not only with, but on my Lord.
Thou giv'st thy self on Earth, from Heaven above,
Thou giv'st thy self again, such is thy Love.
Shall not thy dying Love on Earth invite me?
Shall not thy living Love from Heaven excite me?
Can thou do more than dye? Do more than love me?
Cannot bleeding Love, nor feeding love too, move
Be angry Lord! and let my sins at least,
Harrass and toss me to this blessed Feast:
Then shall thy sacred Body and thy Blood,
Be Meat and Medicine both, Physic and Food.
Give me this day my daily Bread, I cry,
Or in this pilgrimage I faint and dye.
Why did my Lord and Savior think it meet
To condescend to wash his servants Feet?

CHRIST. To raise the price of that contemned grace,
Humility, born of a Heavenly Race.
If any one had reason to be high,
And lift his Head above the Towering Sky,
None shows a better title to it than I.
I claim Gods Titles, Worship, Nature, Name.
God, and Gods Privy-Councellor I am;
My Births Divine, my works were works of Wonder:
My Life was Lightning, and my Voice was Thunder.
I was King too, but yet my power was shown,
In Kindness, Love, and Courtesy alone.
Great was my Works, as not to be withstood*
Yet great in nothing more than doing good.
I raise the Dead, tho Dead to worldly pelf;
I Died unto the World, and to my Self.
For when my Miracles came to be known,
I stopped men's mouths, together with my own.
I raised the Sick, and stilled the Winds beside;
Yet knew not how to raise a puff of pride.
When I was once transfigured on high,
Both Moses and Elias standing by;
The only news they brought me, I must Dye.
When in a King like manner once I came
Riding in Triumph to Jerusalem;
My joys were soon allayed by my fears,
For then I wet my Palms with dewy Tears.
'Twas then and there I was to be a King,
But Consecrated such by Suffering.
My Throne was placed betwixt the Crosses Horns;
My Scepter was a Reed, my Crown of Thorns;
My Robes were Mocks, my Acclamations, Scorns.
Thus both my Life and Death commends to thee,
This Godlike virtue of Humility?

SOUL. Could man but know himself, himself he would know
To be a stinking Dunghill clad with Snow.
Vile Earth without, and viler Soul within,
A mighty nothing, superadded sin.
Methinks the sin of pride should find no place,
Nor yet Humility become a grace
In man, whose sinful nature is so base.
But when I see what once my Lord became,
I little, nothing worse, than nothing am.
Never do we seem so little in our ^ye,
As when we look down on our selves from high.
When I consider what my Lord has done,
I melt away like Snow-balls in the Sun.
When by thy light, and b^thy spritely Art,
I dig to the center of my sinful Heart.
I am all fear, all dread, all in a maze,
Viewing the grizley Spirits which I raise.
But when I see a Nature so Divine,
Exerting so much goodness once in mine;
How Heaven courts Earth, and God becomes our brother,
How one Abyss does call upon another;
Here self dissolves, struck by such potent Charms,
Expiring, like to Moses, in Gods Arms.
Here pride, that brat of darkness and of night,
Not daring to behold this glorious sight;
Makes off, like spirits at the day-brake light.
Oh! let me see my Face in this thy Glass!
Shall man be proud, when God so humble was?
Since that the meanest services were thine,
I will not grudg (my Lord) shall make them mine,
Whatever thy hand has touched is Divine
I Will go from house to house, from door to door,
Healing thy sick, and visiting thy poor.
Since in these Offices I need not fear
To meet a Friend, for I shall meet thee there.
Why is it Recorded (Lord) why is it said,
That thou for thirty pieces wast betrayed?

CHRIST. Thou sold'st thy self to sin; to set thee free,
The price of slaves was judged the price of me.
As in a Glass behold, my Child, and view,
The baseness of thy sin, and thraldom too.
Jesus thy Lord, setting so vile a rate on,
Making thy Soul do Homage unto Satan.
Pagans a Drunken Bacchus did adore,
Mars, Mammon, Pluto, Venus too, a Whore.
Who casts off these by his Baptismal vow,
Tho he thinks not, he may adore them now.
Uncleanness, rapine, riot, and excess;
Mars, Venus, Pluto, Bacchus was no less.
And all but Devils in a Godlike dress.
The Christian sins with Pagan rites accord,
Both Tribute pay to Satan as their Lord.
Tho sinners aim at naught but pleasing profit;
The Devils service is the meaning of it.
Pagans in all their superstitious evils,
They meant a God, tho Worshipped none but Devils.
Who owns himself a Christian by my Name,
And breaks my Precepts, does the very same:
When as I was about to be betrayed,
Lord is it I? The Traitor Judas said;
Nor was that wretch ever so void of sense,
To think my Person worth but thirty Pence.
'Twas not his Reason, but his Avarice,
That on his Master set so low a price.
'Twas lust that did above his Lord prevail,
So the beam leaned too much to the weakest scale.
Jesus more worth than worlds, a Judas cries,
Rather than lust be starved, Jesus Dies.
Such is the nature of a sin when bred,
What cannot once be cured, must be fed.
Whose heart the world does sway, and that his bliss is,
He Will sell me (Judas like) for thirty pieces.
Tho in Exchange he does impart a kiss,
I need not tell thee who his Master is.
For so in secret Caverns Serpents lurk,
Like hidden Springs, setting the Wheels on work.

SOUL. In Lawful things we most of all offend,
When our desires want measure both, and end:
Whose swelling mind his Fortunes does out go,
Five Hundred pounds is not so much as two.
Proud and ambitious Minds will draw a Sword
For that which meek men count not worth a Word.
The sober Person dines without a wish,
When Lust is pined at a double Dish.
Never was there Judge that dare to be unjust,
Were he not bribed otherwise by Lust:
None covets sin, but lust for to fulfill,
And so sins willingly against his Will.
Down to my mean Estate, Lord bend my mind!
And let them both like Warp and Woof combined:
Sleeping securely thus on Natures Lap,
I Am safe from Satan's wiles and Fortunes Clap.
Why did that Traitor wound thee with a Kiss,
And suck rank Poison from the Streams of Bliss?

CHRIST. To expiate thy foul Hypocrisy,
Which does at once betray thy God and me:
My flesh it was a Mirror, to express
Gods Justice, Goodness, Truth and Righteousness:
Who makes a breach in any one of these,
Tho a Disciple, yet a Judas is;
Who in my Gospel Precepts does be-lye me,
In all my Gospel Truths he will deny me:
He will not dye that dares not to be just:
He Will never forsake his life that wont his lust:
Who shipwracks Conscience, as the Scripture says;
Must cast away the Anchor of his 1 Timothy 1.19.
Faith,
Whose formal Christian only may as well,
(Bating the name of Hypocrite and Hell)
Become a Jew, a Turk, an Infidel;
He is my Friend, by the same reason so,
As Turk and Jew, and Pagan is my Fo;
And tho he wears my Coat, as Judas Kisses,
When the Fashion alters, tears it all in pieces:
They who would make me King, did most deride me;
Who cried Hosanna most, they crucified me.

SOUL. Cursed Hypocrisy! that would outvye
The God of Wisdom, Truth, Sincerity:
Daring to kiss his Face, in's Courts to dwell,
More distant from him, than is Heaven from Hell:
So Apes are counted most deformed Creatures,
Who are not men, but would be men in features.
Grant I may love thee, Lord, by being like thee,
That I may never at once both kiss and strike thee:
Let me detest all sin in every part,
That I may never be Judas in my Heart.
The Garden is a Seat of Pleasure; why
Was it the Scene of thy sad Tragedy?

CHRIST. Here in a Garden I atoned that Sin
Which in a Garden you know did begin.
For there we find the Tree of Good and Evil,
Which Adam eat of, tempted by the Devil:
Here I engaged that Tempter in the Field,
Where first he made thy Parents for to yield:
Here my embittered Cup did first confute
The fancied Pleasures of Forbidden Fruit.
That Curse of sweat when man procures his food Genesis 3.17.
,
I here atoned by sweating drops of Blood.

SOUL. Enough my Lord! thou'st fully paid my Scores,
Fitting thy Plasters wisely to my Sores:
Approach you hither all you idle Drones;
View how your Lord both sweats, and sighs, and groans;
Behold you swearers how he faints and swoons,
Under the burden of your cursed VVounds:
View how his Blood and Moisture is sunk up,
By drinking of the Drunkards poisoned Cup.
Come here my Lusts! and dare to taste no more
Of The Fruit' the Tree of Good and Evil bore,
Y' have tasted of the Apple, view the Core!
Hear, O supine Devotion, his loud cry:
So strong, so fervent, that it pierced the Sky;
His very Prayer was an Agony.
Why did thou deprecate thy Cup, and say,
Father, if possible, pass it away?
'Twas thy Baptismal Cup thou long'st for, how
Could thou desire it once, and dread it now?

CHRIST. Oh 'twas a dreadful Cup as never was seen,
Poisoned with Wrath of God, and dregs of Sin:
The greatest sorrow and the quickest sense,
Does set the higher Price on Patience:
Once to desire it, now to drink it loath,
Does signify my love and sorrow both.

SOUL. Shall I take pleasure in those cups and cates,
Which my dear Lord so dreads and deprecates?
Shall I delight in that by which he dies?
And sport with ponyards, and with Agonies?
Grant that thy Cup, more dreadful than thy Cross is,
May sour my sins, and sweeten all my losses:
Suffer me, Lord, thy love for to control;
Thou suffer in thy Body, why in Soul?

CHRIST. Sin from thy soul, my child, did first begin;
My sorrows did commence as did thy sin:
And why I sweat such drops of such a sort,
The burden of thy sins must answer for it.
View how my soul's surrounded for thy sin,
Sweats Blood without, and feels a Hell within.
Such anguish as is never to be found,
Sweat without Heat, and Blood without a Wound:
With God, with Sin, with Satan did I strive,
Mine was the Life of Death, as Death of Life;
My Death was one, yet in that all may be;
Who di'd before and after, di'd in me:
Well may my Blood be squeezed through all my Pores,
I had as many deaths, as I had Doors.

SOUL. And shall my sins (dear Lord) increase thy store,
And cause thee for to dye ten Thousand more?
Sin robbed thee of thy life; and it is as true,
It kills thy death, and stobs thy kindness too:
Mercy, Love, Truth, and Goodness, are a good
More dear to thee, than was thy Flesh and Blood:
This thou assum'st the other to display,
And yet in these thou suffer'dst every day.
Thy flesh never felt so much from Daggers keen,
As did thy Heart and Mind feel by my sin.
O cursed sin! far harder to be born,
Than Whips, than Deaths, than Daggers, Crowns of Thorn.
Why did the Jews, all in a spiteful Vogue,
Prefer before thee, Barabbas, a Rogue?

CHRIST. To show the sinners choice in every Vice,
Wh' on God and Conscience sets so low a Price,
To gain his Lust, will lose bis Paradise.
The value of a soul, were to be sold,
Weighs down a world, yea tho a world of Gold.
Gods Glory's more to be esteemed than
Ten Thousand worlds, than Millions of Men:
Put all into the scales, they wont outpoise
The wilful madness of the sinners choice.
There Is no unjust man sins, but that in sinning
He stabs the mighty God that is within him:
Lust stares you in the face, heard in its groans,
Felt by its fires, smelt in its rotten bones:
The Drunkard of all sinners not the least,
Tho God has stamped his image in his breast,
Changes that coin, and only buys a beast.
The Swearer sins not at the common rate,
Swallowing the Devils Hook without a Bait,
Pawning his soul but for a fruitless evil,
And not so much as cheapning with with the Devil.
Who fears man more than God, I Will answer for it,
He kills himself for fear of being hurt.
Thus through the sinners choice it comes to pass,
Each sin cries out, Not Him, but Barabbas.

SOUL. The sinner's wretched choice does far outvy,
What Is said in Holy Writ, or Hystory.
Esau stands fool on record for his dotage,
Selling his Birthright for a mess of Pottage.
Glaucus changed Gold for Brass; Crates they say,
To brave his folly, cast his Gold away.
The Romans framed an Altar to apppease
A feverish God, worshipping a Disease.
The Sinners folly does them all excel,
Exchanging Life for Death, and Heaven for Hell.
If Souls more worth than Worlds, infer from hence
How cheap the're sold, when sold for thirty Pence.
Nay, for a filthy Lust, when passed and gone
Not to be found but in a Sigh or Groan.
Is this the Paramour, that most does please us?
Is this the Barabbas that Vyes with Jesus?
Is there such charming Magic in its hue,
As to be Wed without a Dowry too?
Nay, pay a price down sor't, and such a price,
As Health, Wealth, Life, Soul, Bliss and Paradise.
Since thou do guard the Tree of Life so well
With Cherubims of Death, and Flames of Hell,
How can I break the Fence, since to be blessed,
It is my Duty both, and Interest.
Why wast thou stripped (my Lord) I cannot fathom?

CHRIST. To take on me the state of sinning Adam:
He and thou naked were, I naked am,
That thou may have my Robes to hide thy shame.

SOUL. O Clothe me with the Robe of thy great Merit;
Adorn me with the Graces of thy Spirit.
Why wast thou bound (my Lord) why whipped with Cord?
My Faith begins to fail me, help me Lord!

CHRIST. Was Adams sin naught in respect to thee,
Who robbed Gods Orchard, the forbidden Tree?
Or did that Fruit never set thy Teeth on Edge?
Or Achan- like, did never steal a Wedg?
I for thy theft, was like a thief fast bound;
Not guilty, but for thee was guilty found.
Thy greater sins did Stob me to the heart;
The lesser were those Whips that made me smart,
Causing such ghastly Wounds in every part.

SOUL. Let me not cherish, Lord, that viprous brood,
Which fed upon the reekings of thy Blood.
Oh, wound my sins, which caused such wounds in thee,
Then heal those wounds thy love has made in me.
Why wast thou spit on (Lord) why mocked, why made
A Prophet, Priest and King in Masquerade.

CHRIST. Learn where the sin of sin does chiefly lie:
Offering affront to the glorious Majesty.
Profaness lays him open to Disgrace,
And Malice spits him in the very face.
Drunkards deface his Image, spoil his Creature;
Lust would assoil his pure and spotless Nature.
The unbeliever fain would tie his hands,
From punishing the breach of his commands.
And what Injustice does, you soon may guess;
It strips him of his Robes of Righteousness:
In Robes of Scarlet, Scoffers make him stand,
And puts a Reeden Scepter in his hand.
Who with inflamed Blood, revenge does seek,
Does smite his blessed Maker on the Cheek:
The Proud Crown him with Thorns; the Swearers part,
Is for to strike his Poniard through his heart.
All sin does mean the same to the Deity
What the Jews meant, and did effect in me.

SOUL. To affront my God, it is the Sinners sport;
God may be injured, true! can he be hurt?

CHRIST. I was both God and Man, conclude thou then,
What hurt sin brought to God, what hurt to men.
My Body felt its pangs, my Soul its fears,
My Eyes its taunts, its mocks and scoffs my Ears:
My head the prickled Crown, my Cheeks the nips;
My Hands and Feet the Nails, my Back the Whipts;
It Is strange, but true, what cannot be denied,
God cannot dye, yet it was a God that died.

SOUL. I clearly see my sins do wound my Lord,
Without a Trope, with and without a Sword.
Cursed Serpent sin, since naught can quench his thirst,
Till he is imbibed the precious Blood of Christ.
What Sinners make so light of, by their leaves,
It pressed God down, like as a Cart with Sheaves:
Nay, pressed forth Blood, when laid upon his back;
Poor Wretch am I, shall never a heartstring crack?
Shall both thy Head and sacred Temples reek,
And not a tear bedew my withered Cheek.
Indeared Mothers, when they see a Dart
Levelled at the tender Infants Heart;
They Cry, they Screek, I Faint, I Swound, I Dye;
So cannot I my Lord, so cannot I;
Yet I Am resolved these sins shall never be mine;
I Will spit them in the face, who spat in thine.
Grant that the Spittle, Malice cast on thee;
May wipe all foul Aspersions off from me.
But now again, my Lord, I Am at a loss,
What meant thy carrying up and down thy Cross?

CHRIST. The Pagans, when a Judgment stroke a Town,
Did lead their Sacrifices up and down
To Appease their angry Gods; it is also said,
Isaac did bear the Wood on which he is laid.
Simon and I, bearing that weighty Tree,
Tells my Disciples what t'expect from me.
Come on my Child, with an undaunted heart,
Since I go first, and also bear a part.

SOUL. Can I refuse, thy blessed Yoke to take,
Since born by thee, and fitted to my Neck?
Thy Cup was full of the red Wine of Sadness;
Thou fil'st it up to me with Oil of gladness.
Thy Cross was fixed on Golgotha, a place
Where God from thee withheld his blessed Face.
Mine thou have fixed on Mount Moriah's green,
The place where God once promised to be seen Gen 22.
.
A Crown of Thorns thy sacred head encloses;
Thou wear'st the Prickles, and I wear the Roses.
Truth Lord! who follows thee, shall have no loss:
The Cross bears him, who ever bears the Cross:
Is it unlawful, Lord, for me to say,
Why was thy Cross fixed on a Golgotha?

CHRIST. This was the seal Tradition would maintain,
Where Isaac once had like to have been slain.
The place of Dead men's Skulls; it is also said
It was the place where Adam 's buried.
This being so, as't has been said of old,
Then Death was Conquered in his Fort and Hold.
Man found out sin, by sin Death first came in;
Sin brought forth Death, and Death has conquered sin.
Who by the Serpents sting has got a hurt,
The Oil of Serpents is a plaster for it.
'Twas humane Flesh that caused the first to dye;
So humane Flesh obtained the Victory.
Under my Cross Death like a Victim lies,
And as a Sacrifice of the Altar dies.
So that of Golgotha it may be said,
Here is the place where Death lies buried.
Courage my Soul! Death's done his utmost spite;
The Serpent he may hiss, but cannot bite.
Spread his cold hand he may, and press upon
Thy spriteless Corpse, but cannot break a Bone.
Hence Death, a dark and shady Entry call,
Bending thy footsteps to a spacious Hall.

SOUL. When through Death's valley I shall bend my way,
Thy Cross shall be my Rod, my Staff, my Stay:
Can thou, my Soul, refuse to lay thy Head
Within that place where Jesus made his Bed?
Once 'twas a Golgotha of stench and smell;
The Pagans called it Hades, the Jews say Hell.
Since Christ lay there, and from thence did arise,
Call it from hence, the Gate of Paradise.
Chide not (dear Lord) my curiosity;
Why was thy Cross exalted up on high?

CHRIST. It was Gods penal Law, and his Decree Deuteronomy. 27.26.
;
Cursed is every one that hangs of the Tree.
I to atone thy Sin, thy Curse, thy Shame,
Did dye that Death which did attest the same.
Although it was a Roman Death I died;
Yet an All-seeing Eye did so provide,
That the curse should contain that Ignomy
The Law pronounced to him that hung oth' Tree.
Have thou not read the place, where it is rehearsed,
And they shall look on him whom they have pierced.
By this it is plain, my Cross I was to bear,
And dye that Death, whose piercing was by Spear.
When the Lamb of old was to the Altar ti'd,
Mounted aloft, and then upon it di'd;
My Crosses Exaltations verified.
That sacrificed Ram (as it is related Exodus 29.27.
,
At the time when the Priest was consecrated,
'Twas waved to and fro, heaved up and hurld,
Pointed to the four corners of the World.
When I was consecrated on the Tree,
That Jewish rite was well becoming me:
For so my Cross was mounted up on high,
That all the World may their Redeemer spy.
Thus placed 'twixt Earth, Gods footstool and Heavens Throne,
To reconcile both God and Man in one.
The Brazen Serpent in the Desert was
A Type of me, relating to my Cross:
The Jews being stung with Serpents, were made whole,
By a brass Serpent fixed on a Pole
To cure the Wound, caused by that cursed Creature;
Art cannot effect the cure, no more could Nature;
For if it was a Serpent, then I Am sure,
Serpents by nature rather kill then cure;
A fiery Serpent too, who can endure?
The sting of Death is sin, by the Serpent shown,
The Venom too, cause 'twas a fiery one.
What more averse to Reason, Sense or Faith,
Than to seek Life from an accursed Death.
A crucified Jesus did bespeak
Spite to the Jew, and folly to the Greek.
But if you look at Gods wise end in this,
The cursed Tree's become the Tree of bliss.
Look as the aforesaid Serpent made of Brass,
Was not a Serpent, but its Image was:
So without sin, I Am made a sinful Creature,
And by my Death gave Life to humane Nature;
And this Life is conveyed, as Scripture says,
By looking on my Cross, with lively faith:
A Faith that puts the Serpent to the rout;
Pulls out his sting, and lets the Poison out.

SOUL. Since that my Lord thus raised himself on high;
Why does my Soul, oth' ground thus groveling lie!
O, fix my heart on this thy blessed Tree!
So as to taste the fruit, and healed be:
What boot's thy pardon, tho so full, so free,
If that my Conscience will not pardon me?
I have been told, that this thy Towering cross,
The downfall of the Devils Kingdom was.

CHRIST. Some make the brazen Serpent for to be
A fitting Emblem of this Verity.
A dead and wounded Serpent on a Tree,
Bespeaks the wounds Satan received from me.
For thus my Cross became the Stage and Scene,
Where that cursed Serpent vents his utmost spleen.
Nor did I break his Scepter and his Rod
By force of Arms alone, as being God;
By Martial Law I entered in the Field,
By a new Conquest made my Foe to yield.
My Innocence did quench his fiery Dart,
My Patience smote him to the very Heart.
My Foe by wounding me, did himself wound,
Meeting his fiery Dart at the rebound.
Murdering the Son of God in the sinners stead:
He brought both shame and curse upon his Head.
And thus I caught the Devil in that gin,
By which he made Adam and Eve to sin.
In The Serpents shape at first he did appear,
Not in his own, 'twas full of dread and fear,
And by this Craft he got the Woman's Ear.
In love to man, man's Flesh and Blood took I,
Clothing my Godhead with Humanity:
The Serpent by this art, I did outvy.
Who views my Cross, now with a faithful Eye,
May see the cursed Serpent wounded lie.
What once was termed the ignominious Tree,
Now proves a Trophy of my Victory.
For so the Romans in a conquered Town
Set up a Trophy of their great Renown.
At first it was a Garment, or some Clothes,
Stripped from the back of their new conquered Foes;
Then fastened to a Transverse Beam it was;
Then mounted on a Pole, my very Cross.
I having spoild the Devil on the Tree,
I made the show on it, Triumphed openly Col. 2.15.
:
My Cross that was so cursed, does appear
To be my Chariot, and triumphing Chair.

SOUL. If that the Serpent's crucified with thee,
Why do I find him daily tempting me?
Is not my heart more Devil e're then he?
Grant that as Satan felt thy Crosses smart,
So do thou Rule and Reign within my Heart.
Why would my Lord, girt with a Crown of Thorns,
Be nailed and rivetted to Crosses horns?

CHRIST. The Earth once cursed by Adams sin, did bear
Briars and Thorns, which on my Head I wear,
And for that Curse I make Atonement here.
Before the Heathens Oxes Blood was shed,
They put a Crown of Flowers on his Head.
When I was Crowned with Thorns upon the Tree,
The Heathen may behold the Mystery.
When Isaac, the delight of Abraham 's Eyes,
Had like to bave been once a Sacrifice,
A Ram was caught in the Thickets of the VVood,
Christ crowned with Thorns is that Ram understood:
In every Jewish Sacrifice of Old,
My Cross was but the story often told:
For when the Lamb was slain, his joints stretched out,
Then ti'd to the Altars Horns, without all doubt
The Mystery of the Cross was pointed out.

SOUL. Since that the Jewish sacrifice and thine,
Did in one Altar meet and so combine:
Oh let my sins be fastened to the Tree,
And like a sacrifice be slain with thee:
So shall the Jews and Christian Rites agree,
And Christ be all in all in them and me.
Let all my crosses, losses, mocks, and scorns,
Be dignified by thy Crown of Thorns
I have not done, methinks thy Cross points out,
Some latent Truth behind, (Lord) clear my doubt,

CHRIST. How does the God of Love, void of all evil,
Run counter to the Malice of the Devil?
Since that the cursed Caitiffs proper food,
Is for to glut of the streams of humane Blood.
But God is Love, tho Justice might step in,
And claim man's blood, as forfeited by sin:
Yet Goodness is so full of his own good,
Rather than man shall lose his life and blood,
God by the hands of his own Justice dies:
Not man, but God becomes the Sacrifice:
The powers of darkness and eternal night
Were spoiled here, and here exposed to sight.
By the same sword thy Lord received his wound,
He smote the cursed Serpent to the ground.
Here Satan, more than Christ seems to be dead:
He bruised his heel indeed, but he his head:
Nor was he hurt alone, but it is as true,
He was disarmed of all his weapons too.
Can he condemn? The sinner soon replies,
Man shall not dye, since God himself here dies.
When that the Creditor's become thy friend,
The Bailiffs inquisition's at an end.
Here Hell was hy its captive, captive led,
And the destroyer, Death, slain by the dead.
That Handwriting which threatened man with the loss
Of life, is cancelled here, and nailed to the cross.
So laws of old, when that their power was lost,
They were exposed, transfixed to a Post:
And to make all complete, Gods Justice too,
For thy contentment is exposed to view.
Here both Gods Arms of Justice, with his Hands,
Were fastened to the cross by loving hands:
He cannot lift them up (since they are bound)
To strike the contrite sinner to the ground:
Nor can his weighty feet (since they are pent)
Trip up the heels of any Penitent.
Only his hands are stretched, as silent charms,
TO allure the soul to fall into his arms.
The mouth of Justice here is still and mute,
And only bows his head to the sinners suit.
His side is pierced, his blood trails on the ground
To fetch you in, and so close up the wound.

SOUL. Since that my soul for sin can find no ease,
Tossed on the billows of the angry seas,
I Will fly unto thy Cross, and there imbark,
Creeping in at the Windows of that Ark,
Thy side I mean, Lord grant me entrance in,
Then let thy precious wounds close up my sin.
Nor am I pleased my sins are covered,
Till they be crucified with thee, and dead.
How shall I sound thy pangs, thy pains, thy smart,
And what a sufferer for me thou were,
Till that I find and feel thy pois'ned dart,
Lie throbbing in each Fiber of my Heart.
The Jew before the Victims blood was shed,
(Laying his hand upon the accursed head)
Cried out, 'Twas I that merited this pain,
Thus to be bound and strangled, cut and slain:
My sin, that cursed beast, that goard my Lord,
I Will bind him to thy Altar fast with cord,
Then slay the slayer with the slayers sword,
'Twas sin that forced thy death, or't had not been;
Shall not thy death enforce the death of sin?
I Will therefore stretch its hands and arms full wide
Upon thy Cross, and wound them through thy side.
Thy pangs shall through my hollow bowels move,
And echo back again thy dying love:
My tears shall meet thy blood, then safely I
May say thy death is mine, when thus I dye,
Pardon my suit, O Lord, discover why
Thou choosest such a painful death to dye?

CHRIST. Small was the instance of man's first offense;
The greater was his disobedience:
Scarce do ye sin, or ever go astray,
Till pleasure goes before and leads the way.
I bore those pains most contrary to sense,
Man's cheap and pleasant sin to recompense.
What was thy pleasure, let it be thy fear,
Since what is so cheap to thee, to me's as dear.
A living death, a dying life had I;
I di'd in dying, yet I could not dye:
My bones disjointed, and my Nerves extended,
I di'd in every part, yet no life ended.
My lingering death, that death may signify,
Where sinners always live, and always die.
By this death, without death, it may be shown,
(If Infinite by Finite can be known)
Thy ever dying death I did atone.

SOUL. A death so painful; shameful, never was seen,
Nay cursed too; I wished had never been.

CHRIST. I wish so too; but such hecame thy sin:
For never was there sin thou did commit,
But pain, and shame, and curse attended it.

SOUL. Truth, Lord: in every breach of thy command,
The Pain does take the Pleasure by the hand.
The Proud shall never want their pain and trouble,
The reason is, they bottom on a bubble.
The worldlings in their plenty still do crave,
And pained in this they want the goods they have:
The envious to themselves prove very Devils,
Making their brothers goods become their evils.
Lust is a Devil too, that first does tempt us,
Then making conscience Devil to torment us.
The liar finds a truth, who never said it;
He suffers from his conscience and his credit.
Injustice that withdraws another pelf,
Does the exactest Justice on it self.
It is a truth too true, we may rely on it:
Each sin does bear his cross, but will not dye on it
Thy death was painful (Lord) but I Am offended,
That by a shameful death thy life was ended.

CHRIST. My Cross was as a Pulpit placed on high
Preaching a Sermon visible to the eye
Of Meekness, Patience, Love, Humility.
These virtues in the mind could make no stamp,
Had I appeared arrayed in worldly Pomp:
Phocian, Thrasias, and such men as these,
Regulus, Aristides, Socrates:
Such Heroes Virtues never could climb the sky,
Were not their persons once condemned to dye:
So stars shine brightest in a frosty night,
The biggest least appearing in our sight.
In love to man, and tender sympathy
To man in troubles 'twas but meet that I
Should feel the brunt of all, and therefore dye.
Now love's a law never to be controlled,
What e're it touches, turns all to Gold:
From an accursed death exalts its fame;
Nobles disgrace finds dignity in shame.
Since God must be atoned too, I Am content
To undergo this legal punishment:
Condemned to dye in shame, what greater dread,
Than to dye once, be killed too when dead.
Can worse be meant, what all men always have:
My pains must want a death, my death a grave.
This was thy shame (my soul) mine never had been,
Were not to expiate thy shameful sin.
That sin is clothed with shame, this does express it;
Men dare to sin, but dare not to confess it.
Sin dies thy Aspect red, or makes it pale;
Nature to hide thy shame, pulls on her Vail.
Like to the cursed Serpent, such is lust,
It creeps on's belly, and it licks the dust.
Liars want feet to stand on, yet they can
Dare to affront a God, but sneak from man.
Drunkards have naught to speak them humane creatures,
But inward guilt, and some few outward features:
Would they but once in my word view their face,
They Would curse the Image, but commend the Glass.
The Misers sins as base, base earth at best,
Making it self the center of its rest.
Thus shame to wait on sin will never fail,
Bating the sting that is in the vipers tail.

SOUL. Most shameful sin! tho Hell had never been;
Methinks there is Hell enough in every sin:
Shall I create a Title and a Name
To that which made my God a public shame?
Since sin exposed my Lord, I Will here begin,
From this example to expose my sin.
I Will search and try, judge and condemn its cause,
At the most strict Tribunal of thy Laws.
I Will strip the Varlet of his vain pretenses,
Then Scourge him roundly for his vile Offenses.
I Will bind him fast in this fast twisted Cord,
Sins guilt, deaths curse, Gods Ire, Hells Flaming Sword.
I Will make him feel his burden with Remorse,
Of conscience, bear, and dye too on the Cross.
I Will cause my luxuries to take a sup
Of The mixtures they prepared for thy Cup.
Here my intemperance like thee, O Christ,
Shall on thy Cross cry out, I thirst! I thirst!
My whoredorms, riots, revels in the Night,
Shall here do penance in thy Robes of White.
My Oaths that stabbed thee to the Heart, shall feel
The pangs and pains of thy side-peircing Steel.
My pride that cannot stoop, nor bear a frown,
Shall feel the pungent prickles of thy Crown.
My lusts, those Nayls that tied thee to the Tree,
Shall feel themselves fast bound and tied with thee.
Those fierce and fiery passions that most please us,
Shall here lie prostrate at the Feet of Jesus.
Thus shall my sins with all their mighty Host,
Be stretched and nailed to thy cursed Post,
Then cry aloud, and so give up the Ghost.
Why would thou dye upon that cursed Wood,
Methinks ther'es something yet (Lord) understood?

CHRIST. TO atone the sin of the forbidden Tree,
Once cursed by Adam, but more curse to me.
O Cross! the name and quintessence of Evils,
Cursed by God, by Angels, Men, and Devils.
What curse is greater, except this be worse,
I am at length become the Creatures curse?
The Sun at Noonday hides his Glorious Face,
Blushing at such an object of disgrace.
My Corpse they must not rest a night of the Tree,
Lest that the Air should take offense at me.
The Earth that is cursed by mine, tho Adams sin,
Will Not let me touch her with my nether skin.
That Earth where Serpents feed, and Beasts do tread on,
I must not find a place to lay my head on.
Rocks put on sense, and seem for to condole,
The pangs and dolors of my dying Soul.
The Temple seems to be profaned by me,
And rents its Clothes as hearing Blasphemy.

SOUL. If spotless innocence has thus been used,
Can sins Excuses ever be excused?
Who counts his sin but small, of little weight,
Must say the same of God, if he say right.
Count thy sin small, if any can be such,
It Is not a little that thou love it much.
For so a Bodkin if it reach thy Heart,
Kills thee as sure as does a greater Dart.
The prickles of that Crown which Jesus wore,
Bedewed his Temples with a purple gore.
The smaller instance does enhanse the sin;
VVilt loose Gods Grace and Favor for a pin?
In smallest cranies serpents will not fayl,
First to twine in the Head, and then the tail.
Who takes an earnest penny, he engages
To do more work, when Satan bids more wages.
Nor must thou reckon at the common rate,
Thy sin was small, cause the temptation's great.
Such as man is, such is the power of sin,
Prevailing not without, but from within.
Some Healthful persons will devour a mess,
When squeamish stomachs will recoyl at less.
Joseph was Tempted more than e're was David,
The one fell foul, the other he was saved.
Poor thirty pieces did prevail upon
Judas, when thousands could not on St. John;
Who for a pound will not sin, but will for seven,
This is to set a price on God and Heaven.
What Is Infinite, and what is Eternal Life,
Equal outweighs five thousand pounds, as five.
But for Temptation this had never bin,
Is naught to say, but that you love the sin.
Nor can sins pleasure or its pleasing Profit
Excuse the sin for the Commission of it.
Since in its tempting and commodious ware,
Jesus outbids the Devils market far.
Judge whether Vice or Virtue is more gainful,
Since Life to come's so sweet, and Death so painful.
Nor can thou say it is thine unhappy state,
Sin never was thy choice, but it is thy Fate.
Can Life cause Death? Good Evil, Truth a lie?
Life, Goodness, Truth cries out, why will thou dye?
Is man a Creature of a rank no higher
Than artificial Puppet made of Wier.
Are praises, promises, rewards, all one,
As if you should sing well to please a stone?
Is man no more blame worthy for his sin,
Than is a Watch not pointing right the Pin?
Conscience would never smite thee for a Vice,
Did not thy Nature prompt thee otherwise.
Is It not the Drunkards choice to set at naught
That cup where Aconite is made the draught?
And cannot Heaven nor Hell make him refrain,
Can Heaven e're lose its price, or Hell its pain?
Strange Fate; never fixed on ought but what are evils,
As if God never made men, but all were Devils.
If sin has caught thee in its fatal gin,
Thy punishment's as fatal as thy sin.
But after all, is there no strength and force
In this, that sin made God himself a curse?
Then sinner take thy fill, carouse and quaff,
But can thou drink oth' Cup that Christ drank of?
Or can thy back once bear that direful Rod,
Pressed with the Arm of an Almighty God?
If sin made God so cursed, Oh what can
Make sin more cursed unto sinful man!
If innocence did under wrath so groan,
What comfort can the sinner look for? none.
I beg thy Favor Lord for to relate,
Why thou wast Crucified without the Gate?

CHRIST. For to complete a Jewish Type of note,
The accursed Sacrifice of the Scapen Goat.
Nor was it fit my Merits and my Grace
Should be confined only to the Jewish Race.
I died a Pagan Death, my erected wood
Stood 'loft, that all may view it for their good.
My Arms were stretched out from East to West,
To close with every Soul that would be Blessed.
My Titles wrote in Hebrew Latin, Greek;
All Nations in me may Salvation seek.

SOUL. Thou dyd'st for all; naught can it falsify,
But only cursed Infidelity.
Were not thy Death of Value infinite,
It could not make atonement for one sprite.
But being infinite, it satisfied,
Both for this world, and thousand worlds beside.
Let my name in thy Cross Engraven be;
Thou did not dye for all, if not for me.
But why in Holy Writ is it verified,
My Lord betwixt two Malefactors died.

CHRIST. There is a reason why the Apostle said it,
Not only for to save the Prophets credit.
I was esteemed a greater thief to be
Than either of those Thieves that died with me.
But yet by dying thus I mercy meant
To the greatest thief, the greatest penitent.
When Adam robbed the Tree to make him Wise,
And then denied it, lost his Paradise.
Humble confession finds admission in
To Paradise thus lost by Adams sin.
Wht one Thief lost, you see the other found;
Who falls and rises soon, he gains ground.
But he that lives in sin, in sin shall dye,
Yea tho his Lord and Savior stands by.
Who hopes for Heaven, but will not change his vice,
May find a Hell, yea in a Paradise.
His very hopes are founded in his fears,
Since lust would fire a Heaven about his Ears.
Bateing my word, each sinner can foretell,
Sin has a Central force that points at Hell.
I need not say, Depart out of my sight,
It never was, nor can be his delight.
Who to my sacred Laws has small regard,
Has less of reason to expect reward.
My Cross here seems to represent my Throne,
Which at the last day I shall sit upon;
O'th left hand stands the Goats, my Sheep of the right,
As meet inheritors with Saints in light?

SOUL. By these two Thieves, my Lord has clearly shown,
Justice and Mercy does uphold his Throne.
The one aws my hopes, the other checks my fears,
The one hoists up Sail, whilst that the other stears.
To the dying Thief much was thy mercy shown,
I will not presume on it, cause he was but one.
'Twas his first time he ever heard of thee,
The same can never be verified of me.
He for his Lord and Savior once did take thee,
In that weak state when all thy friends forsake thee.
Thou own'st him at thy death, he thee at thine,
The same can never be truly said of mine.
I Will now resolve, God never held forth to morrow;
Or if he did, did not repenting sorrow.
That I shall turn to God, can it be said.
When that I scarce can turn me in my Bed?
My time is short, way heavy, long the course;
Shall all the burden lie of the weakest Horse?
My debts run on, shall I discharge the score,
And pay them bitter when I owe the more?
I blush to think what is dreadful for to own,
My lusts shall have the Marrow, God the Bone.
When on the dying Thief thou cast thine Eyes,
Methinks thy words some potent truth implies,
This day thou shall be with m' in Paradise?

CHRIST. The Jews held forth a double Paradise,
That on the Earth, and that above the Skies;
The place where earthly joys all met together,
The one the fitter umbrage of the other.
From hence the Elysian Fields first took their rise,
Shades of the Trees that grew in Paradise:
Both Jew and Greek concur that men survive
Their mortal clay, and then are most alive.
Nothing to nothing tends, and more say I,
It Is by a Metaphor my Saints can dye.
God's not the God of the dead, but of the living,
The Souls of Abraham, Isaac, still surviving.
Moses, Elias, in the Mount appears
Alive, tho dead above two thousand years.
When Jacob saw the garment of his son,
Cries out, some Beast has killed him, I Am undone;
Whilst thus lamenting his unhappy fate,
Joseph's alive, and Lives in Princely state.
Whilst mine and thy dear friend do spriteless lie,
Inexorable to thy sighs and cry,
They are not Dead, but are alive as I,
Leaving their Grave-Cloaths for to wipe thine Eye.
Have thou not seen a Student at his Book,
Close pent, and pris'ned in some private nook.
He Is then all Mind, all Soul, all Life, all Sprite,
And most alive, when dead to Human sight.
Have thou not seen two Combatants Engage,
Till one seems prostrate dead upon the Stage;
But when drawn off, dragged through a Postern Door,
He is alive, as e're he was before.
So have I seen the Branches of a Vine,
At Winters season faint away and pine.
When at that instant each luxuriant shoot,
Tho seeming dead, yet is alive at Root.
And when the Sun imparts its gentle light,
Each branch appears again in pregnant plight.
Thy Life on Earth is hid with Christ above,
And when the Sun of Righteousness and Love,
Quickneth thy Soul, all truth shall be displayed,
And latent forms of things which have been dead.
Have thou not heard the pangs and pains that come
From teeming Mothers of a pregnant Womb?
Presaging, as Aurora does the Morn,
A welcome Infant shortly to be born.
Thus when Expiring Souls do vent their groans,
Their sighs, their sobs, and such like dying tones.
Conclude upon this struggle and this strife,
The souls new Birth into a better Life.
Thus shaking off this cold clay clod of Earth,
It joys to reassume its former birth.
Fast fixing on the center of its Rest;
Knows nothing, but this one thing, to be blessed.

SOUL. How does the Soul forget her noble Birth,
When she is confined within these Walls of Earth;
Kissing her shadow, courting to her slave,
Thinking her self no bigger than a grave.
As if a Bird that is soaring up on high,
Should cast her eyes down on the Earth, and spy
Her shadow there, and say that it was I,
When she is a climbing up the Towering Sky.
So does the Soul by her dear Flesh inclined,
Impress her false opinions on her mind.
Counting that only true what is in her sight,
And what she sees and feels of bulky weight.
As if a Child pent in its Mothers Womb,
Sold say the world affords no larger Room.
So Children fancy there is no more of Sky,
Nor Earth, than what is bounded by the Eye.
The folly of our Souls no less appears,
As in our fancies here, so in our fears.
Fearful of Death, who never had fearful been,
Till he put on the Vizard of our sin.
When e're he strikes me with his gentle Wand,
And takes me by the cold and clammy Hand.
He wounds my sin, not me, since that I dye,
Only in dear and tender sympathy,
To this vile Earth of mine, which is not I.
So have I heard a loving Mother cry.
When that her Child was stricken, Ah! I dye.
When all is but love, and care, and sympathy,
To her dear Babe, for she is alive as I.
These Bodies we dwell in, they are but Tents,
Tenants can live without their Tenements.
Or in some others dwell; nor do we lose
This Mortal Life, when stripped of our Clothes.
Paul wished to be dissolved to be with Christ,
Knowing that after death he should exist.
For tho it was his pleasure for to dye,
Yet as before, so after, he was I.
And I with Christ, and that is all in all;
St. Paul he was with Christ, Christ with St. Paul.
Can Saints in Paradise e're faint and dye,
Having the Tree of Life thus standing by?
Can they fall in Gods Arms? thirst at a Well?
Freeze at a Fire? can ever Heaven be Hell?
Or can a Soul sun'd in the beams of Light,
Be wrapped in shades of everlasting Night?
Like to the dying Thief, I beg thine Ear
For to be open to my constant Prayer.
When Death shall spread a cold shute on my Bed,
And wreath his Poppey Garland on my Head,
Then close the Casements of my tender Eyes;
My Soul may close with thee in Paradise!
Why does the Apostle Lord, report thy crying,
With a loud voice, when at the point of dying?

CHRIST. When all my Members were upon the Wrack,
And all the sins of the World lay on my Back,
No wonder that they made so great a crack.
The Thunder never sent forth such a sound,
Nor ever Lightning pierced so deep a wound.
It rent the Rocks, and made the Earth to quake,
The Heavens went into Mourning for my sake.
To the lower parts of the Earth my Voice is fled,
It burst the Tomb-stones, and awaked the Dead.
Hell heard the Voice too, the same poys'ned dart
That pierced my side, did rend the sinners heart.
All Creatures mourn at my sad obsequies,
Nature must sink when the God of Nature dies.

SOUL. Grant that the Voice which clove the Rocky Pit,
May pierce my Heart too, harder far than it.
Let my Soul echo back to this thy groan,
Shall the Rocks find thee Ears, and I have none?
In The Caverns of my Heart let thy voice sound,
And let it reach the Heavens at the rebound.
My sins thus smote by this thy weighty Rod,
I safe may say, this was the Son of God.
Hear me Lord too, when at the point of Death,
My strength does fail me most, strengthen my Faith.
Why is it said or can be said by thee,
My God! my God! why have forsaken me?

CHRIST. This is the fruit of that embittered Tree,
Which once I tasted for the World and thee.
Which sets thy teeth on edg, but mine much more;
Thou have the kernells of it, I the core.
O sting of sin! all sorrows met in one,
Such sorrows as were felt, but cannot be known.
View O my Child what a great good God is,
And how thou wast Created for that Bliss.
As knifes were made to cut, and stones do tend
With their main force to the center as their end.
As Vessels to be filled, and as a Glass
Was only made to represent thy Face;
So wast thou shaped and formed for Happiness.
What Torment Nature finds, hence may be guest,
When she is with held from the center of her rest.
The Object of man's Bliss is infinite,
Having a quick sense of it in his sprite,
And tending to it too, with all his might.
To be rent from this bliss, is such a loss,
As never was felt on Earth, but on my Cross.
Embosom'd in my Fathers Breast were I,
None better knew where happiness did lie,
And must a Cloud withdraw it from my Eye?
Gods will was mine, my nature of the same,
Born of a Virgin, and died like a Lamb;
Can innocence be made a public shame?
I came from Heaven, and know what joys were there,
Revealed them too, and must I lose them here?
I was Gods Son; Gods Darling too were I.
Can God forsake himself, his Son, and dye?
The Echo of thy sin (my Child) says I.

SOUL. Hear me, O Lord! and let thy dying throb,
Give all my cursed sins their mortal stob.
How can I bear sins damned Curse for ay.
Which bowed the Back of God all in a day!
Well may the damned wish they never had been
And call to the Mountains for to hide them in,
More ease to bear a Mountain than a sin.
Lord pardon what is past, and I Will amend,
Why should I kiss that knife that killed my Friend.
Which cut a wound so deep as never did Thunder,
That rends the Rocks, this God himself asunder.
Why did my Lord, dying of the cursed Post,
Express his Death by giving up the Ghost?

CHRIST. When Nature most did fail, my cries were most,
To show how freely I gave up the Ghost.
None takes away my Life, nor none can crave it,
But God from whence I had it, he must have it.
Know that these dying words, this truth implies,
The Fragrant Odor of my Sacrifice.
The Pagans thought their Gods would not impart
Their favors to a Victim wanting heart.
Or if it came to pass the beast had cried,
Or loud, or strugled before he died.
When e're the Jew did Sacrifice a Beast,
It was to be his own, and of the best.
Chiefly a Lamb of pure and spotless Feature,
A meek, a harmless, and a gentle Creature.
After the Victim had incurd his death,
He was consumed by a Heavenly Breath.
Nor did this sacrifice acceptance find,
Unless performed by a grateful mind.
That sweet Perfume, that incense that did savor
The sacrifice, and so procured favor.
The Jewish Rites were relative of mine,
Who was a Sacrifice pure and Divine.
A Male, the choicest, firstborn set apart,
Formed, framed, and fashioned by Heavenly Art.
And when I did the wrath of God atone,
'Twas by a free will Offering of my own.
Making the Jewish Mincha Offering good,
When freely pouring out my Life and Blood.
Led as a Lamb, and as a Lamb too died,
Closing my Mouth, but opening wide my side.
My Sacrifice it was my precious Life,
My free consent, the Sacrificing Knife.
My Godhead, what the Altar did of Old,
It sanctified the Gift, and made it Gold.
I was consumed too, as from above,
With Flagrant Flames of everlasting Love.
Look as Eliah when about to dye,
Mounts in a Fiery Chair, then climbs the Sky,
Dropping his Mantle to the standers by.
In fervent Love to man, from Heaven I came,
And thither went, all in a Fiery Flame.
Expiring out to God my Vital Breath,
Casting my Bodies Mantle on the Earth.
So dying persons commonly commend
Their choicest Treasure to their choicest friend.
To thee my Child, I left my precious Merit,
My Body to my Friends, for them to bury 't,
And to my God I did commend my spirit.

SOUL. The Death of Saints, as David does Record
Is precious in the aspect of the Lord Psalm. 116.15.
.
When Enoch walked with God, God closed his eye;
Nor known, nor heard, nor seen he was to dye.
Abr'am gave up the Ghost, and therefore blessed.
Gods Bosom was the pillow of his rest.
When Moses died, such was the Jewish Faith,
'Twas by a Kiss from God, his Soul in Death
Being extracted by a Heavenly Breath.
Scaree can we say, Eliah ever died,
Since both in Soul and Body he bestired
The Fiery Chair, and unto Heaven did ride.
Lord let me now depart, Old Simeon cries,
And like a Swan sings sweet before he dies.
Sweetly expiring by such tempting Charms!
As he in Christ's, and Christ within his Arms.
Saint Paul perceiving death a drawing on,
Calls it no more than dissolution:
And so the Tent-maker took down his Tent,
Without a Crack, or Noise, or any Rent.
This is the truth of what the Wiseman Prove. 10.22.
says,
That Righteousness deliv'reth from death:
Since that his Darts can never be felt as keen,
Till they be whetted at the forge of sin:
Nor does he ever ride the pale-faced Revel. 6.8.
Horse,
Till Guilt and Hell engages in the Course.
Who wrongs his Prince, and what is more, his God,
Must dread the Usher of the sable Rod.
So have I seen a Prisoner in a swound,
When at the Assize he heard the Trumpet sound;
The Musick's good, but such he cannot find it,
Since that he knows the Judge comes close behind it.
Such is the Music of a Passing Bell,
Each sinner knows the meaning too too well,
Death goes before, and after follows Hell.
Who makes his soul and body of one crust,
Of Heaven and heavenly things can have no gust,
Nor can with ease be turned into dust.
Who stews his flesh in Riot and Excess,
And lulled asleep with steams of drunkenness,
That soul can never hope in Heaven to dwell,
Since he is descended to the lowest Hell.
Ethereal Mansions are too pure and clear,
For him to hope to have a dwelling there:
That state of bliss, 'twould be his state of pain,
His lusts would poise him down to Hell again.
Who strives to make his Prison strong within,
As it is without, by gratifying sin;
That captive must conclude without all doubt,
His labor must be painful to get out:
And that which pains him most, and grieves him more,
He Is worse, got out, than e're he was before.
Nor could that Gospel-fool this world Luke 12.20.
depart,
Till death by force of arms tore out his heart.
Knock off my chains (dear Lord) and make me free,
Dead to the world, and the world dead to me.
Thus dying in the flesh, and to it more,
Death can complete, but what is done before:
Laying his gentle hand upon my back,
My soul may part from hence without a crack.
My spirit failing, and my strength exhaust,
I freely may like thee give up the Ghost.
Why did the Sun (my Lord) withdraw his Light,
Changing bright day into a darksom night?

CHRIST. At a full Moon the Sun eclipsed, to see
It was both Miracle and Mystery:
A Glorious Star points out my Glorious Birth;
A greater Star's eclipsed at my death:
By both conclude this truth was verified,
'Twas God that once was born, 'twas God that died.
This dreadful darkness (child) had never been seen,
Were not for Thine, the Jews, and Adam's sin.
For so in Holy Writ it is often Ezekiel. 32.7, 8.
said,
Gods Wrath to sin by darkness was Joel 2.10.
displaid.
When God was wroth with Pharaoh and his Amos 8.9, 10.
Host,
Thick darkness overspread the Egyptian Coast.
That dreadful day of doom shall make this good,
The Sun to darkness turns, the Moon to blood.
So base is sin, and of so foul a feature,
That neither God can view it, nor his creature.

SOUL. Who would not hate his sin, and fear his God,
That for its baseness, and this for his Rod.
Tho God's not clothed with passions of man,
His anger far outgoes man's Passion:
What Tyrants frown like to the louring sky,
Rattling down Fire and Brimstone from on high.
The Lions roaring, and the Thunders noise,
Is but the Echo of his angry Voice:
Night-hag of Hell, clad in its black Attire,
Is but the shadow of his dreadful Ire:
If darkness be so full of fear and fright,
What is the darkness of Eternal Night?
O sin of Hell! or rather Hell of sin;
Darkness without, and darkness too within!
But here my doubts return to me again,
Why was the Vail of the Temple rent in twain?

CHRIST. The Temple of the Jews did typifie
This lower World, and that above the sky:
The outward Court, this outward world did mean,
Where all do meet in, and where beasts are slain.
That inward Court, wherein God had his Throne,
By that the Heaven of Heavens is clearly shown:
To this most Holy Place none could prevail
To enter in, 'twas guarded with a Vail;
Now this Vail was thy sins that dismal shroud,
Which on the place of glory draws a cloud:
This is that Cherub who with flaming Rod,
Bars up thy passage to the Living God:
Nor was it meet, till the bars of Hell be broken,
This passage-gate to Heaven should e're be open.
Whose sins do chain them to the posts of Hell,
In heavenly places are unfit to dwell.
In likeness of thy sinful flesh and blood,
Thy sins I did atone upon the Wood:
And when my flesh was torn with dying pain,
Thy sins with Temples vail were rent in twain:
Now is the Vail pulled off from Moses Face,
And the way plained to the most Holy Place:
Where neither Peasant, Priest, nor King did venture
For to approach, all holy souls may enter.
Nor is man reconciled to God. alone,
But Jew and Gentile too, here meet in one.

SOUL. Grant that thy voice which made the vail to part,
May rend the Vail of sin off from my heart!
My sin's the Gulf that Dives knew so well,
Makes that vast distance between Heaven and Hell.
Let this wide space be filled with thy great Merit,
And circumcise my heart too with thy Spirit.
What boots it Lord, if Heaven's laid open to me,
If that my souls unfit for Heaven and Thee.
Silence my doubts, dear Lord, and make this clear,
Why was thy side once pierced with a spear?
From thence came Water, and from thence came Blood:
Methinks there must be something understood.

CHRIST. Near to the Heart, so Providence thought fit,
A Cruse of VVater's placed, to cool its heat.
When Blood and Water from my side burst out,
That I was truly dead, thou needst not doubt.
Except it did appear I truly di'd,
My Resurrection cannot be verified:
When Moses in the Desert struck the Rock,
He smote my side with a Prophetic Knock.
The Covenant of old was then made good,
When ratified by Water and by Heb. 9.19.
Blood,
And so the Covenant that did come after,
It was confirmed too by Blood and Water.
This Water and this Blood the Apostle says,
Are the great witnesses of the Christian Faith.
Pure as the water, such my Doctrine was,
My Patience was exemplar on the cross.
What I have teached, you may build your faith on;
And what I promised, that I took my death on.
In the old Law there is no atonement made,
Till the blood of the Sacrifice was shed.
That sacrificing Rite was then applied
To me, when that the Dagger pierced my side:
This bloody spout, once gaged for thy sin,
Lets my Life out, and lets thy death come in:
My Blood comes forth, thy Pardon for to merit,
Water concurreth for to cleanse thy spirit:
For so of old, to make a Leper pure,
Blood mixed with Water must effect the cure.
Such Cordials from this Lymbeck were distilled,
Thy Font with one, thy Cup with others sill'd.
As Woman first was framed from Adam's side,
So from my Breast was formed the Church my Bride;
First formed by vital Water, then my Blood
And body both, became her spritely food.

SOUL. What greater favor could my Lord impart,
Than through his side, that I may view his heart,
More wounded by his Love than Daggers Art*
What greater love than this was ever read?
My Lord will live in me when he is dead.
The Cross displayed thy Death, 'twas thy intent,
Thy Life should be conveyed by the Sacrament.
Once to my flesh thou did thy self impart,
Nothing will please thee now, except my heart.
What said (Hypocrates) is here made good,
If all the Spirits in the Creatures blood,
Were once extracted and imbibed, then
Men that are mortal would be immortal men.
Who drinks thy blood, draws in thy vital breath,
Must find a life, yea in the Jaws of Death.
Thou art the Tree of Life in Paradise;
Whose Faith can strongly feed on thee, never dies.
Let thy VVounds and thy Blood, Lord make me whole,
And with this water purify my soul.
I beg thy Favor (Lord) what did't betoken,
Not one bone of thy body shall be broken?

CHRIST. God counts our hairs, and hears all our groans;
And is in Covenant with our very bones.
That mine might be preserved, I Would the defense
Of Promise, Prophecy, and Providence.
The Jew wont break a bone of the Paschal Lamb
When sacrificed; that Sacrifice I am:
What in my natural body's understood,
My body Mystical shall make it good.
My Bride so dearly bought, I Will love and cherish,
Not the least member of her once shall perish:
My piercing eye beholds each dust, and whither
Retired, my hand can bind up all together,
I di'd, it is true, but yet I live, and I
As little can in my poor Member dye.
My flesh and blood, my soul and life he is,
Can such a member ever fail of bliss?
Will not God cherish that life he is begun,
Or can you cut a Ray off from the Sun?
The dearest husband may forsake a wife,
But God whiles God can never forego his Life.
Souls full of Goodness, Truth, Integrity,
The Life and Spirit of the Deity
Then ceases for to live when God can dye.

SOUL. Lord hear my voice, and listen to my cry,
Reach me thy hand, or else I faint and dye!
What loving Mother but will hear the crying
Of her dear Child when at the point of dying?
Suffer not thy dear self to be in pain,
Why should my Lord and Savior dye again?
What life I have in me, it is thine alone,
Let not thy foes and mine once break a bone,
Nor suffer me to see corruption.
Vouchsafe (my Lord) this secret to disclose,
Why at thy death we read the dead arose?

CHRIST. Under that curse of dying thou shall dye
A double death, for sin did couched lie:
Sin robbed thy body of its vital breath,
And caused thy soul to dye a second death:
My body from my soul was rent of the Cross;
My soul from God of the two the greater loss.
But yet by dying thus, 'twas truly shown,
Thy double death I satisfied in one.
I loosed deaths bonds, bursting Hell-gates asunder,
Out comes the dead, and tells abroad the wonder.
Have thou not heard nor seen that wonted Fashion
Of Potent Princes at their Coronation,
To make their Glory and their Joy combine,
The very Conduit-Pipes must flow with Wine;
To show withal their Grace and Clemency,
The Prison's open, and the captives free.
So in Triumphal Conquests, Princes please
To cast about their Gifts and Largesses.
My Cross it was my Throne, tho cursed by sin,
Where I was consecrated Priest and King.
When that my side was pierced by my foe,
My blood more choice than wine did freely flow:
Having discharged thy debts upon the Tree,
Both from the Grave and Hell I set thee free,
And here I made the Jail-delivery.
Mounting on my Triumphant Chariot, I
Led sin and Satan in captivity,
Dragging them at my Chariot-Wheels, and then
I freely gave my gifts and grace to men.
Such was the glorious conquest of my Cross,
That sin, death, grave, and hell, my Vassals was.

SOUL. If so, my Lord, why am I dead in sin?
As if what thou have done had never been.
Since thou have broke the Prison of the Grave,
Why does my sin fetter me like a slave,
Making my soul forget her former birth,
Sinking her deeper in this mud of earth?
And tho within this Clay she cannot stay long,
Why should she strive to make her Prison strong?
Since that my soul's enlarged from the nether Hell,
I will no more in that dark dungeon dwell:
Since thou have paid so dearly for thy slave,
Shall not my Lord his dear-bought purchase have?
My debts are paid, shall I begin the score,
And load thy Cross with sins and sorrows more?
Oh that the breath of life would breath upon
This rotten Carcass, and this dried Bone,
That I may testify two Truths in one,
Thy mighty Death, and Resurrection!
One question more, Why did the Apostles all
So faithfully record thy Burial?

CHRIST. The Prophet David did this Truth Psalm. 16.
foretell,
Thou will not leave my soul in the nether Hell.
This from Isaiah too may be Isa. 55.9.
inferred,
I died with wicked, with the rich interred.
Joseph 's Pit, Daniel 's Den, and Jonah 's Whale
Were but the umbrage of my Burial.
It Is a religious seed in nature bred,
All Nations do prepare to inter the dead:
Such was the custom of the Egyptian Sages,
Holding the Soul to live immortal Ages,
Lest after death the soul might transmigrate,
The body was embalmed in Princely State,
That both uniting, they might frustrate death,
Aping an Immortality on Earth.
The Grecian Rites, tho different, did tend
To perfect and complete the self-same end;
Fetching the Souls Original no higher,
Than that its nature was like unto Fire;
The Piles erected, and the Bodies burned:
By this the soul to her first state returned:
The body too, thus purged in the fire,
Like to the soul, may never more expire.
The Romans did no less their bodies burn,
Closing the ashes in sepulchral Urn.
The corpse drencht of its dregs was thus calcined,
And made Ethereal, like to the mind:
These uncorrupted Ashes did presage
Their firm belief of an immortal age.
The Jews best taught of God, abhorred burning,
The soul next aftr death to God returning;
The body was committed to the Earth,
Its proper Parent, whence it had its birth.
It was Gods penal law too, sinners must,
As dust they were, return unto the dust.
Nor did Gods Law consign men to this fate,
Without a prospect of a future state:
Who di'd a cursed death, so it is Deuteronomy. 29.
inferred,
Was afterward exposed, but then interred;
Lest perishing o'th tree may thence create
A foul opinion of a future state:
For so Gods image would have been beli'd;
As if the soul like to the body di'd;
The body too preyed on by winged Fowl,
Should never more return unto the soul:
The Washings, Ointments, Gums, with other cost:
Suggests this Truth, None that are dead are lost.
Nor can we (Judas- like) this question state,
Why was this Ointment spent at such a rate?
Why are our Clothes wrapped up, so neatly spread,
But that the Grave's a Wardrope for the Dead?
When the Sacrifice of the Altar was consumed,
The Ashes by the Priest was then assumed.
Then Faithfully deposited abroad,
As Relics that were Relative to God.
The Earth, the Elements, the spacious Globes,
Are but one chest to keep my Servants Robes.
The Keys are hung upon my Royal Throne,
And when I turn my hand, all know their own.
None is so rich in death, but that he has
Either a Monument, or Epitaph;
Nor none so poor, but that he thinks it meet,
A stone should Crown his Head, or shoe his Feet.
This truth by this dumb Language is displayed,
Man fain would be alive when he is dead.
Thus stones do speak, and speak it to the full,
That man both is, and would be living Soul.
Thus Custom, Nature, Piety withal,
Brings Gums and Spikenard for my Burial.
Nor did my due interment want its sense,
Both as to time, and place, and circumstance,
The seventh day was the season God had blessed,
The very day on which I took my rest.
Of The six't day Adams Body had its Birth;
Of The six't my Body visited the Earth.
This held for truth, and for a truth related,
Adam the same day fell he was created,
On the same day I gave the Thief a taste,
Of The Fruit of Paradise which Adam lost.
Nor was it less Mysterious that I have
A Garden-plat, wherein to pitch my Grave.
By this cunclude, my Death a way has forced,
To Paradise again which Adam lost.
It Is not without remark I laid my Head
In a new Tomb where none was buried.
As I was spotless in the Virgins Womb,
My Purity required a Virgin Tomb.
Were I interred with sinners as I died,
My Resurection would have been beli'd.
Had others slept with me, it might be said,
Some other person's risen in my stead.
My Tomb was therefore new, hewn out of stone,
That so my Resurrection may be known.
Had it been built of stones, stones more than one,
The Bottom might be razed, the Body stone.
But since it was a stone cut out of Rock,
Had Pilates Signet too, to be the Lock.
Since that a weighty stone too, guards the Cell;
And did become its sturdy Sentinel.
And to make sure, a band of Soldiers taken,
Whom envy, malice, fear, did keep awaken.
This Rock so Guarded, was the Cornerstone
Of the truth of my Resurrection.

SOUL. Since my Lord died for me, shall I not come,
And break a Box of Spikenard on thy Tomb?
I know thy purity and innocence
Needs not my Myrrh, my Gums, my Fankincense
For to preserve thy sacred person whole,
As incorrupt in Body as in Soul.
What Power in Gums and Ointments e're can be,
The Body from corruption to keep free;
Such was the power of thy Divinity:
Since that I cannot now Embalm my Head,
I will Anoint the Members in its stead,
Thy Body, Hands, and Feet shall nor go free,
What to the Members done, is done to thee.
Since thou will have a Tomb cut out by Art,
Oh let thy Spirit work it in my Heart!
It is a Rocky Stone, but yet it will
Make thee a Tomb when Polisht by thy skill.
Since it was so, as thou my Lord have said,
Thou wast interred where no man else was laid;
Oh let no wilful sin dare once to dwell
Within that place where God has made his Cell:
Seal it then with the signet of thy Word,
That no vile lust may steal away my Lord.
Help me to watch my Lips, and guard my Heart,
That no ill thought, ill speaking, or ill Art,
May offend my Lord and cause him to depart.
What I engaged in my Baptismal Vow,
I here remember, and do promise now,
That since my Lord was Dead and Buried,
This Truth in me shall be accomplished.
My sins shall dye with thee upon the Cross,
A painful lingering Death as Jesus was.
When once they are Dead, Oh let it never be said,
I shall renew acquaintance with the Dead.
But like our dearest Friends, when dead and rotten,
Become vile Earth, and therefore soon forgotten.
So Abra'm said of Sarah when she died,
Take her away, let her no more be eyed.
If that my sin with thee is thus interred,
And that I am made free among the dead,
I shall with joy at last lift up my head:
Lord lay me lower in this bed of dust,
Then raise me to the mansions of the Just.
The Close.

I am thy Servant Lord! I am no Poet;
As thou do know, and all that know me know it.
If I have ask't, or made thee say amiss,
I beg thy pardon on my beaded knees;
Grant me thy Spirit, Lord, and by its art
Do thou imprint these Lines upon my heart,
That then my scribble, not till then, shall be
Esteemed to be good Divinity.
What Is said amiss, thy pardon, Lord, that mine is;
What well, the Grace and Favor only thine is:
As thou have been my Alpha, be my --

FINIS.

