GODS Anatomy UPON MAN'S HEART.

Or, A SERMON PREACHED BY ORDER Of the Honorable House of COMMONS, At
Margarets Westminster, December. 27. Being a day of Public Humiliation.

By THOMAS WATSON, Pastor of Stephens Walbrooke, London.

The Third Impression.

Does not he see my ways and count all my steps? Job 31. 4. Prope Deus est,
tecum est, intus est. London, Printed for Ralph Smith, and are to be sold at
his shop at the sign of the Bible in Cornhill near the Royal Exchange. 1654.

GODS Anatomy UPON MAN'S HEART.
HEB. 4. 12. But all things are naked, and opened unto the eyes of Him with
whom we have to do.
WE are met this day to humble our souls, and to bring our Censer, as once
Aaron did, and step in, that the wrath of the great GOD may be appeased. And
was there ever need to lie in sackcloth, then when the Kingdom almost lies in
ashes. Or to shed tears, then when the Nation has shed so much blood* These
days are called in Scripture, Soul-afflicting days, Lev. 23. 29. For
whatsoever soul it be that shall not be afflicted in that same day, he shall
be cut off from among his people. And certainly, that may be one reason why
there is so much State-affliction, because there is so little Soulaffliction.
Our condition is low, but our hearts are high. God sees with what hearts we now
come, what is our spring, what our center; his eye is upon us. So says my
Text, All things are naked and open.

I shall wave the Coherence, lest I be prevented, and handle the words as an
entire Proposition. We have here a Map of Gods Knowledge. But before I extract
any thing, I will first open the Terms. In the Law, first the Lamps were
lighted before the Incense was burned; I may allude, First the judgment is to
be enlightened by Doctrine, before the affections are set on fire. Ministers
must be first shining, and then burning Lamps.

All things are [ naked.] Some Expositors translate the word (...) Excoriata,
And to this sense Chrysostom inclines. It is a Metaphor from the taking off
the skin of any beast, which does then appear naked. Thus our hearts are said
to be naked; they lie open to the eye of God, they have no covering; there is
no veil over the heart of a sinner, but the veil of unbelief; and this
covering makes him naked.

This is not all, the Apostle goes higher. They are naked and [ open] (...).
The word (...) * Beza.
Interpreters render Per spinam dorsi * Gagneius
findere. It alludes to the cutting up of the Sacrifices under the Law, where
the Priest did divide the Beast in pieces, and so the intestina the inward
parts were made visible* Or it may allude to an Anatomy, where there is a
dissection and cutting up of every part, the Mesentery, the Liver, the
Arteries. Such a kind of Anatomy does God make; an heart-Anatomy: He does cut
up the inwards, and makes a difference; This is Flesh, that is Spirit; this is
faith, that is fancy. He makes a dissection, as the knife that divides between
the flesh and the bones, the bones and the marrow, the sinews and the veins.
All things are open (...), They are cut up before him.

The next word is, (...) [ All things] (...), as a Learned Writer upon the
words Oecumenius.
. There is nothing scapes his eye: and herein Gods knowledge does infinitely
differ from ours. We cannot see in the dark, nor can we see many things at
once; but it is not so with him, Nihil tam profundum quod non extrahatur in
lucem Calvin.
. There is nothing so deep, but God will bring it above-board. Who will bring
to light (...) the hidden things of darkness 1 Cor. 4. 5
. And he sees many things at once, nay, all are as if they were but one.
Scientia Dei est infinita, and in singulis and in omnibus, tanquam unum esset
singular Austin.
. All things being represented to him in the pure Crystal, of his own Essence,
are but as one individual thing.

Again [ unto his eyes.] Eyes are ascribed to God not properly, but
Metaphorically; Idols have eyes, yet they see not Ps. 115. 5
; God has no eyes, yet he sees; the eye of God is put in Scripture for his
Knowledge; all things are naked to his eye, that is, they are obvious to his
Knowledge. We cannot sin but it must be in the face of our Judge.

The last word is, [ with whom we have to do,] (...) pro (...) ( Cornel a
lapide. The sense is clear. To whom we must give an account. So some translate
it, Reddere rationem Hierome. Calvin*
And Oecumenius, (...), To whom we must be responsible. The words thus opened
fall into these parts.

1. Here is the Judge, that is God. Unto the eyes of [Him] 2. The matter of
fact [ All things] 3. The Evidence given in, All things are [Naked] 4. The
clearness of the evidence, Naked and [Open] 5. The Witnesses [ his eyes] 6.
The persons to be adjudged either for life or death, [ We] that is, every
individual person: There is none exempted from this General Assize. With whom
we have to do.
The Proposition I shall dilate upon is this,

That the most secret Cabinet-designes Doct.
of man's heart are all unlocked and clearly anatomized before the Lord.

I might produce a whole cloud of witnesses, giving in their full vote and
suffrage to this truth. I shall rest in two or three, that in the mouth of
three witnesses this great truth may be established.

He knows the secrets of the heart, Psalm. 44. 21. in the original it is Ps.
44. 21.
(...) the hidden things of the heart; those which are most veiled and masked
from humane perception.

And, Psalm. 139. 2. Thou know Psalm. 139. 2
my thoughts afar off. Here are two words, that set out the infiniteness of
Gods knowledge.

First, Thou know my thoughts, 1.
there is nothing can be paralle'ld with a thought.

First, For its subtilty, it is called the (...)
imagination of the thought Genesis 6 5.
, or as the word may bear, the first embryo and forming of the thought, that
is, a thing very subtle, and scarce discernable.

Secondly, For its celerity, our thoughts are winged, like the Cherubims, they
will in an instant travel over the world: they are swifter then Eagles 2 Samuel
1. 23.
, but he that rides upon the swift cloud can over-take them, he can out-march
them.

Thirdly, For its incongruity: our thoughts are snarl'd and tangled one within
another, they have no dependence, they may be inter anomala: yet even these
thoughts are known to God, and set in their proper Sphere: what David says of
his members, may be said of our thoughts, Are they not all written in thy Book?

2. Afar off, that is either. 2.
1. God knows our thoughts before 1.
we our selves know them. He knows what designs are in the heart, and men
would certainly pursue, did not he turn the wheel another way. God knew what
was in Herod's mind before Herod himself knew it, viz. that he would have
destroyed the child Jesus. God knew his thoughts afar off: he sees what
blood and venom is in the heart of a sinner, though it never comes to have
vent: he looks at the intention, though it be not put in execution.

Secondly, Afar off, that is, God 2.
knows our thoughts when we have forgotten them: they are afar off to us, but
they are present with him, These things have thou done, and I kept silence:
thou thoughtest I was such a one as thy self, etc. That is, that I had a weak
memory, but I will reprove thee, and set thy sins in order before thee Ps.
50. 2^.
. Millions of years are but as a short Parenthesis between: and that we may not
think God forgets, he keeps a Book of Records, Rev. 20. 12. I saw the dead,
small and great stand before the Lord, and the Books were opened. God writes
down, Item such a sin: and if the Book be not discharged, there will be an
heavy reckoning; to every believer, the debt-book is crossed, the black lines
of sin are crossed out in the red lines of Christ's blood.

To instance in one Scripture more, The night shines as the day, Psalm. 39. 12.
The Clouds are no Psalm. 39. 12
Canopy, the night is no Curtain to draw between, or intercept his knowledge;
we cannot write our sins in so small or strange a character, but God can
read, he has a key for them. Indeed, we know not sometimes what to make of his
Providence, His way is in the Sanctuary Ps. 77. 13
, we cannot read his handwriting: but He understands our* Hearts without a
commentary, He is privy to all our treachery, though we think to keep it under
lock and key; We cannot climb so high but he sees us, we cannot dig so low but
he takes notice. The men of Babel were climbing very high, they would make a
City and Tower, the top whereof should reach to heaven, and so indeed it did;
for God saw them all the while, and what became of it? He divided their
language; Genesis 11. 7, 8.
Achan digs deep to hide his counsels, saying, No eye shall see; he takes the
Babylonish garment, and hides it in the earth, with the wedge of Gold, but God
unmasks his theevery Josh. 7. 21
.

If there be any here, that when they should have been doing Gods work, have
been by stealth hiding the Babylonish garment, making themselves rich,
feathering their own nests; instead of driving in nails into Gods Temple to
fasten it, have been driving a wedge of gold into their chests, God sees it;
let me tell you, all the gain you get, you may put in your eyes, nay, if you
belong to God you must, and weep it out again. God has a window that looks
into your hearts. Momus complained of Vulcan, that he had not set a grate at
every man's breast. God has such a grate, he is the great Superintendent; we
come into the world as upon a Theater, every man acts his several Part or
Scene, God is both the Spectator and the Judge.

You have seen the Doctrine proved.

For the Amplification, let us consider what the knowledge of What the knowledge
of God is.
God is; it is a most pure act by which he does at one instant know himself in
himself, and all things without himself, not only necessary, and contingent,
but which shall never be, after a most perfect, exquisite, and infallible
manner. Out of this description, we may gather two things. 1. That there 1.
is no Succession in Gods knowledge, it is uno intuitu, our knowledge is per
^rius and posterius, from the effect to the cause; it is not so in God. 2.
Things that are not have an objective 2.
being in his knowledge, Romans 4. 17. He calls things that are not as if they
were; even these non entia have an Idea in his knowledge.

Quest. Here a question may be Quest.
started, If there be such perfection in the knowledge of God, then he knows sin?

Resp. The Schools distinguish of Answ.
a double knowledge in God. There is, 1. Scientia simplicis intelligentiae, a
knowledge of pure intelligence, and thus he knows evil by a contrary good, as
the light discovers the darkness. So we say, Rectum est index sui and obliqui,
The straight rule shows the crooked. 2. There is a knowledge of approbation.
Thus God does not know sin; for he hates it, he punishes it. Christ was made
sin, yet he knew no sin; he did know it so as to hate it, not so as to act
or approve it.

I pass to the Reasons.

1. Reason. From his creation; 1. Reas.
God is the Father of lights, therefore must needs see. It is his own Argument,
He that planted the ear, shall he not hear? he that formed the eye, shall he
not see *? He that Ps. 94 9.
makes a Watch, knows all the pins and wheels in it, and though these wheels
move cross one to another, he knows the true and perfect motion of the Watch,
and the spring that sets these wheels a going; He that formed the eye, shall he
not see? Man may be compared to a spiritual Watch. The affections are the
wheels; the heart is the spring; the motion of this Watch is false; the heart
is deceitful; but God that made this watch knows the true motion of it (be it
never so false) and the spring that sets the wheels a going. God knows us
better then we know our selves: He is as Ezekiels wheels full of eyes, and as
Augustine says, he is totus oculus, all eye Aug. in Psalm. 126. Reas. 2.
.

2. Reason. From his ubiquity. He is Omniscient, because Omnipresent, Ier. 23.
24. Do not I fill Jer. 23. 24.
heaven and earth? He is no where included, and yet no where excluded; His
circumference is every where: God has an eye in Councels, in Armies, he makes
an Heartanatomy; he sees what men's designs are, and whither they are driving.
If hatred wears the livery of Friendship, if Ambition comes masqued with
humility, if Religion be made a stirrup to get into the saddle of preferment,
God sees it; And though they dig into hell, thence shall my hand take them,
Amos 9. 2. God can unlock hell; Plato says of the King of Lydia, he had a
Ring, when he turned the head of it to the palm of his hand, he could see
every one, but himself walk invisible. Thus God observes all our actings, but
himself is not seen, as the Apostle argues, 1 Timothy 6. 16. Therefore the
Schoolmen say well, Deus est in loco repletive. Aquin.
Man may be circumscribed, the Angels may be defined, but God is in every place
by way of repletion. His Center is every where, and his eye is ever in his
Center.

Object. 1. But is it not said, Genesis Object. 1.
18. 21. I will go down and see whether it be done altogether according to the
cry?

Resp. It could not be that God Answ.
was ignorant; because there is mention made of a cry, but it is spoken (...),
after the manner of a Judge; who will first examine the cause before he will
pass the sentence. Therefore to answer that Scripture, I will go down and see:
It implies two things.

First, The moderation God uses when he is upon a work of Justice; God does
not make the sword the Judge; he does first weigh things the balance; he does
ever lay judgment to the line, before he draws the line of confusion. God when
he is upon a work of Justice, is not in a Riot, as if he did not care where he
hits, but goes in the way of a circuit against offenders, I will go down and
see; He does not punish rashly: and this may be a good hint to them that have
power in their hand, they must work by line and plummet; judging the Cause
rather then the Person; they must proceed in righteousness; else seeming Zeal
is no better then Wildfire; it is not justice, but violence.

Secondly, I will go down and see. It denotes Gods patience in waiting for
sinners; He staid till the cry came up: God puts up a great deal of injury at
our hands, before Justice draws the sword. He spins out mercy into patience,
and eekes out patience into long-suffering. Oh, had not Gods patience been
infinite, we have spent so long upon it, that we had quite spent the stock. But
let no sinner presume: Though God be long-suffering, he does not tell us how
long: When the cry comes up, God comes down. If pride, lust, oppression abound,
God will hear the cry, and will quench the fire of sin with a shower of
blood.

Object. 2. Zeph. 2. 1. I will search Object. 2.
Jerusalem with candles. Implying, that something is hid out of his reach.

Resp. Not that God needs any Answ.
candles to see by; for though it be said, The spirit of man is the candle of
the Lord Prove. 20. 27.
: This candle is not for him to see by, but for us. Therefore this searching
implies two things:

First, The exactness of Gods knowledge; He has such a deep insight as
usually men have upon search. 2. God threatens to search, because he would have
us search. As, Lam. 3. 40. Let us search and try our ways. Gods searchers are
now abroad, his Judgments; let us find out our sins, or else our sins
will find us out.

Information. And this has two Use 1.
branches.

1. What manner of persons ought 1. Branch.
we to be 2 Pet. 3. 11
? has God a window that opens into our breasts? Does he make a critical
descant upon our actions? Oh what holiness, what sincerity, what exemplary
piety becomes us, being in such a presence! Were we to come before some great
Monarch, what solemn preparations would we make? Shall the eye of a King do so
much, and not the eye of God? The King can only see the outside; there may be
treason within, for ought he knows: but God has a key for the heart, Ier. 17.
10. I the Lord search the heart. And will not this command reverence? In these
days of solemn Humiliation, Gods eye is principally upon the heart. God looks
there most where we look least; some have no heart at all Hos. 7. 11
; sin has stolen away their heart; others have an heart too much, An heart
and an heart Psalm. 12. 2 (...)
; others have hearts good for nothing, earthly hearts; like Saul that was hid
among the stuff 1 Samuel 10 22
; some have Angels tongues, but as Nebuchadnezzar, he had the heart of a beast
given to him. Brethren, did our hearts stand where our faces do, this would be
a day of blushing, we should be ashamed to look one upon another; remember God
has a key for the heart.

When we come to these solemn duties, God asks that question as 2 King. 10. 15.
Iehu did Iehonadab, 2 King. 10. 15. he saluted him and said to him, Is thy
heart right, as my heart is with thy heart? And he said, It is. If it be, give
me thy hand. And he took him up into the chariot.

This is Gods question. You come this day to humble your selves and make
atonement, Is your heart right with me? if we can answer, as he did; Lord, thou
know it is; Though I have much weakness, yet my heart is right, I have no
false byasse upon it; though I am not perfect, I hope I am sincere; Then will
God say, Give me your prayers, give me your tears, now come up with me into the
chariot. A tear from a bleeding heart is a precious perfume in heaven. Oh did
we consider this all-seeing eye, we durst not bring so much strange fire into
the Divine presence. We read of Ezekiels wheels, they had a wheel within a
wheel Ezekiel. 1. 16.
. Thus God has a thought within a thought; He does intervenire Seneca.
he comes between us and our thoughts.

The goddess Minerva (as the Poets feign) was drawn in such lively colors,
that which way soever one turned, still Minerva's eye was upon him. Thus, turn
which way you will, fall in love with any sin; still God looks upon you, He
has an eye in your heart, He is (...). What manner of persons ought we to be?

Of how dangerous consequence is it, to act any thing against God? He 2 Branch
of Infor.
sees it, and his knowledge is armed with Power; He that has an eye to see,
will find an hand to punish. If there be any designs against God, though
carried on never so subtly; remember there is a Council of War sits in Heaven.

Against GOD? Will some say. By no means.

There are four Things; and if we act either directly or indirectly against
any of these, we act against God; and he sees it, He writes it down.

1. If we act against his truth, we act against God, truth is a beam 1.
of God, it is his essence, he is called (...), the truth; it is the most
orient Pearl of his Crown, take away his truth and we ungod him. Truth is the
precious seed, by which we are begotten to life Jam. 1. 18
, it is the pillar of our salvation; it is not only norma fidei, the rule of
faith, but it is radix fidei, the root out of which faith grows; take away
truth, and what is faith but fancy? we believe our selves into hell. Truth is
the great purchase of Christ's blood, and it has been transmitted to us in the
blood of many Saints and Martyrs; if we strike at truth, we strike at God; and
does not God see this?

Give me leave to plead in Gods cause, is not this pure wine of truth mixed
with water, nay, with poison? How are the truths of God almost lost in the
crowd of errors? what truth in Divinity but is now called in question? some
denying the Scriptures, others denying the Lord that bought them; not only the
foundations of the earth are out of course, but even the foundations of
Scripture are shaken. We read that when the bottom less Pit was opened, there
arose a smoke as the smoke of a great furnace, and the Sun and the air
were darkened Rev. 9. 2.
. The late errors sprung out of the furnace of hell, have made such a smoke
and mist in the Church of God, that the bright Sun of truth is much eclipsed
in our Horizon. How many Religions are there now among us, and every day in a
new dress? old heresies newly vamp'd? Our Savior Christ says, Luke 18. 8
If the Son of man comes, shall he find faith on the earth? yes sure, he may
now find many faiths; so many men, almost so many faiths; Pudet haec opprobria
nobis, etc. These things are done, but are they punished? are they not
countenanced? God sees; silence when truth is wounded, is a loud sin.

Secondly, We act against God, 2.
when we act against his Covenant; a Covenant is a serious thing. Suppose the
matter of it Civil, (though ours is more) the making of it is Divine. We read
of a Covenant made with an Heathen King, Ezekiel. 17. 16, 17, 18.
which being broken, says God, shall he prosper, shall he escape that does
such things? what, when lo he had given his hand, ver. 18. He shall not escape;
let us look upon our solemn League and Covenant, I tremble when I read it; we
covenanted not only against Prelacy, but Popery; not only Hierarchy, but
Heresy; not only Sin, but Schism; and have we not gone against the letter
of it? how is the Covenant slighted, as an Almanac out of date? Those that did
once lift up their hand to it, do now lift up their heel against it. Indeed at
first the Covenant was looked upon as sacred; the drunkard would be sober that
day, the unclean person chaste; but within a while it is laid aside; we begin
to play fast and loose with God, and for a trifle will venture the curse of the
Covenant; But they like men have transgressed the Covenant Hos. 6. 7.
, or as in Hebrew (...)
, They like Adam, how is that? for a poor apple; so for a trifle, a Penny in
the shop, or the bushel, men will set their Covenant and their conscience to
sale. God sees this, and hear what he says, I will bring a sword, which shall
avenge the quarrel of my Covenant Lev. 26. 25.
: Covenantviolation is an high affronting sin, and an affront will make God
draw his sword; to set our hand and seal to the Covenant, and then to tear
off the Seal, if the Covenant will not hold us, God has Chains that will.

That which does inhance the sin, is, it must needs be renitente conscientia,
against light; it is to be presupposed no man would take a Covenant blindfold,
either he was informed, or else might have been; This is that which dies the
sin in grain; take any sin, put it in the scales, and put in this weight
with it, that before and when it was done, it was against knowledge; This
circumstance is as much as the sin it self; though it be but one sin, it
weighs as much as two.

The Covenant is Nodus Connubialis, a marriage-knot; for a woman to go away
from her husband after solemn Contract, is of an high nature. The Covenant is
zona virginea, a girdle, or golden claspe that binds us to God and God to us.
The girdle in ancient times was an Emblem of chastity. When the Covenant is
broken, the Church loses her virginity. Israel was a People espoused to God in
Covenant Jer. 3. 2.
; but having stained this federal relation by idolatry, (a sin that did
directly cut asunder the marriage-knot,) God gives her a Bill of divorce: Plead
with her, says he, Hos. 2. 2.
she is not my wife.

The Carthaginians were execrable for Covenant Breaking Poeni foedifragi semper
habiti. Plautus.
, insomuch that it grew at last to a proverb, Punica fides Salust.
, The faith of a Carthaginian; and I would to God it might not be said, that
many of the Christians in England are turned Carthaginians; they make no
reckoning of their oaths.

The Scythians had a Law, That if any man did duo peccata contorquere, bind
two sins together, a Lie and an Oath, he was to lose his head, because this was
the way to take away all Faith and Truth among men: If all Liars and Perjurers
in this age should come to Trial, I think we should scarce find men enough to
bring them to the Bar.

3. We act against God when we 3.
act against his Ambassadors. I mean not such as have stolen into the Priests
Office, such as are gone out, 1 John 4. 1. not sent out, they are gone without
a Commission; but such as are in a Scriptural manner instituted into this holy
Function; he that acts against these, acts against God; and remember God sees,
he writes it down: What injury is done to the Ambassador, the King takes as
done to his own person; so says Christ, He that despises you, despises me.
What a black veil is drawn over the face of the Ministry! Let me plead with
you; God might have come in his own person, and have preached to you in flames,
as when he did once deliver the Law upon Mount Sinai; but then you would have
said, Oh let not God speak, lest we die, let Moses speak; God might have
preached to you in the Ministry of Angels, but you would not have been able to
bear it: God is not in the fire, nor in the earthquake, but in the still small
voice: 1 King. 19. 11. 12.
He is pleased in a sweet kind of humility to send his Ambassadors, and he
puts an Olive Branch into their mouth; they woo, and beseech, and all (...), in
the bowels of Christ; will not love conquer.

This Nation is sick of a spiritual Pleurisy, we begin to surfeit upon the
bread of life; when God sees his mercies lying under table, it is just with him
to call to the enemy to take away. I heartily pray that plenty of Ordinances
does not as much hurt in this City, as Famine has done in other places of the
Land; and if we once say, what is this Manna? no wonder if we begin to say, who
is this Moses? Oh what a sad change is there in our days! Those that once
would have counted our feet beautiful, that would have been ready to have
pulled out their eyes for their Minister, are now ready to pull out their
Ministers eyes; and what is the quarrel? Even this! Am I become your enemy
because I tell you the truth? G* l. 4. 16
If Ministers would preach placentia, smooth things, make the way to Heaven
nearer then ever Christ made it, then they should be admired. (You shall have
more people gaze at a Comet or Blazingstarre, then at the Sun.) But if they
come to lay the axe of the Law to the root of Conscience; if they fall a
hewing, and cutting down men's sins; The Land is not able to bear their words.
If the Prophet goes to tell King Asa of his great sin in joining with a
wicked Army. 2 Chronicles. 16. 9.
Herein thou have done foolishly. If he goes about to imprison his sin, he
himself shall be imprisoned. Then Asa was wroth with the Seer, and put him in
a prisonhouse. Ver. 10.
This was Ierusalems sin, and it drew tears from Christ; O Jerusalem, Mat.
23.
thou that stonest the Prophets! etc. And she stoned them so long, till she had
not one stone left upon another.

Those that would annihelate the Ministry, go to pull the stars out of
Christ's hand; and they will find it a work not feasible; it will fare with
them as with the Eagle, that going to fetch a piece of flesh from the Altar, a
coal sticking to the flesh, she burnt her self and her young ones in the
nest. 2 Chronicles. 36. 16. They mocked the Messengers of God, and misused his
Prophets, till there was no remedy.

4. We act against God, when we 4.
act against that Order and Government which he has set up in his Church* God
is the God of Order* he has set every thing in its proper sphere. The order
and harmony of the World does consist in Degrees, one thing still above
another. For as Aristotle says, no Harmony consists of Union; there can be no
music, if all the sounds be alike; The Countertenor is above the Base. In
nature, the Sun is Commander in chief among the Planets. Thus in the Body
Politic; God has set King, Nobles, Judges, still in a descent: and this makes
up the Harmony. And these Powers are of God, Romans 13. 1. The Powers that Romans
13. 1.
be, are of God. Magistracy is the hedge of a Nation, And he that breaks an
hedge, a serpent shall bite him.

Use 2. Reproof, Here Is a just Impeachment Use. 2.
against two sorts of Persons.

1. The Libertine. And there are 1. Branch of reproof
two kinds of them:

First, The profane Libertine, that fancies to himself a God made up of
mercy; and therefore he ingulphes himself in sin, does act pro arbitrio, he
is upon the spur to go to hell, as if he were afraid hell would be full
before he could get thither. Does not he say, God shall not see.

Secondly the Religious Libertine, and these are of two sorts.

1. That pleads Liberty of Conscience. Conscience! Must he have his Conscience,
that makes no Conscience? What, He that has sinned away his Conscience? If
Conscience be a sufficient plea, the Papists will come in for a childs part.
Conscience must have a Rule; it binds only virtute praecepti, by virtue of a
precept. If Conscience goes against the Word, Deponenda est talis D. Ames. de
Consc.
Conscientia. Get Conscience bettet informed. The Conscience of a sinner is
defiled, Tit. 1. 15. Conscience being defiled, may err; Conscience erring, may
suggest that which is sinful. There is nothing can bind a man to sin.

2. Sort of the Religious Libertine is, That sins because Grace abounds; that
says, God sees no sin in his people, and therefore what need we see it?
After we are in Christ, we cannot sin; therefore Repentance is out of date.
Whom I shall refute in two words.

There needs Repentance after 1.
we are in Christ: for, 1. Though sin in a Believer be covered Psalm. 32. 1
, yet it is not perfectly cured. There are still Reliquiae peccati, some
remainders of corruption; and certainly, as long as there is an issue of sin
open, there must be an issue of sorrow kept open.

2. Every sin after we are in 2.
Christ, is a sin of unkindnesse, it is labes sponsae, the sin of a Spouse;
and if any thing will melt and break the heart, this will. The sins of the
Regenerate do wound Christ's heart deeper then others. Has not Christ suffered
enough already? Will thou wound him whom God has wounded? Will you give him
more vinegar to drink? O rather Give wine to him that is of an heavy heart;
Cheer him with thy tears: Look on a bleeding Christ with a bleeding heart. 2.
Branch of reproof


It does impeach the Hypocrite, who is a practical Atheist, he says, God shall
not see. The word in the Hebrew (...).
Job. 13. 16. signifies to dissemble. The Syriack word is the same with
assumens vultum, a facetaker. The Hypocrite wears a vizor of Sanctity. Aquinas
in his Sums calls hypocrisy simulatio virtutis. The counterfeiting of
virtue. The hypocrite is a very Mountebank, he pretends that which he is not.
He is like those Angels that assumed the dead bodies, but there was no soul to
animate them, Genesis 19. 1. he is a shape, an Genesis 19. 1
apparition, he does but assume Religion. The hypocrite is a walking Land-skip,
a rotten post gilded over; he is like the painted grapes that deceived the
living birds. Plut.
Or the beautiful apples of Sodom with this Motto, No further then Colors;
touch them, and they moulder to dust.

In short, hypocrites are like turning pictures which have on one side the
image of a Lamb, on the other side a Lion: so they are on their outside
Saints, but their inside devils. Hypocrites may be compared to trumpets which
make a great sound, but within they are hollow. Do these believe the all-seeing
eye? The hypocrite turns all Religion into mere complement; he walks with a
dark Lanthorn, saying, No eye shall see. He goes about to juggle with God, as
Ieroboams wife did think to do with the Prophet, 1 Kin. 14. 6. but he pulled
off her vizor, Come in thou wife of Jeroboam. The hypocrite knows God is of
purer eyes then to behold sin, yet for all this will play a Devotion; he will
venture to abuse God, that he may delude men. The hypocrite takes more care to
make a Covevant, then to keep it; and is more studious to enter into Religion,
then that Religion should enter into him. This Text does arraigne the
Hypocrite: (...), All things are naked. God sees our juglings.

I shall give you two (...), or distinguishing Characters whereby you may know
an hypocrite.

1. He is one that is partial in 1. Character.
his goodness; zealous in lesser things, and remiss in greater. As Luther
complained of some in his time, and our Savior in his time, which strain at a
gnat, and swallow a Camel. He is one that sweats only in some part, but is
cool in all the rest, which is a sign his zeal is distempered. He is zealous
against a Ceremony, a Relic or painted Glass, (not that I plead for these)
but in the mean time lives in known sin; Lying, Cozening, Extortion, etc.
Just as the High Priests, It is not lawful, say they, to put the money into
the Treasury, because it is the price of blood. Mat. 27. 6
They speak like conscientious men. Oh do not defile the treasury! But let me
ask the question, Why did they shed that blood* it was innocent blood. They
will not take the price of blood into the treasury, but they never scruple to
take the guilt of blood into their souls. They were zealous for the Temple, but
in the mean time murderers of the Son of God. And we have a parallel
Scripture to this, Romans 2. 22. Thou that abhorrest idols, *Romans 2. 22.
do thou commit sacrilege? Who at the first blush would not have taken these
for very holy, devout men; they were zealous against idolatry? But see a root
of hypocrisy! They were partially good, they hated one sin, but not another;
idolatry, but not sacrilege. Though it was an abominable sin, and there was
an express Law of God against it, Deuteronomy. 26 12, 13, 14.
yet these seeming Zealots make no conscience of robbing God of his tithes.

And here as in a Scripture looking-glass, we may see our own faces; have we
not many now adays seemingly zealous against Popery? if they see a Cross,
though it be in a Coat of Arms, they are much offended, and are in a kind of
convulsion: but in the mean time make no conscience of sacrilege, starving out
the Ministry, they put out the fire on Gods Altar, shut the doors of his
Temple; is not this visible hypocrisy? There are some it may be will not be
heard to swear, it will not stand with their Saintship, that were to call the
devil father aloud, but they will defraud and defame, which is a sin they
can never satisfy for; take away a man's name, what amends can you make him?
it is no better then murder; and if these be Saints, there are as good Saints in
hell?

The second Character of an Hypocrite 2 Character.
is, he makes Religion a mask to cover his sin.

Herod pretended to worship Christ, but his zeal was no other then malice,
forit was to have destroyed him. Thus often bad purposes lie hid under good
pretenses. Iezabel that she may dissemble her murderous intentions, proclaims
a Fast. Absalom to color over his treason pretends a religious vow. How
cunning is the heart to go to hell! Sometimes Covetousness pretends
Conscience; Judas fisheth for money under a pretense of Religion, This ointment
might have been sold for three hundred pence, and given to the poor, Joh. 12.
5. how charitable Judas was! but his charity began at home, for he carried the
Bag. Many make Religion a Cloak for their Ambition, Come, see my my Zeal, says
Iehu, for the Lord 1 King. 10. 16.
. No, Iehu, thy zeal was for the kingdom; it was not zeal, but State Policy.
Iehu made Religion hold the Stirrup, till he got into the Saddle, and possessed
the Crown; here was (...) Chrysoft.
, double-died hypocrisy.

The Hypocrite does ex diametro set himself against God.

First, he opposes him in his Essence; 1.
God is a substance, the Hypocrite is only a shape.

Secondly, in his unity; God is one, 2.
and made him one at first, but he has made himself two, an heart and an
heart; he gives God the Tenth, and leaves the rest for that which he loves
better.

Thirdly, in his goodness. God is 3.
good, and in him is no mixture. The Hypocrite is therefore good in show, that
he may be bad indeed Hypocritae tegunt malum bone.
, he is a devil in Samuels Mantle. Pilate would make the world believe he had a
tender Conscience, he washes his hands, but he could not say as David, I will
wash my hands in innocence, for then he would never have given his Vote for the
shedding of innocent blood. God sees our prevarications. How odious is the
Hypocrite? We our selves cannot endure treacherous dealing; therefore in the
Commonwealth, he that poisons, has a greater punishment then he that kills
with the sword, because he offers it hypocritically under a show of meat and
drink. Judas, betrayest thou the Son of man with a kiss? we may as well betray
Christ with a tear, as Judas did with a kiss Lachrymae (...) d^ctae. Bernard
. You may see Gods great dislike of this sin, in that he forbids his people in
the old Law, the very resemblances of it, Linsy Woolsy; and by his
expostulation, Psalm. 50. 16. What have thou to do to take my Covenant into thy
mouth, seeing thou hate to bereformed? Thou Hypocrite, what have thou to do
to meddle with Religion, to pretend Saint-ship, that make religion odious,
and the offering of God to be abhorred? Hear that dreadful Commination, Isa.
29. They draw near to me with their lips. They *Is. 29 14
have God in their mouths, but their heart is far from me; therefore, v. 14. I
will take away the wisdom of the wise men; I Will blast their Proceedings, I will
infatuate their Counsels, They are Hypocrites! Christ pronounces seven woes to
this sin, in one Chapter, that he never does the like to any other, Mat. 23.
Woe to you Hypocrites, Woe, Woe, etc. To be an hypocritical Nation, and to be
the Generation of Gods wrath are made in scripture synonomaes, and are all one.
Isa. 10. 6. And when the Holy Ghost would inhance and aggravate the torments of
hell, he sets them out under this notion, The place of Hypocrites; as if hell
were taken up on purpose for the Hypocrite to quarter (...).

Use 3. A word of Exhortation. If the Use. 3. Exhort.
secrets of our hearts are unvailed and unmasked, walk as in the eye of God Sic
vivendum est tanquam in conspectu, sic cogitandum tanquam aliquis in itimum
pectus (...) spic^re possit; quid prodest ab homine quidvis ab scondi, cum
nihil Deo clusum est interest animis nostris and cogitationibus mediis
intervenit. Sen.
. He thinks that of Hagar should be a Christians Motto, Thou God see me. And
David's prospect should be ever in our eye, Ps. 16. 8. I have set the Lord (...)
as is before me, some set their bags of money always before them, others set the
fear of men always before them* but a wise Christian will set God, and
judgment, and eternity aways before him: If indeed Gods eye were at any time
off from us, we might take the more liberty; but if all things be naked and
naked in his Eye, we cannot sin but in the face of our Judge. Oh then
reverence this Eye of God.

First, it should be a bridle to keep 1.
us from sin: How shall I do this and sin against God? Seneca gives his friend
Lucillius this counsel: Whatever he was doing, he should imagine that some of
the Roman Worthies did behold him, and then he would do nothing dishonorable.
The eye of God should be ever in our eye; this would be as a Supersedeas and
counter-poyson against sin, nor is it enough to prune sin Plurimi radunt
peccata, non eradicant. Bernard.
, viz. to cut off the external acts, but kill the root. Crucify
complexion-sinnes; let not thy heart sit brooding upon sin. Again, let Gods
omniscience deter thee from hiding sin. Who would hide a traitor? Now it
sucks your breast, shortly it will suck your blood. Men think to walk in the
dark, and to ^arry their sins under a Canopy, that no eye shall see them: as
those that have bad eyes, think that the sky is ever cloudy, whereas the fault
is not in the sky, but in their eyes: so when the Prince of the world has
blinded men's eyes, because there is darkness within, they think it is dark
abroad too, and now the sky is cloudy, God cannot see: but remember, all
things are naked: do not go about to hide sin: confess, confess, it is a work
proper for the day. Confession does that to the soul which the Surgeon does
to the body; it opens a spiritual vein, and lets out the bad blood. The only
way to make God not see sin is to see it our selves, but not with dry eyes,
point every sin with a tear.

2. It is a spur to virtue: art thou zealous for God? do thou exhaust thy
self in the cause of religion? God sees it, thou shall lose nothing: for the
present thou have a Promise which is Gods bill of exchange Mat. 19. 29*
and when God comes to make up thy Accounts, thou shall be paid with overplus:
The more any man has disbursed himself for God, the greater sums of glory are
still behind.

3. It is a whetstone to duty. O thou Christian that art much in private, that
set hours apart for God, (a sign he has set thee apart,) thou sheddest
many a tear in thy closet, the world takes no notice; but remember, Gods eye is
upon thee, thy Prayers are registered, thy tears are bottled up, and he that
sees in secret, will reward thee openly Mat. 6. 6
. How should this add wings to Prayer, and oil to the flame of our devotion?
Let us take heed of slacking our pace in Religion, let not our tears begin to
freeze; for this if it does not lose, yet it may lessen our Crown.

Here is a breast of consolation Use. 4.
to the Saints of God (in these sad times,) in the midst of all that hard
measure they may meet with; let the world frown, let men persecute and
calumniate, (and it may be, think they do God service*,) here is sap in the
vine, John. 16. 2*
a strong cordial to take, (...), All things are naked, They do nothing but
what our Father sees. They make wounds, and then pour in vinegar; God writes
down their cruelty, he sees what rods they use, and how hard they strike; and
he that has an eye to see, has also an hand to punish. I have seen, I have
seen the affliction of my people Act. 73* 4.
, not only with an eye of Providence; but with an eye of pity. This was a
great comfort to David in his affliction, and was like a golden shield in the
hand of his faith, My groaning is not hid from thee Psalm. 38. 6*
: when I weep, Christ weeps in my tears, he bleeds in my wounds. There are two
bloods will cry: the blood of souls, when they have been starved or poisoned:
and the blood of Saints. I do not mean Saints without Sanctity, Titular Saints;
but such as have Christ engraven in their hearts, and the Word copyed out into
their lives; It Is dangerous meddling with their blood Rev. 6. 9
; if we spill their blood, it is no better then spilling Christ's blood, for
they are members of his body, In all their affliction he was afflicted Isa. 63.
9.
. The People of God are precious to him. There is Blood Royal running in their
souls, they are his Jewels, Mal. 3. 17. And his heart is exceedingly taken with
them, it is wounded with love, I was jealous for Sion with great jealousy
Zach. 8. 2
; jealousy (we know) proceeds from love; nay, I was zealous for Sion; zeal is
the flame of love; Oh then ye Saints of God, be of good comfort; whatever your
measure is, God sees it, Exodus 14. 24. In the morning-watch, the Lord looked
through the Pillar of fire and of the cloud, and troubled the Host of the
Egyptians; remember, God has an eye in the cloud.

Caution. God being so infinite in Use. 5.
wisdom; If things go cross in Church or State, take heed of charging God with
folly; do not censure, but admire. All things are naked. There is not any thing
that stirs in the world, but God has a design in it, for the good of his
Church: He carries on his design by men's designs: Al things are unvailed to
the Eye of Providence. God is never at a stand: He knows when to deliver, and
how to deliver.

1. When to deliver.

David says, My times are in thy hand Ps. 31. 15.
. If our times were in our own hand, we would have deliverance too soon; if
they were in our Enemies hand, we should have deliverance too late: But my
times are in thy hand; and Gods time is ever best. Every thing is beautiful in
its season: when the mercy is ripe, we shall have it. It is true, we are now
inter malleum and incudem: Between the hammer and the anvill, we may fear we
shall see the death of Religion, before the birth of Reformation. But do not
cast away your Anchor; God sees when the mercy will be in season. When his
people are low enough, and the enemy high enough, then usually appears the
Churches morning star Cum duplicantur lateres venit. Moses.
, let God alone to his time. Isa. 60. 22


2. How to deliver.

All things are naked. God will deliver sometimes in that way in which we think
he will destroy. It might seem strange, when he would deliver Israel, he
stirred up the hearts of the Egyptians to hate them. Psalm. 105. 25
Could this be a likely way? yet by this means was deliverance ushered in. So
now the hearts of many are stirred up to hate the People of God, to hate the
Covenant; but God can make use of their power and rage, as once he did of the
Highpriests malice, and Judas treason, for our greater advantage; there was no
way for Jonah to be saved but to be swallowed up; he sails safe to land in the
Whales belly; God brings his people many times to shore upon the broken Pieces
of the ship: God can make the enemies do his work; he does sometimes play his
own game by their hand. Well then may we cry out with the Apostle Romans 11 33
, (...)! O the depth of the riches, both of the wisdom and knowledge of God!
God will not make us of his privy counsel, his path is in the deep; if we
cannot see a reason of his Proceedings, let us censure our own shallowness,
not his depth.

It is a word of counsel, it shows us Use. 6. ult.
whither to have recourse in all our straits and doubts; go to God, all things
are naked in his eye, he is the Oracle of wisdom, If any man lack wisdom, let
him ask it of God Jam. 15.
. We are here in tenebris, in the dark pray with David, Lord, light my candle
Ps, 18. 28
, shed some beams of divine knowledge into my soul. Beg of God, that as things
are naked in his eyes, so they may be naked in our eyes that we may see the
sinfulness of sin, and the beauty of holiness. The times are evil, let us pray
to God that he would be our Pilot, that he would teach us to walk jealously
toward our selves, piously toward him, prudently toward others, that he
would give us the graces of our relation which do bespangle and grace our
profession, that so guiding us by his Counsels Ps. 73. 24.
, we may at last be received to Glory.

FINIS.

