Divine Cordial Or, the Transcendent PRIVILEGE OF Those that Love God, And are
SAVINGLY CALLED.

Published by THOMAS WATSON, Minister of the Gospel.

But as for you, ye thought evil against me, but God meant it unto good,

Genesis 50.20. LONDON: Printed for Thomas Parkhurst, at the Three Crowns, over
against the great Conduit, at the lower end of Cheapside. 1663.

The EPISTLE to the READER^
CHRISTIAN READER:
THere are two things, which I have always looked upon as difficult: The one
is, to make the Wicked sad; they want not cause of sadness, they are taken
captive by Satan 2 Timothy 2.2^.
: This is all that is gotten by fighting on the Devils side; he does not make
his Soldiers Captains, but Captives, he leads them Prisoners before him, and
at last will give them damnable pay: Yet so are sinners blinded by the God of
this world 2 Cor. 4.4.
, that they cannot see the chains they are held in, but kiss their fetters, and
go laughing to Hell. The other puzling difficulty, is, to make the Godly
joyful: Though they have enough to rock their troubled hearts quiet, and may
encourage themselves in the Lord their God; yet like the froward child, ^hey put
away the breast, and refuse to be comforted. Amnon, though a Kings Son, was
lean 2 Samuel 13.4.
. This dejection in the Godly, arises from a double Spring; either because
their inward comforts are darkened, or their outward comforts are disturbed: To
cure both which troubles, I have put forth this ensuing Piece, hoping by the
blessing of God, it will buoy up their disponding hearts, and make them look
with a more pleasant as^ect; I would prescribe them to take now and then a
little of this Cordial. When the Prophet Eliah's spirits were ready to faint
under the Juniper Tree* the Angel set before him a Cake, and a Cruse of Water,
and when he had eaten he was cheered, and went in the strength of that meat,
till he came unto Horeb the Mount of God 1 King 19.8.
. Methinks this Text, like that sweet repast, may very much corroborate and
strengthen the Saints in their journey to Heaven* and may be as a sacred
feather, to drop the golden Oil of consolation into their hearts: All things
shall work togethe^ for good, to them that love God. T^ knew that nothing shall
hurt the god^ly, is matter of comfort Psalm. 91.10.
; but to be assured that all things which fall out, shall co-o^erate for their
good, that their crosses shall be turned into blessings, the bloody showrs of
affliction shall water the withering root of their Grace, and make it flourish
more; here is that may fill their hearts with joy till they run over. It will
be no small revivement to me, if these Labors of mine prove advantageous to
any. When S. Paul's Prison would not admit him the lib^rty of a Pulpit, he wrote
some Epistles, the benefit whereof the Church of God has reaped in after-ages.
When I am at present taken off from my public employment of preaching, I shall
be glad if I may be useful by writing; and while I my self am in a civil sense
dead I may make others in a spiritual sense alive: This is the Prayer of him,
who is

Thy Friend, in all true Affection and Devotion. THOMAS WATSON.

THE CONTENTS.
CHAP. I. THe Preface or Introduction. CHAP. II. Showing that all things work
for good to the Saints. CHAP. III. That the best things work for good. That the
Attributes of God work for good. That the Promises of God work for good. That
the Mercies of God work for good. That the Graces work for good. That the
Creatures of God work for good, in particular the good Angels. That the
Communion of Saints works for good. That Christ's Intercession works for good.
That the Saints Prayers, conceived and indicted by the blessed Spirit, work for
good.
CHAP. IV. That the worst things work for good to the Go^ly. That the evil of
Affliction works for good. That the evil of Temptation works for good. That the
evil of Desertion works for good. That the evil of Sin, by Gods overruling
Power, works for good to the Godly.
CHAP. V. Showing why all things must needs work for good to the Saints. CHAP.
VI. Several Inferences drawn from the Proposition. CHAP. VII. Showing the
Persons interested in this glorious Privilege, They love God. The Nature of
love. The Kinds of love. The Properties of love, The Degree of love.
CHAP. VIII. A sharp Reproof to those who do not love God. CHAP. IX.
Discovering the Prints of love to God. CHAP. X. Containing an Exhortation to
love God. Motives to excite love. Means directing to it. Preserve love that it
does not fall into a Consumption. Increase love to God, and blow it up into a
holy flame*
CHAP XI. The second Qualification of the Persons interested in the Text, They
are effectually called. Our deplorable condition before we are called. The
Means of our blessed Call. Gods Method in calling sinners. The Properties of
the Divine Call. The End of Effectual Calling.
CHAP. XII. Two Inferences from the Premises. CHAP. XIII. Exhorting to labor
after the Heavenly Calling Signs of Effectual Calling.
CHAP* XIV. Several Exhortations to them who are Called. 1. Admire Free Grace.
2. Pity those who are uncalled. 3. Walk worthy of your High-Calling.
CHAP. XV. Concerning Gods Purpose. CHAP. XVI. Our whole salvation must be
resolved into Gods Purpose. The Saints Comforts are built upon this impregnable
Rock.

A DIVINE CORDIAL.
CHAP. I. The Proaemium, or Introduction.
ROMANS 8.28. We know that all things work together for good, to them that love
God, to them who are the called according to his purpose.


IF the whole Scripture be the feast of the soul (as St Ambrose says) then
this Chapter may be a dish at this feast, which with its sweet variety may very
much refresh and animate the hearts of Gods People. In the preceding verses the
Apostle had been wading through the great Doctrines of Justification and
Adoption; Mysteries so arduous and profound, that without the help and conduct
of the Spirit, he might soon have waded beyond his depth. In this verse the
Apostle touches upon that pleasant string of Consolation; We know that all
things work together for good, to them that love God. Not a word but is
weighty* therefore I shall gather up every filing of this Gold, that nothing be
lost.

In the Text there are three general Branches. 1. A glorious Privilege, All
things work for good. 2. The Persons interested in this Privilege; and they
are doubly specified. 1. They are Lovers of God. 2. They are Called. 3. The
Original and Spring of this effectual calling, set down in these works, (...),
according to his purpose. Of all these in order; and I begin with the first.

1. The glorious Privilege; wherein there are two things considerable: 1. The
certainty of the Privilege, (...), We know. 2. The excellency of the
Privilege, (...), All things work together for good.

certainty of the Privilege: We know. It is not a matter pendulous or
doubtful; the Apostle does not say* We hope, or conjecture, but it is like an
Article in our Creed, We know all things work for good:

Whence observe, That the Truths of the Gospel, Doct.
are evident and infallible.

A Christian may come not only to a loose opinion, but to a certainty of what
he holds. As the Axioms in Logic, and Aphorisms in Physic, are demonstrated
to Reason; so the Truths in Religion are demonstrated to Faith* We know, says
the Apostle. Though a Christian has no^ a perfect knowledge of the Mysteries
of the Gospel, yet he has a certain knowledge. We see through a glass darkly
(...).
, 1 Cor. 13.12. therefore we have not perfection of knowledge; but we behold
with open face (...).
, 2 Cor. 3.18. therefore we have a certainty. The Spirit of God does imprint
Heavenly Truths upon the heart, as with the point of a Diamond. A Christian may
know infallibly there is an evil in sin, a beauty in holiness: He may know
that he is in the state of Grace, 1 John 3.14. We know that we have passed from
death to life. He may know that he shall go to Heaven, 2 Cor. 5.1. We know that
if our earthly Tabernacle were dissolved, we have a building of God, an house
made without hands, eternal in the Heavens. The Lord does not leave his People
at uncertainties in matters of Salvation. The Apostle comes with his Probatum
est, in the Text, We know; we have arrived at a (...), or holy confidence; we
have both the Spirit of God and our own experience setting seal to it.

Let us not rest in Scepticisme, Use.
but labor to come to a certainty in the things of Religion. As that Martyr
woman said, I cannot dispute for Christ, but I can burn for Christ. God knows
whether we may not be called forth to be witnesses to his Truth; therefore it
concerns us to be wel-grounded, and confirmed in it. If we are doubtful
Christians, we shall be wavering Christian* whence is apostasy, but from
incredulity? * Men first question ^he truth, and then fall from the T^u^h. O
beg the ^pi^it of God, not only to anoint you, but to seal you, 2 Cor. 1.22.

CHAP. II. Containing the grand Proposition.
excellency of the Privilege: All t^ings work together for good. This is a
Jacobs staff in the hand of faith, with which we may walk cheer^ully to the
Mount of God: what will sa^isfie or give content, if this will no^? A^l things
work together for good. This word (...) work together, is a Physical
expression. Several poysonful ingredients put together, being tempered by the
skill of the Apo^heca^y, make a Sovereign Medicine, and work together for the
good of the Patient Venen^ ex corporibus per venen^t^ pharmaca educunt medici.
Pet. Mart.
. So all Gods P^ovidences being divinely tempered and sanctified, do work
together for the best to the S^in^s. He who loves God, and is called according
to his purpose, may say to his soul, Soul take thy ^ase, for, there is much
good laid up for thee, every thing in the wo^l^ shall be for thy good. This is
a Christians Cordial, which may cause the color to come in his face, and make
him like Jonathan, who when he had tasted the honey at the end of the ro^ hi^
eyes were enlightened, 1 Samuel 14 27. Why should a Christian exentera^e himself?
^
why should ^e kill himself wi^h care, when all things shall sweetly concu^^e,
yea conspi^e for his g^od? The result of the ^ex* is this,

Doct. That all the various dealings of God with his Children, Doct.
do by a special Providence turn to their good N^m^ qui sit Christianus de
rerum catastrophe debe^ ambig^re* P. Mart.
.

Psalm. 25.^0. All the paths of the Lord are mercy unto such as keep his
Covenant. If every path has mercy in it, then it works for good.

1. What things work for good to the Godly.

2. Why all things work for good to the Godly.

1. What things are they which work for good to the Elect?

1. The best things. 2. The worst things. Answ.

CHAP. III. Showing that the best things work for good to the Godly.
1. THe best things work for good to the Godly: There a^e eight of these.

1. Gods Attribut^s work for good; these

1. Gods Power works for good. It is a glorious power, Col. 1.11. and it is
engaged for the good of the Elect. Out of this strong comes forth sweetness
Judge. 14.14.
. The Power of God works for good four ways.

1. In supporting us in misery. 2. In supplying our wants. 3. In subduing our
corruptions. 4. In conquering our enemies.
Gods Power works for good,

1. In supporting us in misery, Deuteronomy. 33.27. Underneath are the everlasting
Arms. What upheld Daniel in the Lions Den? Jonah in the Whales Belly? the three
Children in the Furnace? only the power of God. Is it not strange to see a
bruised Reed grow and flourish? How is a weak Christian able, not only to
endure ^ffliction, but rejoice in it? He is upheld by the Arms of the Almighty,
2 Cor. 12.9. My strength is made perfect in weakness.

Elijah by the unnatural Ravens, will bring sustenance to his people. God can
preserve the Oil in the Cruse, 1 Kings 17.14. The Lord made the Sun on Ahaz's
Dial go ten degrees backward: So when our outward comforts are declining, and
it is almost Sunsetting, God often causes a revival, and b^ings the Sun many
degrees backward.

3. In subduing our corruptions: Mic. 7.19. He will subdue our iniquities. The
Hebrew word is (...) He will put them under the yoke. Is thy sin strong? God is
powerful, he will break the head of this Leviathan. Is thy heart hard? God will
dissolve that stone in Christ's blood, Job 23.16. The Almighty makes my heart
soft. When we say as Iehoshaphat, We have no might against this great Army, the
Lord goes up with us, and helps us to fight our battles; he strikes off the
heads of those Goliah-lusts which are too strong for us.

4. In conquering our enemies. He stains the pride, and breaks the confidence
of adversaries (...). Chrysostom.
. Psalm. 2.9. Thou shall break them with a rod of iron. There is rage in the
Enemy, malice in the Devil, but power in God. How easily can he rout all the
Forces of the wicked! 2 Chronicles. 14.11. It is nothing for thee Lord to help. Gods
power is on his Churches side, Deuteronomy. 33.29. Happy art thou O Israel, O people
saved by the Lord, who is the shield of thy help, and the sword of thy
excellency.

2. The Wisdom of God works for good. Mighty God, so the Counselor, Isa. 9.6.
We are often times in the dark, and in matters intricate and doubtful, know not
which way to take; here God comes in with light, Psalm. 32.8. I will guide thee
(...) with mine eye. EYE, there is put for Gods wi^dome. Whence is it the
Saints can see further than the most quick-sighted Politicians? They foresee an
evil, and hide themselves, they see Satan's Sophisms; this is (...); Gods wisdom
is the Pillar of fire to go before, and guide them.

Goodness of God works for good two ways. 1. Gods goodness is a means to make
us good, Romans 2.4. The goodness of God leads thee to repentance. The
goodness of God is a spiritual Sunbeam to melt the heart into tears. Oh says
the soul, Has God been so good to me? has he reprieved me so long from Hell,
and shall I grieve his Spirit any more? shall I sin against Goodness? 2. The
goodness of God works for good, as it ushers in a^l our blessings. The daily
favors we receive, are the silver streams which flow from the Fountains of
Gods goodness. This Divine Attribute of Goodnes^, brings in two sort^ of
blessings. 1. Common Blessings. All partake of these; the bad as well as the
good: This sweet dew falls upon the Thistle, as well as the Rose, Psalm. 33.5.
2. Crowning Blessings. These only the godly partake of, Psalm. 103.4. Who
crowns us with loving kindness. Thus the blessed Attributes of God work for
good to the Saints.

2. The Promises of God work for good. Dei Chirographum (as Austin calls them)
a Bill of Gods hand; is it not good to have security? The Promises are the
Breasts of the Gospel; and is not the Breast for the good of the Infan^? They
are called Precious Promises, 2 Pet. 1.4. they are as Aquavitae to a soul that
is ready to faint. Carda^ says, Every precious stone has some virtue latent
in it: The Promises are full of virtue, and that especially in four Cases.

1. Are we under the guilt of sin? there is a Promise, Exodus 34.6. The Lord,
the Lord merciful, gracious, etc. where God does as it were put on his glorious
Embroidery, and hold out the Golden Scepter, to encourage poor trembling
sinners to come to him. The Lord Merciful. God is more willing to pardon, than
to punish: Mercy does more multiply in him, than sin in us: Mercy is his
Nature. The Be naturally gives honey; it stings only when it is provoked. But
says the guilty sinner, I cannot deserve mercy: but he is Gracious; he shows
mercy, not because we deserve mercy, but because he delights in mercy. But what
is that to me? perhaps my name is not in the pardon: He keeps mercy for
thousands; the Exchequer of mercy is not exhausted: God has Trea^ures lying
by, and why may not thou come in for a Child's part? This Promise is as
Bezar-stone.

2. Are we under the defilement of sin? there is a P^omise wo^king for good,
Hos. 14.14. I will heal their backslidings. God will not only bestow mercy,
but grace. And he has made a Promise of ^ending his Spirit, Isa. 44.3. which
for its sanctifying nature, is in Scripture compared sometimes to Water, which
cleanses the V^ss^l; sometimes to the Word, which is the Fan to winnow and
purify the Ai^; sometimes to Fire, which does refine Me^tals: Thus the Spirit
of God shall cleanse and consecra^e the ^oul, making it partake of the Divine
Nature.

3. Are we in great dangers? there is a Promise works for our good, Psalm. 91.15.
I will be with him in trouble. God does not use ^o b^ing his people into
troubles, and leave them there, but will stand by them, he will hold their head
and heart when they are ^ainting. And there is another Promise, Psalm. ^7.39 He
is their strength in the time of trouble. Oh says the ^oul, I shall fain^ in
the day of trial; but God will be the stre^gt^ of ^ur heart, he will join his
^orces with us; either he will make his hand light^, or our faith stronger.

4. Do we fear outw^^d ^ants? there is a Promise, Psalm. ^4.10. They that fear
the Lord, shall not want any good thing. If it be good for us, we shall have
it; if it be not good for us, then, the not having of it, is good. Exodus 23.25.
I will bless thy bread, and thy water. This blessing falls as the honey-dew
upon the leaf, it sweetens that little we possess. Let me want the Venison, so
I may have the Blessing. Quest. But I fear I shall not get a livelihood? Answ.
Peruse that Scripture, Psalm. 37.25. I have been young, and now am old, yet have
I not seen the righteous forsaken, nor his Seed begging bread. How must we
understand this? 1. David speaks it as his own observation; he never beheld
such an Eclipse, he never saw a godly man brought so low, that he had not a bit
of bread to put in his mouth. 2. David never saw the righteous and their Seed
lacking. Though the Lord might try godly Parents a while by want, yet not their
Seed too: The Seed of the godly shall be provided for. 3. David never saw the
righteous begging of bread, and forsaken: Though he might be reduced to great
straits, yet not forsaken; still he is an heir of Heaven, and God loves him.
Thus, in all these Cases, the Promises work for good.

How do the Promises work for good? Quest. Ans. 1.


1. They are food for Faith; and that which strengthens Faith works for good.
The Promises are the Breast-milk of Faith; Faith sucks nourishment from them,
as the child by drawing the Breast. Genesis 32.7. Jacob feared exceedingly: His
spirits were ready to faint; now he goes to the Promise, verse. 12. Lord, thou
have said, thou will do me good. This Promise was his food; he got so much
strength by sucking this Promise, that he was able to wrestle with the Lord all
night in prayer, and would not let him go till he had blessed him.

2. The Promises are springs of joy. There is more in the Promise to comfort,
than in the world to perplex. Vrsin was comforted by that Promise, Ioh. 10.29.
No man shall pluck them out of my Fathers hands. The Promises are Cordials in a
fainting fit, Psalm. 119.92. V^less thy Word had been my delight, I had perished
in my affliction. The Promises are as Cork to the Net, to bear up the heart
from sinking in the deep waters of dist^ess.



Temporal Mercies, as Health, Prosperity. Mercy works most kindly upon an
ingenious (...).

1 The mercies of God humble: 2 Samuel 7.18. Then went King David in, and sat
before the Lord, and said, Who am I, O Lord God? and what is my fathers house,
that thou have brought (...) hithe^to? Lord, whence is such honor conferred
upon me, that I should be King? that I who did follow the Sheep, should go in
and out before thy people? So says a gracious heart, Lord, what am I, that it
should be better with me than others? that I should drink of the fruit of the
Vine, when others drink, not only a Cup of Wormwood, but a Cup of Blood? what
am I, that I should have those mercies, which others want, who are better than
I? Lord, whence is it, that notwithstanding all my unworthiness, a fresh Tide
of mercy comes in every day? The mercies of God make a sinner proud, but a
Saint humble.

2. The mercies of God have a melting influence upon the soul, they dissolve it
in love to God (...). Chrysostom.
. Gods Judgments make us fear him, his mercies make us love him. How was Saul
wrought upon by kindness! David had him at the advantage, and might have cut
off, not only the skirt of his Robe, but his head; yet he spares his life: This
kindness melted Saul's heart, 1 Samuel 24.16. Is this thy voice, my son David? and
Saul lift up his voice, and wept. Such a melting influence has Gods mercy, it
makes the eyes drop with tears of love.

3. The mercies of God make the heart ^ruitful. When you lay out more cost upon
a ^^eld, it bears a better crop. A gracious soul honors the Lord with his
Substance; he does not do with his mercies, as Israel with their Jewels and
Earrings, make a Golden Calfe; but as Solomon did with the money thrown into
the Treasury, build a Temple for the Lord. The Golden showers of mercy cause
fertility.

4. The mercies of God make the heart thankful: Psalm. 116.12, 13. Quid
retribuam Domino? What shall I render unto the Lord for all his benefits
toward me? I will take the Cup of salvation. David alludes to the people of
Israel, who at their Peace Offerings did use to take a Cup in their hands, and
give thanks to God for Deliverances. Every mercy is an Alms of Free Grace; and
this enlarges the soul in g^atitude. A good Christian is not a Grave to bury
Gods mercies, but a Temple to sing his praise. If every Bird in its Kind (as
Ambrose speaks) does chirp forth thankfulness to its Maker; much more will an
ingenious Christian, whose life is enriched and perfumed with mercy.

5. The mercies of God quicken: As they are Load-stones to love, so Whet-stones
to obedience: Psalm. 119.9. I will walk before the Lord in the Land of the
living. He that takes a review of his blessings, looks upon himself as a person
engaged for God; he argue^ from the sweetness of mercy, to the swiftness of
duty; he spends and is spent for Christ; he dedicates his (...) to God. Among
the Romans, when one had redeemed another, he was ever afterward to serve him.
A soul encompassed with mercy is zealously active in Gods service.

6. The mercies of God wo^k compassion to others. A Christian is a temporal
Savior; he feeds the hungry, clothes the naked, visits the Widow and O^phan in
their distress; the backs and bellies of the poor, a^e the surrows where he
sows the golden S^eds of his Charity: Psalm. 112.5. A good man shows favor,
and lends: Charity d^ops from him freely, as Mirth from the Tree. Thus to the
godly, the mercies of God wo^k for good, they a^e wings to lift them up to
Heaven.

2. Spiritual mercies wo^k (...) g^od: The a savor of life, it is verbum cum
u^ctione, it is a soul-transforming Word, i^ assimilates the heart into Christ's
likeness, it is the breeder of Assurance, 1 These. 1.5. Our Gospel came to you,
not in word only, but in power, and in the Holy Ghost, and in much assurance:
It is vehiculum salutis, the Charet of Salvation.

2. Prayer works for good (...). Chr. orat. de prec.
. Prayer is the Bellows of the affections, it blows up holy desires and ardou^s
of soul: Prayer has power with God, Isa. 45.11. Command ye me. It is a Key
that unlocks the Treasury of God's Bowels. Prayer keeps the heart open to God,
and shut to sin; it a^^wageth the intemperate heats and swellings of lust. It
was Luther's counsel to a friend, when he perceived a tentation begin to arise,
to betake himself to Prayer. Prayer is Bombarda Christianorum Luther.
, the Christians Gun, which they discharge against their enemies. Prayer is the
Pancreston, the Sovereign Medicine of the soul: Prayer sanctifies every mercy,
1 Timothy 4.5. it is the dispeller of sorrow: by venting the grief it eases the
heart. When Hannah had p^ayed, she went away, and was no more sad, 1 Samuel 1.18.
And i^ it has these rare effects, then it works for good.

3. The Lords Supper works for good: It is an Emblem of the Marriage Supper of
the Lamb, Rev. 19.9. and an Earnest of that Communion we shall have with Christ
in Glory; it is a feast of fat things; it gives us bread from Heaven, such as
does not only preserve life, but prevent death. It has glorious effects in the
hearts of the Godly; it quickens their Affections, strengthens their Graces,
mortifies their Corruptions, revives their Hopes, increases their Joy. Luther
says, It is as great a work to comfort a dejested soul, as to raise the dead
to life; yet this may, and sometimes is done to the souls of the Godly in the
blessed Supper. The Sacrament has a peculiar excellency above the Word
preached. In the Word there is the Breath of God, in the Sacrament the Blood of
God; in the Word we hear his Voice, in the Sacrament we have his kiss. The
Word proceeds out of Gods mouth, the Sacrament out of his sides.

4. The Graces of the Spirit work for good. Grace is to the soul as light to
the eye, as health Pro. 31.12. She will do him good all the days of her life.
How incompa^ably useful are the Graces! Faith and Fear go hand in hand; Faith
keeps the heart cheerful, Fear keeps the heart serious; Faith keeps the heart
from sinking in despair, Fear keeps it from floating in presumption; all the
Graces display themselves in their beauty: Hope is the Helmet, 1 These. 5.8.
Meekness the Ornament, 1 Pet. 3.4. Love the Bond of perfectness, Col. 3.14. The
Saints Graces are Weapons to defend them, Wings to elevate them, Jewels to
enrich them, Spices to persume them, Stars to adorn them (...).
, Cordials to refresh them: And does not all this work for good? The Graces are
our Evidences for Heaven; is it not good to have our Evidences ready at the
hour of death?

inanimate, Judge. 5.20. The Stars in their course fought against Sisera; the
Stars as the Host of God gathered in a Battalio, and by their influences
raising terrible tempests, did as it were conspire the ruin of Sisera and his
Army* 2. Creatures animate. The Angels, those noble Citizens and Princes of
Heaven, work for the good of the Saints Domestici Dei, caeli cives, principes
paradisi. Bern.
. The good Angels are ready to do all offices of love to the people of God,
Heb. 1.14. Are they not all ministering Spirits, sent forth to minister for them
who shall be heirs of salvation? Some o^ the Fathers are of opinion, that every
Believer has his ^u^elar Angel; it needs no hot debate, it may suffice that we
know the whole Hiera^chy of Angels is employed for the good of the Saints. The
good Angels do service to the Saints:

1. In life. The Angel did comfort the Virgin Mary, Luke 1.28. The Angel did
stop the mouths of the Lions that they could not hurt Daniel, Dan. 6.22. A
Christian has an invisible Guard about him, the Tutelage, and Guardian-ship of
Angels, Psalm 91.11. He shall give his Angels charge over thee to keep thee in
all thy ways. The Angels are of the Saints Lifeguard, yea, the chief of the
Angels; Are they not all ministering spirits? The highest Angels take care of
the lowest Saints.

2. At death. The Angels are about the Saints sick-beds to comfort them. As God
comforts by his Spirit, so by his Angels. Christ in his Agony was refreshed by
an Angel, Luke 24.45. So are Believers in the agony of death: And when the
Saints breath expires, their souls are carried up to Heaven by a Convoy of
Angels, Luke 16.22.

3. At the day of Judgment. 1. The Angels shall open the Saints Graves, and
dig away the earth from their bodies, and shall conduct them into the presence
of Christ, when they shall be made like his glorious body, Mat. 24.31. He shall
send his Angels, and they shall gather together his Elect, from the four winds,
from the one end of Heaven to the other. 2. The Angels at the day of Judgment
shall rid the Godly of all their enemies. Here the Saints are plagued with
enemies, Psalm. 38.20. They are mine adversaries, because I follow the thing
that good is: well, the Angels will shortly give Gods people a Writ of ease,
and set them free from all their enemies: Mat. 13.38. The tares are the
children of the wicked one, the harvest is the end of the world, the reapers
are the Angels; as therefore the tares are gathered and burn^ ^n the fire, so
shall it be in the end of the world, the Son of man shall send forth his
Angels, and they shall gather out of his Kingdom all things which offend, and
them which do iniquity, and east them into a furnace of fire. At the day of
Judgment the Angels of God will take the wicked, which are the Tares, and will
bundle them up, and throw them into Hell-furnace, and then the Godly will not
be troubled with enemies any more: Thus the good Angels work for good. See here
the honor and dignity of a Believer, he has Gods name written upon him, Rev.
3.12. the Holy Ghost dwelling in him, 2 Timothy 1.14. and a Guard of Angels
attending him.

Insuper nostro lateri ministros, caelitus addis.

6. The Communion of Saints works for Cor. 1.24. (...), We are helpers of your
joy. One Christian conversing with another, is a means to confirm him: As the
stones in an Arch help to strengthen one another; one Christian by imparting
his experiences does heat and quicken another, Heb. 10.24. Let us provoke one
another to love, and good works: How does Grace flourish by holy conference! a
Christian by good discourse drops that oil upon another as makes the Lamp of
his Faith burn the brighter.

Aaron with his golden plate upon his fore^head, and his precious incense, and
he prays for all Believers as well as he did for the Apostles, Ioh. 17.20.
Neither pray I for these alone, but for all them that shall believe in me. When
a Christian is weak, and can hardly pray for himself, Jesus Christ is praying
for him; and he prays for three things. 1. That the Saints may be kept from
sin, verse. 15. I pray that thou should keep them from the evil. We live in
the world as in a Pesthouse; Christ prays that his Saints may not be infected
with the contagious evil of the times. 2. For his peoples progress in
holiness, verse. 17. Sanctify them: Let them have constant supplies of the
Spirit, and be anointed with fresh oil. 3. For their glorification, verse. 24.
Father, I will that those which thou have given me, be with me where I am.
Christ is not con^ent till the Saints are in his arms. This prayer which he
made on Earth, is the Copy and Pattern of his prayer in Heaven. What a comfort
is this, when Satan is tempting, Christ is praying! this works for good.

Christ's prayer takes away the sins of our prayers. As a child (says St
Ambrose) that is willing to present his father with a Posie, goes into the
Garden, and there gathers some Flowers and some Weeds together, but coming to
his mother, she picks out the Weeds, and binds up the Flowers, and so it is
presented to the Father. Thus when we have put up our prayers, Christ comes,
and picks away the Weeds, the sin of our prayer, and presents nothing but
Flowers to his Father, which are a sweet smelling savor.

(...).
. 1. They prevail for recovery out of sickness, James 5.15. The prayer of faith
shall save the sick, and the Lord shall raise him up. 2. For victory over
enemies, Isa. 37.4. Lift up thy prayer for the remnant that is left, verse. 36.
Then the Angel of the Lord went forth and smote in the Camp of the Assyrians,
an hundred and fourscore and five thousand. 3. For deliverance out of prison,
Acts 12.5. Prayer was made without ceasing of the Church unto God for him;
verse. 7. And behold the Angel of the Lord came upon him, and a light shined in
the prison, and he smote Peter on the side, and raised him up, and his chains
fell off. The Angel fetched Peter out of prison, but it was prayer fetched the
Angel. 4. For forgiveness of sin, Job 42.8. My servant Job shall pray for you,
for him will I accept. Thus the prayers of the Saints work for good to the Body
Mystical. And this is no small privilege to a Child of God, that he has a
constant Trade of Prayer driven for him. When he comes into any Town or
Corporation, he may say, I have some Prayer here, nay, all the world over I
have a stock of prayer going for me; when I am indisposed, and out of ^^^e,
others are praying for me, who are quick and lively. Thus the best things work
for good to the people of God.

CHAP. IV. Showing that the worst things work for good to the Godly.
2. THe worst things work for good to the (...). Aecumon.
. Mis^ake me not, I do not say of their own nature they are good Evil thing*
in their own nature, do not cooperate, but contra-operate.
, for they are a fruit of the curse; but though they are naturally evil, yet
they are morally good, the wise overruling hand of God disposing and
sanctifying. As the Elements, though of contrary qualities, yet God has so
tempered them, that they all work in an harmonious manner, for the good of the
Universe. Or as in a Watch, the wheels seem to move contrary one to another,
but all carry on the motion of the Watch, and help to make the Alarm ^trike:
So things that seem to move cross to the Godly, yet by the wonderful
Providence of God work for their good. Among these (...) worst things, there
are four sad evils work for good to them that love God.

SECTION I. Showing that the evil of affliction works for good to the Godly.


Ruth 1.21. The Almighty has afflicted me. Instruments can no more stir till
God gives them a Commission, than the Axe can cut of it self without an hand.
Job eyed God in his affliction: therefore, as Austin observes, he does not say,
The Lord gave, and the Devil took away Non di^cit Job, Deus dedit, Diabolus
abstulit.
; but, The Lord has taken away. Who-ever brings an affliction to us, it is God
that sends it.

2. The second heart-quieting consideration, is, That afflictions work for
good: Ier. 24.5. Like these good figs, so will I acknowledge them that are
carried away captive of Judah, whom I have sent out of this place into the Land
of the Chaldeans for their good. Iudahs captivity in Babylon, was (...) for
their good. Psalm. 119.71. It is good for me that I have been afflicted (...).
Theod.
. Which Text, like Moses his Tree, cast into the bitter waters of affliction,
may make them sweet and wholesome to drink of. Afflictions to the Godly are
medicinable. Out of the most poysonful D^ug God extracts our salvation.
Afflictions are as needful as Ordinances, 1 Pet. 1.6. No vessel can be made of
Gold without fire; so it is impossible that we should be made vessels of
honor, unless we are melted and refined in the furnace of affliction. Psalm.
25.10. All the paths of the Lord are mercy; his bloody paths are mercy. As the
Li^^er intermixeth bright colors with dark shadows; so does the wise God mix
mercy with judgment. Those afflictive providence which seem to be
prejudicial, are beneficial: Let us take some Instances in Scripture. Ioseph's
brethren threw him into a pit, afterward they sell him, then he is cast into
prison, yet all this did work for his good: His abasement made way for his
advancement; he was made the second man in the Kingdom. Genesis 50.20. Ye thought
evil against me, but God meant it to good. Jacob wrestled with the Angel, and
the hollow of Jacobs thigh was out of joint, this was sad; but God turned it to
good, for there he saw Gods face, and there the Lord blessed him, Genesis 32.30.
Jacob called the name of the place Peniel, for I have seen God face to face.
Who would not be willing to have a bone out of joint, so he might have a sight
of God? King Manassah was bound in Chains, this was sad to see a Crown of Gold
changed into Fetters; but it wrought for his good, for, When he was in
affliction he besought the Lord, and humbled himself greatly, and the Lord was
entreated of him, 2 Chr. 33. 11, 12. He was more beholding to his Iron Chain,
than to his Gold Chain; the one made him proud, the other made him humble. Job
was a spectacle of misery, he lost all that ever he had, he ab^unded only in
boils and ulcers, this was sad; but it wrought for his good, his grace was more
proved and improved; God gave a Testimony from Heaven of his integrity, and did
compensate his loss by giving him twice as much as ever he had before, Job
42.10. Paul was smitten with blindness, this was uncomfortable, but it turned
to his good; God did by that blindness make way for the light of grace to
shine into his soul, it was the beginning of an happy conversion, Acts 9.6.

As the hard frosts in Winter bring on the flowers in the Spring; as the night
ushers in the morning star: So the evils of affliction p^oduce much good to
those that love God. But we are ready to question the truth of this, and ^o say
as Mary did to the Angel, How can this be? therefore I shall show you several
ways how affliction works for good.

1. As it is our Preacher and Tutor, Mic. 6.^9. Hear ye the Rod Cum vibices
dorso meo imprimeres, praecepta tua cordi meo insculpsisti. Rivet. in Psalm.
. Luther says, he could ^ever fightly understand some of the Psalms, ^ill he
was in affliction. Affliction teaches ^wo things. 1. What sin is. In the Word
^reached, we hear what a dreadful thing sin is, that it is both defiling and
damning, but we ^ear it no more than a painted Lion; therefor God lets loose
affliction, and then we feel ^in bitter in the fruit of it. A sickbed often
^eacheth more than a Sermon; we can best see ^he ugly visage of sin in the
glass of affliction. 2. Affl^ction teaches us to know our selves. In
prosperity we are for the most part strangers ^o our selves; God makes us know
affliction, that we may the better know our selves: We ^ee that corruption in
our hearts in time of ^ffliction, which we would not believe was ^here. Water
in the glass looks clear, but ^et it on the fire, and the scum boils up: In
prosperity, a man seems to be humble and ^hankful, the water looks clear, but
set this man a little on the fire of affliction, and the ^cum boils up, much
impatience and unbe^ief appears. Oh says a Christian, I never ^hought I had
had such a bad heart, as now I ^ee I have; I never thought my corruptions ^ad
been so strong, and my graces so weak.

2. Afflictions work for good as they are a means to make the heart more
upright. prosperity the heart is apt to be divided, Hos. 10.2. The heart
cleaves partly to God, and partly to the World; it is like a Needle between two
Load-stones, God draws, and the World draws; now, God takes away the World that
the heart may cleave more to him in sincerity. Corrigere, quasi cor rectum
facere; Correction, is a setting the heart right and strait. As we sometimes
hold a crooked stick over the fire to straiten it: So God holds us over the
fire of affliction to make us more strait and upright. Oh how good is it, when
sin has bent the soul awry from God, that affliction should straiten it again!

Calvin says) was a series of suffering, Isa. 53.2. A man of sorrows, and
acquainted with grief: He wept, he bl^d. Was the Head Crowned with Thorns, and
do we think to be Crowned with Roses? It is good to be like Christ, though it
be by sufferings. Jesus Christ drank a bitter Cup, it made him sweat drops of
blood to think of it; and though it be true, he drank the Poison in the Cup (
the wrath of God) yet there is some Wormwood in the Cup left, which the Saints
must drink: Only here is the difference between Christ's sufferings and ours;
his were satisfactory, ours are only castigatory.

4. Afflictions work for good to the Godly, Isa. 27.9. This is all the fruit,
to take away his sin. What if we have more of the rough File, if we have less
Rust? Afflictions carry away nothing but the excrements of sin. If a Physician
should say to a Patient, Your body is distempered, and full of bad humors,
which must be purged out, or you dye; but I will prescribe Physic, which
though it make you deadly sick, yet it will carry away the dregs of your
disease, and save your life: would not this be for the good of the Patient?
Afflictions are the purging Pills God uses to carry away our spiritual
distempers; they cure the Tympany of pride, the Fever of lust, the D^opsie of
covetousness: Do they not then work for good?

Eveniunt mala in ha^ vita, ne viator tendens ad (...) stabulum pro domo
dil^g^t. Aust.
. We read of a Star, Rev. 11.8. The name of the Star is Wormwood. Have not we
seen this Star appear? Do not we find this Star Wormwood in every condition? A
Tho^n grows up with every Flower.

Surgit amari aliquid quod in ipsis floribu^ angat.

God would have the world hang as a loose Tooth, which being twitched away,
does not much trouble us. Is it not good to be weaned? the oldest Saint needs
it. Why does the Lord break the Conduit-pipe, but that we may go to him in whom
are all our fresh springs Psalm. 87.7.
.

In the valley of Achor a door of hope, Hos. 2.15. Achor signifies trouble: God
sweetens outward pain, with inward peace. Ioh. 16.20. Your sorrow shall be
turned into joy. Here is the Water turned into Wine. After a bitter Pill God
gives Sugar. Paul had his Prison-Songs. Gods Rod has Honey at the end of it.
The Saints in affliction have had such sweet raptures of joy, that they have
thought themselves in the borders of the Heavenly Canaan; they have ga^hered
Grapes of Thorns.

7. Afflictions wo^k for good, as they are a magnifying of us, Job 7.17. What
is man God does by affliction magnify us three ways. 1. In that he will
condescend so low as to take notice of us; that he will afflict us, rather than
lose us. It Is an honor that God will mind dust and ashes: It Is a magnifying of
us, that God thinks us worthy to be smitten. Gods not striking, is a slighting,
Isa. 1.5. Why should ye be stricken any more? If you will go on in sin, take
your course, sin your selves into Hell. 2. Afflictions do magnify us, as they
are Insignia honoris, Ensigns of Glory, Signs of Sonship, Heb. 12.7. If you
endure chastning, God deals with you as Sons. Every print of the Rod is a
badge of honor. 3. Afflictions do really tend to the magnifying of the Sain^s,
as they make them renowned in the world. Soldiers have never been so admi^ed
for their victories, as the Saints have been for their sufferings. The zeal and
constancy of the Martyrs in their trials have rendered them famous to posterity.
How eminent was Job for his patience! God leaves his name upon Record, Ye have
heard of the patience of Job, James 5.11. Job the Sufferer, was more renowned
than Alexander the Conqueror.

8. Afflictions work for good, as they are a means to make us happy, Job 5.17.
Happy is the man whom God corrects. What Po^^ti^ian or Moralist ever placed
happiness in the Cross? Job does; Happy is the man whom God corrects.

Quest. How do affl^ct^ons make us happy?

Answ. In that afflictions being sanctified, bring us nearer to God (...).
Cyril.
. The Moon in the full is ^urther off from the Sun: so are many farther off
from God in the full Moon of prospe^ity: affliction brings them nearer to God.
The Lodestone of mercy does not draw us so near to God, as the Cords of
affliction. When Absalom set Ioab's Co^n on fire, then he came running to
Absalom, 2 Samuel 14.30. When God sets our worldly comforts on fire, then we run
to him, and make our peace with him. When the Prodigal was pinched with wan^,
then he returned home to his father, Luke 15.18. When the Dove could find no
rest for the sole of her foot, then she flies to the A^k: When God b^ings a
Deluge of ^ffliction upon us, then we fly to the A^k Christ. Thus affliction
makes us happy in bringing us nearer to God Mala quae hic nos pre^unt ad Deum
ire pogunt.
. Faith can make use of the waters of ^^fl^ction ^o swim faster to Christ.

put to silence the wicked: How ready are they to asperse and calumniate the
Godly, that they serve God only for self-interest; therefore God will have his
people endure sufferings for Religion, that he may hang a Pad-lock on the lying
lips of wicked men. When the Atheists of the world see that God has a people,
who serve him not for a Livery, but for love, this stops their mouths. The
Devil accuses Job of hypocrisy, that he was a mercenary man, all his Religion
was made up of ends of gold and silver, Job 1.9. Does Job serve God for naught?
Have not thou made a hedge about him? etc. Well, says God, Put forth thy hand,
touch his estate. The Devil had no sooner received a Commission, but he falls a
breaking down Job's hedge; I, but still Job worships God, Chap. 1.20. and
professes his faith in him, Chap. 13.15. Though he slay me, yet will I trust
in him. This did amuse and silence the Devil himself. How does it strike a dam^
into wicked men, when they see that the Godly will iratum colere numen, keep
close to God in a suffering condition, and when they lose all, yet will hold
fast their integrity.

10. Afflictions work for good, as they make way for glory, 2 Cor. 4.17. not
that merit G^ory, but they prepare for it. As ploughing prepares ^he earth for
a Crop; so afflictions do prepare, and make us meet for Glory. The Limner lays
his Gold upon dark colors: So God first lays the dark colors of affliction,
and then he lays the golden color of Glory. The Vessel is first seasoned,
before Wine is poured into it: The Vessels of mercy are first seasoned with
affliction, and then the Wine of Glory is powered in Ad tempus affligi bonu^
hominem etiam ex benignitate est, ut scilicet copiosius donetur, and beatior
tanta fiat. Lud. Vives.
. Thus we see afflictions are not prejudicial, but beneficial to the Saints. We
should not so much look at the evil of affliction, as the good; not so much at
the dark side of the Cloud, as the light. The worst that God does to his
children, is to whip them to Heaven.

SECTION II. Showing that the evil of Temptation works for good to the Godly.
Tempter, Mark. 4.3. He is ever lying in ambush, stat in procinctu Diabolus; he
is continually at work with one Saint or other (...). Chrysostom.
. The Devil has his Circuit, or Diocese, that he walks every day; he is not
yet fully cast into prison, but like a prisoner that goes under Bail, he walks
about to tempt the Saints. This is a great molestation to a child of God; as it
is a trouble to a Virgin to have her chastity daily assaulted. Now concerning
Satan's Temptations, there are three things to be considered: 1. His Method in
tempting. 2. The Extent of his Power. 3. That these Temptations work for good.


1. Satan's Method in tempting: Here, take notice of two things. 1. His Violence
in Red Dragon: He labou^ to storm the Castle of the heart, he throws in
thoughts of blasphemy, he tempts to deny God; these are the fiery Darts he
shoots, whereby he would inflame the passions.

2. His Subtilty in tempting, and so he is the Old Serpent. There are five
chief subtilties the Devil uses. 1. He observes the temper and constitution;
he lays suitable baits of temptation. As the Husbandman knows what Grain is
proper for the Soil, Satan will not tempt contrary to the natural disposition
and temperament: This is his Policy, he makes the Wind and Tide go together:
That way the natural Tide of the heart runs, that way the Wind of temptation
blows. Though the Devil cannot know men's thoughts, yet he knows their temper,
and accordingly he lays his baits: -- Omnium discutit more -- He tempts the
ambitious man with a Crown, the sanguine man with beauty.

2. Satan observes the fittest time to temp^ in: As a cunning Angler casts in
his Angle when the Fish will bite best. Satan's time of tempting is usually
after an Ordinance; and the reason is, because then he thinks he shall find us
most secure. When we have been at solemn Duties, we are apt to think all is
done, and we grow remiss, and leave off that zeal and strictness as before;
just as a Soldier, who after a Battle leaves off his Armou^, not once dreaming
of an enemy: Now Satan watches his time, and when we least suspect, then he
throws in a tentation.

3. He makes use of near Relations; the Devil tempts by a proxy: Thus he handed
over a temptation to Job by his Wife, Job 2.9. Do thou still retain thy
integrity? A Wife in the bosom may be the Devils instrument to tempt ^o sin.

4. Satan tempts to evil by them that are good; thus he gives poison in a
golden Cup: He tempted Christ by Peter; Peter disswades him from suffering;
Master, pity thy self. Who would have thought to have found the Tempter in the
mouth of an Apostle?

5. Satan tempts to sin, under a pretense of Religion. He is most to be feared
when he transforms himself into an Angel of Light. He came to Christ with
Scripture in his mouth; It is written. The Devil baits his hook with Religion;
he tempts many a man to Covetousness and Extortion, under a pretense of
providing for his Family; he tempts some to make away themselves, that they may
live no longer to sin against God; and so he draws them into sin, under a
pretense of avoiding sin. These are his (...), and subtle stratagems in
tempting.

2. The Extent of his Power; how far Satan's power in tempting ^eacheth. 1. He
can Achan. 2. He can poison the Fancy, and instill evil thoughts into the
mind: As the Holy Ghost does cast in good motions, so the Devil does bad; he
put it into Judas his heart to betray Christ, Ioh. 13.2. --

3. Satan can excite and irritate the corruption within, and work some kind of
inclinableness in the heart to embrace a temptation. Though it is true, Satan
cannot force the Will to yield consent, yet he being an earnest Suitor, by his
continual solicitation may provoke to evil. Thus he provoked David to number
the people, 1 Chronicles. 21.1. -- The Devil may by his subtle Arguments dispute us
into sin.

3. That these temptations work for good to the children of God. A Tree that is
shaken by the wind is more settled and rooted: so the blowing of a temptation
does but settle a Christian the more in grace. Temptations work for good eight
ways.

1. Temptation sends the soul to prayer. The more furiously Satan tempts, the
more fervently the Saint prays. The Deer being shot with the Dart runs faster
to the water: When Satan shoots his fiery darts at the soul, now it runs faster
to the Throne of Grace. When Paul had the Messenger of Satan to buffet him, 2
Cor. 12.8. For this I besought the Lord thrice, that it might depart from me.
Temptation is a Medicine for security. That which makes us pray more, works for
good.

2. Temptation to sin, is a means to keep from the perpetration of sin. The
more a child of God is tempted, the more he fights against the temptation: The
more Satan tempts to blasphemy, the more a Saint trembles at such thoughts, and
says, avoid Satan. When Ioseph's Mistress tempted him to folly, the stronger
her temptation was, the stronger was his opposition. That temptation the Devil
uses as a Spur to sin, God makes it a Bridle to keep back a Christian from it.
The more a chaste Virgin is assaulted, the more she abhors the motion.

3. Temptation works for good, as it abates the swelling of pride: 2 Cor. 12.7.
Least I should be exalted above measure, there was given me a Thorn in the
flesh, a Messenger of Satan to buffet me. The Thorn in the flesh was to prick
the Bladder of pride (...). Chrysostom.
. Better is that temptation which humbles me, than that duty which makes me
proud. Rather than a Christian shall be haughty minded, God will let him fall
into the Devils hands a while, to be cured of his Imposthume.

4. Temptation works for good, as it is a Touchstone to try what is in the
heart. The word tentare, signifies explorare. The Devil tempts that he may
deceive; but God suffers us to be tempted to try us. 1. Temptation is a trial
of our sincerity: It argues our heart is chaste, and loyal to Christ, when we
can look a temptation in the face, and turn out back upon it. 2. It is a trial
of our Courage: Hos. 7.11. Ephraim is a silly Dove, without an heart. So it may
be said of many, they are without an heart, they have no heart to resist
temptation; no sooner does Satan come, but they yield: Like a Coward, as soon as
the Thief approaches, he gives him his purse. But he is the valourous
Christian, that b^andisheth the Sword of the Spirit against Satan, and will
rather dye than yield. The courage of the Romans was never more seen, than when
they were assaulted by the Carthaginians: The valor and Puissance of a Saint
is never more seen, than in a Field-battel, when he is fighting with the
Red-Dragon, and by the power of faith puts the Devil to flight. That ^race is
tried Gold, which can stand in the fiery trial, and withstand fiery Darts.
Fidei robur potest esse concussum, non excussum Tertul.
.

5. Temptations work for good, as God makes them who are tempted, fit to
comfort others in the same distress. A Christian must himself be under the
buffetings of Satan, before he can speak a word in due season to him that is
weary. St Paul was versed in temptations, 2 Cor. 2.11. We are not ignorant of
his Devices: and he was able to acquaint others with Satan's cursed Wiles, 1
Cor. 10.13. A man that has rid over a place where there are Boggs and
Quicksands, is the fittest to guide others through that dangerous way. He that
has felt the claws of the roaring Lion, and has lay'n bleeding under those
wounds, is the fittest man to deal with one that is tempted. None can better
discover Satan's sleights and policies, than those who have been long in the
fencing School of temptation.

6. Temptations work for good, as they stir up paternal compassions in God to
them who are tempted. The Child which is sick and bruised is most looked after.
When a Saint lies under the bruisings of temptations, Christ prays, and God the
Father pities. When Satan puts the soul into a Fever, God comes with a
Cordial; which made Luther say, that temptations are ample (...) Christi,
Christ's Embraces, because he does then most sweetly manifest himself to the
soul.

7. Temptations work for good, as they make the Saints long more for Heaven;
there they shall be out of Gunshot: Heaven is a place of rest, no Bullets of
temptation fly there. The Eagle that soars aloft in the air, and sits upon
high Trees, is not troubled with the stinging of the Serpent: So when Believers
are gotten above into the Empyraean Heaven, they shall not be molested with the
old Serpent Nullae ibi insidiae Daemonum. Bern.
. In this life, when one temptation is over, another comes; this is to make
Gods people long till death sound a retreat, and calls them off the field where
the Bullets fly so thick, to receive a victorious Crown, where, not the Drum,
or Cannon, but the Harp and Viol shall be ever sounding.

8. Temptations work for good, as they engage the strength of Christ. Christ is
our friend, and when we are tempted he sets all his power on work for us Venit
Diabolu^, subvenit Christus.
: For in that he himself has suffered being tempted, he is able to succor
them that are tempted Defi^ientem sublevat, et vincentem coronat. Aug.
. If a poor soul were to fight alone with the Goliath of Hell, he were sure to
be vanquished; but Jesus Christ brings in his Auxillary forces, he gives fresh
supplies of grace, 2 Cor. 12.9. And in him (...), we are more than Conquerours.
Thus, the evil of temptation works for good.

Quest.
But sometimes Satan foils a Child of God; how does this work for good?

Answ.
I grant, that through the suspension of divine grace, and the ^ury of a
tentation, a Saint may be overcome; yet this foyling by a tentation shall wo^k
for good. 1. By this foyl God makes way for the augmentation of grace. Peter
was tempted to self-confidence, he presumed upon his own strength; and when he
would needs stand alone, Christ let him fall; but thi^ wrought for his good, it
cost him many a tear, he went out, and wept bitterly; and now he grows mo^e
modest, he durst not say he loved Christ more than the other Apostles, John
21.15. Love thou me more than these? He durst not say so, his ^all broke the
neck of his pride. 2. ^he foyling by a temptation, causes more ci^cumspection
and watchfulness in a child of God: Though Satan did before decoy him into
sin, yet for the future he will be the more cautious, he will have a care of
coming within the Lions chain any more, he is more shy and fearful of the
occasions of sin; he never ^oes ab^oad without his spiritual Armor, and he
girds on his A^mour by p^ayer; he knows he walks on slippe^y ground, therefore
looks wa^ily to his steps; he keeps close Sentinel in his ^oul, and when he
spies the Devil coming, he stands to his A^mes, and displayes the shiel^ of
Faith, Ephesians. 6.16. This is all the hurt the Devil does; when he foils a Saint by
temptation, he cures him of his careless neglect, he makes him wa^ch and pray
more. When wild Beasts get over the hedge, and hurt the Co^n, a man will make
his fence the stronger: So when the Devil gets over the hedge by a temptation,
a Christian will be sure to mend his sense; he is more fearful of sin, and
careful of ^uty. Thus the being worsted by temptation works for good.

Object. But if being foiled works for good, this may make Christians careless
whether they are overcome by tentations or no?

Resp. There is a great deal of difference between falling into a temptation,
and running into a temptation; the falling in^o a temptation shall work for
good, not the running into it. He that falls into a River is capable of help
and pity, bu^ he that despera^ely turns into it, is guilty of his own death.
It Is mad running into a Lions D^n. He that runs himself into a temptation, is
like Saul, who fell upon his own sword.

From all that has been said, by way of Corollary, see how God does be^ool the
old Serpent, making his temptations ^u^n to the good of his people. Sure did
the Devil know how much benefit accrues to the Saints by temptation, he would
forbear to tempt Tentationes quas Diabolu^ commovet od interitum, Deus
convertit ad profectum. Bern* do Teni.
. Luther once said, there are three things make a Christian, Prayer,
Meditation, Temptation. After a Fever the body shoots up more in stature:
After Believers have been in a hot fit of temptation, they have shot up more in
holiness. St. Paul in his voyage to Rome, met with a contrary wind, Acts 27.4.
So the wind of temptation is a contrary wind to that of the Spirit, but God
makes use of this cross wind to blow the Saints to Heaven.

SECTION III. Showing that the evil of Desertion works for good to the Godly.
deserti^n works for good. The Spouse complains of desertion, Cant. 5.6. My
beloved had withdrawn himself, and was gone. There is a twofold withdrawing;
either 1. In regard of grace, when God suspends the influence of his Spirit,
and withholds the lively actings of grace. If the Spirit be gone, Grace
freezeth into a chilness and dedolency. Or 2. A withdrawing in regard of
Comfort; when God withholds the sweet manifestations of his favor, he does
not look with such a pleasant aspect, but vails his face, and seems to be quite
gone from the soul.

God is just in all his withdrawings: we desert him* before he deserts us Tu me
non deseris nisi prius ego te deseram. Austin.
: We desert God when we leave off close communion with him; when we desert his
Truths, and dare not appear for him; when we leave the guidance and conduct of
his Word, and follow the Ignis fatuus of our own corrupt affections, and
passions. We usually desert God first, therefore we have none to blame but our
selves.

Desertion is very sad; for as when the light is withdrawn, darkness follows
in the air* So when God withdraws, there is darkness and sorrow in the soul.
Desertion is an Agony of Conscience, as Alstead calls it; God holds the soul
over Hell; Job 6.9. The Arrows of the Almighty are within me, the poison
whereof drinks up my spirits. It was a custom among the Persians in their wars
(as Drusius notes,) to dip their Arrows in the poison of Serpents, to make them
more deadly: Thus did God shoot the poisoned Arrow of desertion into Job, under
the wounds whereof, his spirit lay bleeding. In times of desertion the people
of God are apt to be dejected, they dispute against themselves, and think that
God has quite cast them off; therefore I shall prescribe some comfort to the
deserted soul. The Mariner when he has no star to guide him, yet he has
light in his Lanthorn, which is some help to him: So when the poor soul is
sailing in the dark of desertion, and wants the bright morning star, I shall
lay down four Consolations, which are as the Mariners Lanthorn to give some
light.

1. None but the Godly are capable of desertion. Wicked men know not what Gods
love means, nor what it is to want it; they know what it is to want health,
friends, trading, but not what i^ is to want Gods favor. Thou fear thou art
not Gods child, because thou art deserted, whereas none but the Godly are
deserted. The Lord cannot be said to withdraw his love from the wicked, because
they never had it. The being deserted, evidenceth thee to be a Child of God.
How could thou complain that God has estranged himself, if thou had not
sometimes received smiles and love tokens from him?

2. There may be the seed of grace, where there is not the flower of joy. The
earth may want a crop of Corn, yet may have a Mine of Gold within. A Ch^istian
may have grace within, though the luscious fruit of joy does not grow. Vessels
at Sea, that are richly fraught with Jewels and Spices, may be in the dark, and
be ^ossed in the storm. A soul enriched with the treasures of grace, may yet be
in the dark of desertion, and so tossed as to think it shall be cast away in
the storm. David in a state of disconsolacy prays, Take not away thy holy
Spirit from me, Psalm. 51.11. He does not pray, says Austin, Lord, Give me thy
Spirit, but, Ne tollas spiritum, Take not away thy Spirit; so that still he had
the Spirit of God remaining in him.

3. These deser^ions are but for a time. Christ may go into the withdrawing
^oom, and leave the soul a while, but he will come again. Isa. 54.8. In a
little wrath I hid my face from thee for a moment, but with everlasting
kindness will I have mercy on thee. When it is dead low water, the Tide will
come in again. Isa. 57.6. I will not be always wroth, for the spirit should
fail before me, and the souls which I have made. The tender Mother sets down
her child in anger, but she will take it up again into her arms, and kiss it.
God may put away the soul in ange^, but he will take it up again into his dear
embraces, and display the banner of love over it.

4. These desertions wo^k for good to the Godly, and that seven manner of
ways.

1. Dese^tion works a cure upon the soul. 1. It cures sinful somnolency. We
find the Spouse fallen upon the b^d of sloth, Ca^t. 5.2, I sleep; and
p^e^ently Christ was gone, Verse. 6. My beloved had withdrawn himself. Who will
speak to one that is drowsy? 2. Desertion cures inordinacy of affection ^o ^he
world, 1 John 2.15. Love not the world. We may hold the world as a Posie in our
hand, but it must not lie too near our heart; we may use it as an Inn where we
take a bait, but it must not be our home. Perhaps these secular things steal
away the heart too much. Good men are sometimes sick with a Surfeit, and drunk
with the luscious delights of prosperity; and having spotted their silver wings
of grace, and much defaced Gods Image by rubbing it against the earth, the Lord
to recover them of this, hides his face in a Cloud; this Eclipse has good
effects, it darkens all the glory of the world, and causes it to dis-appear.

2. Desertion works for good, as it makes the Saints prize Gods countenance
more than ever, Psalm. 63.3. Thy loving-kindnesse is better than life; yet the
commonnesse of this mercy abates the price of it: When pearls grew common at
Rome, they began to be slighted. God has no better way to make us value his
love, than by withdrawing it a while. If the Sun did shine but once a year, how
would it be prized! when the soul has been long benighted with desertion, Oh
how welcome now is the return of the Sun of Righteousness!

3. Desertion works for good, as it is a means to imbitter sin to us. Can there
be a greater misery than to have Gods displeasure? what makes Hell but the
hiding of Gods face? and what makes God hide his face, but sin? John 20.13.
They have taken away my Lord, and I know not where they have laid him. So, our
sins have taken away the Lord, and we know not where he is laid. The favor of
God is the best Jewel; it can sweeten a prison, and unsting death: Oh how
odious then is that sin, which robs us of our best Jewel! Sin made God desert
his Temple, Ezekiel. 8.6. Sin causes him to appear as an enemy, and dress himself
in armor. This makes the soul pursue sin with an holy malice, and seek to be
avenged of it. The deserted soul gives sin Gall and Vinegar to drink, and with
the Spear of mortification, lets out the heart-blood of it.

4. Desertion works for good, as it works these three gracious effects.

1. It sets the soul a weeping for the loss of God. When the Sun is gone, the
dew falls; and when God is gone, tears drop from the eyes. How was Micah
troubled when he had lost his gods? Judge. 18.24. Ye have taken away my gods,
and what have I more? So, when God is gone, what have we more? It is not the
Harp and Viol can comfort, when God is gone. Though it be sad to want Gods
presence, yet it is good to lament his absence.

2. Desertion sets the soul a seeking after God. When Christ was stepped aside,
the Spouse pursues after him, she seeks him in the streets of the City, Cant.
3.2. And a non inventus being returned, she makes a hue and cry after him,
verse. 3. Saw ye him whom my soul loves? The deserted ^oul sends up whole
Vollies of sighs and groans, it knocks at Heaven-gate by prayer, it can have no
rest till the golden beams of Gods face shine.

3. Desertion puts the Christian upon enquiry; he enquires the cause of Gods
departure: What is the accursed thing that has made God angry? Perhaps pride,
perhaps surfeit on Ordinances, perhaps worldliness, Isa. 57.17. For the
iniquity of his Covetousness, was I wroth; I hid me. Perhaps there is some
secret sin allowed. A stone in the pipe hinders the current of water: So sin
lived in, hinders the sweet current of Gods love. Thus Conscience as a
blood-hound, having found out sin and overtaken it, this Achan is stoned to
death.

5. Desertion works for good, as it gives us a sight of what Jesus Christ
suffered for us. If the sipping of the Cup be so bitter, how bitter was that
which Christ drank upon the Cross? He drank a Cup of deadly poy^on, which made
him cry out, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? None can be so sensible
of Christ's sufferings, none can be so fired with love to Christ, as those who
have been humbled by desertion, and have been held over the flames of Hell for
a time.

6. Desertion works for good, as it prepares the Saints for future comfort: The
nipping frosts prepare for spring flowers. It Is God's way, first to cast down,
^hen to comfort, 2 Cor. 7.6. When our Savior had been fasting, then came the
Ang^^^ and ministered to him. When the Lord has kept his people long fasting,
then he sends the Comforter, and feeds them with the hidden Manna, Psalm. 97.11.
(...) Light is sown for the Righteous. The Saints comforts may be hid like seed
under ground, but the seed is ripening, and will increase, and flourish into a
Crop.

7. These desertions work for good, as they will make Heaven the sweeter to us.
Here our comforts are like the Moon, sometimes they are in the full, sometimes
in the wain. God shows himself to us a while, and then retires into the
withdrawing room: How will this set off Heaven the more, and make it more
delightful and ravishing, when we shall have a constant aspect of love from
God, 1 Thessalonians. 4.17.

Thus we see desertions work for good: The Lord brings us into the deep of
desertion, that he may not bring us into the deep of damnation; he puts us into
a seeming Hell, that he may keep us from a real Hell. God is fitting us for
that time, when we shall enjoy his smiles for ever; when there shall be neither
clouds in his face, or Sunsetting; when Christ shall come and stay with his
Spouse, and kiss her with the kisses of his lips, and the Spouse shall never
say more, My Beloved has withdrawn himself.

SECTION IV. Showing that the evil of sin works for good to the Godly.
sin works for good; not in its own nature (for it is damnable), but God in his
infinite wisdom overruling it. This is St Austins gloss upon the Text Etiam
percatum ipsum in bonum convertit Deu^. Aug.
. I may now say, as the Apostle in another sense, 1 Cor. 15.51. Behold, I show
you a Mystery: Sin it self to the Godly works for good. Indeed it is matter of
wonder, that any honey should come out of this Lion. -- We may understand it in
a double sense.

1. The sins of others work for good to the Psalm. 120.5. Woe is me that I dwell
in Meshech: Yet even this the Lord turns to good.

1. The sins of others work for good, as they breed holy sorrow. Gods people
weep for what they cannot reform: Psalm. 119.136. Rivers of tears run down mine
eyes, because they keep not thy Law. David was a mourner for the sins of the
times; his heart was turned into a Spring, and his eyes into Rivers. Wicked men
make merry with sin, Ier. 11.15. When thou do evil, then thou rejoycest. But
the Godly are weeping Doves, they grieve for the oaths and blasphemies of the
Age, they take the sins of others, and make them spears to pierce their own
souls. This grieving for the sins of others is good. 1. It shows a Child-like
heart. It Is ingenuity to resent with sorrow the injuries done to our Heavenly
Father. 2. It shows a Christ-like heart, Mark 3.5. He was grieved for the
hardness of their hearts. 3. The Lord takes special notice of these tears; he
likes it well that we should weep when his glory suffers. It argues more grace
to grieve for the sins of others, than for our own. We may grieve for our own
sins, out of fear of Hell, but to grieve for the sins of others, is from a
principle of love to God: These tears drop as water from the Roses, they are
sweet and fragrant, and God puts them in his Bottle.

2. The sins of others work for good to the Godly, as they set them the more a
praying against sin. If there were not such a spirit of wickedness abroad,
perhaps there would not be such a spirit of prayer. Crying Sins cause Crying
Prayers: The people of God pray against the iniquity of the times, that God
will give a check to sin, that he will put sin to the blush; if they cannot
pray down sin, they pray against it; and this God takes kindly; these prayers
shall be both recorded and rewarded. Though we do not prevail in prayer, we
shall not lose our prayers, Psalm. 35.13. My prayer returned into my own bosom.

3. The sins of others work for good, as they make us the more in love with
grace. The sins of others are a foil to set off the luster of grace the more.
One contrary sets off another: Deformity sets off beauty. The sins of the
wicked do much disfigure them: Pride is a disfiguring sin; an ambitious man is
but a Bladde^ whom the Devil has blown up; now, the beholding another pride,
makes us the more in love with humility. Malice is a disfiguring sin, it is the
Devils picture; the more of this we see in others, the more we fall in love
with meekness and charity. Drunkenness is a disfiguring sin, like Cyrces Cup,
it turns men into Beasts, it deprives of the use of reason; the more
intemperate we see others, the more we fall in love with sobriety. The black
face of sin sets off the beauty of holiness so much the more.

4. The sins of others work for good, as they work in us the stronger
opposition against sin, Psalm. 119.126. The wicked have made void thy Law;
therefore I love thy Law. David had never loved Gods Law so much, if the wicked
had not set themselves so much against it. The more violent others are against
the truth, the more valiant the Saints are for it. Living fish swim against the
stream; the more the Tide of sin comes in, the more the Godly swim against it.
The impieties of the times, provoke holy passion in the Saints: that anger is
without sin, which is against sin. The sins of others are as a Whet-stone to
set the sharper edge upon us, they whet our zeal and indignation against sin
the more.

5. The sins of others work for good, as they make us more earnest in working
out our salvation. When we see wicked men take such pains for Hell, this makes
us more industrious for Heaven Impi^ quam stren^^ s^r^^unt Diabolo! Cyprian.
. The wicked have nothing to encourage them, yet they sin; they venture shame
and disgrace, they break through all oppositions; Scripture is against them,
and Conscience is against them, there is a flaming sword in their way, yet they
sin. Lam. 5.9. We gat our bread with the peril of our lives. Sinners eat the
bread of wickedness with the pe^il of their souls. Godly hearts seeing the
wicked thus mad for the forbidden fruit, and hacknying our themselves in the
Devils service, are the more emboldned and quickened in the ways of God, they
will take Heaven as it were by storm. The wicked are swift Dromedaries in sin,
Ier. 2.23. and do we creep like Snails in Religion? shall impure sinners do the
Devil more service, than we do Christ? shall they make more have to a Prison,
than we do to a Kingdom? are they never weary of sinning, and are we weary of
praying? have not we a better Master than they? are not the paths of virtue
pleasant? is not there joy in the way of duty, and Heaven at the end? The
activity of the sons of Belial in sin, is a spur to the Godly to make them mend
their pace, and run the faster to Heaven.

6. The sins of others work for good, as they are Glasses in which we may see
our own hearts. Do we see a flagitious impious sinner? behold a picture of our
hearts, such should we be if God did leave us; what is in other men's practice,
is in our nature. Sin in the wicked, is like fire on a Beacon that flames and
blazeth forth, sin in the Godly is like fire in the Embers. Christian, though
thou do not break forth into a flame of scandal, yet thou have no cause to
boast, for there is much sin raked up in the Embers of thy nature; thou have
the root of bitterness in thee, and would bear as hellish fruit as any, if
God did not either curb thee by his power, or change thee by his grace.

7. The sins of others work for good, as they are a means to make the people of
God more thankful. When you see another infected with the plague, how thankful
are you, that God has preserved you from it? It is a good use that may be made
even of the sins of others, to be more thankful; why might not God have left
us to the same excess of riot? Think with thy self, O Christian, why should God
be more propi^ious to thee, than to another? why should he take thee out of the
wild Olive of nature, and not him? how may this make thee to adore free grace!
What the Pharisee said boastingly, we may say thankfully, Luke 18.11. God, I
thank thee that I am not as other men are, Extortioners, Unjust, Adulterers,
etc. So we are to adore the riches of grace, that we are not as others,
Drunkards, Swearers, Sabbath Breakers. Every time we see men ran^ing it in sin,
we are to bless God we are not such. If we see a fran^ique person, we bless
God it is not so with us: Much more when we see others under the power of
Satan, we are to make our thankful acknowledgement that it is not our
condition.

8. The sins of others work for good, as they are a means to make Gods people
better. Christian, God can make thee a gainer by another sin: The more unholy
others are, the more holy thou art. The Roses that grow near Garlic, are
sweetest: So another unsavouriness makes a Christians graces send out a more
fragrant perfume. The more a wicked man gives himself to sin, the more a godly
man gives himself to prayer, Psalm. 109.4. But I give my self to prayer.

9. The sins of others work for good, as they give an occasion to us of doing
good: Were there no sinners, we could not be in such a capacity for service.
The Godly are often a means to convert the wicked: their prudent advise, and
pious example, is a lure and bait to draw sinners to the embracing of the
Gospel. The disease of the Patient works for the good of the Physician; by
emptying the Patient of noxious peccant humors, the Physician enricheth
himself: So by converting sinners from the error of their way, our Crown comes
to be enlarged, Dan. 12.3. They that turn many to righteousness, shall shine as
the Stars for ever and ever: Not as Lamps or Tapers, but sicut Stelia, as the
Stars for ever. Thus we see the sins of others work for our good.

own sins shall work for good: This must be understood warily, when I say the
sins of the go^ly work for good, not that there is the least good in sin. Sin
is like poison, which corrupts the blood, infects the heart, and without a
Sovereign Antidote brings death: Such is the venomous na^u^e of s^n it is deadly
and damning Pe^^ato rum oleum s^inas Ge (...) (...) ^orn.
: Sin is worse than Hell, but yet, God by his mighty overruling power makes
sin in the issue turn to the good of his people; God can make a Treacle of this
poison: Hence, that golden saying of St. Austin, God would never permit evil,
if he could not bring good out of evil. The Relics and remains of corruption
in the Saints, work for good several ways.

1. Sin makes them weary of this life. That sin is in the godly, is sad, but
that it is a burden, is good. St. Paul's afflictions (pardon the expression)
were but a play to him in comparison of his sin; he rejoiced in tribulation, 2
Cor. 7.4. But how did this bird of Paradise weep and bemoan himself under his
sins! Romans 7.24. Who shall deliver me from the body of this death? A Believer
carries his sins, as a Prisoner his shackles: Oh how does he long for a
Jail-delivery! This sensibility of sin is good.

2. This in-being of corruption makes the Saints prize Christ more. He that
feels his sin, as a sick man feels his sickness, how welcome is Christ the
Physician to him! He that feels himself stung with sin, how precious is the
brazen Serpent to him! When Paul had cried out of a body of death, how thankful
was he for Christ! Romans 7.25. I thank God through Jesus Christ my Lord. Christ's
blood saves from sin, and is the sacred ointment which kills this Quicksilver.

3. Sin works for good, as it is an occasion of putting the soul upon six rare
Duties.

1. It puts the soul upon self-searching. A child of God being conscious to
himself of sin, takes the Candle and Lanthorn of the Word, and searches into
his heart: he desires to know the worst by himself; as a man who is distempered
in body, desires to know the worst of his disease. Though our joy lies in the
knowledge of our graces, yet there is some benefit in the knowledge of our
corruptions: Therefore Job prays, Make me to know my transgressions, Job 13.23.
It Is good to know our sins, that we may not flatter our selves, or take our
condition to be better than it is. It Is good to find out our sins, least they
find us out.

2. The inherency of sin puts a child of God upon self-abasing. Sin is left in
a godly man, as a Cancer in the breast, or a bunch upon the back, to keep him
from being proud. Gravel and Dung are good to ballast a Ship, and keep it from
overturning: The Dung of sin helps to ballast the soul, that it be not
overturned with vainglory. We read of the spots of Gods children, Deuteronomy. 32.5.
When a godly man looks his face in the glass of Scripture, and sees the spots
of infidelity and hypocrisy, this makes the plumes of Pride fall; they are
humbling spots. It Is a good use may be made even of our sins, when they
occasion low thoughts of our selves: Better is that sin which humbles me,
Melius estpeccatum humilians, quam justitia inflans. Austin.
, than that duty which makes me proud. Holy Bradford uttered these words of
himself, I am (says he) a painted hypocrite; and Hooper, Lord, I am Hell, and
thou art Heaven. From the Thorn of sin, the Saints have gathered the Grape of
Humility.

3. Sin puts a child of God upon self-judging; he is sui Iudex, he passes a
Sentence upon himself, Pro. 30.2. I am more brutish than any man. It Is
dangerous to judge others, but it is good to judge our selves, 1 Cor. 11.31. If
we would judge our selves, we should not be judged. When a man has judged
himself, now Satan is put out of Office: When he lays any thing to a Saints
charge, he is able to retort and say, It is true Satan, I am guilty of these
sins, but I have judged my self already for them; and having condemned my self
in the lower Court of Conscience, God will acquit me in the upper Court of
Heaven.

4. Sin puts a Child of God upon self-conflicting. Spiritual-self conflicts
with carnal-self, Gal. 5.17. The Spirit lusts against the flesh. Our life is a
wayfaring life, and a warfaring life; there is a duel fought every day between
the two Seeds: A Believer will not let sin have peaceable possession: If he
cannot keep sin out, he will keep sin under ^ though he cannot quite overcome,
yet he is overcoming, Rev. 2.7. (...), to him that is overcoming.

5. Sin puts a Child of God upon self-observing: He knows sin is a
Bo^om-Traytor, therefore narrowly observes himself. A subtle heart needs a
watchful eye. The heart is like a Castle that is in danger every hour to be
assaulted; this makes a Child of God lie always Sentinel, and keep a Guard
about his heart. A Believer has a strict eye over himself, least he fall into
any scandalous enormity, and so open a sluice to let all his comfort run out.

Vt ignes ignibus coetinguiuntur, venenis venena depelluntur, calores Febrium
medicinalibus caloribus franguntur, i^a nihil impedit quin pecca^a peccatis
curentur. Aug. contra Pelag.
6. Sin puts the soul upon self-reforming. A child of God does not only find out
sin, but drive out sin; one foot he sets upon the neck of his sins, and the
other foot he turns to Gods Testimonies, Psalm. 119.59. Thus the sins of the
Godly work for good; God makes the Saints Maladies their Medicines.

But let none abuse this Doctrine; I do not say that to an impenitent person
sin works for good, no it works for his damnation; but it is to them that love
God: And for you that are Godly, I know you will not draw a wrong conclusion
from this, either to make light of sin, or to make bold with sin Ne dicas ero
sine metu, etc. Luther.
; if you should do so, God will make it cost you dear. Remember David, he
ventured presumptuously on sin, and what got he? he lost his peace, he felt the
terrors of the Almighty in his soul: Though he had all helps to cheerfulness,
he was a King, he was of a ruddy sanguine complexion, he had skill in Music,
yet nothing could administer comfort to him, he complains of his broken bones
Longo temporecum aculeo and morsu illiu^ peccati onflictatur, quartumvis
remissum.

Luther in Genesis


, Psalm. 15.8. And though he did at last come out of that dark Cloud, yet some
Divines are of Opinion, that he never recovered his full joy to his dying day.
If any of Gods people should be tampering with sin* because God can turn it to
good; though the Lord does not damn them, he may send them to Hell in this
life, he may put them into such bitter agonies, and soul-Convulsions, as may
fill them full of horror, and make them draw nigh to despair: Let this be a
Flaming Sword to keep them from coming near the forbidden Tree.

And thus I have shown, that both the best things, and the worst things, by the
overruling hand of the great God, do work together for the good of the Saints.

CHAP. V. Showing the Reason of the Proposition.
THe grand Reason why all things shall work for good, Reason.
is the near and dear interest which God has in his people. The Lord has made
a Covenant with them, Ier. 32.38. They shall be my people, and I will be their
God. By virtue of this compact, all things do, and must work for good to them.
Psalm. 50.7. I am God, even thy God. This word (...) Thy God, is the sweetest
word in the Bible, it implies the best relations; and it is impossible there
should be these relations between God and his people, and every thing not work
for their good. This expression, I am thy God, implies,

1. The relation of a Physician; I am thy Physician. God is 1. A Skilful
Physician, therefore knows what is best (...) Chrysostom.
. God observes the several tempers of men, and knows what will wo^k most
effectually; some are of a more sweet disposition, and are drawn by mercy;
others are more rugged and knotty pieces; these God deals with in a more
forcible way. Some things are kept in Sugar, some in Brine. God does not deal
alike with all, he has Trials for the st^ong, and Cordials for the weak. 2.
God is a Faithful Physi^ian, therefore will turn all to the best. If he does
not give thee ad voluntatem, it shall be ad sanitatem Austin.
; If God does not give thee that which thou likest, he will give thee that
which thou need. A Physician does not so much study to please the taste of
the Patient, as to cure his distemper. We complain such sore trials lie upon
us; let us remember God is our Physician, therefore he labors rather to heal
us, than humor us. Gods dealings with his children, though they are sharp, yet
they are safe, and in order to a Cure, Deuteronomy. 8.16. That he might do thee good
in the latter end.

This word, Thy God, implies the relation of a Father. A Father loves his
child; therefore whether it be a smile or a stroke, it is for the good of the
child: I am Thy God, thy Father, therefore all I do is for thy good. Deuteronomy. 8.5.
As a man chastens his Son, so the Lord thy God chastneth thee. Gods chastning
is not to destroy, but to reform. God cannot hurt his children, for 1. He is a
tenderhearted Father, Psalm. 103.13. Like as a father pities his children, so
the Lord pitieth them that fear him. Will a father seek the ruin of his
child, the child that came out of his loins, that bears his image? all his
care and contrivance is for his child; who does he settle the inheritance upon
but his child? God is tenderhearted, the Father of mercies, 2 Cor. 1.3. He
begets all the mercies and bowels in the creatures. 2. He is an everlasting
Father, Isa. 9.7. He was our Father from eternity: Before we were Children, God
was our Father, and he will be our Father to eternity. A Father provides for
his child while he lives; but the Father dies, and then the child may be
exposed to injury: But God never cease to be a Father; thou that art a
Believer, have a Father that never dies, and if God be thy Father, thou can
never be undone, all things must needs work for thy good.

3. This word, Thy God, imports the relation of an Husband; this is a near and
sweet relation. The Husband seeks the good of his Spouse; he were unnatural
that should go about to destroy his Wife, Ephesians. 5.29. Did ever any man hate
his own flesh? There is a marriage-relation between God and his People Anima
fidelis Deum habet sponsum. Gulielm. Paris.
, Isa. 54.5. Thy Maker is thy Husband. God entirely loves his People, Isa.
43.4. He engraves them upon the Palms of his hands, Isa. 49.16. He sets them as
a Seal upon his Breast, Cant. 8.16. He will give K^ngdoms for their Ransom,
Isa. 43.3. which shows how near they lie to his heart. If he be an Husband
whose heart is enamoured with love, then he will seek the good of his Spouse;
either he will shield off an injury, or will turn it to the best.

4. This word, Thy God, implies the relation of a Friend, Cant. 5.16. This is
my Friend. A Friend is Animae dimidium (as Austin says), half of ones self; he
is studious and inquisitive how he may do his friend good, he promotes his
welfare as his own. Jonathan ventured the Kings displeasure for his friend
David, 1 Samuel 19.4. God is our friend, therefore will turn all things to our
good. There are false friends; Christ was betrayed by a friend: but God is the
best friend. ^. He is a faithful friend, Dan. 7.9. Know therefore that the Lord
thy God he is God, the faithful God. 1. He is faithful in his love: He gave his
very heart to us, when he gave the Son out of his bosom; here was a pattern of
love without a parallel. 2. He is faithful in his promises, Titus 1.2. God that
cannot lie has promised. He may change his promise, but cannot break it. 3. He
is faithful in his dealings; when he is afflicting he is faithful, Psalm.
119.75. In faithfulness have thou afflicted me; he is sifting and refining us
as Silver, Psalm. 66.10.

2. He is an immutable friend, Heb. 13.5. I will never leave thee, nor forsake
thee. There are five Seals set to that promise, (...), Friends often fail at a
pinch. Many deal with their friends as women do with their flowers, while they
are fresh they put them in their bosoms, but when they begin to wither they
throw them away; or as the Traveller does with the Sun-Dial; if the Sun shines
upon the Dial, the Traveller will step out of the Road, and look upon the Dial;
but if the Sun does not shine upon it, he will ride by, and never take any
notice of it: So if prosperity shine on men, then friends will look upon them,
but if there be a Cloud of adversity on them, they will not come near them: but
God is a friend for ever; I will not leave thee. Though David walked in the
shadow of death, he knew he had a friend by him, Psalm. 23.9. I will fear no
evil, for thou art with me. God never takes off his love wholly from his
people, it is Amicitia immortalis Austin.
, John 13.1. He loved them (...), to the end: God being such a friend he will
make all things work for our good. There is no friend, but will seek the good
of his friend.

5. This word, Thy God, imports yet a nearer relation, the relation between the
Head and the Members. There is a Mystical union between Christ and the Saints:
He is called (...), The Head of the Church, Ephesians. 5.23. Does not the Head
consult for the good of the Body? The Head guides the Body, it sympathizeth
with it, it is the fountain of spirits, it sends forth influence and comfort
into the Body: All the parts of the Head are placed for the good of the Body;
the Eye is set as it were in the Watchtower, it lies Sentinel to spy any
danger that may come to the Body, and prevent it. The Tongue is both a Taster
and an Orator. If the Body be a Microcosme, or little world, the Head is the
Sun in this world, from whence proceeds the light of Reason. The Head is placed
for the good of the Body. Christ and the Saints make one Body Mystical. Our
Head is in Heaven, and sure he will not suffer his Body to be hurt, but will
consult for the safety of it, and make all things work for the good of the Body
Mystical.

CHAP. VI. The Inferences drawn from the Proposition. A Use of Information.
1. IF all things work for good, hence learn, Use of Information.
That there is a Providence: Things do not work of themselves, but God sets
them a working for good. 1 Branch*
God is the great Disposer of all events and issues, he sets every thing a
working, His Kingdom rules over all, Psalm. 103.13. It is meant of his
providential Kingdom. Things in the world are not governed by second Causes, by
the counsels of men, by the Stars and Planets, but by divine Providence.
Providence is Regina mundi, the Queen and Governesse of the world. There are
three things in Providence. 1. (...), Gods foreknowing; 2. (...), Gods
determining; 3. (...), Gods directing all things to their periods and events:
Whatever things do work in the world, G^^ sets them a working. We read in the
(...) Ezekiel of Wheels, and Eyes in the (...), and the moving of the Wheels:
The (...) are the whole Universe, the (...) Wheels are Gods Providence, (...)
of the Wheels is the hand of (...) turning all things here belo^^ (...) is by
some called (...) else but the result of (...) 1 Kings 22.34.


Learn to adore (...) Providence has an influence upon all things here below;
it is this that (...) the I^gredients, and makes up the whole Compound.

2 Branch.
2. It shows us the happy condition of every Child of God; All things work for
his good, the best and worst things: Psalm. 112.4. Unto the upright arises
light in darkness. The most dark cloudy Providence of God have some Sunshine
in them (...). Plato.
. What a blessed condition is a true Believer in! when he dies he goes to God,
and while he lives, every thing shall do him good; -- affliction is for his
good. What hurt does the fire to the gold, only purify it? What hurt does the
Fan to the Corn, only separate the Chafe from it? What hurt do Leeches to the
body, only suck out the bad blood? God does never use his staff, but to beat
out the dust. Affliction does that which the Word many times will not, it opens
the ear to Discipline, Job 36.10. When God lays men upon their backs, then they
look up to Heaven. Gods smiting his people is like the Musicians striking upon
the Viol, which makes it put forth a melodious sound. How much good comes to
the Saints by affliction? when they are pounded and broken, they send forth
their sweetest smell. Affliction is a bitter root, but it bears sweet fruit,
Heb. 12.11. It yields the peaceable fruits of righteousness. Affliction is
the Highway to Heaven; though it be Flinty and Thorny, yet it is the nearest
way. Poverty shall. starve our sins; sickness shall make grace more healthful
Languor corporis salutom animae parturit.
, 2 Cor. 4.16. Reproach shall cause the Spirit of God, and of Glory to rest
upon us, 1 Pet. 4.14. (...); death shall stop the Bottle of Tears, and open the
Gate of Paradise. A Believers dying day, is his ascension day to glory. Hence
it is, the Saints have put their afflictions in the Inventory of their riches,
Heb. 11.26. Themistocles being banished his own Country, grew afterward in
favor with the King of Egypt, whereupon he said, Periissem, nisi periissem, I
had perished, if I had not perished. So may a Child of God say, If I had not
been afflicted, I had been destroyed; if my health and estate had not been
lost, my soul had been lost.

3. 3 Branch.
See then what an encouragement here is to become Godly! All things shall work
for good: Oh that this may tempt the world to fall in love with Religion. Can
there be a greater Lodestone to piety? Can any thing more prevail with us to
be good, than this, All things shall work for our good? Religion is the true
Philosophers stone, that turns every thing into Gold: Take the sowrest part of
Religion, the suffering part, and there is comfort in it. God sweetens
sufferings with joy, he candies our Wormwood with Sugar; oh how may this bribe
us to Godliness! Job 22.21. Acquaint thy self with God, and be at peace, so
good shall come unto thee. No man did ever come off a loser by his acquaintance
with God; thereby good shall come unto thee, abundance of good, the sweet
distillations of Grace, the Hidden Manna, yea, every thing shall work for good:
Oh then get acquaintance with God, espouse his Interest. 4 Branch.


4. It shows us the miserable condition of wicked men: To them that are godly
evil things work for good, to them that are evil, good things work for hurt;
illis qui oder^^t deum, etiam bona cedunt in malum.

1. Temporal good things work for hurt to the wicked. Riches and Prosperity In
^^undo splendour epum, gloriae majestas, a^icitiarum presidia, v^rborum
blanditiae voluptatum illecebrae ab amore dei homines ^bstrahunt.
; they are not munera, but insidiae, as Seneca speaks. Worldly things are given
to the wicked as Michael was given to David, for a snare, 1 Samuel 18.21. The
Vulture draws sickness from a perfume: so do the wicked from the sweet perfume
of Prosperity: Their mercies are like poisoned bread given to Dogs: Their
Tables are sumptuously spread, but there is a hook under the bait, Psalm. 69.22.
Let their Table become a snare: All their enjoyments are like Isreal's Quails,
which were sauced with the wrath of God, Numb. 11.33. -- Foe^us pecuniae, funus
animae --. P^ide and Luxury are the Twins of Prosperity: Deuteronomy. 32.15. Thou art
waxen fat; then, he forsook God Fulgentes voluptatis seintillulae praestigiis
suis fascinant mentem, et (...) rapide impellunt.
. Riches are not only the Spiders web, unprofitable, but the Cockatrice egg,
pernicious, Eccl. 5.13. Riches kept for the hurt of the Owner: Et transeunt, et
vulnerant Ambrose.
. The c^mmon mercies wicked men have, are not Loadstones to draw them nearer to
God, but Milstones to sink them deeper in Hell, 1 Timothy 6.9. Their dilicious
dainties are like Hamans Banquet; after all their Lordly fare, death will bring
in the Reckoning, and they must pay the reckoning in Hell.

2. Spiritual good things work for hurt to the wicked; from the flower of
heavenly blessings they suck poison. ^. The Ministers of God work for their
hurt. The same wind that blows one Ship to the Haven, blows another Ship upon a
Rock. The same breath in the Ministry, that blows a godly man to Heaven, blows
a profane sinner to Hell. They who come with the Word of Life in their mouth,
yet to many are a savor of death, Isa. 6.10. Make the heart of this people
fat, and their ears heavy. The Prophet was sent upon a sad Message, to preach
their Funeral Sermon. Wicked men are worse for preaching, Amos 5.10. They hate
him that rebukes in the Gate. Sinners grow more resolved in sin; let God say
what he will, they will do what they list, Ier. 44.16. As for the word which
thou have spoken to us in the name of the Lord, we will not hearken unto thee.
The word preached is not healing, but hardening. And how dreadful is this for
men to be sunk to Hell with Sermons!

2. Prayer works for their hurt, Pro. 8.15. The Sacrifice of the wicked is an
abomination to the Lord. A wicked man is in a great strait; if he prays not, he
sins, if he prays, he sins, Psalm. 109.7. Let his prayer become sin. It were a
sad Judgment if all the meat a man did eat should turn to ill-humors, and breed
diseases in the body: So it is with a wicked man; that Prayer which should do
him good, works for his hurt; he prays against sin, and sins against his
prayer; his Duties are tainted with Atheism, fly-blown with Hypocrisy, God
abhors them.

3. The Lords Supper works for their hurt, 1 Cor. 10.31. Ye cannot eat of the
Lords Table, and the Table of Devils. Do we provoke the Lord to jealousy? Some
of the Jews kept their Idol Feasts, yet would come to the Lords Table; says
the Apostle, Do you provoke the Lord to wrath? Profane persons feast with
their sins, yet will come to feast at the Lords Table: This is to provoke God:
To a sinner there is death in the Cup, he eats and drinks his own damnation, 1
Cor. 11.29. Thus the Lords Supper works for hurt to impenitent sinners. After
the Sop the Devil enters.

4. Christ himself works for hurt to desperate sinners; he is (...), a stone of
stumbling, and a rock of offense, 1 Pet. 2.7. He is so accidentally and
occasionally, through the pravity of men's hearts; instead of believing in him,
they are offended at him. The Sun, though in its own nature is pure and
pleasant, yet it is hurtful to sore eyes. Jesus Christ is as well for the fall,
as the rising of many, Luke 2.34. Sinners stumble at a Savior, and pluck Death
from the Tree of Life. As Chemical Oils recover some Patients, but destroy
others: So the Blood of Christ, though to some it is medicinable, to others it
is damnable. Here is the unparalled misery of such as live and dye in sin,
The best things work for their hurt; Cordials themselves kill.

5. See here the wisdom of God, 5 Branch.
who can make the worst things imaginable turn to the good of the Saints; he
can by a divine Chymist^ie extract Gold out of dross. (...) -- O the depth of
the wisdom of God! Romans 11.33. It is Gods great design to set forth the wonder
of his wisdom. The Lord made Joseph's prison a step to preferment. There was no
way for Jonah to be saved, but by being swallowed up. God suffered the
Egyptians to hate Israel, Psalm. 106.41. and this was the means of their
deliverance. St Paul was bound with a Chain, and that Chain which did bind him
was a means to enlarge the Gospel, Phil. 1.12. This wise Physician can of the
Viper make a Treacle. God does enrich by impoverishing, he causes the
augmention of Grace by the diminution of an Estate: When the Creature goes
further from us, it is that Christ may come nearer to us. God works strangely;
he brings Order out of Confusion, Harmony out of Discord; he makes use many
times of unjust men, to do that which is just: He is wise in heart, Job 10.4.
He can reap his Glory out of men's fury (...)
, Psalm. 76.10. Either the wicked shall not do the hurt which they intend, or
they shall do the good which they do not intend. God often helps when there is
least hope, and saves his people in that way, which they think he will destroy:
He made use of the Highpriests malice and Judas his Treason, to redeem the
World. God has sometimes much ado to please us; through indiscrete passion,
we are apt to find fault with things that fall out; which is as if an
illiterate man should censure Philosophy; or a blind man find fault with the
work in a Landscape. Job 11.12. Vain man would be wise. Silly animals will be
taxing Providence, and calling the wisdom of God to the Bar of Reason. Gods
ways are past finding out, Romans 11.33. They are rather to be admired, than
fathomed. There is never a Providence of God, but has either a mercy, or a
wonder in it. How stupendous and infinite is that wisdom, that makes the most
cross, perplex dispensations work for the good of his children!

6. How little cause have we then to be discontented at outward trials and
emergencies? 6 Branch.
What? discontented at that which shall do us good? All things shall work for
good. There are no sins Gods people are more subject to than unbelief and
impatience; they are ready, either to faint through unbelief, or fret through
impatience. When men fly out against God by discontent and impatience, it is a
sign they do not believe this Text. Discontent is an ungrateful sin, because we
have more mercies than afflictions; and it is an irrational sin, because
afflictions work for good. Discontent is a sin which puts us upon sin, Psalm. 37
8. Fre^ not thy self to do evil. He that frets will be ready to do evil:
Fretting Jonah, was sinning Jonah, Chap. 4.9. The Devil blows the coals of
passion and discontent, and then warms himself at the fire. Oh let us not
nourish this angry Viper in our Breast. Let this Text breed patience, All
things shall work for good to them that love God. Shall we be discontented at
that which works for our good (...). Chrysostom.
? If a friend should throw a bag of money at another, and in throwing it,
should break his head, he would not be troubled much, seeing by this means he
has got a bag of money. So the Lord may bruise us by afflictions, but it is to
enrich us, these afflictions work for us a weight of glory; and shall we be
discontented?

7. See here that Scripture fulfilled, Psalm. 73.1. God is good to Israel. 7
Branch.
When one looks upon cross Providence, and sees the Lord covering his people
with ashes, and making them drunk with Wormwood, Lam. 3.15. he would be ready
to call in question the Love of God, and to say that he has dealt hardly with
his people; Oh no, yet God is good to Israel, because he makes all things work
for good. Is not he a good God, who turns all to good? he works out sin, and
works in grace; is not this good? 1 Cor. 11.32. We are chastned of the Lord,
that we should not be condemned with the world. The Hell of affliction is to
save us from the Hell of damnation. Let us always justify God; when our
outward condition is never so bad, let us say, yet God is good.

8. See what cause the Saints have to be frequent in the work of thanksgiving!
8 Branch.
Christians are herein defective; though they are much in supplication, yet
little in gratulation. The Apostle says, (...), In every thing giving thanks,
1 Thessalonians. 5.18. Why so? because God makes every thing work for our good. We will
thank the Physician though he gives us a biter Pill which makes us sick,
because it is to make us well; we will thank any man that does us a good turn;
and shall not we be thankful to God who makes every think work for good to us?
God loves a thankful Christian. Job thanked God when he took all away, Job
1.21. The Lord has taken away, blessed be the name of the Lord: Many will
thank God when he gives, Job thanks him when he takes away, because he knew God
would work good out of it. We read of Saints with Harps in their hands, Rev.
14.2. an Emblem of praise. We shall meet many Christians who have tears in
their eyes, and complaints in their mouths, but few with Harps in their hands,
who in affliction praise God; to be thankful in affliction, is a work peculiar
to a Saint. Every Bird can sing in Spring, but some Birds will sing in the dead
of Winter. Every one almost can be thankful in prosperity, but a true Saint can
be thankful in adversity. A good Christian will bless God, not only at the
Sunrising, but at the Sunsetting. Well may we in the worst that befalls us,
have a Psalm of thankfulness, because all things work for good (...).
Chrysostom. in Psalm.
. Oh be much in blessing of God: we will thank him that does be^riend us. --

9. If the worst things work for good to a Believer, what shall the best
things, Christ, and Heaven? How much more shall these work for good? If the
Cross has so much good in it, 9 Branch.
what has the Crown? If such precious Clusters grow in Golgotha, how delicious
is that fruit which grows in Canaan? If there be any sweetness in the waters
of Marah, what is there in the wine of Paradise? If Gods Rod has Honey at the
end of it, what ha^h his golden Scepter? If the bread of affliction tastes so
savou^y, what is Manna? what is the Heavenly Ambrosia? If Gods blow and stroke
work for good, what shall the smiles of his face do? If Grapes may be gathered
of Thorns, what fruit will the Tree of Life yield? If temptations and
sufferings have matter of joy in them, what shall Glory have? If there be so
much good out of evil, what then is that good, where there shall be no evil? If
Gods chastening mercies are so great, what will his crowning mercies be?
Wherefore comfort one another with these words.

10. If God makes all things to turn to our good, 10 Bran.
how equal is it that we should make all things tend to his glory? 1 Cor.
10.31. Do all to the glory of God. The Angels glorify God, they sing divine
Anthems of praise; how then ought man to glorify him, for whom God has done
more, than for the Angels! He has dignified us above them in uniting our
nature with the Godhead. Christ has dyed for us, and not the Angels: The Lord
has given us, not only out of the common stock of his bounty, but he has
enriched us with Covenant-blessings, he has bestowed upon us his Spirit; he
studies our welfare, he makes every thing work for our good; Free Grace has
laid a plot for our Salvation. If God seeks our good, shall not we seek his
glory?

Quest. How can we be said properly to glorify God, he is infinite in his
perfections, and can receive no augmentation from us?

Answ. It is true, in a strict sense we cannot bring glory to God, but in an
Evangelical sense we may. When we do what in us lies to lift up Gods name in
the world, and cause others to have high reverential thoughts of God, this the
Lord interprets a glorifying of him; as a man is said to dishonor God, when he
causes the name of God to be evil spoken of.

Quest. How many ways are we said to advance Gods glory? Answ. Three ways. 1.
When we aim at his glory (...)^
; when we make him the first in our thoughts, and the last in our end. As all
the Rivers run into the Sea, and all the Lines meet in the Center, so all our
actions terminate and center in God. 2. We advance Gods glory by being fruitful
in grace, John 15.18. Herein is my Father glorified, that ye bring forth much
fruit. Barrenness reflects dishonor upon God; then we glorify God, when we
grow in fairness as the Lilly, in tallness as the Cedar, in fruitfulness as the
Vine: The Spouses Breasts were like Clusters of Grapes, Cant. 7.7. -- 3. We
glorify God, when we give the praise and glory of all we do unto God. It was
an excellent and humble Speech of the King of Sweden, He feared the peoples
ascribing that glory to him, which was due to God, would remove him before the
work was done. When the Silkworm weaves her curious work, she hides her self
under the Silk, and is not seen. When we have done our best, we must vanish in
our own thoughts, and transfer the glory of all to God. 1 Cor. 15.10. I labor
more abundantly than they all: One would think this speech favored of pride?
but the Apostle pulls off the Crown from his own head, and sets it upon the
head of Free Grace, Yet not I, but the Grace of God which was with me.
Constantine did use to write the name of Christ over his Door, so should we
over our Duties.

Thus let us endeavor to make the name of God glorious and renowned. If God
seek our good, let us seek his glory; if he makes all things tend to our
edification, let us make all things tend to his exaltation. So much for the
first part of the Text, the Privilege.

THE BREATHINGS OF LOVE.
CHAP. VII. Showing the Nature, Cause, Kinds, Properties, and Degree of love to
God.
2. I Proceed to the second general Branch of the Text, the Persons interested
in

1. They are Lovers of God: All things Despisers and Haters of God, have no lot
or part in this privilege, it is childrens bread, it belongs only to them that
love God. Because love is the very heart and spirit of Religion, I shall the
more expatiate upon this; and for the further discussion of it, I shall clear
these five things.

1 The Nature of love to God. 2 The Ground of love to God. 3 The Kinds of love
to God. 4 The Properties of love to God. 5 The Degree of love to God.
Nature of divine love. Love is an expansion of soul, or the inflaming of the
affections, whereby a Christian breaths after God as the supreme and sovereign
good. St Austin in his second Tome, calls love Pondus animae: Love is to the
soul as the weights to the Clock, it sets the soul a going toward God; it is
the wing by which we fly to Heaven; by love we cleave to God, as the Needle to
the Lodestone.

Ground of love to God, and that is, knowledge. Ignoti nulla cupido -- We
cannot love that which we do not know. That our love may be drawn sorth to God,
we must know these three things in him.

1. A fullness, Col. 1.19. He has a fullness of grace to cleanse us, and of
glory to crown us, a fullness not only of sufficiency, but redundancy; he is a
Sea of goodness without bottom and banks.

2. A freeness. -- Fluit acrius amne perenni -- God has an innate propensness
to dispense mercy and grace, he drops as the Honeycomb, Rev. 22.17. Whosoever
will let him take of the water of life freely: God does not require we should
bring money with us, only appetite.

3. A Propriety. We must know this fullness in God is ours, Psalm. 48.14. This
God is our God. Here is the ground of love, Deity and Propriety.

3. The Kinds of love, which I shall branch

1. There is a love of Appretiation, when we set an high value upon God, as
being the most sublime and infinite good; we so esteem of God, as if we have
him we care not though we want all things else. The Stars vanish when the Sun
appears: All creatures vanish in our thoughts when the Sun of righteousness
shines in his full splendor, Cant. 1.13. A bundle of Myrrh is my well-beloved
unto me, and as a cluster of Camphir^.

2. A love of Complacency and delight: So Aquinas defines love to be
complacentia amantis in amato: As a man takes delight in a friend whom he
loves. The soul that loves God rejoices in him, as in his treasure, and rests
in him, as in his Center. The heart is so set upon God as it desires no more,
John 14.8. Show us the Father, and it suffices.

3. A love of Benevolence, which is a wishing well (...) the Cause of God
(...), etc. Aristot.
. He that is indeared in affection to his friend, wishes all happiness to
him. This is to love God, when we are well-wishers, we desire that his Interest
may prevail; our Vote and Prayer is, that his name may be had in honor; that
his Gospel, which is the Rod of his strength, may like Aarons Rod, blossom, and
bring forth Almonds.

Properties of love. 1. Our love to God must be entire, and that ex part
subjecti, in regard of the Subject, it must be with the whole heart. Mark
12.30. Thou shall love the Lord thy God (...), with all thy heart. In the Old
Law, an High Priest was not to marry with a Widow, nor with an Harlot; not with
a Widow, because he had not her first love, nor with an Harlot, because he had
not all her love. God will have the whole heart. Hos. 10.2. Their heart is
divided. The true Mother would not have the child divided; nor God will not
have the heart divided: God will not be an Inmate, to have only one Room in the
heart, and all the other Rooms let out to sin. It must be an entire love.

2. It must be a sincere love, Ephesians. 6.24. Grace be with all them that love our
Lord Jesus (...) in sincerity. Sincere, quasi sine cera; it alludes to Honey
that is pure, and has no Wax in it: Our love to God is sincere, when it is
pure, and without self-respects: This the Schoolmen call, Amor amicitiae, a
love of friendship. We must love Christ propter Christum (as Austin says) for
himself: as we love sweet Wine for its taste. Gods Beauty and Love must be the
two Load-stones to draw our love to him. Alexander had two friends, Ephestion
and Craterus; Ephestion says he, loves me because I am Alexander: Craterus
loves me because I am King Alexander: The one loved his person, the other loved
his benefits. Many love God because he gives them Corn and Wine, and not for
his intrinsecal excellencies. Lycurgus would have Virgins to be married without
dowry, because their Husbands should marry them purely for love. We must love
God more for what he is, than for what he bestows. True love is not mercenary:
You need not hire a Mother to love her child: A soul deeply in love with God
needs not be hired by rewards; he cannot but love him for that oriency of
beauty that sparkles forth in him.

3. It must be a fervent love. The Hebrew word for love (...) signifies ardency
of affection. Saints must be Seraphims, burning in holy love. To love one
coldly, is all one as not to love him. The Sun shines as hot as it can. Our
love to God must be intense and vehement; like the Coals of Juniper, which are
most acute and fervent, Psalm. 120.4. Our love to transitory things must be
indifferent; we must love quasi non, as if we loved not, 1 Cor. 7.30 Non jubet
Apostolus ut mundana haec abjiciamus, sed ne si^^^ hisce fluxis rebus immersi;
tunc enim non p^ssidemus, sed ab illis possidemur. Beza.
. But our love to God must flame forth. The Spouse was amore perculsa, Sick of
Love to Christ, Cant. 2.5. We can never love God as he deserves: As Gods
punishing us is less than we deserve, Ezra. 9.13. so our loving him is less
than he deserves.

4. Love to God must be active; it is like fire, which is the most active
element; it is called, The Labor of Love, 1 These. 1.3. Love is no idle grace,
it sets the head a studying The love of Christ constrains, 2 Cor. 5.13.
Pretenses of love are insufficient. True love is not only seen at the Tongues
end, but at the Fingers end; it is the labor of love. Those living creatures,
Ezekiel. 1.8. had wings, and hands under their wings: an Emblem of a good
Christian; he has not only the wings of faith to fly, but hands under his
wings he works by love, he spends and is spent for Christ.

5. Love is Liberal; it has Love Tokens to ^estow, 1 Cor. 13.4. Charity* (...)
is ^ind: Love has not only a smooth tongue, but a kind heart. David's heart was
fired with love to God, and he would not offer that to God which cost him
nothing, 2 Samuel 24.24. Love is not only full of Benevolence, but Beneficence*
Love which enlarges the heart, never straitens the hand. He that loves Christ,
will be liberal to his Members; he will be eyes to the blind, feet to the lame;
the backs and bellyes of the poor, shall be the furrows where he sows the
golden Seeds of liberality. Some say they love God, but their love is lame of
one hand, they give nothing to good uses. Indeed faith deals about invisibles,
but God hates that love which is invisible: Love is like new Wine which will
have vent; it vents it self in good works. The Apostle speaks it in honor of
the Corinthians, that they gave to the poor Saints, not only to, but beyond
their power, 2 Cor. 8.2* Love is bred at Court, it is a Noble Munificent grace.

6. Love to God is peculiar: He who is a electing, adopting love; so a gracious
heart gives to God such a special distinguishing love, as none else are sharers
in* 2 Cor. 11.2. I have espoused you to one husband, that I may present you as
a chaste Virgin to Christ. A Wife espoused to an Husband, gives him such a love
as she has for none else; she does not part with her conjugal love to any, but
her husband: So a Saint espoused to Christ, gives him a peculiarity of love, a
love incommunicable to any other, namely, a love joined with adoration. Not
only the love is given to God, but the soul, Cant. 4.8. A garden enclosed, is
my Sister, my Spouse. The heart of a Believer is Christ's Garden, the Flower
growing in it, is love mixed with Divine Worship, and this Flower is for Christ
alone to smell to; the Spouse keeps the Key of the Garden, that none may come
there but Christ.

7. Love to God is permanent; it is like the ^ire the Vestal Virgins kept in
Rome, it does not go out; true love boyls over, but does not give over. Love to
God, as it is sincere without hypocrisy, so it is constant without apostasy.
Love is like the Pulse of the body, always beating; it is not a Land-floud, but
a Spring. As wicked men are constant in love to their sins; neither shame, nor
sickness, nor fear of Hell, will make them give over their sins: so nothing can
hinder a Christians love to God: Nothing can conquer love, not any
difficulties, or oppositions, Cant. 8.6. Love is strong as the Grave. The Grave
swallows up the strongest bodies; so Love swallows up the strongest
difficulties, Cant. 8.7. Many waters cannot quench love: Neither the sweet
waters of pleasure, nor the bitter waters of persecution: love to God abides
firm to the death, Ephesians. 3.17. Being rooted and grounded in love. Eight
things, as Chafe and Feathers, are quickly blown away; but a tree that is
rooted, abides the storm; he that is rooted in love endures: True love never
ends but with the life.

5. The Degrees of love. We must love Minus Domin^ te amat, qui aliquid tecum
amat. Austin.
. Psalm. 73.25. There is nothing on earth I desire in comparison of thee. God is
the quintessence of all good things, he is superlatively good; now the soul
seeing a super-eminency in God, and admiring in him that constellation of all
excellencies, is carried out in love to him in the highest degree. The measure
of our love to God, says Bernard, must be (...) love him without measure Modus
diligandi Deum, est diligere Deum sine modo. Bern.
. God who is the chief of our happiness, must have the chief of our
affections, Cant. 8.2. I would cause thee to drink of my spiced Wine, of the
juice of my Pomgranate. If the Spouse has any love better than other, a Cup
more juicy and spiced, Christ shall drink, of that. The creature may have the
Milk of our love, but God must have the Cream. Love to God must be above all
other things, as the Oil ^wims above the Water.

1. We must love God more than Relations: As in case of Abraham's offering up
Isaac; Isaac being the son of his old age, no question he loved him entirely,
and doated on him; but when God says, Abraham offer up thy son; though it were
a thing might seem, not only to pose his Reason, but his Faith, for the Messiah
was to come of Isaac, and if he be cut off, where shall the world have a
Mediator? yet such was the strength of Abraham's faith, and the ardency of his
love to God, that he will take the sacrificing Knife, and let out Isaac's
blood. Our blessed Savior tells us of hating Father and Mother, Luke 14.26.
Christ would not have us unnatural; but if our dearest Relations lie in our
way, and would hinder us from Christ, either we must step over them, or tread
upon them, Deuteronomy. 33.9. Though some few drops of love may run beside to our
Kindred and Alliance, yet the full torrent must run out after Christ; Relations
may lie in the bosom, but Christ must lie in the heart.

2. We must love God more than Estate. Heb. 10.34. Ye took joyfully the
spoiling of your goods. They were glad they had any thing to lose for Christ.
If the world be laid in one S^ale, and Christ in the other, he must weigh
h^aviest. And is i^ thus? Has God the highest room in our affections? Plutarch
says, When a Dictator was created in Rome, all other Authority was for the
time suspended: So when the love of God bears sway in the heart, all other love
is suspended, and is as nothing in comparison of this love.

CHAP. VIII. Containing a sharp Corrective to those that do not love God.
Use 1. THis may serve for a sharp Reprehension to such as have not a dram of
love to God in their hearts: Use 1. Reproof.
And are there such Miscreants alive? He who loves not God, aut lapis est, aut
belluae, he is a Beast with a man's head. Oh wretch, Do thou live upon God
every day, yet not love him? If one had a friend that fed him continually with
money, and gave him all his allowance, were not he worse than a Barbarian, that
did not respect and honor that friend? Such a friend is God, he gives thee thy
breath, he bestows a livelihood upon thee, and will thou not love him? Thou will love thy Prince if he saves thy life, and will thou not love God who gives
thee thy life? What Lodestone so powerful to draw love, as the blessed Deity?
He is blind whom beauty does not tempt; he is sottish, who is not drawn with
the Cords of love. When the body is cold, and has no heat in it, it is a sign
of death: That man is dead, who has no heat of love in his soul to God. How
can he expect love from God, who shows no love to him? Will God ever lay such a
Viper in his bosom, as spits forth the poison of malice and enmity against him?

This Reproof falls heavy upon the Atheists of this Age, who are so far from
loving God, that they do all they can to spite him; They declare their sin as
Sodom, Isa. 3.9. They set their mouth against the Heavens Psalm. 73.9.
, in pride and blasphemy, and bid open defiance to God; These are Monsters in
Nature, Devils in the shape of men: Let them read their doom, 1 Cor. 16.22. If
any man love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be Anathema Maran-ath^^ Idem
significat vox (...) apud Hebraeos.
; that is, let him be accursed from God, till Christ's coming to Judgment (...).
Chrysostom. de Anathem.
; let him be heir to a curse while he lives, and at the dreadful day of the
Lord, let him hear that heart-rending sentence pronounced against him, Go thou
cursed.

CHAP. IX. Discovering the Signs, or Fruits of love to God.
Use 2. LEt us try our selves impartially, Use 2. Trial.
whether we are in the number of those that love God. For the deciding of this,
(our love will be best seen by the Fruits of it) I shall lay down fourteen
Signs, or Fruits of love to God, and it concerns us nearly to search, whether
any of these Fruits grow in our Garden.

1. The first Fruit of love is, musing of the mind upon God. He who is in love,
1. Fruit of love.
his thoughts are still upon the Object: He who loves God, is ravished and
transported with the Contemplations of God, Psalm. 139.17. When I awake, I am
still with thee. The thoughts are as travelers in the mind: David's thoughts
kept Heaven-Road, I am still with thee. God is the Treasure, and where the
Treasure is, there is the heart. By this we may try our love to God: What are
our thoughts most upon? Can we say we are ravished with delight when we think
on God? Have our thoughts got wings? are they fled aloft? Do we contemplate
Christ and Glory? Oh how far are they from being lovers of God, who scarce ever
think of God? Psalm. 10.4. God is not in all his thoughts. A sinner crowds God
out of his thoughts; he never thinks of God, unless with horror, as the
Prisoner thinks of the Judge.

2. The Second Fruit of love is, desire of Communion: 2. Fruit.
Love desires familiarity and intercourse, Psalm. 84.2. My heart and flesh
cries out for the living God. King David being debarred the House of God,
where was the Tabernacle, (the visible token of his presence) he now breaths
after God, and in an holy Pathos of desire, cries out for the living God.
Lovers would be parlying together. If we love God we prize his Ordinances,
because there we meet with God: He speaks to us in his Word, and we speak to
him in Prayer. By this let us examine our love to God. Do we desire intimacy of
communion with God? Lovers cannot be long asunder. Such as love God, have an
holy fondness, they know not how to be from him; they can want any thing but
Gods presence; they can want health and friends, they can want a full Table,
but they cannot want God: Psalm. 143.7. Hide not thy face from me, least I be
like them that go down into the Grave. Lovers have their (...), fainting fits:
David was ready to faint away, and dye, when he had not a sight of God. They
who love God cannot be contented with having Ordinances, unless they may enjoy
God in them; that were to lick the glass, and not the honey.

What shall we say to them who can be all their lives long without God? they
think God may be best spared: They complain they want health and trading, but
not that they want God. Wicked men are not acquainted with God; and how can
they love who are not acquainted? nay, which is worse, they do not desire to be
acquainted with God, Job 21.14. They say to God, depart from us, we desire not
the knowledge of thy ways. Sinners shun acquaintance with God, they count his
presence a burden; and are these Lovers of God? Does that woman love her
husband, who cannot endure to be in his presence?

3. The Third Fruit of love is grief. Where there is love to God, 3. Fruit.
there is a grieving for our sins of unkindness against him. A Child that loves
his Father cannot choose but weep for offending him. The heart that burns in
love, melts in tears: O that I should abuse the love of so dear a Savior! Did
not my Lord suffer enough upon the Cross, but must I make him suffer more?
shall I give him more Gall and Vinegar to drink? How dis-loyal and
dis-ingenious have I been? how have I grieved his Spirit, trampled upon his
Royal Commands, slighted his Blood? this opens a Vein of godly sorrow, and
makes the heart bleed afresh. Mat. 26.75. Peter went out, and wept bitterly.
When Peter thought how dearly Christ loved him; he was taken up into the Mount
of Transfiguration, Christ showed him the Glory of Heaven in a Vision; now that
he should deny Christ after he had received such signal love from him, this
broke his heart with grief, he went out, and wept bitterly.

By this let us try our love to God: Are our hearts spiritual Lymbecks,
dropping the water of godly tears? Do we grieve for our unkindnesses against
God, our abuse of mercy, our non-improvement of Talents? How far are they from
loving God, who sin daily, and their hearts never smite them! they have a Sea
of sin, and not a drop of sorrow; they are so far from being troubled, that
they make merry with their sins, Ier. 11.15. When thou do evil, then thou
rejoycest. Oh wretch, did Christ bleed for sin, and do thou laugh at it?
These are far from loving God: Does he love his friend, that loves to do him an
injury?

4. Fruit.
4. Another Fruit of love is Magnanimity. Love is valourous, it turns cowardice
into courage: Love will make one adventure upon the greatest difficulties and
hazards; Amor nescit difficultates. The fearful Hen will fly upon a Dog or
Serpent, to defend her young ones. Love does infuse (...), a spirit of
Gallantry and Fortitude into a Christian. He that loves God will stand up in
his Cause, and be an Advocate for him: Acts 4.20. We cannot but speak the
things which we have seen and heard. He who is afraid to own Christ, has but
little love to him. Nicodemus came sneaking to Christ by night, John 3.2. He
was fearful of being seen with him in the day time. Love casts out fear. As the
Sun expels Fogs and Vapors; so does Divine Love in a great measure expel
carnal Fear. Does he love God, that can hear his blessed Truths spoken against,
and be silent? He who loves his friend, will stand up for him, and vindicate
him when he is reproached. Does Christ appear for us in Heaven, and are we
afraid to appear for him on Earth? Love animates a Christian; it fires his
heart with zeal, and steels it with courage.

5. The fifth Fruit of love is, sensibility. If we love God, 5. Fruit.
our hearts ache for the dishonours done to God by wicked men: To see, not only
the Banks of Religion, but Civility, broken down, and a Flood of wickedness
coming in; to see Gods Sabbaths profaned, his Oath violated, his Name
dishonored; if there be any love to God in us, we shall lay these things to
heart. Lot's righteous soul was vexed for the unclean conversation of the
wicked, 2 Pet. 2.17. He took the sins of Sodom, and made Spears of them to
pierce his own soul. How far are they from loving God, who are not at all
affected with his dishonor? if they have but Peace and Trading, they lay
nothing to heart. A man who is dead drunk, though another be bleeding to death
by him, he never minds, or is sensible: so, many being drunk with the wine of
Prosperity, when the honor of God is wounded, and his Truths lie a bleeding,
they are not sensible. Did men love God, they would grieve to see his Glory
suffer, and Religion it self become a Martyr.

6. The sixth Fruit of love is, Antipathy against sin. 6. Fruit.
Fire purges the Dross from the Metal. The Fire of Love purges out sin. Hos.
14.8. Ephraim shall say, what have I to do any more with Idols? He that loves
God, will have nothing to do with sin, unless to give battle to it. Sin is
Dei-cidium, it strikes not only at Gods Honor, but his Being. Does he love his
Prince, that harbors him who is a Traitor to the Crown? Is he a friend to God,
who loves that which God hates Quomodo amas Deum, cum adhuc amas quod ^dit
Deus? Austin.
? The love of God, and the love of sin, cannot dwell together: The Affections
cannot be carried to two contraries at the same time. A man cannot love health,
and love poison too: so, one cannot love God, and sin too. He who has any
secret sin in his heart allowed, is as far from loving God, as Heaven and Earth
are distant one from the other.

7. Another Fruit of love is, Crucifixion. 7. Fruit.
He who is a Lover of God, is dead to the world, Gal. 6.14. I am crucified to
the world; I am dead to the honors and pleasures of it. He who is in love with
God, is not much in love with any thing else Cui Christus dulcescit, mundus
am^rescit. Bern.
: His love to God moves as the Sun in the Firmament, swiftly; but his love to
the world, is as the motion of the Sun upon the Dial, which is very slow. The
love of God, and the violent love of the world, are inconsistent Fortis est ut
mors amor; sicut mors violenter separat animas a corpor^, ita amor Dei
violenter segregat hominem a mundano amore. Isidor.
. 1 John 2.15. If any man love the world, the love of the Father is not in him.
Love to God swallows up all other love; as Moses's Rod swallowed up the
Egyptian Rods. If a man could live in the Sun, what a small Point would all the
Earth be! So when a man's heart is raised above the world, in the admiring and
loving God, how poor and slender are these things below! they seem as nothing
in his eye. It was a sign the Primitive Christians did love God, their money
did not lie near their heart, but they laid down their money at the Apostles
feet, Acts 4.35.

Try by this your love to God. What shall we think of such as have never enough
of the world? they have the dry Dropsy of Covetousness, thirsting insatiably
after riches, Amos 2.7. That pant after the dust of the earth. Never talk of
your love to Christ (says Ignatius) (...), when you prefer the world before
the Pearl of price; and are there not many such who prize their gold above God?
If they have a South-Land, they care not for the water of life; they will sell
Christ and a good Conscience for money. Will God ever bestow Heaven upon them,
who so basely undervalue him, preferring glittering dust, before the glorious
Deity? what is here in the Earth that we should so set our hearts upon it? only
the Devil makes us look upon it through a Multiplying Glass. The world has no
real intrinsecal worth; it is but Paint and Alchymy. The world has two
Breasts, the one Breast is dry, it is vanity; the other Breast runs blood, it
is vexation.

8. Fruit.
8. The next Fruit of love is fear. In the Godly love and fear do kiss each
other. There is a double fear arises from love. 1. A fear of displeasing. The
Spouse loves her husband, therefore will rather deny her self, than displease
him. The more we love God, the more fearful we are of grieving his Spirit, Genesis
39.9. How then can I do this great wickedness, and sin against God? When
Eudoxia the Empress threatened to banish Chrysostom, Tell her (says he) I
fear nothing but sin. That is a blessed love which puts a Christian into an hot
fit of zeal, and a cold fit of fear, making him shake and tremble, and not dare
willingly to offend God.

2. A fear mixed with jealousy, 1 Samuel 4.13. Elies heart trembled for the Ark.
It is not said, his heart trembled for Hophni and Phinehas, his two sons, but
his heart trembled for the Ark, because if the Ark were taken, then the glory
was departed. He that loves God is full of fear least it should go ill with the
Church; he fears least profaneness (which is the plague of Leprosy) should
increase, least Popery get footing, least God should go from a People. The
presence of God in his Ordinances, is the beauty and strength of a Nation. The
Trojans had the Image of Pallas, and they had an opinion that as long as that
Image was preserved among them, they should never be conquered. So long as Gods
presence is with a people, so long they are safe; but the soul inflamed in love
to God, fears least the visible tokens of Gods presence should be removed.

By this Touchstone let us try our love to God. Many fear least peace and
Trading go, but not least God and his Gospel go; are these Lovers of God? He
who loves God is more afraid of the loss of spiritual blessings than temporal.
If the Sun of Righteousness remove out of our Horizon, what can follow but
darkness? What comfort can an Organ, or Antheme give, if the Gospel be gone?
is it not like the sound of a Trumpet, or a Volley of shot at a Funeral?

9. Fruit.
9. If we are lovers of God, we love that which God loves. 1. We love Gods Word.
David esteemed the Word, for the sweetness of it, above honey, Psalm. 119.103.
and for the value of it, above gold, Psalm. 119.72. The Lines of Scripture are
richer than the Mines of Gold. Well may we love the Word; it is the Load-Star
that directs us to Heaven, it is the Field in which the Pearl is hid. That man
who loves not the Word, but thinks it too strict, and could wish any part of
the Bible torn out (as that Adulterer did the seventh Commandment) he has not
the least spark of love in his heart.

2. We love Gods day; we do not only keep a Sabbath, but love a Sabbath. Isa.
58.13. If thou call the Sabbath a delight. The Sabbath is that which keeps up
the face of Religion amongst us; this day must be consecrated as glorious to
the Lord. The house of God is (...), the Palace of the Great King; on the
Sabbath God shows himself there, through the Lattice. If we love God, we prize
his day above all other days. All the week would be dark, if it were not for
this day; on this day Manna falls double; now, if ever, Heaven-gate stands
open, and God comes down in a golden shower: This blessed day the Sun of
Righteousness rises upon the soul. How does a gracious heart prize that day,
which was made on purpose to enjoy God in?

3. We love Gods Laws. A gracious soul is glad of the Law, because it checks
his sinful exorbitances. The heart would be ready to run wild in sin, if it
had not some blessed restraints put upon it by the Law of God. He that loves
God, loves his Law, the Law of repentance, the Law of self-denial. Many say
they love God, but they hate his Laws, Psalm. 2.3. Let us break their bands
asunder, and cast away their cords from us. Gods precepts are compared to
cords, they bind men to their good behavior; but the wicked think these cords
too strait, therefore they say, let us break them. They pretend to love Christ
as a Savior, but hate him as a Prince. Christ tells us of his yoke, Mat.
11.29. Sinners would have Christ put a Crown upon their head, but not a yoke
upon their neck. He were a strange King should rule without Laws.

4. We love Gods picture, we love his Image shining in the Saints, 1 John 5.1.
He that loves him that begat, loves him also that is begotten of him. It Is
possible to love a Saint, yet not love him as a Saint; we may love him for
something else, for his ingenuity, because he is affable and bountiful. A beast
loves a man, but not quatenus homo, as he is a man, but because he feeds him,
and gives him provinder. But to love a Saint as he is a Saint, this is a sign
of love to God. If we love a Saint for his Saint-ship, as having something of
God in him, then we love him in these four Cases.

1. We love a Saint though he be poor. A man that loves gold, loves a piece of
gold though it be in a rag: So though a Saint be in rags, we love him, because
there is aliquid Christi, something of Christ in him.

2. We love a Saint though he has many personal failings. There is no
perfection here; in some, rash anger ^revails; in some, inconstancy; in some,
too much love of the world. A Saint in this life is like gold in the ore, much
dross of infirmity cleaves to him, yet we love him for the grace that is in
him. A Saint is like a fair face with a scar: We love the beautiful face of
holiness, though there be a scar in it. The best Emerald has its blemishes,
the brightest Stars their twinklings, and the best of the Saints have their
failings. Thou that can not love another because of his infirmities, how
would thou have God love thee? have not thou good store*

3. We love the Saints though in some lesser things they differ from us.
Perhaps another Christian has not so much light as thou, and that may make him
err in some things; will thou presently un-Saint him, because he cannot come
up to thy light?
Where there is union in Fundamentals, there ought to be union in Affections.

4. We love the Saints though they are persecuted. We love precious Metal
though it be in the furnace. St Paul did bear in his boby the marks of the Lord
Jesus, Gal. 6.17. Those marks were like the Soldiers scar, honorable. We must
love a Saint as well in Chains, as in Scarlet. Constantine did kiss the hole
of Paphnusius his eye, because he suffered the loss of his eye for Christ. If
we love Christ, we love his persecuted Members.

If this be to love God, when we love his Image sparkling in the Saints, Oh
then, how few Lovers of God are to be found! Do they love God, who hate them
that are like God? Do they love Christ's person, who are filled a spirit of
revenge against his people? How can that wife be said to love her husband, that
tears his picture? Surely Judas and Julian are not yet dead, their spirit lives
in the world. Who are guilty but the innocent? What greater crime than
holiness, if the Devil may be one of the grand Jury? Wicked men seem to bear
great reverence to the Saints departed; they canonize dead Saints, but
persecute living. In vain do men stand up at the Creed, and tell the world,
They believe in God, when they abominate one of the Articles of the Creed,
namely, The Communion of Saints. Surely, there is not a greater sign of a man
ripe for Hell, than this, not only to want grace, but to hate it.

10. Another blessed sign of love, is, to entertain good thoughts of God. He
that loves his friend construes what his friend does in the best sense. 1 Cor.
13.5. Love thinks no evil. Malice interprets all in the worst sense; Love
interprets all in the best sense; it is an excellent Commentator upon
Providence* It thinks no evil. He that loves God, has a good opinion of God;
though he afflicts sharply, yet the soul takes all well. This is the Language
of a gracious spirit: My God sees what an hard heart I have, therefore drives
in one Wedge of affliction after another, to break my heart; he knows how full
I am of bad humors, how sick of a Plurisie, therefore lets me blood to save my
life; this severe dispensation is either to mortify some corruption, or to
exercise some grace: How good is God that will not let me alone in my sins, but
smites my body, to save my soul! Thus he that loves God, takes every thing in
good part. Love puts a candid gloss upon all Gods actions. Thou who art apt to
murmur at God, as if he had dealt ill with thee, be humbled for this; say thus
with thy self, if I loved God more, I should have better thoughts of God. It Is
Satan that makes us have good thoughts of our selves, and hard thoughts of God.
Love takes all in the fairest sense, it thinks no evil.

11. The eleventh Fruit of love is Obedience, John 14.21. He that has my
Commandments, and keeps them, 11 Fruit.
he it is that loves me. -- Pater adsum, impera quid vis -- Plaut.
. It Is a vain thing to say we love Christ's person, if we slight his Commands.
Does that Child love his Father, who refuses to obey him Am^re Deum. and
obedire, duae sunt alae, quibus evoles ad coelos, tr^nsveharis ad sanctos,
inseraris inter Angelos. Austin. de vis. infi*
? If we love God, we will obey him in those things which cross flesh and
blood: 1. In things difficult. 2. In things dangerous.


1. In things difficult. As 1. In mortifying sin. There are some sins which are
not only near to us as the garment, but dear to us as the eye; if we love God,
we will set our selves against these, both in purpose and practice. 2. In
forgiving our enemies. God commands us upon pain of death to forgive, Ephesians.
4.32. Forgiving one another (...).
. This is hard, it is crossing the stream; we are apt to forget kindnesses, and
remember injuries; but if we love God, we will pass by offenses. When we
seriously consider how many Talents God has forgiven us, how many affronts and
indignations he has put up at our hands, this makes us write after his Copy,
and endeavor rather to bury an injury, than retaliate it.

2. In things dangerous. When God calls us to suffer for him, we will obey.
Love made Christ suffer for us; love was the Chain that fastened him to the
Cross: So if we love God, we shall be willing to suffer for him. Love has a
strange quality, it is the least suffering grace, and yet it is the most
suffering grace: It is the least suffering grace in one sense; it will not
suffer known sin to lie in the soul unrepented of, it will not suffer abuses
and dishonours done to God, thus it is the least suffering grace; yet it is the
most suffering grace, it will suffer reproaches, bonds, imprisonments, for
Christ's sake, Acts 21.13. I am ready not only to be bound, but to dye for the
name of the Lord Jesus. It Is true, every Christian is not a Martyr, but he has
a spirit of Martyrdom in him, ^he says as Paul (...) I am ready to be bound,
he has a disposition of mind to suffer, if God call. Love will carry men out
above their own strength. Tertullian observes how much the Heathen suffered for
love to their Country. -- Vicit amor Patriae -- If the Springhead of Nature
rises so high, surely Grace will rise higher. If love to their Country will
make men suffer, much more should love to Christ. 1 Cor. 13.7. Love endures
all things. Basil speaks of a Virgin condemned to the fire, who having her life
and estate offered her, if she would fall down to the Idol, answered, Let life
and money go, welcome Christ Valeat vita, pereat pecunia.
. It was a noble and zealous speech of Ignatius, Let me (says he) be groun'd
with the teeth of wild beasts, if I may be Gods pure Wheat (...). Ignat.
. How did divine affection carry the Primitive Saints above the love of life,
and the fear of death? St Steven was stoned, St Luke hanged on an Olive Tree,
St Peter crucified at Jerusalem with his head downward Eusebius.
. These divine Hero's were willing to suffer, rather than by their cowardice to
make the name of God suffer. How did St Paul rattle his Chain that he wore for
Christ Act. 28.20.
? he did glory in it, (...) as a woman that is proud of her Jewels, says
Chrysostom. And holy Ignatius did wear his Fetters as a Bracelet of Diamonds.
Heb. 11.35. Not accepting deliverance. They refused to come out of Prison on
sinful terms, they preferred their innocence before their liberty.

By this let us try our love to God, have we a spirit of Martyrdom? Many say
they love God, but how does it appear? they will not forgo the least comfort,
or undergo the least cross for his sake. If Jesus Christ should have said to
us, I love you well, you are dear to me, but I cannot suffer, I cannot lay down
my life for you, we should have questioned his love very much; and may not
Christ suspect us, when we pretend love to him, yet will endure nothing for
him? They who bear true affection to God, will according to their vow in
Baptism, fight under his Banner to the death, and make Christ's Crown flourish
in their ashes.

12 Fruit.
12. He who loves God, will endeavor to make him appear glorious in the eyes of
others. Such as are in love will be commending, and setting forth the
amiablenesse of those persons whom they love. The Lovesick Spouse describes
Christ in all his beauty, Cant. 5.11.13. His head is as the most fine Gold, his
cheeks are as a bed of Spices. If we love God, we will spread abroad his
excellencies, that so we may raise his fame and esteem, and may tempt others to
fall in love with him. Love cannot be silent, we shall be as so many Trumpets,
sounding forth the freeness of Gods Grace, the Transcendency of his Love, the
Glory of his Kingdom. Love is like fire; where it burns in the heart, it will
break forth at the lips, it will be elegant and pathetical in setting forth
Gods praise: Love must have vent.

13. The Thirteenth Fruit of love is, 13 Fruit.
To long for Christ's appearing. 2 Timothy 4.8. Henceforth there is a Crown of
Righteousness laid up for me, and not for me only, but for them which love
Christ's appearing. Love desires union, Aristotle gives the reason, because joy
flows from union. When our union with Christ is perfect in glory, then our joy
will be full. He that loves Christ, loves his appearing. Christ's appearing will
be an happy appearing to the Saints. His appearing now, is very comfortable,
when he appears for us as an Advocate, Heb. 9.24. But the other appearing will
be infinitely more, when he shall appear for us as our Husband; he will at that
day bestow two Jewels upon us. 1. His love; a love so great and astonishing,
that it is better felt than expressed. 2. His likeness, 1 John 3.2. When he
shall appear, we shall be like him. And from both these, Love and Likeness,
infinite joy will flow into the soul. No wonder then he who loves Christ, longs
for his appearance. Does not the Bride long for the Marriage-day? The Spirit
and the Bride say come, even so come Lord Jesus, Revel. 22.17. By this let us
try our Love to Christ. A wicked man who is (...) self-condemned, is afraid of
Christ's appearing, he wishes he would never appear; but such as love Christ,
are joyful to think of his coming in the Clouds; they shall then be delivered
from all their sins and fears, they shall be acquitted before men and Angels,
and shall be for ever translated into the Paradise of God.

14 Fruit.
14. Love will make us stoop to the meanest offices. Love is an humble grace, it
does not walk abroad in state, it will creep upon its hands, it will stoop and
submit to any thing whereby it may be serviceable to Christ. As we see in
Joseph of Arimathea, and Nicodemus, both of them Honorable Persons, yet one
takes down Christ's body with his own hands, and the other embalms it with sweet
odours; it might seem much for persons of their rank to be employed in that
service, but love made them do it. If we love God we shall not think any work
too mean for us, wherein we may be helpful to Christ's Members. Love is not
squemish, it will visit the sick, relieve the poor, wash the Saints wounds. The
Mother that loves her child, is not coy and nice, she will do those things
about her child, which others would scorn to do. He who loves God will humble
himself to the meanest office of love to Christ and his Members. These are the
fruits of love to God. Happy are they, who can find these Outlandish Fruits
growing in their souls.

CHAP. X. An Exhortation to love God.
Use 3. THe third Use is of Exhortation, Use 1. Exhortation.
and it has three Branches. 1. Let me earnestly persuade all, who bare the
name of Christians, to become Lovers of God, Psalm. 31.33. 1. Branch
O love the Lord all ye his Saints. There are but few that love God: Many give
him an hypocritical kiss, but few love him. It Is not so easy to love God as
most imagine. The Affection of love is natural, but the Grace is not. Men are
by nature (...) God-haters, Romans 1.30. The wicked would fly from God; they
would neither be under his rules, nor within his reach; they fear God, but do
not love him. All the strength in men or Angels, cannot make the heart love
God: Ordinances will not do it of themselves, nor Judgments; it is only the
Almighty and Invincible power of the Spirit of God can infuse love into the
soul; this being so hard a work, it calls upon us for the more earnest prayer
and endeavor after this Angelical grace of love Impium est Deum non diligere,
cui vicemrepen^^r^ non possumus, etiamsi diligamus. Austin
. To excite and inflame our desires after it, I shall prescribe twenty Motives.

1. Without this all our Religion is vain. It Is not duty, but love to duty, God
looks at; it is not how much we do, 1. Motiv.
but how much we love. If a servant does not his work willingly, and out of
love, it is not accepted. Duties not mingled with love, are as burdensome to
God, as they are to us. David therefore counsels his son Solomon to serve God
with a willing mind, 1 Chronicles. 28.9. To do duty, without love, is not sacrifice,
but penance.

2.
2. Love is the most noble and excellent grace, it is a pure flame kindled from
Heaven, by it we resemble God who is love. Believing and obeying do not make us
like God, but by love we grow like him, 1 John 4.16. Love is a grace does most
delight in God, and is most delightful to him. That Disciple which was most
full of love, lay in Christ's bosom. Love puts a verdure and luster upon all
the Graces: the Graces seem to be eclipsed, unless love shine and sparkle in
them: Faith is not true, unless it work by love; the waters of repentance are
not pure, unless they flow from the Spring of love. Love is the savoury meat
God loves, it is the Incense makes all our Services fragrant and odoriferous;
it is Vinum aromaticum, the Spiced Wine, and the juice of the Pomgranate.

3. Is any thing unreasonable that God requires? it is but our love; 3.
if he should ask our estate, or the fruit of our bodies, could we deny him?
but he asks only our love; he would only pick this flower; is this an hard
request? was there ever any debt so easily paid as this? we do not at all
impoverish our selves by paying it. Love is no burden. Is it any labor for the
Bride to love her Husband? Love is delightful; Non potest amor esse, et dulcis
non esse Bern.
.

4. God is the most adaequate and complete object of our love: 4.
all the exellencies that lie scattered in the creatures, are twisted together,
and united in him; he is a Magazine of blessings; he is Wisdom, Beauty, Love,
yea the quintessence of Goodness; he is Optimus Maximus; there is nothing in
God can cause a nauseating or loathing; the Creature does sooner surfeit than
satisfy; but there are fresh beauties sparkling forth in God; the more we
enjoy of him, the more we are ravished with delight.

There is nothing in God to dull our affections, or quench our love, no
infirmity, no deformity, which do usually weaken and cool love. There is that
delicious sweetness in God, as may not only entice, but command our love. If
there were more Angels in Heaven than there are, and all those glorious
Seraphims had an immense flame of love burning in their breasts to eternity,
yet could they not love God equivalently to that infinite perfection and
transcendency of goodness which is in him. Surely then here is enough to tempt
us to fall in love with God; we cannot spend our love upon a better object.

5. Love does facilitate Religion, it oils the Wheels of the affections, 5.
and makes them more lively and cheerful in Gods service; love takes off the
tediousness in duty. Jacob thought seven years but little, for the love he did
bear to Rachel. Love makes duty a pleasure. Why are the Angels so swift and
winged in Gods service? it is because they love him. Love is never weary. He
that loves Gold is never weary of telling it; and he that loves God, is never
weary of serving him.

6. God desires our love. It were much for a King to desire the love of a woman
that is deformed and leprous. 6.
We have lost our beauty, and stained our blood, yet the King of Heaven is a
Suitor to us. What is there in our love that God should come a wooing for it?
What is God the better for our love? he does not want it, he is infinitely
blessed in himself; if we deny him our love, he has more sublime creatures who
pay the cheerful tribute of love to him. God does not need our love, yet he
seeks it.

7. God has deserved our love; 7.
how has he loved us! Our affections should be kindled at the fire of Gods
love. What a miracle of love is it, that God should love us, when there was
nothing in us lovely! Ezekiel. 16.6. When thou wast in thy blood, I said unto
thee, live. The time of our loathing, was the time of Gods loving. We had
something in us to provoke fury, but nothing to entice love. What an Hyperbole
of love was it to give Christ to us Si amor augeatur in font, necesse est and
in fluxu. Gulielm. Parisiens.
? That Christ should dye for sinners, God has set all the Angels in Heaven a
wondering at this love. St Austin says, The Cross was a Pulpit, and the lesson
Christ preached in it, was love. O the living love of a dying Savior! per
vulnera viscera -- Methinks I see Christ upon the Cross bleeding all over,
methinks I hear him say to us, reach hither your hands, put them into my
sides, feel my bleeding heart, see if I love you not? and will you not bestow
your love upon me? will you love the world more than me? did the world appease
the wrath of God for you? have not I done all this? and will you not love me?
It Is natural to love where we are loved. Christ having set us a Copy of love,
and written it in his Blood, let us labor to write after so fair a Copy, and
imitate him in love.

.8
8. Love to God is the best self-love. It Is self-love to get the soul saved; by
loving God we forward our own salvation: 1 John 4.16. He that dwells in love,
dwells in God, and God in him. And he is sure to dwell with God in Heaven,
that has God dwelling in his heart. So that to love God is the truest
self-love; he that does not love God, does not love himself.

9. Love to God evidenceth sincerity, 9.
Cant. 1.4. The upright love thee. Many a child of God fears he is an
Hypocrite; do thou love God? When Peter was dejected in the sense of his sin,
he thought himself unworthy that ever Christ should take notice of him, or
employ him more in the work of his Apostleship; see how Christ goes about to
comfort him, Job. 21.15. Peter, love thou me? As if Christ had said, Though
thou have denied me through fear, yet if thou can say from thy heart thou
love me, thou a^t sincere and upright. To love God is a better sign of
sincerity, than to fear him. The Israelites feared Gods Justice, Psalm. 78.34.
When he slew them, they sought him, and enquired earnestly after God* (...) all
this to? verse. 36, 37. Nevertheless, they did but flatter him with their mouth,
and lied to him with their tongue; for their heart was not right with him. That
repentance is no better than flattery, which a^iseth only from fear of Gods
Judgments, and has no love mixed with it. Loving of God evidenceth that God
has the heart; and if the heart be his, that will command all the rest.

10. By our love to God, 10.
we may conclude Gods love to us. 1 John 4.9. We love him, because he first
loved us. O says the ^oul, if I knew God loved me, I could rejoice; do thou
love God? then thou may be sure of Gods love to thee. As it is wi^^ Burning
Glasses; if the Glass burn, it is because the Sun has first shined upon it,
else it could not burn: So if our hearts burn in love to God, it is because
Gods love has first shined upon us, else we could not burn in love. Our love
is nothing but the reflex of Gods love.

11. If you do not love God, you will love something else, 11.
either the world or sin; and are these worthy of your love? Is it not better
to love God than these?

First, It is better to love God than

1. If you set your love on worldly things, they will not satisfy: You may as
well satisfy your body with air, as your soul with earth, Eccles. 5.10. Job.
^0.22. In the fullness of his sufficiency, he shall be in straits. Plenty has
its penury. If the Globe of the world were yours, it would not fill. Adam had
two sons, Cain and Abel: Cain signifies possession, Abel signifies vanity; to
show us that in all our possessions there is vanity; and will you set your love
on that which will never give you content? is it not better to love God? he
will give you that which shall satisfy, Psalm. 17. ult. When I awake, I shall
be satisfied with thy likeness. When I awake out of the sleep of death, and
shall have some of the rays and beams of Gods glory put upon me, I shall then
be satisfied with his likeness.

2. If you love worldly things, they cannot remove trouble of mind; if there be
a thorn gotten into the conscience, all the world cannot pluck it out. King
Saul being perplexed in mind, all his Crown-Jewels could not comfort him, 1 Samuel 28.15. -- But if you love God, he can give you peace when nothing else can
(...). Cyril.
; he can turn the shadow of death into the morning, Amos 5.8. He can drop in
Christ's blood, which is a cooling Julip; he can whisper his Love by the Spirit,
and with one smile scatter all your fears and disquiets.

3. If you love the world, you may love that which may hinder you from Heaven.
Worldly contentments may be compared to the Wagons in an Army; while the
Soldiers have been victualling themselves at the Wagons, they have lost the
Battle, Mark 10.23. How hardly shall they that have riches enter into the
Kingdom of God? Prosperity to ma^y, is like the sail to the Boat, which quickly
overturns it: So that by loving the world, you may love that which will
endanger you In hoc mundo viscosa omnia, and obsessa laqueis.
, but if you love God, there is no fear of losing Heaven; he will be a Rock to
hide you, but not to hurt you: By loving him we come to enjoy him.

4 You may love worldly things, and they cannot love you again. You love Gold
and Silver, but your Gold cannot love you again; you love a picture, but the
picture cannot love you again; you give away your love to the Creatu^e, and
receive no l^ve back; but if you love God, he will love you again, John 14.23.
If any man love me, my Father will love him, and we will come unto him, and
make our abode with him. God will not be behind-hand in love with us; for our
d^op we shall receive an o^ean.

5. When you love the world, you love that which is worse than your selves. The
soul (as Damascen says) is a sparkle of Celestial brig^^ness, it carries in it
an Idea and resemblance of God; while you love the World, you love that which
is infinitely below the worth of your souls. Will any one lay out cost upon
sackcloth? when thou layest out thy love upon the world, thou layest out gold
upon dung, thou hangest a Pearl upon a Swine, thou love that which is
inferior to thy self. As Christ sp^aks in another sense of the Fowls of the
ai^, Matthew. 6.26. Are not ye much better than they? So I say of wo^ldly things,
Are not ye much better than they? You love a fair house, a beautiful picture;
are not you much better than they? but if you love God, now you place your love
on the most noble sublime object, you love that which is better than your
selves: God is better than the Soul, better than Angels, better than Heaven:

6. You may love the world, and have hatred for your love, John 15.19. Because
ye are not of the world, therefore the world hates you. Would it not vex one
to lay out money upon a piece of ground, and instead of b^inging forth Corn or
Grapes, it should yield nothing but Nettles? Thus it is with all sublunary
things; we love them, and they prove Nettles to sting. The world is a
Stepmother, instead of giving the breast it draws out the sword; we meet with
nothing, but either disappointment or discourtesie, Judge. 9.15. Let fire come
out of the Bramble, and devour the Cedars of Lebanon. While we love the
Creature, fire comes out of this Bramble to devour us: But if we love God, he
will not return hatred for love, Prove. 8.17. I love them that love me. God may
chastise, but he cannot hate. Every Believer is part of Christ, and God can as
well hate Christ as hate a Believer.

7. You may over-love the Creature. You may love Wine too much, Silver too
much, but you cannot love God too much. If it were possible to exceed, excess
here were a virtue; but it is our sin we cannot love God enough, Ezekiel. 16.30.
How weak is thy heart? So it may be said, How weak is our love to God? it is
like water of the last drawing from the Still, which has less Spirit in it. If
we could love God far more than we do, yet it were not proportionable to his
worth: So that there is no danger of excess in our love to God.

8. You may love worldly things, and they dye and leave you. Riches take wings,
Relations drop away (...). Ignat.
. The Romans painted the vanity of worldly things in the form and shape of a
man; in his right hand a Rose, in his left hand a Lilly, under his feet
Wormwood: An Emblem of the world: The Rose is sweet, the Lilly fair, but both
fading; and under the feet Wormwood; at death all the delights of the world
will be bitter. There is nothing here abiding Fuit tempus and avidissimos sui
deserit, nec quod futurum est, meum est, nec quod fuit; in puncto sugientis
temporis pendeo, etc. Senec. Epist 72.
; the Creature has a little honey in its mouth, but it has wings, it will
soon fly away; -- Vitae primordium, mortis prodromum -- But if you love God,
he is a portion for ever, Psalm. 73.26. As he is called a Sun for comfort, so a
Rock for eternity, he abides for ever. Thus we see it is better to love God
than the world.

Secondly, It is better to love God than (...)
? 1. Sin is a debt. Forgive us our debts. It is a debt which binds over to the
wrath of God; why should we love sin? does any man love to be in debt? 2. Sin
is a disease, Isa. 1.5. The whole head is sick. And will thou love sin? will
any man hug a disease? will he love his plague-sores? 3. Sin is a pollution.
The Apostle calls it (...), filthiness, James 1.21. It is compared to Leprosy,
to poison of Asps, to Vomit. Gods heart rises against sinners, Isa. 11.8. My
soul loathed them. Sin is a misshapen Monster; lust makes a man brutish, malice
makes him devilish. What is in sin to be loved? shall we love deformity? 4.
Sin is an enemy. It is compared to a Serpent, Prove. 23.32. It has four stings,
S^ame, Guilt, Horror, Death. Will a man love that which s^eks his death? Surely
then it is better to love God than sin (...). Olympiad.
. God will save thee, sin will damn thee; is not he bewitched who loves
damnation?

12.
12. The relation we stand in to God calls for love. There is near affinity,
Isa. 54.5. Thy Maker is thy Husband: And shall not a Wife love her Husband? He
is full of tenderness; his Spouse is to him as the Apple of his Eye, he
rejoices over her as the B^idegroom over the Bride, Isa. 62.5. He loves the
Believer as he loves Christ, John 17. ult. the same love for quality, though
not equality. If God be an Hu^band, shall we not love him? Affinity requires
affection. Either we must love God, or we give ground of suspicion that we are
not yet married to him.

13.
13. Love is the most abiding grace. This will stay with us when other graces
take their farewell. In Heaven we shall need no Repentance, because we shall
have no sin; in Heaven we shall not need Patience, because there will be no
affliction; in Heaven there shall need no Faith: Faith looks at things unseen,
Heb. 11.1. but then we shall see God face to face; and where there is vision,
there needs no Faith.

But when the other Graces are out of date, love continues; and in this sense
the Apostle says, Love is greater than Faith, because it abides longest, 1
Cor. 13.8. (...), Charity never fails. Faith is the Jacob's Staff we walk
with in this life, 2 Cor. 7.5. We walk by Faith; but we shall set this Jacob's
Staff at Heavens door, and only love shall enter. Thus love carries away the
Crown from all the other graces. Love is the most long-lif'd grace, it is a
blossom of Eternity. How should we strive to excel in this grace, which alone
shall live with us in Heaven, and shall accompany us to the Marriage Supper of
the Lamb?

14. Love to God will never let sin thrive in the heart. 14.
Some Plants will not thrive when they are near together, as the Laurel and
Vine: The love of God withers sin: Though the Old man live, yet as a sick man,
it is weak, and draws its breath short. Love, like the water of Jealousy,
makes the thigh of sin to rot. The Flower of love kills the Weed of sin; though
sin does not dye perfectly, yet it dies daily. How should we labor for that
grace, which is the only aqu^-fortis to destroy sin.

15.
15. Love to God is an excellent means for growth of grace. 2 Pet. 3. ult. But
grow in grace. Growth of grace is very pleasing to God. Christ accepts the
truth of grace, but commends the degrees of grace; and what can more promote
and augment grace, than love to God? Love is like watering of the Root, which
makes the Tree grow: Therefore the Apostle uses this expression in his prayer,
1 These. 3.5. The Lord direct your hearts into the love of God. He knew this
grace of love would nurse and cherish all the graces.

16.
16. The great benefit which will accrue to us, if we love God, 1 Cor. 2.9. Eye
has not seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into the heart of man, the
things which God has prepared for them that love him. The Eye has seen rare
sights, the Ear has heard sweet Music; But eye has not seen, nor ear heard,
nor can the heart of man conceive, what God has prepared for them that love
him! Such glorious rewards are laid up, that (as Austin says) Faith it self is
not able to comprehend. God has promised a Crown of life to them that love
him, James 1.12. This Crown encircles within it all blessedness, Riches, and
Glory, and Delight; and it is a Crown that fades not away, 1 Pet. 5.4. Thus God
would bribe us to love him by rewards.

17. Love to God is Armor of proof against error. 17.
For want of hearts full of love, men have heads full of error: Unholy
Opinions are for want of holy Affections. Why are men given up to strong
Delusions, but because they received not the Truth in love? 2 These. 2.10, 11.
The more we love God, the more we hate those Heterodox Opinions that would draw
us off from God into Libertinism: The more a man loves health, the more he
hates Mercury.

18. If we love God, 18.
we have all winds blowing for us, every thing in the world shall conspire for
our good: We know not what fiery Trials we may meet with, but to them that Love
God all things shall work for good: Those things which work against them, shall
work for them; their Cross shall make way for a Crown; every Wind shall blow
them to the heavenly Port.

19.
19. Want of love to God is the Ground of Apostasy. The Seed in the Parable
which had no root, fell away: He who has not the love of God rooted in his
heart will fall away in time of temptation. He who loves God, will cleave to
him, as (...) to Naomi, Ruth 1.16. Where thou go I will go, and where thou
dyest I will dye. But he who wants love to God will do as Orpah to her
Mother-in-Law, she kissed her, and took her farewell of her. That Soldier who
has no love to his Commander, when he sees an opportunity he will leave him,
and run over to the Enemies side. He who has no love in his heart to God, you
may prick him down for an Apostate.

20. Love is the only thing, in which we can retaliate with God. 20.
If God be angry with us, we must not be angry again; if he chide us, we must
not chide him again; but if God love us, we must love him again: There is
nothing in which we can answer God again, but love; we must not give him word
for word, but we must give him love for love. Thus we have seen twenty Motives
to excite and inflame our love to God.

Quest. How shall we do to love God?

Answ. 1. Study God: Did we study him more, we should love him more. Take a
view of his superlative Excellencies (...). Merc. Tris^egist.
, his Holiness, his incomprehensible goodness: The Angels know God better than
we, and clearly behold the splendor of his Majesty, therefore they are so
deeply enamoured with him.

2. Labor for an Interest in God, Psalm. 36.1. O God, thou art my God; That
Pronoun My, is suavissima amoris illecebra, a sweet Lodestone to Love; a man
loves that which is his own. The more we believe, the more we love: Faith is
the Root, and love is the Flower that grows upon it, Gal. 6.5. Faith which
works by love.

3. Make it your earnest request to God that he will give you an heart to love
him; Dilectio Dei, donum Dei. Aust.
this is an acceptable request, sure, God will not deny it. When King Solomon
asked wisdom of God, 1 Kings 3.9. Give therefore thy servant an understanding
heart: Verse. 10. The speech pleased the Lord. So when thou cryest to God, Lord,
give me an heart to love thee, it is my grief I can love thee no more; O kindle
this fire from Heaven upon the Altar of my heart; sure this prayer pleases the
Lord, and he will pour of his Spirit upon thee, whose golden Oil shall make the
Lamp of thy Love burn bright.

2 Branch
2. I proceed to the second Branch of Exhortation: You who have love to God,
labor to preserve it; let not this love dye, and be quenched. As you would
have Gods love be continued to you, let your love be continued to him. Love, as
fire, will be ready to go out: Rev. 2.4. Thou have left thy first love. Satan
labors to blow out this flame, and through neglect of Duty we lose it. When a
tender body leaves off clothes, it is apt to get cold: so when we leave off
duty, by degrees we cool in our love to God. Of all graces, Love is soonest apt
to decay; therefore we had need be the more careful to preserve it. If a man
has a Jewel, he will keep it; if he has Land of Inheritance, he will keep it;
what care then should we have to keep this grace of Love? It Is sad to see
professors declining in their love to God: Many are in a spiritual consumption,
their Love is decaying.

There are four Signs, whereby Christians may know their love is in a
Consumption.

1. When they have lost their taste. He that is in a deep Consumption, has no
taste; he finds not that savoury relish in his meat, as formerly: So when
Christians have lost their taste, they find no sweetness in a promise, it is a
sign of a spiritual Consumption, 1 Pet. 2.3. If so be ye have tasted the Lord
is gracious. Time was, when they found comfort in drawing nigh to God; His Word
was as the dropping honey, very delicious to the pallat of their soul: but now
it is otherwise, they can taste no more sweetness in spiritual things, than in
the white of an Egg, Job 6.6. This is a sign they are in a Consumption; to lose
the taste, argues the loss of the first love.

2. When Christians have lost their Appetite. A man in a deep Consumption, has
not that Stomach to his meat, as formerly. Time was when Christians did hunger
and thirst after righteousness, they minded things of an heavenly aspect, the
Grace of the Spirit, the blood of the Cross, the Light of Gods Countenance;
they had a stomach to Ordinances, and came to them as an hungry man to a feast;
but now the case is altered, they have no Appetite, they do not so prize
Christ, they have not such strong affections to the Word, their hearts do not
burn within them; a sad presage they are in a consumption, their love is
decaying. It was a sign David's natural strength was abated, when they covered
him with clothes, and yet he gat no heat, 1 Kings 1.1. So when men are plied
with hot Clothes, I mean Ordinances, yet they have no heat of affection, but
are cold, and stiff, as if they were ready to be laid forth; this is a sign
their first love is declined, they are in a deep Consumption.

3. When Christians grow more in love with the World, it argues the decrease of
spiritual love. They were once of a sublime Heavenly temper, they did speak the
language of Canaan; but now they are like the fish in the Gospel, which had
money in its mouth, Mat. 17. ult. they cannot lisp out three words, but one is
about (...); their thoughts and affections (like Satan) are still compassing
the earth; a sign they are going down the hill apace, their love to God is in a
Consumption. We may observe, when Nature decays and grows weaker, persons go
more stooping: And truly when the heart goes more stooping to the Earth, and is
so bowed together, that it can scarce lift up it self to an Heavenly thought,
it is now sadly declining in its first love. When Rust cleaves to Metal, it
does not only take away the brightness of the Metal, but it does canker and
consume it: So when the earth cleaves to men's souls, it does not only hinder
the shining luster of their graces, but it does by degrees canker their graces.

4. When Christians make little reckoning of Gods Worship; Duties of Religion
are performed undone, yet they are ill done; this is a sad Symptom of a
spiritual Consumption; Remissness in Duty, shows a decay in our first love. The
strings of a Viol being slack, the Viol can never make good music: When men
grow slack in Duty, they pray as if they prayed not, this can never make any
harmonious sound in Gods Ears. When the spiritual Motion, like that of the
Eighth Sphea^, is ^^ow and heavy, and the Pulse of the soul beats low, it is a
sign Christians have left their first love.

Let us take heed of this spiritual Consumption; it is dangerous to abate in our
love. Love is such a grace as we know not how to be without. A Soldier may as
well be without his weapons, a Limner without his pensil, a Musician without
his Viol, as a Christian can be without love. The body cannot want its ^^tural
heat. Love is to the soul, as the natural heat is to the body, there is no
living without it. Love does influence the graces, it excites the affections,
it makes us grieve for sin, it makes us cheerful in God; it is like oil to the
wheels; it quickens us in Gods service. How careful then should we be to keep
alive divine love!

Quest. How may we keep our love from going out?

Answ. Watch your hearts every day; take notice of the first declinings in
grace; observe your selves when you begin to grow dull and listless, and use
all means for quickening; be much in prayer, meditation, holy conference. When
the fire is going out you throw on fuel: So when the flame of your love is
going out, make use of Ordinances, and Gospel-promises, as fuel to keep the
fire of your love burning.

3 Branch.
3. Let me exhort Christians to increase in love to God; let your love be boiled
up higher, Phil. 1.9. And this I pray, that your love may abound, (...). more
and more. Our love to God should be as the light of the morning; first there is
the Crepusculum or daybreak, then it shines brighter to the full Meridian.
They who have a few sparks of love should (...) blow up those divine sparks
into a flame. A Christian should not be content with so small a dram of grace,
as may make him scruple whether he has any grace or no, but should be still
improving the stock. He who has a little gold would have more; you who love
God a little, labor to love him more. A godly man is like a dropsy man, the
more grace he drinks in, the more he thirsts: He is contented with a very
little of the world, yet he is never satisfied, but would have more of the
Spirits influence, and labors to add one degree of love to another. To
persuade Christians to put more Oil to the Lamp, and increase the flame of
their love, let me propound these four divine Incentives.

1. The growth of love evidenceth the truth. Elisha's cloud) we may conclude,
it is true and genuine.

2. By the growth of love we imi^ate the Saints in the Bible: Their love to
God, like the waters of the Sanctuary did rise higher. The Disciples love to
Christ at first was weak, they fled from Christ, but after Christ's death it
grew more vigorous, and they made an open profession of him. Peter's love at
first was more infirm and languid, he denied Christ, but afterward how boldly
did he pr^ach him! Acts 4.10. yea, when Christ put him to a trial of his love,
John 21.16. Simon, love thou me? Peter could make his humble, yet confident
appeal to Christ, Lord thou know that I love thee. Thus that tender plant
which before was blown down with the wind of a temptation, now is grown into a
Cedar, which all the powers of hell could not shake.

The growth of love will amplify

4. The more we love God, the degrees of love. Saint Paul counted Gold and
Pearl but dung for Christ, Phil. 3.8. Yea, he was so inflamed in love to God,
that he could have wished himself accursed from Christ, for his Brethreo the
Jews, Romans 9.3. Not that he could be accursed from Christ; but such was his
fervent love, and pious zeal for the glory of God, that he would have been
content to have suffered, even beyond what is fit to speak, if God might have
had more honor.

Here was love scrued up to the highest pitch, that it was possible for a
mortal to arrive at; and behold how near he lay to Gods heart! the Lord makes
known the Arcana Coeli, he takes him up to Heaven a while, and lays him in his
bosom, where he had such a glorious sight of God, and heard those (...),
unspeakable words, which it is not lawful for a man to utter, 2 Cor. 12.4.
Never was any man a loser by his love to God.

5. If our love to God does not above all things endeavor to cherish and
excite their love to God. This Exhortation will be out of date when we come to
Heaven, for then our light shall be clear, and our love perfect; but now it is
in season to exhort, that our love to God may abound yet more and more.

EFFECTUAL CALLING.
CHAP. XI. Concerning Effectual Calling.
THe second Qualification of the persons to whom this privilege in the Text
belongs, the called of God: All things shall work for good (...), to them who
are called. Though this word [ called] be placed in order after loving of God,
yet in nature it goes before it: Love is first named, but not first wrought; we
must be called of God, before we can love God.

Calling, is made in the 30. verse of this Chapter, the middle link of the
golden chain of Salvation; it is placed between Predestination and
Glorification; and if we have this middle link fast, we are sure of the two
other ends of the Chain. For the clearer illustration of this, there are six
things observable.

SECTION I. A Distinction about Calling.
Distinction. There is a twofold call. 1. An outward call, which is nothing
else but Gods blessed tender of grace in the Gospel, his parlying with sinners,
when he woes them to come in and accept of mercy: Of this our Savior speaks,
Mat. 20.16. Many are called, but few chosen. This external call is insufficient
to salvation, yet sufficient to leave men without excuse.

2. There is an inward call, when God does wonderfully overpower the heart,
and draw the will to embrace Christ; This is, as Saint Austine speaks, Vocatio
alta, and efficax, an Effectual call. God, by the outward call, blows a Trumpet
in the ear; by the inward call, he opens the heart, as he did the heart of
Lydia, Acts 16.14. The outward call may bring men to a profession of Christ,
the inward call brings them to a possession of Christ: The outward call does
curb a sinner, the inward call does change him.

SECTION II. Our deplorable condition before we are called.
2.WHAT we are before this call. 1. We are in a state of vassalage. Nihil
du^ius servitute. Cic.
Before God calls a man, he is at the Devils call. If he says go, he goes: The
deluded sinner is like the Slave that digs in the Mine, hews in the Quarry,
tugs at the Oar; he is at the command of Satan, as the Ass is at the command of
the Driver. 2. We are in a state of darkness, Ephesians. 5.8. Ye were sometimes
darkness. 1. Darkness is very disconsolate. A man in the dark, is full of fear,
he trembles every step be takes. 2. It is dangerous: He who is in the dark, may
quickly go out of the right way, and fall into Rivers and Whirlpools; So in the
dark of ignorance, we may quickly fall into the Whirl-pool of Hell. 3. Before
we are savingly called, we are in a state of impotency, Romans 5.6. (...), When
we were without strength: No strength to resist a temptation, or grapple with a
corruption; sin cut the lock where our strength lay. Nay, there is not only
impotency, but obstinacy, Acts 7.51. Ye do always resist the Holy Ghost.
Besides indisposition to good, there is opposition. 4. We are in a state of
pollution, Ezekiel. 16.6. I saw thee polluted in thy blood. The fancy mints
earthly thoughts, the heart is the Devils Forge, where the sparkles of lust
fly. 5. We are in a state of damnation; we are born under a sad Planet, 1 John
3.36. The wrath of God abides on us. This is our condition before God is
pleased by a merciful call to being us near to himself, and free us from that
misery in which we were before ingulphed.

SECT. III. The Means of our blessed Call.
3. THe means of our Effectual call. The ordinary Familists hold, but is,

1. Partly by his Word, which is Virga virtutis, The Rod of his strength, Psalm.
110.2. The voice of the Word is Gods call to us; therefore he is said [ now] to
speak to us from Heaven, Heb. 12.25. that is, in the Ministry of the Word. When
the Word calls from sin, it is as if we heard a voice from Heaven.

2. Partly by his Spirit; this is the loud call. The Word is the instrumental
cause of our conversion, the Spirit is the efficient. The Ministers of God are
only the pipes and Organs; it is the Spirit blowing in them, that does
effectually change the heart, Acts 10.44. While Peter spoke, the Holy Ghost
fell on all them that heard the Word Nisi spiritus adsit cordi audientis,
inan^^ est labor docentis.
. It is not the Husbandmans industry in plowing and sowing, will make the
ground fruitful, without the early and latter rain. So it is not the seed of
the Word will effectually convert, unless the Spirit put forth its sw^et
influence, and drops as rain upon the heart: Therefore the help of Gods Spirit
is to be implored, that he would put forth his powerful voice, and awaken us
out of the grave of unbelief. If a man knock at a gate of Brass, it will not
open; but if he come with a key in his hand, it will open: So when God, who
has the key of David in his hand Rev. 3.7.
, comes, he opens the heart, though it be never so fast locked against him.

SECTION IV. Gods Method in calling Sinners.


1. Sometimes in the still voice. Such as have had godly Parents, and have sat
under the warm Sunshine of Religious education, know not many times how or
when they were called; the Lord did secretly and gradually instill grace into
their hearts, as the dew falls insensibly in drops; they know by the Heavenly
effects, that they are called, but the time or manner they know not. The finger
moves on the Dial, but we are not sensible when it moves. Thus God deals with
some.

2. Others are more stubborn and knotty sinners, and God comes to them in a
rough wind; he uses more wedges of the Law to break their hearts; he deeply
humbles them, and shows them they are damned without Christ; then, having
Ploughed up the fallow ground of their hearts by humiliation, he sows the seeds
of consolation; he presents Christ and mercy to them, and draws their wills,
not only to accept Christ, but passionately to desire, and fiducially to rest
upon him. Thus he wrought upon Paul, and called him from a Persecutor to a
Preacher. This call, though it be more visible than the other, yet not more
real. A Fontinel may be made in the body as well by corrosive as incision. Gods
Method in calling sinners may vary, but the effect is still the same.

SECTION V. The properties of the divine call.
5. THe Properties of this call. 1. It is Actio haec non fit coactio; Deus non
torquet, sed trahit.
, Psalm. 100.3. Thy people shall be a willing people in the day of thy power.
After this call there are no more disputes, the soul readily obeys Gods call:
As when Christ called Zacheus he did joyfully embrace him into his heart and
house. (...).


2. It is an holy call. 2 Timothy 1.9. Who has called us with an holy calling.
This call of Gods calls men out of their sins; by it they are consecrated and
set apart for God. The Vessels of the Tabernacle were taken from common, and
set apart to an holy use; so they who are effectually called, are separated
from sin, and consecrated to Gods service. The God whom we worship is holy, the
work we are employed in is holy, the place we hope to arrive at is holy; all
this calls for holiness. A Christians heart is is to be the Presence Chamber of
the Blessed Trinity; and shall not Holiness to the Lord be written upon it?
Believers are Children of God the Father, Members of God the Son, Temples of
God the Holy Ghost; and shall not they be holy? Holiness is the Badge and
Livery of Gods people, Isa. 63.18. (...) The people of thy holiness. As
chastity distinguishes a virtuous woman from an harlot: So holiness
distinguishes the Godly from the wicked. It is an Holy calling: Let not any
man say he is called of God, that lives in sin. Has God called thee to be a
Swearer, to be a Drunkard? Nay, let not the moral person say he is effectually
called: What is civility without sanctity? It is but a dead carcass strawed
with flowers. The Kings picture stamped upon Brass will not go current. The
civil man looks as if he had the King of Heavens Image stamped upon him; but he
is no better than counterfeit metal, which will not pass for current with God.

3. It is an irresistible call. When God calls a man by his grace, he cannot
but come. You may resist the Ministers call, but you cannot resist the Spirits
call: The Finger of the blessed Spirit can write upon an heart of stone, as
once he wrote his Laws upon Tables of stone. Gods words are Verba creativa,
Creating words; when he said, Let there be light, there was light; and when he
says, Let there be faith, it shall be so. When God called Paul, he answered to
the call, Acts 26.19. I was not disobedient to the Heavenly vision (...). Chrysostom.
. God rides forth conquering in the Charet of his Gospel; he makes the blind
eye see, and the stony heart bleed. If God will call a man, nothing shall
ponere obicem, or lie in the way to hinder; difficulties shall be untied, the
Powers of Hell shall disband, Romans 9.19. Who has resisted his will? God bends
the Iron sinew, and cuts asunder the Gates of Brass, Psalm. 107.16. When the
Lord touches a man's heart by his Spirit, all proud imaginations are brought
down, and the Fort-Royal of the Will yields to God. I may allude to that, Psalm.
114.5. What ailed thee, O thou Sea, that thou fleddest? and thou Jordan, that
thou were driven back? The man that before was as a raging Sea, foaming forth
wickedness, now on a sudden he flies back and trembles, he falls down as the
Iaylor, What shall I do to be saved? What ailes thee, O Sea? What ailes this
man? the Lord has been effectually calling him, he has been a working a work
of grace, and now his stubborn heart is conquered by a sweet violence.

4. It is an high calling, Phil. 3.14. I press toward the mark, for the price
of the high calling of God. It is an high calling; 1. Because we are called to
high exercises of Religion; to dye to sin, to be crucified to the world, to
live by faith, to have fellowship with the Father, 1 John 1.3. This is an high
calling, here is a work too high for men in a state of nature to perform. 2. It
is an high calling, because we are called to high Privileges, to Justification
and Adoption, to be made Coheirs with Christ Romans 8.17. (...) Aeternae vitae
and gloriae participes; aperiuntur, hic nobis limpidissimi fontes, etc. Beza.
. He that is effectually called is higher then the Princes of the earth.

5. It is a gracious call, it is the fruit and product of free grace. That God
should call some, and not others; some taken, and others left; one called who
is of a more rugged mo^ose disposition, another of acu^er parts, of a sweeter
temper, rejected, here is free-grace^: That the poor should be rich in faith,
heirs of of a Kingdom, Iam. 25. And the Nobles, and Great ones of the world for
the most part reprobated, 1 Cor. 1.26. Not many Noble are called. What is this
free and rich grace? Mat. 11.26. Even so Father, for so it seemed good in thy
sight. That in the same Sermon one should be effectually wrought upon, another,
no more moved then a dead man with the sound of Music; that one should hear a
Spirits voice in the Word, another not hear it; that one should be softened and
moistened wi^h the influences of Heaven; another, like Gideons dry fleece has
no dew upon him; behold here distinguishing grace! The same affliction converts
one, hardens another? affliction to one, is as the bruising of Spices, which
cast forth a fragrant smell; to the other is as the stamping of Weeds in a
Mortar, which are more unfavoury; whence is this, but the (...), the free grace
of God? It is a gracious calling, it is all enameld and inter-woven with
free grace, Si cogitare coeperis O anima mea, quot, and quales sint qui hanc
quae tibi data est gratiam consequi non potuerunt; audisti certe quod muliae
gentes pertransierunt, quae omnes sine cognitione Dei in interitum sempiternum
dilapsae sunt omnibus illis redemptor tuus te praetulit, gratiamque ejus
largitus est; and quare hoe? nullam praeter salvatoris Charitatem, invenire
poteris Causam; elegit te in omnibus, assumpsit te ex omnibus, amavit te pre
omnibus, ut memoriale ejus semper esset apud te Austin.
.

6. It is a glorious call, 1 Pet. 5.10. Who has called us into his eternal
Glory. We are called to the glorious enjoyment of the ever-blessed God: As if a
man were called out of a Prison to sit upon a Throne. Quirtus Curt^us writes of
one, who ^igging in his Garden was called to be King. Thus God calls us to
Glory and Virtue, 2 Pet. 1.3. First, to Virtue, then to Glory. At Athens there
were two Temples, the Temple of Virtue, and the Temple of Honor; and no man
could go to the Temple of Honor, but through the Temple of Virtue. So God
calls us first to Virtue, and then to Glory. What is the glory among men, which
most so hunt after, but a feather blown in the Air? what is it to the weight of
glory? I^ the^e not great reason we should follow Gods call? He calls to
preferment; can there be any loss or prejudice in this? God would have us part
with nothing for him, but that which will damn us if we keep; he has no design
upon us, but to make us happy; he calls us to salvation, he calls us to a
Kingdom: Oh how should we then, wi^h Bartimeus, throw off our ragged coat of
sin, and follow Christ when he calls!

7. It is a rare call; but few are savingly called, Matthew. 22.14. Few are
chosen: Few* not Collectively, but Comparatively. The word (...) to call,
signifies to choose out some from among others. Many have the light brought to
them, but few have their eyes anointed to see that light, Rev. 3.4. Thou have
(...), few Names in Sardis that have not defiled their Garments. The Devil has
the Vintage, God has only a few gleanings. How many Millions sit in the
Region of darknes^? and in those Climates where the Sun of Righteousness does
shine, many there are, who receive the light of the Truth, not the love. There
are many Formalists, but few Believers. There is something looks like Faith,
which is not. The Cyprian Diamond (says Pliny) sparkles like the true Diamond,
but it is not of the right kind, it will break with the hammer: So the
Hypocrites faith will break with the hammer of Persecution. But few are truly
called. The number of precious stones are few to the number of gravel-stones.
Most men shape their Religion according to the fashion of the times; they are
for the Music and the Idol, Dan. 3.7. The serious thoughts of this, would make
us work out salvation with fear, and labor to be in the number of those few,
whom God has translated into a state of grace.

8. It is an unchangeable call, Romans 11.9. The Gifts and calling of God are
(...), without Repentance; that is (as a learned Writer says) those gifts
which flow from Election Willet.
. When God calls a man, he does not repent of it: God does not as many friends,
love one day, and hate another; or as Princes, who make their Subjects
favorites, and then throw them in Prison. This is the blessedness of a Saint,
his condition admits of no alteration. Gods call is sounded upon his decree,
and his decree is immutable. Acts of grace cannot be reversed. God blots out
his peoples sins, but not their names. Let the world ring changes every hour, a
believers condition is ^ixed and unalterable.

SECT. VI. Showing the end of Effectual Calling.
Heavenly Calling, and that is the honor of the High God, Ephesians. 1 12. That we
should be to the praise of his glory. He that is in the state of nature, is no
more fit to honor God, then a Bruit is to put forth acts of Reason. A man
before conversion continually reflects dishonor upon God. As black vapors
which arise out of Fenny Moorish grounds do cloud and darken the Sun. So out of
the natural man's heart arise black vapors of sin, which cast a cloud upon Gods
glory. The sinner is versed in Treason, but understands nothing of Loyalty to
the King of Heaven. I, but there are some whom the lot of Free Grace falls
upon, and these shall be taken as Jewels from among the Rubbish, and be
effectually called, that they may lift up Gods name and honor in the world.
The Lord will have some in all Ages, who shall oppose the corruptions of the
times, bear witness to his truths convert sinners from the error of their
ways: He will have his Worthies, as King David had. They who have been
Monuments of Gods mercies, will be Trumpets of his praise.

CHAP. XII. Two Inferences drawn from the Proposition.
1. IT shows us the necessity of effectual calling; Heaven: We must be made
meet for the inheritance, Col. 1.12. As God makes Heaven fit for us, so he
makes us fit for Heaven; and what gives this idoneity and meetness, but
effectual Calling? A man remaining in the filth and rubbish of nature, is no
more fit for Heaven, than a dead man is fit to inherit. The High Calling is not
a thing arbitrary, or indifferent, but as needful as salvation; yet, alas, how
is this one thing needful neglected! Most men, like the people of Israel,
wander up and down to gather straw, but mind not evidences of their effectual
Calling.

2 Branch.
2. Take notice what a mighty power God puts forth in Calling of sinners! God
does so call as draw* John* 6.44. Conversion is styled a Resurrection, Rev.
20.6. Blessed is he that has part in the first Resurrection; that is a rising
^^om sin to grace. A man can no more convert himself, than a d^ad man can raise
himself. It is called a Crea^ion, Col. 3.10. To create is above the power of
nature.

Object.
But say the Arminians, the Will is not dead, but sleepe^h, and God by a moral
persuasion d^es only awaken us, and then the will can ob^y Gods call and move
of it self to its own conversion.

Answ.
To this I answer, Every man is by sin bound in ^etters* Acts 8.23. I perceive
thou art in the bond of iniquity. A man that is in fetters if you use
arguments, and persuade him to go, is that sufficient? there must be a beating
off his fetters, and setting him free, before he can walk: So it is with every
natural man, he is fettered with corruption; now the Lord by converting grace
must file off his fetters, nay, give him legs to run too, or he can never
obtain salvation.

CHAP. XIII. Exhorting to the heavenly Calling.
2. Labor to clear this to your own souls, that you are savingly called, 2
Pet. 1.10. Give diligence to make your calling sure. This effectual calling.
Acquiesce not in ou^ward privileges, do not cry as the Jews, The Temple of the
Lord; rest not in Baptism; what is it to have the Water, and want the Spirit?
Be not content that you were born within the sound of Aarons Bells, that Christ
has been preached to you; Satisfy not your selves with an empty profession;
all this may be, and yet you are no better than blazing Comets; but labor to
evidence to your souls that you are called of God: Be not Athenians to enquire
News, what is the state and complexion of the times? what are the effects of
such an Eclipse? what changes are like to happen in such a year? what is all
this if you are not effectually called? what if the times should have a fairer
aspect? what though glory did dwell in our Land, if grace does no^ dwell in our
hearts? Psalm. 35.9.
Oh my Brethren, when things a^e da^k without, let all be clear within, Give
diligence to make your calling sure; it is both feasible and probable, God is
not wan^ing to them that seek him; let not this great business hang in hand any
longer. If there were controver^^e about your Land, you would use all means to
clear your Title; and is salvation nothing? will not you clear your Title here?
Consider how sad your effectually called.

1. You are strangers to God; The P^odigal went into a far Country, Luk 15.13.
to imply that every sinner before conve^sion is a far off from God, Ephesians.
2.12. At that time ye were without Christ, strangers to the Covenants of
Promise. Men dying in their sins have no more right to Promises than strangers
have to the right* Privileges of free-bo^n Ci^izens. If you are strangers, what
language can yo expect I know you not?

2. If you are not effectually called, you are enemies, Col. 1.21. Alienated
and enemies. There is nothing in the Bible you can lay claim to but the
threatings: you a^e heirs to all the plagues written in the Book of God: Though
you may resist the Commands of the Law, you cannot fly from the Curses of the
Law. Such as are enemies to God, let them read their doom. Luke ^9.27. But
those mine enemies which would not that I should reign over them, bring hither,
and slay them before me. Oh therefore, how nearly does it concern you, to make
your calling sure? How miserable and damnable will your condition be, if Death
call you, before the Spirit call you!

Quest. 1. But is there any hope of my being called? I have been a great sinner.

Answ. Great sinners have been called. Paul was as bloody a persecutor, as ever
Domitian or Julian; yet he was called (...). Chrysostom.
. Some of the Jews, who had an hand in crucifying Christ, were called. God
loves to display the Flag of Free Grace to sinners. Therefore be not
discouraged; you see a golden Cord let down from Heaven, for poor trembling
souls to lay hold upon.

Quest. 2. But how shall I know that I am effectually called?

Answ. 1. He who is savingly called, is called out of himself; not only sinful
self, but righteous self; he denies his duties and moral endowments, Phil. 3.9.
Not having mine own righteousness. He whose heart God has touched by his
Spirit, lays down the Idol of Self-righteousness at Christ's feet for him to
tread upon; he uses morality, and Duties of Pi^ty, but does not trust to them.
Noah's Dove made use of her wings to fly, but trusted to the Ark for safety.
This is excellent, when a man is called out of himself. This self-renunciation
is (as Austin says) Primus ad fidem aditus, the first step to saving faith.

effectually called has a visible change wrought; not a change of the
faculties, but of the qualities; he is altered from what he was before; his
body is the same, but not his mind; he has another spirit Numb. 14.24.
, he is alter idem. Paul was so changed after his conversion, that people did
not know him, Acts 9.21. Oh what a Metamorphosis does grace make! 1 Cor. 6.11.
And such were some of you; but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified Abluti a
sordibus peccatorum Sanctificati per renovationem interioris hominis. Clarius.
. Grace is the true Verticordia, it turns the heart. In effectual calling there
is a threefold change wrought.

1. There is a change wrought in the Understanding: darkness was upon the face
of the deep, but now there is light, Ephesians. 5.8. Now ye are light in the Lord.
The first work God made was light; so it is in the new Creation; he who is
savingly called, says as that man in the Gospel, John 9.25. Whereas I was
blind, now I see. He sees that evil in sin, and excellenty in the ways of God,
as he never saw before. Indeed this light which the blessed spirit brings may
well be called (...)* a marveleus light, 1 Pet. 2 9. That ye should show forth
the praises of him who has called you into his marvelous light Inseritur (...)
ad deno^andam hujus lucis excellentiam. Grot.
. It is a marvelous light in six respects, 1. Because it is strangely conveyed;
it does not come from the Caelestial Orbs, where the Planets are, but from the
Sun of Righteousness. 2. It is marvelous in the effect: This light does that
which no other light can, it makes a man see himself blind. 3. It i^ a
marvelous light, because it is more penetrating; other light may shine upon the
face, this light shines upon the heart, and enlightens the Conscience, 2 Cor.
4.6. -- 4. It is a marvelous light, because it sets those that have it a
marveling: they marvel at themselves, how they could be contented so long
without it; they marvel that their eyes should be opened, and not others; they
marvel that notwithstanding they hated and opposed this light, yet it should
shine in the Firmament of their souls. This is that the Saints will stand
wondering at to all eternity. 5. It is a marvelous light, because it is more
virtual than any other; it does not only enlighten, but quicken, it makes
alive those who were dead in trespasses and sins; therefore it is elegantly
called Lumen vita, the light of life, John 8.12. -- 6. It is a marvelous light,
because it is the beginning of the everlasting light. The light of grace is the
morning star which ushers in the Sun-light of glory.

Now then Christian, Can thou say, that this marvelous light of the Spirit
has dawned upon thee? when thou were inveloped in ignorance and did neither
know God nor thy self, suddenly, A light from Heaven shined round about thee.
This is one part of that blessed change which is wrought in the effectual
calling.

2. There is a change wrought in the Will 7.18. To will is present with me. The
Will which before opposed Christ, now embraces him; the Will which was an Iron
Sinew, now is like melting Wax, it readily receives the stamp and impression of
the holy Ghost. The Will as the Primum Mobile, moves heavenward, and carries
all the O^bs of the affections along with it. The regenerate Will answers to
every call of God, as the Echo answers to the voice, Acts 9.6. Lord, what will thou have me to do? The Will now becomes a Volunteer, it lifts it self under
the Captain of Salvation Heb. 2.10.
. Oh what an happy change is wrought here! before Will kept Christ out, now it
keeps sin out.

Conversation. He who is called of God, walks directly contrary to what he did
before; he walked before in envy, and malice, now he walks in love; before he
walked in pride, now in humility: The Current is carried quite another way,
Acts 23.1. I have lived in all good Conscience. As in the heart their is a
New Birth, so in the life a New Edition, Thus we see what a a mighty change is
wrought in such as are called of God.

How far are they from this effectual call, who never had any change! They are
the same they were forty, fifty years ago, as proud and ca^nal as ever; they
have seen many changes in the times, but they have had no change in their
hearts. Let not men think to go to Heaven per saltum, to leap out of the
Harlots lap into Abraham's bosom; either they must have a gracious change while
they live, or a cursed change when they dye.

3. He who is called of God, esteems of God has called by his grace esteems it
more that he is called to be a Saint, then that he is called to be a King; he
values his High-Calling above his High-Birth. Theodosius thought it a grea^er
honor to be a Christian, than to be an Emperor. A carnal person can no more
value spiritual blessings, than a child can value a knot of Diamonds; he
perfers his wordly grandeur, his ease, plenty, titles of honor, before
conversion; he had rather be called Duke than Saint; a sign he is a stranger to
effectual calling. He who is enlightened by the Spirit* counts holiness his
best Heraldry, and looks upon his effectual calling as his preferment; when he
has taken this degree, he is a Candidate for Heaven.

4. He who is effectually called, is called Heavenly Calling, Heb. 3.1. He that
is called of God min^s the things of an Heavenly aspect; he is in the world,
but not of the wo^ld. Naturalists say of precious stones, though they have
their matter from the earth, yet their sparkling luster is from the influence
of the Heavens: So it is with a godly man, though his body be from the earth,
yet the sparkling of his affections is from Heaven; his heart is drawn into the
upper Region, as high as Christ. He does not only cast off every wicked work,
but every earthly weight; he is not a Worm, but an Eagle.

effectual calling, is diligence in our ordinary calling. Some brag of their
high calling, but they lie idle at Anchor. Religion does not se^^ Warrants to
idleness. Christians must not be as the Leviathan, which is made to play in the
Sea, Psalm. 104.26. Idleness is Balneum* Diaboli, the Devils Bath; a slothful
person becomes a prey (...) every tentation. Grace while it cures the heart
does not make the hand lame. He who is called of ^od, as he works for heaven,
so he works in his trade Vt rosa de spinis nascitur, ita e laboribus fructus
capitur jucundiffimus. Erasm.
. Now if upon sea^ch, you can find that you are effectually called, I have
three Exhortations to you.

CHAP. XIV. Three Exhortations to them who are called.
1. ADmire and adore Gods free grace in calling you; that God should leap over
so many, that he should pass by the wise and noble, and that the lot of
free grace Psalm. 145.2. I will extol thee, O God my King, every day will I
bless thee, and I will praise thy name for ever. Those who are Patterns of
mercy, should be Trumpets of praise. Oh long to be in Heaven, where your
thanksgivings shall be purer, and shall be raised a Note higher.

2. Pity those who are not yet called. Sinners envy, but pity, they are under
the power of Satan, Acts 26.18. They tread every day on the Banks of the
bottomless pit; and what if death should give them a jog? Oh pity uncoverted
sinners. If you pity an Ox or an Ass going astray, will not you pity a Soul
going astray from God, who has lost his way, and his wits, and is upon the
precipice of damnation.

Nay, not only pity sinners, but pray for them; Though they curse, do you
p^ay, You will pray for persons destracted; Sinners are distracted, Luke 15.17.
When he came to himself; it seems the Prodigal before conve^sion was not
himself. Wicked men are going to execution; Sin is the halter which strangles
them, Death turns them off the Ladder, and Hell is their buring place; and will
not you pray for them when you see them in such danger?

3. You who are effectually called honor your high calling, Ephesians. 4.1. I
therefore beseech (...).
of the vocation whrewith you are called. Christians must keep a Decorum; they
must ob^erve the (...), what is comely O anima mea formam tuam e^^cole f^^tem
orne, maculas terge, mores corige, dignam sponsam omni nisu te read. Ausl.
. This is a seasonable advice, when many who profess to be called of God, yet
by their loose incautelous walking, they cast a blemish on Religion, whereby
the ways of God a^e evil spoken of. It is Salvians Speech, What do Pagans say
when they see Christians live scandalously? Sure Christ taught them no better.
Will you reproach Christ, and make him suffer again, by abusing your Heavenly
calling (...). Ignat. Epist. ad Trall.
? It Is one of the saddest sights, to see a man lift up his hands in prayer, and
with those hands oppress; to hear the same tongue praise God, and at another
time lie and slander; to hear a man in words profess God, and in works deny
him: Oh how unworthy is this! Yours is a holy calling, and will you be unholy?
do not think you may take liberty as others. The Nazarite that had a vow on
him, separated him self to God, and promised abstinence; though others did
drink Wine, it was not fit for the Nazarite to do it: So though others are
loose and vain, it is not fit for them who are set apart for God by effectual
calling. Shall not Flowers sweeter then Weeds? You must be (...), A peculiar
People, 1 Pet. 2.9. Not only peculiar in regard of dignity, but deportment.
Scorn things that are sordid and heterogeneous to the Gospel. Scipio refused
the embraces of an Harlot, because he was General of an Army Abhor all motions
to sin, because it will disparage your high calling.

Quest. What is it to walk worthy of our Heavenly calling?

Answ. 1. It is to walk regularly, tread with an even foot, and walk according
to the Rules and Axioms of the Word. A true Saint is for Canonical Obedience,
he follows the canon of Scripture, as the ^reek word is, Gal. 6.16. As many as
walk according to this Canon (...).
. When we leave men's inventions, and cleave to Gods institutions; when we walk
after the Word, as Israel after the pillar of fire; this is walking worthy of
our Heavenly calling.

Genesis 7.1. Noah was upright in his Generation. When others walked with the
Devil, Noah walked with God. We are forbidden to run with the multitude, Exodus
23. Though in civil things singularity is not commendable, yet in Religion it
is good to be singular. Melancthon was the glory of the age he lived in.
Athanasius was singularly holy, he appeared for God when the stream of the
times ran another way. It is better to be a pattern of holiness, than a Pa^tner
in wickedness: It is better to go to Heaven with a few, than to Hell in the
crowd. We must walk Antipodes to the men of the world.

Phil. 4.4. Rejoice in the Lord evermore. Too much drooping of spirit
disparageth our high calling, and makes others suspect the godly life to be
Cynical and Melancholy. Of all complexions Christ loves the Sanguine. Causin^s
in his Hieroglyphics speaks of a Dove, whose wings being perfumed with sweet
Ointments, did draw the other Doves after her. Cheerfulness is a perfume to
draw others to godliness. Religion does not banish all mirth. As there is a
seriousness without sowrness, so there is a cheerfulness without lightness.
When the Prodigal was converted, then they began to be merry, Luke 15.24. Who
should be cheerful if not the people of God? They are no sooner born of the
Spirit, 2 Timothy 4.8.
but they are heirs to a Crown: God is their Portion, and Heaven is their
Mansion, and shall not they rejoice?

4. To walk worthy of our calling is to walk wisely. Walking wisely implies
three

1. To walk warily, Eccles. 2.14. The wise man's eyes are in his head. Others
watch for our halting, therefore we had need look to our standing. We must
beware, not only of Scandals, but Indecencies, least by our indiscretion we
open the mouths of others with a fresh cry against Religion. If our piety will
not convert men, our prudence may silence them.

2. To walk courteously. The Spirit of the Gospel is full of sweetness and
candor, 1 Pet. 3.8. Be courteous, (...) Take heed of a mo^ose supercisious
behavior. Religion does not take away civili^y, but refine it, Genesis 23.7.
Abraham stood up, and bowed himself to the children of Heth. Though they were
of an Heathenish Race, yet Abraham gave them a civil respect. S. Paul was of an
affable tem^e^, 1 Cor. 9.20. I am made all things to all men, that I might by
all means save some. In lesser matters the Apostle yielded to others, that by
his obliging carriage he might win upon them, and catch them by an holy guile.

3. To walk magnanimously. Though we must be humble, yet not base. It Is
unworthy to prostitu^e our selves to the lusts of men. What is sin^ully imposed
ought to be zealously opposed. Co^^cience is Gods Diocese, where (...) ha^h
right to visit, but he who is The Bishop of our souls, 1 Pet. 2.25. We must not
be like hot I^on, which will be beat into any form. A b^ave spi^ited Christian
will choose rather to ^ie, than suffer ^he Virginity of his Conscience to be
super^^itiously des^^ured. Here is the Serpent and the Dove united, sagacity
and innocence; this prudential walking comports with our high calling, and does
not a little adorn the Gospel of Christ.

5. To walk wo^thy of our calling, is to walk influentially; to do good to
others, and to be Heb. 13.16. Vt vita ex sensu and motu dignoscitur, ita fides
ex operibus. Bern
Good works honor Religion. As Mary poured the ointments on Christ; so by good
works we pour sweet ointments on the head of the Gospel, and make it give forth
a fragant smell. Good works, though they are not Causes of Salvation, yet they
are Evidences. When with our Savior we go about doing good, and send abroad
the refreshing influences of our liberality; now we walk worthy of our high
calling.

Lastly, Use ult.
Here is matter of Consolation to you who are effectually called, God has
magnified rich grace toward you; you are called to great honor, to be
Copartners with the Angels, and Coheirs with Christ: This should revive you
in the worst of times. Let men reproach and miscall you; set Gods calling of
you, against man's miscalling: Let men persecute you to death, they do but give
you a pass, and send you to Heaven the sooner: How may this cure the trembling
of the heart! What though the Sea roar, though the Earth be unquiet, though the
Stars are shaken out of their place? you need not fear; you are called,
therefore are sure to be crowned.

GODS ETERNAL PURPOSE.
CHAP. XV. Concerning Gods Purpose.
3. THe third and last thing in the Text, which I shall but briefly glance at,
is, The Ground and O^iginal of our Effectual Calling, in these words, (...),
According to his purpose: Anselm renders it, according to his good will
Signifaetern^^^ Dei b^n^placitum. Ans Im.
. Peter Martyr reads it, (...), according to his Decree; and so Beza Interprets
it. This purpose, or decree of God is the fountainhead of all our spiritual
blessings (...) est decre^um Dei* a aeterno sanctum, ex mera ipsius non
s^ruta^da sed adoranda vol^^tate. Beza
; it is causa (...), the impulsive cause of our Vocation, Justification,
Glorification; it is the highest link in the Golden Chain of Salvation. What is
the reason that one man is called, and not another? it is from the eternal
purpose of God. Gods Decree gives the casting voice in man's salvation.

CHAP. XVI. Showing that all must be resolved into Gods purpose.
Use. 1.
LEt us ascribe the whole work of grace to the pleasure of Gods Will. God did
not choose us because we were worthy, but by choosing us makes us worthy. Proud
men are apt to assume and arrogate too much to themselves in being sharers with
God. While many cry out of Church-sacriledge, they are in the mean time guilty
of a far greater sacrilege, in robbing God of his glory, while they go to set
the Crown of Salvation upon their own head: but we must resolve all into Gods
purpose. The Signs of salvation are in the Saints, but the Cause of salvation
is in God. If it be Gods purpose that saves, then,

1. Not Free Will. The Pelagians are strenuous asse^ters of Free Will, they
tell us, that a man ha^h an innate power to his own conversion; but this Text
confutes it, our calling is according to Gods purpose, The Scripture plucks up
the Weed of Freewill by the roots, Romans 9.16. It is not of him that wills.
All depends upon the (...), the purpose of God. When the Prisoner, is cast at
the Bar, there is no saving him unless the King has a purpose to save him.
Gods purpose is his Prerogative Royal.

2. If it be Gods purpose that saves, then not merit. Bellarmine holds, 2.
that good works do expiate sin, and merit Glory; no, the Text says, We are
called according to Gods purpose: and there is a parallel Scripture, 2 Timothy
1.9. Who has saved us, and called us, not according to our works, but
according to his own purpose and grace. There is no such thing as merit: Our
best works have in them, both defection and infection, and so are but splendida
peccata, glittering sins; Therefore if we are called and justified, it is Gods
purpose brings it to pass.

Object. But the Papists allege that Scripture for merit, 2 Timothy 4.8.
Henceforth is laid up for me a Crown of righteousness, which the Lord the
righteous Judge shall give me at that day. This is the force of their Argument,
If God in justice rewards our works, then they merit salvation.

Resp. To this I answer. First, God gives a reward as a just Judge, not to the
worthiness of our works, but to the worthiness of Christ. 2. God as a just
Judge rewards us, not because we have deserved it, but because he has promised
it. Debitorem se fecit Dominus, non accipiendo, sed promittendo. Aug.
; God has two Courts, a Court of Mercy, and a Court of Justice: the Lord
condemns those works in the Court of Justice, which he Crowns in the Court of
Mercy: Therefore that which carries the main stroke in our salvation, is the
(...), the Purpose of God.

3. If the purpose of God be the Springhead of happiness, then we are not saved
for Faith foreseen. It is absurd to think any thing in us could have the least
influence upon our Election Opera praevisa non possunt esse causae
Praedestinationis. Pet. Mar.
. The Arminians say, that God did foresee that such persons would believe,
therefore did choose them; and so they would make the business of salvation to
depend upon something in us: Whereas God does not choose us for faith, but to
faith, Ephesians. 1.4. He has chosen us, that we should be holy; not because we
would be holy, but that we might be holy. We are elected to holiness, not for
it Deus elegit fideles ut sint, non quia jam erant. Aug. de Praedest.
. What could God foresee in us but Pollution, and rebellion? If any man be
saved, it is (...), according to Gods purpose.

Quest. How shall we know that God has a purpose to save us?

Answ. By being effectually called. 2 Pet. 1.10. Give diligence to make your
calling and election sure. We make our Election sure, by making our Calling
sure. 2 These. 2.13. God has chosen you to salvation through sanctification. By
the Stream, we come at last to the Fountain: If we find the Stream of
Sanctification running in our souls, we may by this come to the Springhead of
Election. When a man's eyes are so weak that he cannot look up to the
Firmament, yet he may know the Moon is there, by seeing it shine upon the
water: So though I do not look up into the secret of Gods purpose, yet I may
know I am elected, by the shining of sanctifying grace in my soul. Whosoever
he be that can find the Word of God transcribed and copyed out into his heart,
may undeniably conclude his Election.

Use. 2.
Use. 2. Here is a sovereign Elixar, or unspeakable comfort to them who are the
called of God; their salvation rests upon Gods purpose, 2 Timothy 2.19. The
foundation of God stands sure, having this Seal, the Lord knows them that
are his. Our Graces are imperfect, our comforts ebb and flow, but Gods
foundation stands sure. They who are built upon this Rock of Gods Eternal
Purpose, need not fear falling away; neither the power of man, nor violence of
temptation, shall never be able to overturn them.

FINIS.

