THE ONE THING NECESSARY. Preached in a SERMON At Paul's, before the Right
Honorable the Lord Mayor, and the Aldermen of the City of LONDON, Aug. 31.
1656.

By Thomas Watson, Minister of Stephens Walbrook, LONDON.

The second Edition.

(...).

Ignatius. Heb. 2. 3. How shall we escape, if we neglect so great salvation.

LONDON, Printed by E. M. for Ralph Smith, at the Bible in Cornhil, near the
Royal Exchange; And Thomas Parkhurst, at the three Crowns at the lower end of
Cheap Side against the Conduit. 1658.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE JOHN DETHICK, Lord Mayor of the City of LONDON.
Right Honorable,
IT was not in my thoughts to have published this Sermon (I looked upon it as
too homespun) but in regard it was your Lordships request to me at the first,
and I have since received an invitation from your Honorable Court to that
purpose, I knew not how to deny, lest while I did shun your loving commands, I
should fall under your just censure. My Lord, it was my design in this Sermon
to call you off from the empty high-flown notions, and litigious, disputes of
these times, to look after that which is more solid, and wherein, I am sure
every man is very nearly concerned, Viz. the working out his salvation, Opus
non pulvinaris, sed pulveris; a work it is that may call forth the most
spiritful vigorous actings of the soul in the prosecution of it; pingimus
aeternitati. -- That work had need be well done which is for eternity.

My Lord, this is the true wisdom, to be wise to salvation 1 Timothy 5. 13.
; By this godly policy we shall go beyond all the Politicians of the times; we
shall escape hell, we shall be raised to the true (...) of honor; God will be
our Father, Christ our Brother, the Spirit our Comforter, the Angels our
Companions; when we die we shall carry a good conscience with us, and leave a
good Name behind us. I shall not further expatiate; I desire this Sermon may
come under your Honors Patrociny; some little addition you will find in the
end of it, which I had before prepared for you, but wanted time to serve it in;
The Lord enoble you with his Spirit, and crown you with soul-prosperity, which
shall be the prayer of him, who is

Your Honors in all Gospel-service, Tho. Watson.
From my Study at Steph. Walbrook, October. 15. 1656.
Phil. 2. 12. Work out your own salvation with fear and trembling.
IF there be any thing excellent, it is salvation; if there be any thing
necessary, it is working out salvation; if there be any tool to work with, it is
holy fear; work out your salvation with fear.

The words are a grave and serious exhortation, needful, not only for those
Christians which lived in the Apostles time, but may fitly be calculated for
the meridian of this age wherein we live.

In the Text observe, First the manner of insinuation. (...).

My beloved] The Apostle did labor by all means to ingratiate and wind I The
manner of insinuation.
himself into the hearts of the Philippians. He prescribes a Gospel-pil, and
dips it in sugar, that it may go down the better. He labors to possess the
Philippians of this maxim, that whatever he did speak to them about their
souls, was purely in love. Sometimes he steeps his words in tears, and speaks
weeping; Phil. 3 18
Sometimes he dips them in honey. Paul knew how to reprove; it was part of his
office, and a piece of his spiritual Chyrurgery; Rebuke them sharply, Tit. 1.
13.
or as the Greek word is, cuttingly; (...).
but when he had done launcing, he knew how to pour Wine and Oil into the
wound. He holds forth the breast as a nurse, and is willing not only to impart
his sermon to the people, but his soul.*

And herein the Apostle Paul se^ a Copy to all the Ministers of Christ. Their
hearts must be fired not with heat of passion, but love toward their people.
They are Christ's ambassadors, and must come with an olive branch of peace in
their mouths. If I speak with the tongue of Angels, and have not love, I am as
sounding brass, and a tinckling Cymbal, 1 Cor. 13. 1. It Is better to love as a
Pastor, then speak as an Angel. Love is that flos deliciarum, that flower of
delight which should grow in the heart, and send forth its perfume in the lips
of every Minister. 'Twas said of Origin, Magdebur. ceut. 3.
Cujus ex ore non tam verba quam mella profluere videbantur. Those which come
in a spirit of meekness to their people, are like to do most good; the more
they are (...), the more they are (...); knotty hearts will be soonest wrought
upon by love; the fire will go where the wedge cannot: The Thunderbolt may
break, but the Sun melts: Non fulmen sed flumen.
when love sends forth its sweet influence, it melts a sinner into tears: the
joints being hard and stiff, the rubbing them with oil does supple them; the
best way to supple an hard heart, and make it tender, is to ply it with this
oil of love. And thus much for the manner of insinuation. (...) My beloved.

I proceed now to the exhortation it self; 2 The Exhortation.
work out your own salvation with fear and trembling. Which words do branch
themselves into these three particulars.

First, The Act, (...) work out. Secondly, the Object, (...) your own
salvation. Thirdly, the modus, or the manner how we should work it out, Cum
timore and tremore, with fear and trembling. I shall speak principally of the
two first, and draw in the other briefly in the applicatory.

The Proposition is this, Doct.
That it should be a Christians great work to be working out his salvation. The
great God has put us into the world as into a vineyard, and here is the work
he has set us about, The working out salvation; there is a parallel Scripture
to this, 2 Pet. 1. 10. Give diligence to make your calling and election sure.
When estate, friends, life cannot be made sure, let this be made sure. The
Greek word (...) Verbum satagite significat angi and distorqueri sollicitudine
alicujus aei perficiendae. Lorinus.
signifies to study, or beat the brains about a thing. Beza. Ar. Montanus. 1
Otium excu^ere 2 Vires exerc^re.
This word in the Text (...) work out, implies two things. First, a shaking off
spiritual sloth. Sloth is pulvinar diaboli, a pillow on which many have slept
the sleep of death. Secondly, Jans nius
it implies an uniting and rallying together all the powers of our souls that
we may intend the business of salvation Ad summas usque vires tanquam pro vita
and morte luctan^um Cor^ (...)
. God has enacted a Law in Paradise, that no man shall eat of the Tree of
life, but in the sweat of his brows.

That which is in the Text, called working, has various appellations in
Scripure. First, Sometimes it is called Striving, Luke 13. 29. Strive to enter
in at the strait gate, (...): strive as in an agony, or bloody sweat. Secondly,
sometimes it is called Seeking, Mat. 6. 33. Seek ye first the Kingdom of God,
(...). As a man that has lost a treasure, seeks diligently for it. We have
lost salvation. Adam by eating the tree of knowledge, lost the tree of life.
Now seek, take David's candle and lanthorn, and search for salvation. The word
seek, (as a learned writer notes) signifies to pursue a thing with inflamed
desires, Rem acerrime expctere. Beza.
as a condemned man desires a pardon. Thirdly, Sometimes it is called running
in a race, 1 Cor. 9. 24. So run that ye may obtain, (...). The Apostle seems
to allude to the games of Olympus, which were celebrated every fifth year in
the honor of Jupiter; in those games they did put forth all their strength.
Whence that phrase, pulvere Olympico desudare. It Is along race from earth to
Heaven; lay aside all weights of sin which will hinder you in the race, and
reach forward with a winged swiftness to lay hold upon the mark. Fourthly,
Sometimes it is called offering violence to Heaven, Matthew 11. 12. The
Kingdom of Heaven suffers violence. There must not only be diligence, but
violence; we must not only pray, but pray fervently, Jam. 5. 16. not only
repent, but be Zealous and repent, Rev. 3. 19. not only love, but be sick of
love, Cant. 2. 5. This is offering violence; the Greek word (...) is a Metaphor
taken from a Castle that holds out in a siege, and will not be taken but by
storm: So the Kingdom of Heaven holds out against a supine lazy Christian, and
will not be taken but by storm.

I proceed now to the reasons enforcing this holy sweat and industry about
salvation; and they are three; we must work out salvation, because of, 1. The
Difficulty 2. The Rareness 3. The Possibility
of this work.

difficulty of this work, it is a work that may make us labor to the going
down of the sun of our life. Dan. 6. 14.
Now this difficulty about the work of salvation will appear four manner of
ways.

nature of the work. Ex natura operis.
There is a metamorphosis to be The heart is to be changed. The heart is the
very nursery of sin. Fomes peccati. Bern.
It Is the magazine where all the weapons of unrighteousness lie. It Is a lesser
Hell. The heart is full of antipathy against God, Romans 1. 30.
It is angry with converting grace; now that the byasse of the heart should be
changed, what a work is this! Quanto agone opus est, quantis vigiliis and
lachrymis.
How should we beg of Christ, that he who turned the watet into wine, would
turn the water, or rather poison of nature into the wine of grace?

The current of the life is to be altered. That the Tide of sin, which before
did run so strong, should be turned, this is not easy. That the sinner which
before was failing hell ward, and wanted neither wind nor tied to carry him,
should now alter his course, and sail to a new port, Hic labor, hoc opus, this
is a work indeed. The water may easily be damned up, but no art or industry can
make it run backward in its own channel. It was by a miracle that the River
Jordan was driven back. To see the earthly man become heavenly; to see a sinner
move contrary to himself in the ways of Christ and holiness, is as strange as
to see the earth fly upward, or the bowl run contrary to it is own byasse.

Ex fallacia operis.
salvation-work is difficult in regard of the deceits about the work. The heart
is ready to take many false stiches in this work of salvation. It has the
heart of self-deceit; like those that can cog a Die; Therefore Austin cries
out, Grande profundum est homo. Aug.
The heart is a great deep. The heart is apt to deceive about this work of
salvation 2 ways.

morality for grace. Alas, morality is but nature refined, old Adam put in a
better dress. A moraliz'd man is but a tame devil. There may be a fair stream
of civility running, and yet much vermin of pride and Atheism lie at the
bottom; The garnishment of moral excellencies is but the setting a garland of
flowers upon a dead man. How easy is it to be deceived in the business of
salvation, and with Ixion to embrace a cloud instead of Juno? Civility is not
grace, though it be a good wall to plant the vine of grace against.

a show of grace for grace. Pliny says, there is a Berylstone resembles the
true Diamond. So there is something that looks like grace, which is not; There
are two graces which help much to the working out salvation, and we are soon
deceived in them. First, Repentance. True Repentance is when we weep for sin
quatenus sin; when we weep for it as it is a defiling thing, it blots the
Image of God, stains the virginity of the soul; as it is an act of unkindness,
it is a kicking against the breasts that give us milk: but how easy is it to
prevaricate in this? 1. Many think they repent, when it is not the offense, but
the penalty troubles them; not the Treason, but the bloody axe. 2. They think
they repent when they shed a few tears; but though this ice begins to melt a
little, it freezeth again; they go on still in sin; many weep for their
unkind dealings with God, as Saul did for his unkindness to David; He said to
David, thou art more righteous then I; for thou have rewarded me good, whereas
I have rewarded thee evil: 1 Samuel 24. 17. And he lift up his voice and wept,
ver. 16. But for all this he follows David again, and pursues after him, 1 Samuel 26. Secondly, So men can lift up their voice and weep for sin, yet
follow their sins again. Ille vere plangit commissa, qui non committit
plangenda. Aug.
Thirdly, others forsake sin; but still they retain the love of it in their
hearts. Like the Snake that casts the coat, but keeps the sting; There is as
much difference between false and true tears, as between channel water and
spring water.

faith; but how easily are men cozened with a counterfeit pearl? There is this
deceit about faith, when men apply the promises of the Word, but not the
precepts. Fides non ^ligit objectum.
the promise is salvation, the precept is working out; They will take the one,
but not the other: as if a Physician should prescribe two receipts to his
Patient, a Pill and a Julip, he will take the Julip because it is pleasant, but
not the Pill: Many will take Christ as a Savior, but refuse him as a Prince;
receive his benefits, but not submit to his Laws; This is to put asunder what
God has joined together. There being therefore such mistakes and deceits about
this work of salvation, we had need be the more cautious, and curious in this
work.

Ex impeditione operis.
the difficulty about salvation-work arises from the remoraes and hindrances
of this work. These hindrances are either,

1. From within, viz. 2. Ab intra
the flesh: This is a sly enemy. The flesh cries out for ease* it lusts
against the Spirit, (...).
Gal. 5. 17. We are bid to crucify the flesh, (...). Chiys.
Gal. 5. 24. but how many wounds must we give with the sword of the Spirit,
before the flesh will be perfectly crucified?

2. We meet with hindrances in this work from without. 2. Ab extra


1. Tentations; our whole life, says Austin, is a tentation. We tread among
snares; there is a snare in company, recreation; yea, our table is of a snare
Ps. 69. 22.
; Satan is still fishing for our souls: How often does he lay a train of
tentation to blow up the fort of our grace? The Apostle tells us o^ his fiery
darts (...)
, Ephesians. 6. 16. Tentations are called darts for their swiftness, they are shot
in suddenly; and fiery for their terriblenesse, they are shot like flashes of
fire into the soul which do amaze and afright; and does not this retard the
work o^ Salvation, and make it difficult?

2. Reproaches; this sect is every where spoken against, Act. 28. 22. The old
Serpent is ever spitting his venom at Religion, and the professors of it. I
may allude to that, 1 Cor 10. 1. All our fathers were under cloud: All the
Saints of old have passed to Heaven under a cloud of contumely and reproach;
the world puts them in their black book, whom God will put in his Rubric: The
throat of the wicked is an open Sopulchre Romans 3. 13.
, to bury the good names of professors in. Those who have been the antesignani,
the ensignbearers of Religion, and have carried her colors,

1. Sometimes have been traduced and slandered. Paul was reported to be a
seditious man, 2 Timothy 2. 9. The Popish Rhemists traduced Calvin, and fathered
upon him this opinion, that God was the Author of sin, and that he died
cursing; though Beza, who was an eyewitness, and wrote his life and death,
confuted that slander, and relates what a comfortable end he made: Martin
Bucer, that blessed man, who cried out, in an holy triumph, I am Christ's, and
the devil has nothing to do with me; yet the Papists slanderously report of
him, that he should deny Christ to be the Messiah come in the flesh; but he who
was the Orator at his Funeral, was his compurgator. The like slander did the
Jesuits in Burgundia raise of Beza, that holy man; they say, that he
perceiving death to be at hand, renounced his former profession of the Gospel,
and was perfectly reconciled to the Church of Rome. This was so false, that
Beza, who lived after the slander went abroad, did himself with great
indignation refute it.

2. Sometimes the Saints have had the trial of cruel mockings, Heb. 11. 36.
Cyprian was called in a jeer Coprian; Athanasius, Satanasius; David was the
song of the drunkards, Psalm. 69. 12. I doubt not but Noah had many a bitter
taunt when he was building the Ark so many years before the flood, they would
laugh at him, and censure him for an old doting fool, that would be wiser than
all the world besides. Thus when we see the flood of Gods wrath coming upon the
world, and we begin to build the Ark, and work out salvation, men will be
venting their scorn and derision: What? you will be holier than others, more
precise than needs? all this serves to retard salvation work, and make it
difficult.

3. A third remora or hindrance in this work is open violence; Gal. 4. 29. as
he that was borne after the flesh persecuted him that was born after the
Spirit, even so it is now; no sooner does a man give up his name to Christ, and
seriously set upon the working out his salvation, but the world raises her
train-bands, and sets all the Militia of hell against him. Gods Church is like
Abraham's ram tied in a bush of thorns; witness the ten persecutions in the
time of Nero, Domitian, Trajan, etc. a man strictly holy is the white that is
shot at; if the worlds music will not prevail, it has its furnace ready; 2 Timothy 3. 12. be assured, Christ and his cross are never parted. It is with us
in our building for heaven, as it was with the Jews in their building the wall.
Every one with one of his hands wrought in the work, and with the other hand
held a weapon, Nehem. 4. 17. So we must not only be builders, but warriers;
with one hand we must work, and with the other hand hold a weapon, viz. the
sword of the Spirit, and fight the good fight of faith; this is another
hindrance in the work; no sooner do we begin to set out for heaven, but bonds
and afflictions abide us, Acts 20. 23. The world sounds an alarm, and no
cessation of arms till death.

4. That which makes salvation-work hard, 4. Ex lubricitate operis.
is, it is a slippery work. Look to your selves that we lose not those things
which we have wrought, (...)
Joh. 2. 8. This work falls down almost as fast as we build. An ordinary
artificer, when he has been at work, he finds his work the next morning just
as he left it; but it is not so with us; when we have been working out
salvation by prayer, fasting, meditation, and leave this work a while, we shall
not find our work as we left it, a great deal of our work is fallen down
again. We had need be often called upon to strengthen the things, (...), which
are ready to dye, Rev. 3. 2. no sooner is a Christian taken off from the fire
of the Sanctuary, but he is ready to cool and freeze again in security. He is
like awatch, when he has been wound up toward heaven, he does quickly unwinde
to earth and sin again. Saepemens ad coelum erigitur, oculosquein radios
solis defigit justitiae, gravata autem infirmitate carnis de coelo ad teram
descendit. Bern. de modo vivendi. Sermon. 53
When the gold has been purified in the furnace, it remains pure; but it is
not so with the heart; let it be heated in an Ordinance, let it be purged in
the furnace of affliction, it does not remain pure, but quickly gathers soil
and corruption; we are seldom long in a good frame: All this shows how
difficult the work of salvation is; we must not only work, but set a watch too
Mat. 27. ut.
.

Quest. 1. Quest. 1.
But why has God made the way to heaven so hard, why must there be this
working?

Answ. 1. Resp. 1.
To make us set an high estimate upon heavenly things. If salvation were easily
come by, we should not have valued it to its worth. If diamonds were ordinary,
they would be slighted; but because they are hard to come by, they are in great
esteem. Tertullian says, that when pearls grew common at Rome, they wore them
upon their shoes, which was the next way to tread them under feet. Salvation is
such a pearl as God will not have slighted; therefore it must be acquired by
holy industry. God loves not that the price of spiritual mercies should fall;
they that will have this precious flower of salvation, must gather it in the
sweat of their brows.

fitted for heaven; a father will give his son the inheritance, but first he
will give him education, that he may be fit for it. God will settle salvation
upon us, but first, he makes us meet for the inheritance, (...)
Col. 1. 12. While we are working we are running and fitting for heaven; sin
is weakening, grace is ripening; while we are in combat, we are fitting for
the Crown. First, you season the vessel before you pour in the wine; God will
season us with grace, before he poures ^n the wine of glory.

Quest. 2.
Quest. 2. But if there must be this working, how is it said that Christ's yoke
is easy*?

Answ. To the fleshly part it is hard, Answ.
but where there is a new and holy principle infused, Christ's yoke is easy
Jugum leve and suave. Trem.
; it is not a yoke, but a Crown, When the wheels of the soul are oiled with
grace, now a Christian moves in the way of Religion with facility and alacrity.
A child delights in obeying his father; it was Paul's heaven to serve God. I
delight in the Law of God in the inner man; Romans 7. 22. and how swiftly is the
soul carried upon those wings! Christ's service is freedom; therefore the
Apostle calls it, (...), a Law of liberty, Jam. 1. 25. To serve God, to love
God, to enjoy God, is the sweetest liberty in the world; Christ does not, as
Pharaoh make his people serve with rigor, Exodus 1. 13. but he lays upon them
the constraints of love, 2 Cor. 5. 14. His precepts are not burdens, but
privileges; not fetters, but ornaments. Thus his yoke is easy, but to an
unregenerate man the yoke has a nail in it, it galls and vexes Psalm 2. 3.
; nay, so far as corruption prevails, the best heart finds some reluctance.
And so much for the first reason, the difficulty of the work.

The second Reason why we must put forth so much holy sweat and industry about
salvation, Reas. 2.
is, because of the rareness of this work; but few shall be saved; therefore we
had need work the harder, that we may be in the number of these few. The way to
hell is a road way; the cawsey of it is paved with riches and pleasure; it has
a golden cawsey, therefore there are daily so many travelers in it; but the
way to heaven lies out of the road, it is an unbeaten path, and few can find it
Non cuivis contingit adire Corinthum.
the criers up of universal grace, say, that Christ died intentionally for all;
but then, why are not all saved? can Christ be frustrate of his intention? Some
are so gross to aver that all shall actually be saved: But has not our Lord
Christ told us, That the gate is strait, and few there be that find it? Mat.
7. 14. how all can go in at this gate, and yet but few find it, seems to me a
Paradox. The drove of men goes to the shambles; but a remnant shall be saved,
Romans 9. 27. The whole diece is cut off and goes to the devil, a remnant only
saved; most of the world are wind-falls. That olive tree, Is. 17. 6. with two
or three olive-berries on the top of the uppermost bough may be a fit emblem of
the paucity of those that shall be saved. Satan goes away with the harvest, God
has only a few gleanings. In this great City, if it should go by vote and by
pole, the devil would carry it. Some of the learned observe Brerew. enquir.
, that divide the world into thirty equal parts, nineteen of those thirty are
overspread with Heathenish idolatry, six of the eleven remaining with the
doctrine of Mahomet, so that there remains but five parts of the thirty where
is any thing of Christianity; among those Christians so many seduced Papists on
one hand, and formal Protestants on the other, that surely but few are saved.
It being thus, it should make us strive the more, tanquam pulvere olympico,
that we may be of the number of those few who shall inherit salvation.

there is hope in Israel concerning this Ezr. 10. 2
Salvation is a thing feasible, it may be had; O Christians, though the gate of
Paradise be strait, yet the gate is open. It Is shut against the Devils, it is
yet open to you; who would not crowd hard to get in Non tantum agite sed
satagite Lorinus.
? It Is but paring off your sins, it is but unloading some of your thick clay
Hab. 2. 6.
; it is but asswaging the swelling humor of your pride, and you may get in at
the strait gate. This possibility, nay probability of salvation may put life
into your endeavor. If there be corn to be had Genesis 42. 2.
, why should you sit starving in your sins any longer?

Use 1. Information, Use 1. Inform.
it shows us that salvation is not so facile a thing as most do imagine; many
do fancy a fine easy way to heaven; a sigh, or tear, or Lord have mercy, will
save them; these are in a golden dream. The text tells us of working out
salvation. Non est ad astra mollis e terris via
Basil compares the way to heaven to a man going over a narrow bridge, if he
treads never so little aside, he falls in and drowns. He that thinks the way is
easy, was never yet in the way. There are so many precepts to obey, so many
promises to believe, so many tentations to resist, that we shall not find the
way easy: There must not only be diligence, but violence. Beloved, heaven-gate
is not like that iron-gate, Acts 12. 10. which opened to Peter of its own,
accord; no, there must be knocking and striving. Jacob obtained the blessing in
the garments of Esau. Esau in the Hebrew signifies working (...)
; if you would wear this embroidered garment of salvation, you must have it by
working, Work out your salvation. Hannibal forced a way for his Army over the
Alps; Livy.
we must force our way to glory through difficulties. I like the impress one
gave, viz. a hand with a pick-axe digging a way through a rock, with this
Motto, inveniam aut faciam, either I will find a way, or make it; we must to
heaven through sweat and blood. There Is nothing got without hard labor; Omnia
pro laboribus Jupiter vendidit.
You cannot have the world without labor, and would you have Christ and
salvation? Do men dig for lead, and not much more for gold? It Is observable
that Adam in Paradise was not idle, but did dress the vineyard. The Angels
themselves, though they are glorious Spirits, yet they are Ministering Spirits.
Heb. 1. 14
God has put this diligence into creatures void of reason. The Be is a most
industrious creature; all of them have their several work to do in the Hive.
Some of the Bees do trim the honey, some work the wax, some frame the comb, and
others lie sentinel at the door of the Hive to keep out the drone. Is the Be
so industrious by the instinct of nature in the working of honey? Oh how
industrious ought we to be in the working out salvation.

Use 2. Use 2. Reproof.
Reproof, out of this text as out of a spiritual quiver, I may draw several
arrows of reproof.

1. 1. Branch.
It reproves them that prefer other things before salvation; who labor more
for the bread that perishes; than for salvation. Their chief care is how to
live in the world, and get a present subsistence; All the labor of a man is
for his mouth, Eccles. 6. 7. The body shall be tended and looked after, which
is but the brutish part, but the poor soul is kept to hard commons; This is
for Christians to turn Heathens, Matthew. 6. for after all these things the
Gentiles seek. (...).
We must altiora sapere. God never sent us hither only to wear fine clothes,
(...). Chrysostom.
or fare sumptuously every day, but that we should drive a trade for salvation;
If this be not done, we have shot beside the mark all this while; We have but
trimmed the Scabbard, but let the soul, that blade of admirable mettle, rust and
canker.

2. Branch, 2. Branch
it reproves such as in stead of working stand all the day idle in the
vineyard. Man. 20, 6
They have some faint velleities, they wish for salvation, but do not work. The
idle Christian is like a Soldier that has a good mind to the spoil and
treasure of a Castle, but is loath to put himself to any trouble, or hazard; men
could be content to have salvation if it would (like those ripe figs) Nahum. 3.
12. fall into the mouth of the eater. The sluggard puts his hand in his bosom,
Prove. 19. 24. and is loath to pluck it out though it be to lay hold of a Crown.
They stretch themselves (says the Prophet) upon the beds of Ivory, Amos 6. 4.
men had rather lie upon a soft bed, than go to heaven in a fiery Chariot of
zeal. Nullo modo capit porta illa caelestis divitiis o^ustus, luxu d^stentos,
torpore ^anguidos, fastu elatos, sed per la bores and jejunia saeculi fallentis
illecebras vincentes. Brugensis.
Chrysostom calls idleness the root of despair; an idle Christian ravels out
his time unprofitably. He stands in the world for a cipher, and be assured God
writes down no ciphers in the book of life. An idle person is a fit subject for
the Devil to work upon. We do not use to sow seed in fallow ground, but the
Devil sows most of his seed of tentation in hearts that ly fallow. Hierom
observes of the crabfish; that when the oister opens her self, the Crabfish
flings into her mouth a little stone that the oister cannot shut her self
again, and so the Crab devoures her: The Devil like this Crab when he takes men
gaping (as it is usual for them that are idle) then he throws in his stones of
tentation, and so devoures them.

3, Branch, 3. Branch*
it reproves such as instead of making Religion a work, they make it a play;
these are they that have found out a new way to Heaven, who make the way easier
than ever Christ made it; Such as tell us, that there is no Law to a believer;
and if there be no Law, then no Transgression; and if no Transgression, then
there needs no repentance. Between the Arminian and the Antinomian it is a very
short cut to heaven; The Arminian says we have power of our selves to believe,
and the Antinomian says that a believer is not under any Law, he is bound to
no duty, Christ has done al for him; So that by taking this stride, he is
presently in heaven: If this Doctrine be true, then every day is a play-day,
and the Apostle mistook himself, when he said, work out your salvation.

4. Branch, Branch. 4.
It reproves them that instead of working out their salvation, do dispute away
their salvation; 1. Such as dispute against the authority of Scripture, and
would make our faith a fable. 2. Such as dispute against the immortality of the
soul, and so at once would pull down the court of conscience. 3. Such as
dispute against the divinity of Christ. This may be called indeed the doctrine
of Devils 1 Timothy 4. 1
. It Is a doctrine diametrally opposite to that Scripture, 1 John 5. 20. We are
in him that is true, even in his son Jesus Christ. This is the true God. Which
Text is a Bulwark against the Socinian. O! the patience of God that those who
open their mouths blasphemously against Christ, the earth does not open her
mouth and swallow them up. That such should have any connivance (if not more)
who dare impugn the divinity of the Son of God, is a lamentation, and shall
be for a lamentation. Some of the best Heathen Writers Aristotle Livy, Plutarch.
affirm that there were Edicts and punishments enacted by Heathen Princes and
States in matters of Religion. An Heathen would not suffer his god to be
blasphemed; and shall Christians suffer it?

Branch 5. 5. Branch.
It reproves them, who instead of pursuing their own salvation, pursue their
own destruction. These are profane persons who go to Hell in the sweat of their
brows Impii quam strenue serviunt diabolo. Cyp.


1. Drunkards; what they get in the Temple, they lose in the Tavern; they
steep the Sermons they hear in wine. Woe to the drunkards in Ephraim, Esaias 28.
1. I may change the word, and say, the drunkards of England Ebri^s dum absorbet
vinum, absorbetur a viuo. Ambrose.
There is a kind of wine you call lacrymae, which signifies tears: Such a wine
the damned drink of, which is burned with the wrath of God, and this shall be
the drunkards cup.

2. Swearers: these swear away their salvation. The Swearer it seems has but
bad credit; he must stake down an oath, or none will trust him; but let him
remember, he runs his soul into a Praemunire. Swear not at all Mat. 5. 34
; If we must give an account for idle words, shall not idle oaths be put in the
count-book? When the scab breaks forth in the lip, that man is to be
pronounced unclean. Every oath is a wound given to the soul, and every wound
has a mouth to cry to Heaven for vengeance. Some are boiled up to that height
of wickedness, that like mad dogs, they fly in the face of Heaven by cursing;
and let a Minister tell them of their sin, let him but go about to bring them
home again, as the Law did provide one should bring home his neighbors Ass
when he went astray Exodus 23. 4.
, and they will kick against the reproof. Like lime, by pouring on the water of
a reprehension, they are the more enflamed. These are upon the spur to
damnation; but I will not touch this pitch any longer.

3. Adulterers; the adulterers heart like the swearers tongue, is set on fire
of hell. Creatures void of reason will rise up in judgment against such. It Is
reported of the Stork (that chaste creature) that it confines it self to its
own nest; and if any of the Storks leaving his own mate, joins with any other,
the rest fall upon him, and pluck his feathers from him. God would have the
adulterer put to death, Deuteronomy. 22. 22. Gregory observes concerning the stream of
fire and brimstone poured upon Sodom, God sent that noisome plague to let them
see the filthiness of their sin. This sin of adultery is a soul-damning
sin, 1 Cor. 6. 9. the adulterer like the fly, does so long fly about the
candle, that at last he sings his soul. This sin, though it begins Comical,
it ends Tragical; will it not be bitterness in the end? 2 Samuel 2. 26. This
sweet calm is before an earthquake; after the women's hair, come the lions Rev.
9. 7.
teeth.

Branch 6. 6. Branch.
It reproves them who put off this great work of salvation till they are past
their labor. They put off repenting till old age and sickness.

1. Till old age Sero nimis te amavi domine. Aug.
; when they are fit for no other work, then they will begin this. Old age is no
good age to repent in. When the fingers are stiff, it is ill learning to play on
the Lute: when the heart is grown hard and stiff in wickedness, it is but ill
tuning the penitential string: a tender plant is easily removed, but it is hard
to pluck up an old tree that is rooted. An old sinner that has been a long
time rooting in sin, is hardly plucked out of his natural estate. In matters
of salvation it is dangerous to adjourne Si aurum tibi offeram, non mihi dicis
cras veniam, sed jam exi^is; nemo differt, nemo excusat: salus promittitur and
quis festi^at? Ambrose Sermon. de elemosy^a.
; the longer men go on in sin, the more full possession Satan has of them; the
longer poison stays in the stomach, the more mortal. It Is a madness to put
off the work of salvation till evening and sunset. The night comes when no
man can work Joh. 9. 4.
. It were a very unwise course for a Mariner, while the ship is sound, the
tackling strong, the wind favorable, the Sea calm, to lie idle at anchor;
and when the ship begins to leak, and the tempest to rise, now to launch forth
and hoise up sails for a Voyage: so is he who neglects the time of health and
strength, and when old age comes, and his tackling is even broken, now begins
his voyage toward Heaven. It Is very questionable whether God will accept of
our repentance when it is so late. He calls for the first fruits, and do we
think to put him off with the gleanings? this was not the least reason why God
rejected Cains offering, because it was so long before he brought it. In
process of time Cain brought the fruit of the ground Genesis 4. 3.
, or as the original is more emphatical, at the end of many days (...)
; It seems it was stale before he brought it. How unworthy is this, for men to
give the devil their strength and marrow, and then come and lay their old bones
upon Gods Altar? It Is true, God may show mercy at last, but such run a
desperate hazard; a sinner in the time of his old age, sleeps between death and
the devil, as Peter slept between two soldiers Act. 12. 6
:

2. Till sickness; he were very unwise, Ser.
who being to go a long journey, should lay the heaviest load on the weakest
horse. What imprudence is it to lay the heavy load of repentance on thy self,
when infeebled by sickness? when the hands shake, the lips quiver, the sinews
shrink, the heart faints? Perhaps thou shall have no time of sickness; perhaps
not the use of thy senses; Qui dat poenitenti veniam, non semper dat peccanti
poenitentiam. Aug.
perhaps God will deny thee his grace, and then where is thy repentance? It Is
just, that he who forgets God in the time of health, God should forget him in
the time of sickness.

Branch 7. Branch 7.
It reproves them who begin to work, but do not work out their salvation. It Is
not enough to begin well; Non tantum facite sed perficite; it is Justinians
note; Some have, like Jehu, driven furiously in Religion, but within a while
their chariot-wheels have been taken off. We live in the fall of the leaf;
diverse we have observed, who did once put forth fair blossoms, and give good
hopes of their conversion, but their Spring is turned into Autumn; they have
left off working for Heaven; a sign the motion was but artificial, not vital.
Israel has cast off the thing that is good Hos. 8. 3.
. Such as were once diligent and zealous in Prayer, hearing, holy Conference,
now they have left off the thing that is good; they have tired in their march
to Heaven Pejus est recidere quam incidere. Bern. Sermon. 54. sup. cant.
. I have often thought there are many may be resembled to Nebuchadnezzars image
Dan. 3.
, at first they seemed to have an head of gold; they looked like glorious
professors; then afterward they seemed to be silver, then brass, then iron,
and clay; they have at last degenerated into sin: Thus like fair mornings
they have been soon overcast. Epiphanius observes of the Gnostics, at first
they seemed to be a strict holy people, but afterward they fell to
libertinisme (...)
. Some are grown so impudent, that they brag of their Apostasy; time was when
they did read and pray in their Families, but now they thank God they are grown
wiser, and they surcease from these duties; just as if you should hear the
Devil boast, that once he was an Angel of light, but now he is turned an Angel
of darkness: Apostates are the richest spoils that Satan goes away with; these
he will hang up in hell for triumph. Such as have left off working, let them
read that thundering Scripture, 2 Pet. 2. 21. For it had been better for them
not to have known the way of righteousness, then after they have known it to
turn from the holy Commandment. By leaving off working, they unravel all they
have done before; they lose their reward. He that runs half the race, and
then faints, loses the Garland.

Use 3. Use 3.
And so I proceed to the next Use which is of Exhortation, to persuade you all
in the bowels of Christ to set upon this great work, the working out your
salvation. Beloved, here is a plot for Heaven, and I would have you all in this
plot; rally together all the powers of your souls; give neither God nor your
selves rest, till you have made your election sure. Christians, fall to work,
do it early, earnestly, uncessantly. Pursue salvation as in a holy chase; other
things are but matters of convenience, salvation is a matter of necessity.
Either you must do the work that Christians are doing, or you must do the work
that Devils are doing. Qui in (...)abore ho(...)inum non (...)nt, in la(...)ore
daemo(...)um erunt. Bern.
Oh you that never yet took one stitch in this work of salvation, now begin.
Religion is a good trade if it be well followed. Be assured there is no
salvation without working. But here I must lay down a Caution to prevent
mistakes.

Caution. Caution.
Though we shall not be saved without working, yet not for our working. We do
not work out salvation by way of merit. Bellarmine says, we merit Heaven ex
condigno; no, though we are saved in the use of means, yet by grace too, Ephesians.
2. 5. There must be ploughing and sowing the ground, but yet no crop can be
expected without the influence of the Sun: So there must be working, but no
crop of salvation can be hoped for without the Sunshine of free grace: It Is
your Fathers good pleasure to give you the Kingdom, Luke 12. 32. Give? why
might some say, we have wrought hard for it? I, but Heaven is a donative;
though you work for it, yet it is the (...), the good pleasure of God to bestow
it. Still look up to Christ's merit; it is not your sweat, but his blood saves.
That your working cannot merit salvation, is clear, (...). It Is God that works
in you to will, and to do, ver. 13. It Is not your working, but Gods co-working.
For as the Scrivener guides the child's hand, or he cannot write; so the spirit
of God must afford his auxiliary concurrence, or our work stands still; how
then can any man merit by working, when it is God that helps him to work? I
should now, having laid down this Caution, reassume the Exhortation, and
persuade you to the working out salvation; but I must first remove two
Objections which lie in the way.

Object. 1. Object. 1
You bid us work out salvation; but we have no power to work.

Answ. 1. Answ. 1.
It Is true, we have not power: I deny that we have libertatem arbitrii Lorinus.
, man before conversion is purely passive. Therefore the Scripture calls it cor
lapideum, a heart of stone, Ezekiel. 36. A man in his pure naturals, can no more
prepare himself to his own converting, then the stone can prepare it self to
its own softning. But yet when God begins to draw, we may follow. Those dry
bones in Ezekiel could not of themselves live, but when breath came into them,
then they lived and stood upon their feet, Ezekiel 37. 10.

Quest. Quest.
But suppose God has not dropped in a principle of grace? suppose he has not
caused breath to enter?

Answ. Answ.
Yet use the means. Though you cannot work spiritually, yet work physically; do
what you are able, and that for two reasons.

1. Because a man by neglecting the means, does destroy himself. As a man by
not sending to the Physician, may be said to be the cause of his own death.

Secondly, God is not wanting to us when we do what we are able. Urge the
Promise, Seek and ye shall find, Mat. 7. 7. Put this bond in suit by Prayer;
you say you have no power, but have you not a Promise? Act so far as you can.
Though I dare not say as the Arminian, when we do exert and put forth nature,
God is bound to give grace; yet this I say, Deus volentibus non deest, God is
not wanting to them that seek his grace; Nay, I will say more, he denies his
grace to none but them that wilfully refuse it Joh. 5. 40
.

The second Objection is this; Object. 2.
but to what purpose should I work? there is a decree past, if God has decreed
I shall be saved, I shall be saved.

Answ. Answ.
God decrees salvation in a way of working 2 These. 2. 13.
. Origin in his book against Celsus, observes a subtle Argument of some who
disputed about Fate and Destiny. One gave counsel to his sick friend not to
send for the Physician, because (says he) it is appointed by destiny whether
thou shall recover or not. If it be thy destiny to recover, then thou need
not the Physician; if it be not thy destiny, then the Physician will do thee no
good: The like fallacy does the Devil use to men; he bids them not work; if God
has decreed they shall be saved, they shall be saved, and there is no need of
working; if he has not decreed their salvation, then their working will do
them no good; this is an Argument fetched out of the Devils topics. But we say
God decrees the end in the use of means; God did decree that Isarel should
enter into Canaan, but first they must fight with the sons of Anak. God
decreed that Hezekiah should recover out of his sickness, but let him lay a
fig to the boil, Isa. 38. 21. We do not argue thus in other things. A man does
not say, if God has decreed I shall have a crop this year I shall have a crop.
What need I plough, or sow, or manure the land? No, he will use the means, and
expect a Crop. Though the blessing of the Lord makes rich, Prove. 10. 22. Yet it
is as true, the diligent hand makes rich, Prove. 10. 4. Gods decreeing is
carried on by our working.

And thus having removed these Objections out of the way, let me now persuade
you to set upon this blessed work, the working out your salvation; and that my
words may the better prevail, I shall propound several Arguments by way of
Motive to excite you to this work.

The first Argument or Motive to working, Arg. 1.
is taken from the preciousnesse of the Soul (...) Mac. hom. 26.
; well may we take pains that we may secure this from danger. The soul is a
divine sparkle kindled by the breath of God. It does out-ballance the world,
Mat. 16. 26. If the world be the Book of God (as Origin calls it) the soul is
the Image of God. Plato calls the soul a glass of the Trinity. It Is a bright
mirror in which some refracted beams of Gods wisdom and holiness do shine
forth; the soul is a blossom of eternity.

(...) Phocilides


God has made the soul capable of communion with himself. It would banquer
the world to give half the price of a soul. How highly did Christ value the
soul when he sold himself to buy it O anima redempta sanguine, deputata cum
angelis capax beatitudinis! Bern.
? O then, what pity is it, that this excellent soul, (this soul for which God
called a Council in heaven when he made it Genesis 1. 26
,) should miscarry and be undone to all eternity? who would not rather work
night and day, than lose such a soul? The Jewel is invaluable, the loss
irreparable.

2. Arg. 2.
Holy activity and industry does enoble a Christian Labor splendore decoratur.
Cicero.
. The more excellent any thing is, the more active. The Sun is a glorious
creature, it never stands still, but is going his circuit round the world. Fire
is the purest element, and the most active; it is ever sparkling and flaming.
The Angels are the most noble creatures, and the most nimble, therefore they
are represented by the Cherubims, with their wings displayed. God himself is
actus purissimus, (as the Schoolmen speak,) he is a most pure act: Homer says
of Agamemnon, that he did sometimes resemble Jupiter in feature, Pallas in
wisdom, Mars in valor; by holy activity we resemble God who is a most pure
act. The Phaenix flies with a coronet on its head; the industrious Christian
wants not a coronet; his sweat enobles him; his labor is his ensign of
honor. Solomon tells us that drowsiness clothes a man with rags; Prove. 23. 21.
Infamy is one of the rags that hang upon him; God hates a dull temper. We read
in the Law, that the Ass (being a dull creature) must not be offered up in
Sacrifice. Spiritual activity is a badge of honor.

3. Working out salvation is that which will make death and heaven sweet to us.

1. It will sweeten death. He that has been hard at work all day, how quietly
does he sleep at night? you that have been working out salvation all your
lives, how comfortably may you lay down your head at night in the grave, upon a
pillow of dust in hope of a glorious resurrection? this will be a deathbed
cordial.

2. It will sweeten heaven. The more pains we have taken for heaven, the
sweeter will it be when we come there. It Is delightful for a man to look over
his work and see the fruit appear (...).
. When he has been planting trees in his Orchard, or setting flowers, it is
pleasant to behold and review his labors: Thus in heaven, when we shall see
the fruit of our labors, the end of our faith, salvation, 1 Pet. 1. 9. This
will make heaven the sweeter. The more pains we have taken for heaven, the
more welcome it will be; the more sweat, the more sweet. When a man has been
sinning, the pleasure is gone, and the sting remains Praeterit jucunditas non
relitura, and manet anxietas non peritura. Aug
; but when he has been repenting, the labor is gone, and the joy remains.

4. Yet you have time to work. Arg. 4.
This text and Sermon would be out of season to preach to the damned in hell.
If I should bid them work, it is too late, their time is past; it is night with
the devils, * (...) Ignatius. Epist. 7. ad Smyrnens
it is yet day with you; Work while it is day, John 9. 4. If you lose your day,
you lose your souls. There is not only (...), but (...). This is the season
for your souls. Now God commands, now the Spirit breaths, now Ministers
beseech, and as so many bells of Aaron would chime in your souls to Christ. Oh
improve your season; this is your seed-time, now sow the seeds of faith and
repentance. If when you have seasons, you want hearts; the time may come when
you have hearts, you shall want seasons. Take time while you may; the Mariner
hoists up his sails while the wind blows; never had a people a fairer gale
for heaven than you of this City, and will you not set forward in your voyage?
What riding is there to the Term, I warrant you the Lawyer will not lose his
Term? Oh my brethren, now is the Tearm-time for your souls, now plead with God
for mercy, or at least get Christ to plead for you.

Think seriously of these four things.

First, our life does unravel apace. * Vita hominis est similis naviganti, etc.
Greg.
Gregory compares our life to the mariner in a ship going full sail; We are
every day sailing apace to eternity.

Secondly, The seasons of grace though they are precious, yet not permanent.
Abused mercies will, like Noah's dove, take their wings and fly from us.
Englands golden hour will soon run out; Gospel-blessings are very sweet, but
very swift. Now they are hid from thine eyes, Luke 19 42. We know not how soon
the Golden Candlestick may remove.

Thirdly, There is a time when the spirit has done striving. Genesis 6. 3
There are certain spring-tydes of the spirit, and these being neglected,
possibly we may never see another tide come in. When conscience has done
speaking, usually the spirit has done striving.

Fourthly, the loss of Gospel-opportunityes will be the hell of hell. When a
sinner shall at the last day think with himself, O what I might have been! I
might have been as rich as the Angels, as rich as heaven could make me. I had a
season to work in, but I lost it. Pessimum istud virbu^ habuisse Plautus.
This, This, will be as a vulture gnawing upon him, this will inhance, and
accent his misery. And let all this persuade you speedily to work out your
salvation.

Fifthly, you may do this work and not hinder your other work; working out
salvation and working in a calling are not inconsistent. And this I insert to
prevent an objection. Some may say, but if I work so hard for heaven I shall
have no time for my trade. No sure, the wise God would never make any of his
commands to interfere; as he would have you seek his Kingdom, Mat. 6. 33. so he
would have you provide for your family, 1 Timothy 5. 8. you may drive two trades
together. I like not those that make the Church exclude the shop, that swallow
up all their time in hearing, but neglect their work at home. 2 These. 3. 11.
2 These. 3. 11. They are like the Lillies of the field which toil not, neither
do they spin. Mat. 6. 28
God never sealed warrants to idleness. He, both commands and commends
diligence in a calling. Which may the rather encourage us to look after
salvation, because this work will not take us off our other work. A man may
with Caleb follow God fully, Numb. 14. 34. and yet with David follow the ewes
great with young; Psalm. 78. 71.
Piety and industry may dwell together.

Sixthly, Arg. 6.
The inexcusablenesse of those that neglect working out their salvation.
Methinks I hear God expostulating the case with men at the last day, after this
manner, why did ye not work? I gave you time to work, I gave you light to work
by, I gave you my Gospel, my Spirit, my Ministers, I bestowed Talents upon you
to trade, I set the recompense of reward before you, why did ye not work out
your salvation? Either it must be sloth or stubbornness. Was there any work ye
did of greater concernment? You could work in brick, but not in gold; What can
you say for your selves why the sentence should not pass? Oh how will the
sinner be left speechless at such a time, and how will this cut him to the
heart to think with himself he neglected salvation, and could give no reason
for it.

Seventhly, Arg. 7.
the unexpressible misery of such as do not work out salvation. Those that
sleep in spring; shall beg in harvest; After death, when they look to receive a
full Crop of glory, they will be put to beg, as Dives for one drop of water.
Vagrant persons that will not work, are sent to the house of correction: Such
as will not work out salvation, let them know hell is Gods house of correction
that they must be sent to.

If all this does not prevail, Arg. 8.
consider lastly what it is we are working for, none will take pains for a
trifle; We are working for a Crown, for a Throne, for a Paradise, (...).
Ignatius. (...) Menand.
and all this is comprised in that one word salvation. Here is a whet-stone to
industry. All men desire salvation. It Is the Crown of our hopes; We should not
think any labor too much for this. Nullus labor durus nullu^ tempus longum quo
aeternitatis gloria comparetur. Hierom.
What pains will men take for earthly Crowns and Scepters! And suppose the
Kingdoms of the world were more illustrious then they are, their foundations
of Gold, their walls of pearl, their windows of Sapphire, what were all this to
that Kingdom we are laboring for? We may as well span the firmament, as set
forth this in all its splendour, and magnificence. Salvation is a beautiful
thing, it is as far above our thoughts as it is beyond our deserts. Oh how
should this add wings to our endeavors! The merchant will run through the
intemperate Zones of heat and cold for a little prize Extremos currit mercator
ad indos. Horace
. The Soldier for a rich booty will endure the bullet and sword, he will
gladly undergo a bloody spring for a golden harvest; oh then, how much more
should we spend our holy sweat for this blessed prize of salvation Mercedian
tantae par labor esse potest? Verinus.
!

And so having laid down some Arguments by way of Motive, to persuade us to
this work; I shall now propound some means by way of direction to help us in
this work; and here I shall show you what are those things to be removed which
will hinder our working, and what are those things to be prosecuted which will
further it.

1. Removenda.
We must remove those things

1. The intanglements of the world. While the foot is in a snare, a man cannot
run. The world is a snare Divitiae saeculi sunt laquei diaboli. Bern.
; while our feet are in it, we cannot run the race set before us, Heb. 12. 1.
If a man were to climb up a steepy rock, and had weights tied to his legs, they
would hinder his ascent; too many golden weights will hinder us from climbing
up this steepy rock that leads to salvation. While the mill of a trade is
going, it makes such a noise, that we can hardly hear the Minister lifting up
his voice like a trumpet. The world choaks our zeal and appetite after
heavenly things; the earth puts out the fire; the music of the world charms
us asleep, and then we cannot work. In mines of gold there are killing damps, O
how many souls have been destroyed with a damp arising from the earth.

Animae functiones tolluntur in mania, depravatur in melancholia. here de Sax.
Tract. de melanch.
Under fears and discouragements we act but faintly in Religion. David labors
to chide himself out of this spiritual melancholy, Why art thou cast down O my
soul? Psalm 42. 5. Cheerfulness quickens; the Lacedaemonians used music in
their battles to excite their spirits and make them fight more valiantly.
Cheerfulness is like music to the soul, it excites to duty, it oils the
wheels of the affections: cheerfulness makes service come off with delight,
and we are never carried so swift in Religion as upon the wings of delight.
Melancholy takes off our chariot-wheeles, and then we drive on heavily.

Israel, they despised the pleasant land, Psalm. 106. 24. What should be the
reason? Canaan was a Paradise of delight, a type of heaven; I, but they thought
it would cost them a great deal of trouble and hazard in the getting, and they
would rather go without it, they despised the pleasant land. Are there not
millions among us who had rather go sleeping to hell, than sweating to heaven?
I have read of certain Spaniards that live near where there is great store of
fish, yet are so lazy that they will not be at the pains to catch them, but buy
of their neighbors: such a sinful stupidity and sloth is upon the most, that
though Christ be near them, though salvation is offered in the Gospel, yet they
will not work out salvation. Slothfulness casts into a deep sleep, Prove. 19.
15. Adam lost his rib when he was asleep; many a man loses his soul in this
deep sleep.

The fourth bar in the way to salvation is an opinion of the easiness of
salvation; God is merciful, and the worst come to the worst, it is but repent.

1. God is merciful? it is true, but withal he is just; he must not wrong his
Justice by showing mercy; therefore observe that clause in the proclamation,
Exodus 34. 6. he will by no means clear the guilty. If a King did proclaim, that
only those should be pardoned who came in, and submited to his Scepter; could
any still persisting in rebellion claim the benefit of that pardon? O sinner,
would thou have mercy, and wilt not disband the weapons of unrighteousness?

2. It Is but repent. But repent? It is such a but that we cannot hit unless
God direct our arrow. Tell me O sinner, is it easy for a dead man to live and
walk? Thou art spiritually dead, and wrapped up in thy winding sheet, Ephesians. 2. 2.
Is regeneration easy? are there no pangs in the new birth? is self denial
easy? do thou know what Religion must cost, and what it may cost? it must
cost you the parting with your lusts, it may cost you the parting with your
life; Take heed of this obstruction. Salvation is not per saltum; thousands
have gone to hell upon this mistake. The broad spectacles of presumption have
made the strait gate seem wider than it is.

carnal friends. It Is dangerous listening to their voice. The Serpent did speak
in Eve. Jobs wife would have called him off from serving God, do thou still
retain thine integrity? Job. 2. 9. what still pray and weep? here the devil
did hand over a tentation to Job by his wife. Carnal friends will be calling us
off from our work. What needs all this ado, less pains will serve? We read
that some of Christ's kindred, when they saw Christ so earnest in preaching,
would give him a check, Mar. 3. 21. his friends went to lay hold on him; our
friends and kindred would sometimes stand in our way to heaven, (...). Igna.
Ep. 12. ad Romans
and judging our zeal madness, would lay hold of us and hinder us from working
out our salvation. Such friends Spira met with; for advising with them, whether
he should revoke his former opinions concerning Luthers Doctrine, or persist in
them to the death, they wished him to recant, and so openly abjuring his former
faith, he became like a living man in hell.

The sixth bar in the way to salvation evil company Mclius est habere malorum
odium quam consortium. Bern.
. They will takes us off our work; the sweet waters lose their freshness when
they run into the salt; Christians lose their freshness and savourinesse among
the wicked; Christ's Doves will be sullied by lying among these pots Ps. 68. 13.
. Sinful company is like the water in a Smiths forge, which quenches the iron,
be it never so hot; such cool good affections. The wicked have the plague of
the heart 1 King. 8. 38.
, and their breath is infectious. They will discourage us from working out our
salvation; just as he who is a suitor to a woman, and is very earnest in his
suit, there comes one, and tells him, he knows something by the woman of ill
report, some impediment; the man hearing this, is presently taken off, and the
suit cease; so it is with many a man who begins to be a suitor to Religion,
fain he would have the match made up, and he grows very hot and violent in the
suit, and falls a working out his salvation; but then there come some of his
confederates, and they tell him they know something by Religion that is of ill
report. This Sect is everywhere spoken against Act. 28. 22.
. There must be so much strictness and mortification that he must never look to
see good day more; hereupon he is discouraged, and so the match is broken off.
Take heed of such persons, they are devils covered with flesh; they are (as one
says) like Herod, who would have killed Christ-as soon as he was born: Thus
when Christ is, as it were, beginning to be formed in the heart, they would in
a spiritual sense kill him.

And thus I have shown you the bars that lie in the way to salvation, which are
to be removed.

Promovenda.


The first is in the Text, fear and trembling Gemma pretiosa pietas, sed faci e
surripit^r nisi a timore custodiatur.
. This is not a fear of doubting, but a fear of diligence. This fear is
requisite in the working out salvation. (...), Let us fear lest we come short
Heb. 4. 1.
; fear is a remedy against presumption. Hope is like the cork to the net, it
keeps the soul from sinking in despair; and fear is like the lead to the net,
it keeps the soul from floating in presumption. Fear is that flaming sword that
turns every way to keep out sin from entering Est janitor animae, Petrus
Cellensis.
; fear quickens; it is an antidote against sloth. Noah being moved with fear,
prepared an Ark Heb. 11. 8.
. The traveller fearing least night should overtake him before he gets to his
journeys end, spurs on the faster. Fear causes circumspection; he that walks
in fear, treads warily; fear is a preservative against Apostasy; I will put my
fear in your hearts, and you shall not depart from me, Jer. 32. 40. The fear of
falling, keeps us from falling; Fear is the hadge and livery of a Christian.
The Saints of old were men fearing God Mal. 3. 17
. It is reported of holy Anselm, that he spent most of his thoughts about the
day of Judgment. Blessed is he that fears always, Prove. 28. 14. Fear is a
Christians garrison, Si vis esse securus, semper time.
the way to be secure is always to fear; This is one of the best tools for a
Christian to work with.

love. Love makes the work come off with delight; seven years labor seemed
nothing to Jacob, because of the love that he did bear to Rachel. Love
facilitates every thing Omnia facilia habenti charitatem. Aug.
. It is like wings to the bird, like wheels to the Chariot, like sails to the
ship, it carries the soul on swiftly and cheerfully in duty; love is never
weary; It is an excellent saying of Gregory, let but a man get the love of the
world into his heart, and he will quickly be rich. So do but get the love of
religion into your heart, and you will quickly be rich in grace. Love is a
vigorous active grace, it despises dangers, it tramples upon difficulties;
like a mighty torrent it carries all before it. This is the grace takes heaven
by violence. Get but your hearts well heated with this grace, and you will be
fitted for work.

work in the strength of Christ. (...), I can do all things through Christ that
strengthens me, Phil. 3. 13. never go to work alone. Vis geminata fortior.
Sampsons strength lay in his hair. And a Christians strength lies in Christ.
When you are to do any duty, to resist any tentation, to subdue any lust, set
upon it in the strength of Christ; some go out against sin in the strength of
resolutions and vows, and they are soon foiled: Do as Sampson, he first cried
to Heaven for help, Judge. 16. 28.
and then Tum insiluit Spiritus Domini.
having taken hold of the Pillars, he pulled down the house upon the Lords of the
Philistines. When we engage Christ in the work, and so take hold upon the
Pillar of an Ordinance, we then bring down the house upon the head of our lusts.

Work low* be humble, think not to merit by your working. Either Satan would
keep us from working, or else he would make us proud of our working. God must
pardon our works before he crowns them. If we could pray as Angels, shed rivers
of tears, build Churches, erect Hospitals, and should have a conceit that we
merited by this, it would be as a dead fly in the box of perfume, it would
stain and eclipse the glory of the work. * Vaelandabili vitae hominum si
remota misericordia came Trutina discuties. Aug.
Our duties like good wine relish of a bad cask, They are but glittering sins.
Let not pride poison our holy things; when we have been working for Heaven, we
should say as good Nehemiah, Remember me O my God, concerning this, and spare
me according to the greatness of thy mercy Neh. 13. 22.
.

5. Work upon your knees; be much in awake O North Wind, and come thou South,
blow upon my garden Cant. 4. ult.
. We had need have this spirit blow upon us, there being so many contrary winds
blowing against us, and considering how soon holy affections are apt to wither.
The garden has not more need of wind to make its fruit flow out, then we of
the spirit, to make our graces flourish. Philip joynd himself to the Eunuchs
Act. 8. 29
Chariot; Gods Spirit must join it self to our Chariot; As the Mariner has
Manus ad clavum, oculus ad coelum.
his hand to the stern, so he has his eye to the star. While we are working we
must look up to the spirit; what is our preparation without the spirits
operation? what is all our rowing without a gale from Heaven? The spirit lifted
me up, Ezekiel. 3. 14
Gods Spirit must both infuse grace and excite it. We read of a wheel within a
wheel, Ezekiel. 1. 16. The spirit of God is that inner wheel that must move the
wheel of our endevor. To conclude all, pray to God to bless you in your work;
the race is not to the swift, nor the battle to the strong, Eccles. 9. 11.
nothing prospers without a blessing; and what way to obtain it but by prayer?
It Is a saying of one of the ancients, The Saints carry the keys of Heaven at
their girdle. Prayer beats the weapon out of the enemies hand, and gets the
blessings out of Gods hand.

work in hope; the Apostle says, he that ploughs shall plough in hope, 1 Cor.
9. 10. hope is the souls anchor, Heb. 6. 19. Cast this anchor upon the promise;
and you shall never sink. Spes facit ut cultis mandentur semin, torris.
Nothing more hinders us in our working then unbelief. Sure says a Christian, I
may toil all day for salvation, and catch nothing. What? is there no balm in
Gilead? * Ps. 33. 18.
Is there no mercy-seat? Oh! sprinkle faith in every duty, look up to
free grace, fix your eye upon the blood of Christ; would you be saved: to your
working join believing.

FINIS.

