THE HOLY Eucharist: OR, THE MYSTERY OF THE LORDS SUPPER. Briefly Explained. By
THOMAS WATSON, Minister of the Gospel.

The second Impression newly Enlarged.

Dedit nobis Christus carnem suam in cibum, sanguinem in potum, animam in
pretium aquam lateris in lavacrum. Bernard. 1 Cor. 10. 21. Ye cannot be
partakers of the Lord's-Table, and the Table of Devils. LONDON, Printed by A.
Maxwel, for Thomas Parkhurst, at the Golden Bible, on London Bridge, next the
Gate.

To the Honorable, Virtuous, and my ever Honored Friend, Mrs. DOROTHY
WOLSTENHOLM.
Madam,
BEsides the Cognizance I have had of you, when it was my happiness to live
among some of your Noble Relations, your friendly deportment, and the
favorable Aspect which you have been pleased to cast upon me, has very much
rendered me your Debtor. And I knew not what other way to express my self
grateful, than by presenting yo^ with some of that Treasure, which, through the
help of the Spirit, I have dug out of the Sacred Mines of Scripture. The
Tractate which I here dedicate to you, is small, but the Subject treated on, is
of eminent and singular worth. Pearls may lie in a little room; and a sovereign
Electuary may be given upon a Knive's point. The Supper of the Lord is a matter
of weighty importance, as having in it the very pith and quintessence of the
Gospel. Madam, Admire distinguishing Grace, which has made you Noble, not only
in blood, but in spiritual Endowments Nobilitas cujusque rei est, sibi secundum
^sse.
: How deeply are you obliged to God, who has given you an insight into the
Mystery of Life, which will abide with you, when the Flower of Beauty shall
fade, and the Feathers of Honor must lie in the dust. Madam, let Jesus Christ
be ever in your thoughts, you are never out of his. Let that dear Savior lie
as a bundle of Myrrh between your Breasts; Cant. 1. 13.
delight much in the Galleries where the King of Glory is held. Cant. 7. 5.
Let those hours be counted golden, when you are at Free grace's Table, and
Christ sups with you, and you with him. I have no more at present to add, only
desire your Candid Interpretation, and kind reception of these few impolished
lines: So entreating the Lord to enrich you with all spiritual and eternal
Blessings, I take leave, and rest,

Madam, Yours to serve you, Thomas Watson.

TO THE Reader.
Christian Reader,
WHEN I Contemplate the Holiness and Solemnity of the blessed Sacrament, I
cannot but have some awe upon my Spirit, and think my self bound to hold this
Mystery in the highest Veneration. The Elements of Bread and Wine are in
themselves common, but under these Symbolical Representations, lie hid Divine
Excellencies. Behold here the best of dainties Dapes sa'iares: Hor.
, God is in this Cheer. Here is the Apple of the Tree of Life: Here is The
House of Wine (...) Cant. 3. 4.
, where the Banner of Free grace is gloriously displayed. In the Sacrament we
see Christ broken before us, and his broken body is the only comfort for a
broken Heart. While we sit at this Tab^^ Christ's precious Spikenard of merit
and grace, sends forth its smell. The Sacrament is both an healing, and a
sealing Ordinance. Here our Savior leads his people up the Mount of
Transfiguration, and gives them a Glimpse of Paradise. How welcome, should this
Jubilee of the Soul be? wherein Christ appears in the oriency of his beauty,
and draws the golden (...) of his love to the center of a Believer's Heart. Oh
what Flames of Devotion should burn in our Breasts! How agil and nimble should
we be! mounting up as on Wings of Cherubims, when we are to meet the Prince of
Glory, who brings the Olive Branch of Peace in his mouth, and whose kisses
leave a print of Heaven upon the Soul. The scope of this ensuing Discourse, is
to raise an high value and appretiation of the Sacrament, to Excite Holy
Ardours of Soul in such as intend to partake of it. Think not, That it is
enough to be outwardly devout at Gods Table, drawing near to him with the lip,
when the Heart is far from him Isa. 28. 13.
. What is this but with Ephraim to compass God, with Lies Hoss 11. 12.
? They who put off God with bare shows, he will put them off with bare signs.
They who give God only the skin of Duty, shall carry away only the shell of
Comfort. Spirituality is the life of Worship (...). Chrysostom.
: If we come to the Sacrament in due order*, we shall see him whom our souls
love 1 Chronicles. 15 13.
. The Lord will give us a fore-crop here, and reserve the after-crop of Glory
for the Kingdom of. Heaven. That this may be effected, shall be the earnest
prayer of him, who is

Yours in the Work of the Gospel. Thomas Watson.

THE MYSTERY of the Lords Supper.
MATT. 26. 26 27, 28. And as they were eating, Jesus took bread, and blessed
it, and brake it, and gave it to his Disciples, and said, Take, eat, this is my
body. And he took the Cup; and gave thanks, and gave it to them, saying, Drink
ye all of it: For, this is my blood of the New Testament, which is shed for
many for the Remission of sins.
IN these words, we have the Institution of the Lords Supper. The Greeks call
the Sacrament (...), a Mystery: There is in it, a Mystery of Wonder, and a
mystery of Mercy. The celebration of the Lords Supper (says St. Chrysostom) is
the Commemoration of the greatest Blessing that ever the World enjoyed. A
Sacrament is a Visible Sermon Sacramentum (...) Sacrae (...) figura, qua sub
specie Visibilium, spiritualis gratia and adumbratur and conf^rtur.
. And herein the Sacrament excels the Word Preached. The Word is a Trumpet to
proclaim Christ, the Sacrament is a Glass to represent him.

Quest. But why was the Sacrament of the Lords Supper appointed? is not the
Word, sufficient to bring us to Heaven?

Answ. The Word, is for the Ingrafting; The Sacrament, for the Confirming of
Faith. The Word brings us to Christ; The Sacrament builds us up in him. The
Word is the Font, where we are baptized with the Holy Ghost; The Sacrament is
the Table, where we are fed, and cherished. The Lord condescends to our
w^akness: Were we made up all of Spirit, there were no need of Bread and Wine;
but we are compounded creatures, therefore God to help our Faith, does not only
give us an audible Word, but a visible Sign It sensus fovetur, and fides
firmatur.
. I may here allude to that of our Savior, Joh. 4. 48. Except ye see signs, ye
will not believe. Christ sets his Body and Blood before us in the Elements:
here are Signs, else we will not believe Quia externis ducimur. Hisce Symbolis
sidem in nobisadauget Deus. Gualter.
.

Things taken in by the Eye, do more work upon us, than things taken in by the
Ear. A Solemn Spectacle of Mortality, does more affect us than an Oration. So,
when we see Christ broken in the Bread, and as it were Crucified before us,
this does more affect our Hearts, than the bare Preaching of the Cross.

So I come to the Text: As they were eating, Jesus took bread, etc.

Where I shall open these five particulars, in reference to the Sacrament.

1. The Author. 2. The Time. 3. The Manner. 4. The Guests. 5. The Benefits.
1. The Author of the Sacrament, Jesus Christ. [Jesus took (1.)
bread] To Institute Sacraments, belongs of right to Christ, and is a Flower of
his Crown. He only who can give Grace, can appoint the Sacraments, which are
the Seals of Grace. Christ being the Founder of the Sacrament, gives a Glory,
and a Luster to it. A King making a feast, adds the more state and magnificence
to it. Jesus took bread: he, whose Name is above every Name Phil. 2. 9.
; God blessed for ever.

2. The Time when Christ did institute the Sacrament; wherein we (2.)
may take notice of two Circumstances. 1. It was when he had supped, Luke 22.
20. [(...), After Supper.] Which had this Mystery in it, To show that the
Sacrament is chiefly intended as a spiritual Banquet; it is not to indulge the
Senses, but to feast the Graces. It was, after Supper.

2. The other Circumstance of Time, is, That Christ did appoint the Sacrament a
little before his sufferings, 1 Cor. 11. 23. The Lord Jesus the same night in
which he was betrayed, took bread. He knew troubles were now coming upon his
Disciples; it would be no small perplexing to them, to see their Lord and
Master crucisied; and shortly after they must pledge him in a bitter Cup;
therefore, to arm them against such a time, and to animate their spirits, that
very night in which he was betrayed, he gives them his Body and Blood, in the
Sacrament.

This may give us a good Hint, That in all trouble of mind, especially
approaches of danger, it is needful to have recourse to the Lords Supper. The
Sacrament is both an Antidote against fear, and a Restorative to faith. The
night in which Christ was betrayed, he took Bread.

3. The Manner of the Institution; wherein there are four things 3
observable:

1. The Taking of bread. 2. The Breaking it. 3. The Blessing it. 4. The
Administering the Cup.
1. The Taking of the Bread. 1.
Jesus took bread (...).
.

Quest. What is meant by this Phrase, He took bread.

Answ. Christ's taking and separating the bread from common uses, did hold
forth a double Mystery.

1. It signified that God in his Eternal Decree, set Christ apart for the work
of our Redemption. He was (...), Separate from sinners. Heb. 7. 26.

2. Christ's setting the Elements apart from common Bread and Wine, showed,
That he is not for common Persons to feed on. They are to be divinely, purified
who touch these holy things of God; they must be outwardly separated from the
World, and inwardly sanctified by the Spirit.

Quest. Why did Christ take Bread, rather than any other Element?

Answ. 1. Because it did prefigure Him. Christ was typified by the Show bread,
1 King. 7. 48. By the Bread which Melchisedeck offered unto Abraham, Genesis 14.
18. And by the Cake which the Angel brought to Elias, 1 Kings 19. 4. Therefore
he took Bread, to answer the Type.

2. Christ took bread because of the Analogy; Bread did nearly resemble him,
John 6. 48. I am that bread of life. There is a threefold resemblance. 1. Bread
is useful. Other comforts are more for delight than use. Music delights the
ear, colour^ the eye, but Bread is the staff of Life. So is Christ useful.
There is no subsisting without him, John 6. 57. He that eats me, even he
shall live by me.

2. Bread is satisfying. If a man be hungry, bring him Flowrs or Pictures, they
do not satisfy, but bread does satiate. So Jesus Christ the bread of the soul,
satisfies; he satisfies the eye with beauty, the heart with sweetness, the
conscience with peace.

3. Bread is strengthening. Psalm. 104. 15. Bread which strengthens man's heart.
So Christ, the bread of the soul, transmits strength. He strengthens us against
temptations, he gives strength for doing and suffering Work. He is like the
Cake, the Angel brought to the Prophet, 1 Kings 19. 8. He arose and did eat,
and went in the strength of that meat forty days, and forty nights, unto Horeb
the Mount of God.

2. The second thing in the Institution, 2.
is, Christ's blessing of the bread. He blessed it Benedictione Christi, panis
com munis in sacrum m^usest Gualt.
. This was the Consecration of the Elements. Christ by his Blessing, sanctified
them and made them Symbols of his Body and Blood ^onsecratio, vocabulum est
solenne, significans id quo sit, ut haec signa Visibilia, quae per se aliena
sunt a my^eris religiosis, siut Sacramenta corporis and sanguinis Christi.
Chamier de Eucharist.
.

Christ's consecrating of the Elements, points out three things:

1. Christ in blessing the Elements, opened the nature of the Sacrament to the
Apostles. He did unriddle this Mystery. Christ did advertise them, That as sure
as they did receive the Elements corporeally, so sure they did receive him into
their hearts spiritually.

2. Christ's blessing the Elements, signified his prayer for a Blessing upon
the Ordinance. He prayed that these Symbols of Bread and Wine, might through
the Blessing and Operation of the Holy Ghost, sanctify the Elect, and seal up
all spiritual mercies, and privileges to them.

3. Christ's blessing the Elements, was his giving thanks Moris s^mper judaeis
fuit, ^tex halmudicis Scriptoribus apparet, Ante cibum, aut vinum sumptum,
(...). Josephus. Grotius.
. So it is in the Greek, (...), He gave thanks (...) idem valet quod (...)
Drusius. Beza. Cameron.
.

1. Christ gave thanks, that God the Father had in the infinite riches of his
Grace given his Son to expiate the Sins of the World. And if Christ gave
thanks, how may we give thanks? If he gave thanks who was to shed his blood,
how may we give thanks who are to drink it?

2. Christ gave thanks, that God had given these Elements of Bread and Wine,
not only to be signs, but seals of our Redemption. As the Seal serves to make
over a conveyance of Land; so the Sacrament, as a spiritual Seal, serves to
make over Christ and Heaven, to such as worthily receive it.

3. The third thing in the Institution, 3.
is, the Breaking of the Bread. He brake it (...).
. This did shadow out Christ's Death and Passion, with all the Torments of his
Body and Soul. Isa. 53. 10. It pleased the Lord to bruise him. When the Spices
are bruised, then they send forth a sweet savor. So when Christ was bruised on
the Cross, he did send out a most fragant smell. Christ's body crucifying, was
the breaking open a Box of precious ointment, which did fill Heaven and Earth
with its perfume.

Quest. But why was Christ's body broken? What was the cause of his suffering?

Answ. Surely not for any desert of his own. Dan. 9. 26. The Mesfiah shall be
cut off, but not for himself. In the Original it is, He shall be cut off, and
there is nothing in him (...)
. There is no cause in him, why he should suffer. The high Priest when he went
into the Tabernacle, offered first, for himself, Heb. 9. 7. Though he had his
Mitre or golden Plate, and did wear holy Garments; yet he was not pure and
innocent; he must offer sacrifice for himself, as well as for the people. But
Jesus Christ that great High Priest, though he offered a bloody Sacrifice, yet
not for himself.

Why then was his blessed body broken? Answ. It was for our sins Doleo, Domine,
non tua vulnera sed mea. Amb.
. Isa. 53. 6. But he was wounded for our transgressions. The Hebrew word for
wounded (...)
, has a double Emphasis; either it may signify that he was pierced through as
with a dart Perforatus.
; or that he was profaned Profanatus.
. He was used as some common vile thing; and Christ might thank us for it, He
was wounded for our transgressions Alius peccat, alius plectitur. Luth.
. So that, if the question were put to us, as was once to Christ, Prophecy,
who is it that smote thee? Luke 22. 64. We might soon answer, It was our sins
that smote him (...). Cytill.
. Our pride made Christ wear a Crown of Thorns; as Zipporah said to Moses,
Exodus 4. 25. A bloody husband art thou to me: so may Christ say to his Church,
A bloody Spouse thou have been to me; thou have cost me my heart-blood.

Quest. But how could Christ suffer, being God? the Godhead is impassible?

Resp. Christ suffered only in the Humane nature, not the Divine. Damascen
expresses it by this Simile; If one pour water on Iron that is red hot, the
fire suffers by the water, and is extinguished, but the Iron does not suffer.
So the Humane Nature of Christ might suffer Death, but the Divine Nature is not
capable of any passion. When Christ was in the Humane Nature suffering, he was
in the Divine Nature triumphing. As we wonder at the rising of the Sun of
Righteousness in his Incarnation, so we may wonder at the going down of this
Sun in his Passion.

Quest. But if Christ suffered only in his Humane Nature, how could his
suffering satisfy for sin?

Answ. By reason of the Hypostatical Union, the Humane Nature being united to
the Divine; the Humane Nature did suffer, the Divine did satisfy. Christ's
Godhead did give both Majesty and Efficacy to his sufferings. Christ was
Sacrifice, Priest, and Altar. He was Sacrisice, as he was Man; Priest, as he
was God and Man; Altar, as he was God. It is the Property of the Altar to
sanctify the thing offered on it, Mat. 23. 19. So the Altar of Christ's Divine
Nature sanctified the Sacrifice of his Death, and made it Meritorious.

Now concerning Christ's suffering upon the Cross, observe two things.

1. The Bitterness of it to him, 1.
He was broken. The very thoughts of his Suffering put him into an Agony. Luke
22. 44. Being in an agony, he prayed more earnestly, and his sweat was as great
drops of blood falling to the ground. He was as full of sorrow as his heart
could hold. Mat. 26. 38. (...), My soul is exceeding sorrowful even unto death.

Christ's Crucifixion was, 1. A lingering death. It was more for Christ to
suffer one hour, than for us to have suffered for ever; but his death was
lengthened out, he hung three hours upon the Cross. He dyed many deaths, before
he could dye one Morsque minus poe^ae, quam mora mortis habet.
.

2. It was a painful Death. His Hands and Feet were nailed, which parts being
full of sinnews, and therefore very tender, his pain must needs be most acute
and sharp; and to have the invenoned Arrow of Gods wrath shot to his heart,
this was the direful Catastrophe, and caused that Vociferation and outcry upon
the Cross, My God, my God, why have thou farsaken me? The Justice of God was
now inflamed and heightened to its full (...). Romans 8. 38. God spared not his
Son. Nothing must be abated of the debt. Christ felt the pains of Hell, though
not locally, yet equivalently. In the Sacrament we see this Tragedy acted
before us.

3. It was a shameful Death. Christ was in medio positus; he hung between two
Thieves, Mat. 27. 38. As if he had been the principal Malefactor. Well might
the Lamp of Heaven withdraw its light, and mask it self with darkness, as
blushing to behold the Sun of Righteousness in an Eclipse. It is hard to say,
which was greater, the blood of the Cross, or the shame of the Cross Heb. 12. 2.
.

4. It was a cursed Death, Deuteronomy. 21. 23. This kind of death was so execrable,
that Constantine made a Law, That no Christian should dye upon the Cross. The
Lord Jesus underwent this. Gal. 3. 13. Being made a Curse for us. He who was
God blessed for ever, Romans 9. 5. was under a Curse.

2. Consider the Sweetness of it 2.
to us Non citius fuit, quam profuit.
. Christ's Brusing, is our Healing. Isa. 53. 6. By his stripes we are healed.
Calvin calls the Crucifixion of Christ, Cardo salutis, the Hinge on which our
Salvation turns: And Luther calls it Fons salutis, a Gospel-spring opened to
refresh Sinners. Indeed, the Suffering of Christ is a Deathbed Cordial, It Is
an Antidote to expel all our fear. Does Sin trouble? Christ has overcome it
for us. Besides the two Thieves crucified with Christ, there were two other
invisible Thieves crucified with him, Sin and the Devil.

4. The fourth Particular in the 4.
Institution, is Christ's administering the Cup: And he took the Cup (...).
. The taking of the Cup, showed the Redundancy of Merit in Christ, and the
copiousness of our Redemption. Christ was not sparing; he gave not only the
Bread, but the Cup. We may say as the Psalmist, With the Lord is plenteous
Redemption, Psalm. 130. 7.

If Christ gave the Cup, how dare the Papists withold it Si quis dixerit ex
Dei praecepto, vel necessitate salutis om nes and singulos Chri^i fideels
utramque spe cicm sanctissimi Eucharistiae Sacramenti sumere debere, Anathema
sit. Council. Trident. Sess. Vicesima prima, Canon.
? They clip and mutilate the Ordinance. They blot out Scripture; and may fear
that doom, Rev. 22. 19. If any man shall take away from the words of the Book
of this Prophecy, God shall take away his part out of the Book of Life.

Quest What is meant by Christ's taking the Cup?

Answ. The Cup is figurative: It is a Metonymy of the Subject, the Cup is put
for the Wine in it. By this, Christ signified the shedding of his Blood upon
the Cross; when his Blood was poured out, now the Vine was cut, and did bleed;
now was the Lilly of the Valleys dyed of a purple Color Stolam coccineam
dederunt ei, quamvis ipse vestem corporis, sanguinaria essusione multo nobilius
purpuravit. Bern.
. This was to Christ a Cup of astonishment Ezekiel. 23. 33.
: But to us it is a Cup of salvation. When Christ drank this Cup of Blood, we
may truly say, he drank an health to the World. It was precious Blood, 1 Pet.
1. 19. In this Blood we see Sin fully punished, and fully pardoned. Well may
the Spouse give Christ of her Spiced Wine, and the Juice of her Pomgranate,
Cant. 8. 2. When Christ has given her a draught of his warm Blood, Spiced with
his Love, and perfumed with the Divine Nature.

4. The fourth thing, is, The Guests 4.
invited to this Supper, or the Persons to whom Christ distributed the
Elements: He gave to the Disciples (...)
, and said, Take, Eat. The Sacrament is Chilarens bread. If a man makes a
Feast, he calls his Friends. Christ calls his Disciples; if he had any piece
better than other, he carves it to them.

Luke 22. 19. This is my body which is given for you. That is, for you quatenus
Believers. Christ gave his Body and Blood to the Disciples, chiefly under this
Notion, as they were Believers: As Christ poured out his Prayers Joh. 17. 9.
, so his Blood only for Believers; see how near to Christ's Heart, all
Believers lie! Christ's Body was broken on the Cross, and his Blood shed for
them. Romans 11, 7, The Election has obtained it. Christ passed by others, and
dyed intentionally for them. Impenitent Sinners have no Benefit by Christ's
Death, unless a short Reprieve. Christ is given to the wicked in wrath. He is a
Rock of Offense (...) Idem.
, 1 Pet. 2, 8. Christ's Blood, is like Chemical Drops of Oil, which recover some
Patients, but kill other. Judas sucked Death from the Tree of Life (...), hos
curat illis nocet.
: God can turn Stones into Bread; and a Sinner can turn Bread into Stones: The
Bread of Life, into the S^ne of Stumbling.

5. The fifth thing observable in 5.
the Text, is the benefit of this Supper, in these Words, For the remission of
sins (...).
. This is a mercy of the first Magnitude; the Summum genus, the crowning
blessing: Psalm 103. 3, 4. Who forgiveth thy iniquities, who crowns thee with
lovingkindness: Whosoever has this Charter granted, is enrolled in the book of
Life: Psalm. 32. 1. Bl^ssed is he whose transgression is forgiven. Under this
Word remission of sin, by a Synecdoche, are comprehended all Heavenly
Benedictions, Justification, Adoption, Glory; in respect of which benefits, we
may with Chrysostom (...).
, call the Lords Supper, The Feast of the Cross.

This Doctrine of the Sacrament confutes the opinion of Transubstantiation Non
Transubstantiatio intellig^tur, vel transfusio sed signi and rei con junctio
(...), and Sacramentalis: Beza.
. Use 1. Confut. Bran. 1.
When Christ says, This is my body; The Papists affirm that the Bread after
the Consecration is turned into the Substance of Christ's Body. We hold, that
Christ's Body is in the Sacrament spiritually; but the Papists say, that it is
there carnally; which opinion is both Absurd, and Impious.

1. Absurd; For it is contrary, 1. To Scripture: The Scripture asserts that
Christ's Body is locally, and numerically in Heaven, Act. 3. 21. Whom the
Heavens must receive, until the times of Restitution of all things. If Christ's
Body be circumscribed in Heaven, then it cannot be materially in the Eucharist.

2. It is contrary to reason: How is it imaginable that a thing should be
changed into another Species, yet continue the same? That the Bread in the
Sacrament should be transmuted and turned into Flesh, yet remain Bread still?
When Moses Rod was turned into a Serpent, it could not be at the same time both
a Rod, and a Serpent: That the Bread in the Sa^rament should be changed into
the body of Christ, and yet remain Bread is a perfect contradiction: If the
Papists say, The Bread is vanished: This is fitter to be put into their Legend,
than our Creed; for the color, form, and relish of the Bread still remains.

2. This Opinion of Transubstantiation 2.
is impious; as appears in two things: 1. It is a Profaning Christ's body; for
if the Bread in the Sacrament be the real body of Christ, then it may be eaten,
not only by the wicked, but by Reptils and Vermin, which were to disparage and
cast contempt upon Christ and his Ordinance.

2. It runs men inevitably upon sin; for through this mistake, that the bread
is Christ's very body, there follows the (...), or Divine Worship given to the
bread, which is Idolatry; as also the offering up of the bread, or Host in the
Mass, which is a blasphemy against Christ's Priestly Office Heb. 10. 14.
, as if his Sacrifice on the Cross were imperfect.

Therefore I conclude with Peter Martyr, That this Doctrine of
Transubstantiation is to be abhorred and exploded, being minted only in men's
phancies, but not sprung up in the field of the Holy Scriptures.

2. This Doctrine of the Sacrament, confutes such as look upon the Bran.
Lords Supper only as an empty Figure or shadow, resembling Christ's Death, but
having no intrinsic efficacy in it. Surely, this glorious Ordinance is more
than an Effigies, or representative of Christ: Why is the Lords Supper called
The Communion of the body of Christ 1 Cor. 10. 16.
, but because in the right celebration of it, we have sweet communion with
Christ? In this Gospel-Ordinance, Christ does not only show forth his Beauty,
but send forth his Virtue. The Sacrament is not only a Picture drawn, but a
Breast drawn; it gives us, a Taste of Christ as well as a Sight 1 Pet. 2 3
. Such as make the Sacrament only a representative of Christ, do shoot short of
the Mystery, and come short of the Comfort.

Use. 2. It informs us of several Use 2. Infor.
things. 1. It shows us the necessity of coming to the Lords Supper. Has Jesus
Christ been at all this cost to make a Feast? then sure there must be Guests
Luke 2. 19.
. It is not left to our choice whether we will come or no, but it is a Duty
purely indispensable: 1 Cor. 11. 28. (...).
Let him eat of that Bread: Which Words are not only permissive, but
authorative: As if a King should say, Let it be Enacted. The Neglect of the
Sacrament runs men into a Gospel-Premunire. It was infinite goodness in Christ,
to broach that blessed Vessel of his body, and let his sacred Blood stream out;
and for us wilfully to omit such an Ordinance, wherein the Trophie of mercy is
so richly displayed, and our salvation so nearly concerned, well may Christ
take this as an undervaluing of him, and interpret it no better than a bidding
him keep his feast to himself. He that observed not the Passover, that soul
was to be cut off, Numb. 9. 13. How angry was Christ with those that stayed
away from the Supper! They thought to put it off with a Complement; but Christ
knew how to construe their excuse for a refusal: Luke 14. 24. None of those men
which were bidden, shall taste of my Supper. The Rejecting Gospel-mercy is a
sin of so deep a die, that God can do no less than punish it for a Contempt.
Some need a Flaming Sword to keep them off from the Lord's Table; and others
need Christ's Whip of small Cords to drive them to it.

Perhaps, Some will say, They are above the Sacrament: It were strange to hear
a man say he were above his Food! The Apostles were not above this Ordinance,
and does any one presume to be a Peg higher than the Apostles? Let all
Enthusiasts consult that Scripture, (...) Cor. 11. 26. As often as ye eat this
bread, and drink this Cup. ye show the Lords death till he come. The Lords
Death is to be remembered Sacramentally, til he come to Judgment.

2. See the Misery of Unbelievers; 2.
though the Lord has appointed this glorious Ordinance of his Body and Blood,
they reap no benefit by it. They come indeed to the Sacrament, either to keep
up their Credit, or to stop the Mouth of Conscience, but they get nothing for
their Souls. They come empty of Grace, and go away empty of Comfort: Isa. 29.
8. It shall even be as when an hungry man dreameth, and behold he eats, but
he awaketh, and his soul is empty. So, wicked men fancy they eat of this
spritual Banquet, but they are in a golden Dream Impiis ^ibil rest at praeter
ina^ spectaculum. Davenant.
: Alas, They discern not the Lords body: The Manna lay round about Isreal's
Camp, and they knew it not: Exodus 16. 15. They wist not what it was (...);
: So, carnal persons see the external Elements, but Christ is not known to them
in his saving Virtues: There is honey in this spiritual Rock, which they never
taste: They feed upon the bread, but not Christ in the bread Edunt pan^m
Domini, non panem Do ^um.
. Isaac eat the Kid, when he thought it had been Venison, Genesis 27. 25.
Unbelievers go away with the shadow of the Sacrament; they have the Rind and
the Husk, not the Marrow: They eat the Kid, not the Venison.

Bran. 3.
3. See in this Text, as in a Glass, infinite Love displayed. 1. Behold the love
of God the Father, in giving Christ to be broken for us; that God should lay
such a Jewel to pawn is the Wonderment of Angels: John 3. 16. God so loved the
World, that he gave his only begotten Son. It is a pattern of Love without a
Parallel; it was a far greater expression of Love in God to give his Son to dye
for us, than if he had voluntarily acquitted us of the Debt, without any
satisfaction at all. If a Subject be disloyal to his Sovereign, it argues more
love in the King, to give his own Son to dye for that Subject, than to forgive
him the wrong freely.

2. Behold, the amazing Love of Christ, His body was broken (...), illustre
amoris Christi mnemosynum. Burg.
: The Cross, says St. Austin, was a Pulpit, in which Christ preached his Love
to the World. Let us see an holy Climax or Gradation of the Love of Christ!

1. It was wonderful Love, that 1.
Christ who never had the Viper of sin, fastened on him, should be reputed a
sinner: That he who hated sin, should be made sin 2 Cor. 5. 21.
: That he who is numbered among the Persons of the Trinity, should be numbered
among transgressors, Isa. 53. 12.

2 That Christ should suffer peath 2. Dilexisti me Damine magis quam te ipsum.
: Lord (says Bernard) thou have loved me more than thy self; for thou did
lay down thy life for me. The Emperor Trajan rent off a piece of his own Robe,
to bind up one of his Soldiers Wounds: Christ rent off his own Flesh for us
Nay, that Christ should dye as the greatest sinner, having the weight of all
men's sins laid upon him; here was Love Luther.
usque ad stuporem dulcis! It sets all the Angels in Heaven a wondering.

3. That Christ should dye freely: John 10. 17. I lay down my 3.
Life Non fuit ^x ^ecessitate, sed ex voluntate. Hier.
: There was no Law to enjoin him, no Force to compel him. It is called the
Offering of the Body of Jesus, Heb. 10. 10. What could fasten him to the Cross,
but the Golden Link of Love? 4.


4. That Christ should dye for such as we are: What are we? Not only Vanity,
but Enmity: When we were fighting, he was dying; when we had the Weapons in our
hands, then had he the Spear in his Sides, Romans 5. 8.

5. That Christ dyed ^or us, when he could not expect to be at all bettered 5.
by us: We were reduced to penury; we were in such a condition, that we could
neither Merit Christ's Love, nor R^quite it; for Christ to dye for us when we
were at such a low Ebb, was the very Quintessence of Love. One Man will extend
kindness to another, so long as he is able to requite him; but if he be fallen
to decay, then love begins to slacken and cool: But when we were ingulphed in
misery, and were fallen to decay, we had lost our Beauty, stained our Blood
spent our Portion, then Christ dyed for us; O amazing love, which may swallow
up all our thoughts!

6. That Christ should not repent of his sufferings: Isa. 53, 11. He 6.
shall see of the travel of his soul, and shall be satisfied. It is a Metaphor
that alludes to a Mother, who though she has had hard Labor, yet does not
repent ^it, when she sees a Child brought forth; so, though Christ had hard
Travel upon the Cross, yet he does not repent of it, but thinks all his Sweat
and Blood well bestowed, because he sees the Man-child of redemption is brought
forth into the World Hoc uno laboris sui praemio affatim saturat^r, nunc
qui^scit, nunc deliciis affluit. Forc^ius (...)
: He shall be satisfied; the Hebrew Word (...) signifies such a satiating, as a
man has at some sweet repast or banquet

7. That Christ should rather dye for us, than the Angels that fell. 7.
They were creatures of a more noble Extract, and in all probability might have
brought greater Revenues of glory to God; yet that Christ should pass by those
Golden Vessels, and make us Clods of Earth, into Stars of Glory; O the
Hyperbole of Christ's Love!

8. Yet another Step of Christ's 8.
Love (for like the waters of the Sanctuary, it rises higher)! That Christ's
Love should not cease at the hour of Death. We write in our Letters, Your
Friend till Death: But Christ wrote in another Style, Your Friend after Death!
Christ dyed once, (...) loves ever. He is now testify (...) his Affection to
us; he is making the Mansions ready for us, John 14. 2. He is interceding for
us, Heb. 9. 27. He appears in the Court, as the Advocate, for the Clyent. When
he has done dying, yet he has not done loving; what a stupendous love was
here? Foderunt latus Christi intimafu roris lancea, quod jam dudum amoris
lanceasuitvulneratum. Bern. de pass. Dom.
Who can meditate upon this, and not be in an Ecstasy? Well may the Apostle
call it; A love that passes knowledge (...)
. Ephesians. 3. 19. When you see Christ broken in the Sacrament think of this Love.

4. See then, what dear and entire Bran. 4.
affections we should bear to Christ, who gives us his body and blood in the
Eucharist: If, he had had any thing to part with of more worth, he would have
bestowed it upon us (...). Cyr.
. O let Christ lie nearest our Hearts. Let him be our Tree of Life, and let us
desire no other Fruit ^et him be our Morning Star, and let us rejoice in no
other Light.

As Christ's Beauty, so his Bounty should make him loved by us; he has given us
his Blood, as the Price; and his Spirit as the Witness of our Pardon. In the
Sacrament Christ bestows all good things: He both imputes his Righteousness,
and imparts his Loving Kindness. He gives a Fore-taste of that Supper which
shall be celebrated in the Paradise of God. To sum up all: In the blessed
Supper, Christ gives himself to Believers; and what can he give more? Dear
Savior, how should thy Name be as Ointment poured forth! The Persians worship
the Sun for their God, let us worship the Sun of Righteousness. Though Judas
sold Christ for Thirty Pieces, let us rather part with all, than this Pearl.
Christ is that Golden Pipe, through which, the Golden Oil of Salvation is
transmitted to us.

5. Was Christ's Body broken? then we may behold Sin odious in the Bran. 5.
Red Glass of Christ's Sufferings. It is true, Sin is to be abominated, as it
turned Adam out of Paradise, and threw the Angels down to Hell. Sin is the
Peace-breaker; it is like an Incendiary in the Family, that sets Husband and
Wife at variance; it makes God fall out with us. Sin is the Womb of our
Sorrows, and the Grave of our Comforts. But that which may most of all
disfigure the Face of Sin, and make it appear Ghastly, is this, It crucified
our Lord: It made Christ Vail his Glory, and lose his Blood. If a Woman did see
that Sword which killed her Husband, how hateful would the sight of it be to
her? Do we count that Sin Light, which made Christ's Soul Heavy unto Death?
Mark 14. 34. Can that be our joy, which made the Lord Jesus a man of sorrows?
Isa. 53. 3. Did he cry out, My God, why have thou forsaken me? And shall not
those Sins be forsaken by us, which made Christ himself forsaken? O let us look
upon Sin with Indignation. When a Temptation comes to Sin, let us say as David,
2 Samuel 23. 17. Is not this the blood of the men that went in jeopardy of their
lives? So, Is not this the Sin that poured out Christ's Blood? Let our Hearts
be enraged against Sin. When the Senators of Rome showed the people Caesar's
bloody Robe, they were incensed against those that slew him. Sin has rent the
White Robe of Christ's Flesh, and dyed it of a Crimson Color: let us then seek
to be avenged of our Sins. Under the Law, if an Ox gored a Man that he dyed,
the Ox was to be killed, Exodus 21. 28. Sin has gored and pierced our Savior,
let it dye the Death. What pity is it, for that to live, which would not
suffer Christ to live?

6. Was Christ's Body broken? Let us then from his suffering on the Bran. 6.
Cross, learn this Lesson, Not to wonder much, if we meet with Troubles in the
World. Did Christ suffer, who knew no Sin? And do we think it strange to
suffer, who know nothing but Sin? Did Christ feel the anger of God? And is it
much for us to feel the anger of Men? Was the Head crowned with Thorns? And
would the Members lie among Roses Non de cet membrum delicatum esse sub capite
crucifixo Bern.
? Must we have our Bracelets and Diamonds, when Christ had the Spear and Nails
going to his heart? Truly such as are guilty, may well expect the lash, when he
who was innocent, could not go free.

2. The second Use is of Exhortation, and it has several Branches. Use. 2.
Exhcrt.


1. Was Christ's precious body broken Bran. 1.
for us? Let us be affected with the great goodness of Christ; Who can tread
upon these hot Coals, and his Heart not burn? Cry out with Ignatius, Christ my
Love is crucified. If a Friend should dye for us, would not our Hearts be much
affected with his Kindness? That the God of Heaven should dye for us, how
should this stupendous mercy have a melting influence upon us! The body of
Christ broken, is enough to break the most flinty Heart. At our Savior's
Passion, the very Stones did cleave asunder: Mat 27. 51. The Rocks rent. He
that is not affected with this, has an Heart harder than the Stones quaenam te
genuit sola sub ^upe leaen^ Ca tul.
. If Saul was so affected with David's Mercy in sparing his Life, 1 Samuel 24. 16.
How may we be affected with Christ's kindness, who to spare our life, lost his
own! Let us pray, that as Christ was Crucifixus, so he might be Cordi-fixus:
As he was fastened to the Cross, so that he may be fastened to our Hearts.

2. Is Jesus Christ spiritually exhibited Bran. 2.
to us in the Sacrament? Let us then set an high value and Estimate upon him.

1. Let us prize Christ's body. Every crumb of this bread of life is precious,
John 6. 55. My flesh is meat indeed. It is Panis eximius and
supersubstantialis, as Cyprian calls it. The Manna Chamier lib. 11. Sect. 15.
was a lively Type and Emblem of Christ's Body (...). Cyril.
: Manna was sweet. Exodus 16. 31. The taste of it was like wafers made with
honey, it was a delicious meat; therefore it was called Angels Food, for its
excellency Borrheus.
: So Christ the Sacramental Manna, is sweet to a Believer's Soul. Cant. 2. 3.
His fruit was sweet to my taste. Every thing of Christ is sweet Haud animae
suavior cibus. Lactant.
. His Name is sweet his Virtues sweet. This Manna sweetens the Waters of Marah.

Nay, Christ's Flesh excells Manna. 1. Manna was Food, but not Physic. If an
Israclite had been sick, Manna could not have cured him; but this blessed Manna
of Christ's body, is not only for food, but for medicine Corpus Christi, aegris
medicina. Bern.
. Christ has healing under his wings, Mal. 4. 2. He heals the Blind eve, the
hard Heart. Take this medi^ine next your Heart, and it will heal you of all
your spiritual Distempers.

2. Manna was Corruptible: It ceased when Israel came to Canaan: But this
blessed Manna of Christ's Body will never cease. The Saints shall feed with
infinite delight, and Soul satisfaction, upon Christ to all Eternity. The Joys
of Heaven would cease, if this Manna should cease. The Manna was put in a
golden Pot in the Ark, to be preserved there: So the blessed Manna of Christ's
Body being put in the golden Pot of the Divine Nature, is laid up in the Ark of
Heaven, for the Saints to feast upon for ever. Well then may we say of Christ's
blessed Body, It is meat indeed. The Field Eosso agro corpor s Christi,
margarita salutis inv^itur.
of Christ's Body being dug upon the Cross, we find the Pearl of Salvation
there.

2. Let us prize Christ's Blood in the Sacrament. It is drink indeed Ego botrus
carnis Pro salute tua portatus sum ad Torcular Crucis, inde eliquatum est
mustum tuae redemptionis. Bern. de Caen. Dom.
, John 6. 55. Here is the Nectar and Anibrosia God himself delights to taste
of. This is both a Balsom and a Perfume. That we may set the higher value upon
the blood of Christ, I shall show you seven rare supernatural Virtues in it.

1. It is a reconciling blood: Col. 1. 21. 1.
(...). Chrysostom.
You that were sometime alienated, and enemies, yet now has he reconciled
through death. No sooner was the Message brought to King David, Uriah is dead,
2 Samuel 11. 21. but the anger of David was removed. No sooner was the blood of
Christ poured out, but God's anger was pacified. Christ's blood is the blood
of atonement. Nay, it is not only (...), but (...), not only a Sacrifice, but
a Propitiation, 1 John 2. 2. Which denotes a bringing us into Favor with God.
It is one thing for a traitor to be pardoned, and another thing to be brought
into Favor. Sin rent us off from God, Christ's Blood does soader and ^cment us
to God. If we had had as much grace as the Angels, it could not have wrought
our Reconciliation. If we had offered up Millions of Holocausts and Sacrifices,
if we ^ad wept Rivers of Tears, this could never have appeased an angry Dei^y;
only Christ's blood does ingra^iate us into God's Favor, and make him look
upon us with a smiling Aspect. When Christ dyed, the Vail of the Temple was
rent: This was not without a Mystery, to show that through Christ's blood, the
Vail of our Sins is rent, which did interpose between God and us.

2. Christ's blood is a quickening 2.
blood. John 6. 54. Whosoever drinks my blood, has eternal life. It both ^egets
life, and prevents death. Lev. 17. 11. The life of a thing is in the blood.
Sure enough, the life of our ^oul is in the blood of Christ. When we contract
deadness of Heart, and are like Wine that has lost the spi rits, Christ's blood
has an elevatin^ power, it puts vivacity into us, m^ king us quick and vegete
in our mo tion. Isa. 40. 31. They shall mou^ up with wings as Eagles.

3. Christ's blood is a cleansi^ 3.
blood. Heb. 9. 14. How much more shall the blood of Christ purge your Co^
sciences! As the Merit of Christ'^ blood does pacify God, so the Ve^ tue of it
does purify us. It is Baln^ um coeleste, the King of Heaven Bath. It is
Lavacrum animae; a Lav^ to vvash in. It vvasheth^ crimson sinner milk white^
(...) Theodoret.
1 John 1. 7. The blood (...) Jesus cleanses us from a^ our sin. The Word of
Go^ is a Looking-glass to show us o^ spots, and the blood of Christ is a fou^
tain to vvash them away, Zac. 12. 1^

But this blood will not vvash, if i^ be mingled with any thing. Wate^ will
not vvash clean, except it b^ mingled with Soap or Camphire; ^ut if we go to
mingle any thing with Christ's Blood, either the Merits of ^oints, or Prayers
of Angels, it will ^ot wash. Let Christ's Blood be pure and unmixed, and there
is no spot but ^t will wash away. It purged out ^oahs Drunkenness, Lots Incest.
In^eed there is one spot so black, that Christ's Blood does not wash away, and
that is the Sin against the Holy Ghost; not but that there is Virtue enough in
Christ's Blood to wash it a^ay; but he who has sinned that ^n, will not be
washed; he contemns Christ's Blood and tramples it under ^oot. Heb. 10. 29.

4. Christ's Blood is a softning 4.
blood. There is nothing so hard, ^ut may be softened, if it lie a steep (...)
this blood; it will soften a stone. ^ater will soften the Earth, but it ^ill
not soften a stone; but Christ's blood mollifies a Stone, it soft^s an Heart of
stone. It turns a Flint into a Spring. The Hea^ which before was like a piece
hew^ out of a Rock, being steeped Christ's blood, becomes soft, a^ the waters
of Repentance flow from it. How was the Jaylor's Heart di^ solved, and made
tender, when the blood of sprinkling was upon it! A^ 16. 30. Sirs, What must I
do to saved? His heart was now like me^ ing Wax, God might set, what S^ and
Impression he would upon it.

5. Christ's blood, is a coolin^ 5.
blood 1. It cools the Heat of Si^ The Heart naturally is full of diste^ pered
Heat; it must needs be ho^ being set on fire of Hell. It burns i^ Lust and
Passion; Christ's blood a^ lays this Heat, it quenches the I^ flammations of
Sin. 2. It cools the Heat of Conscience. In time of de^ sertion, Conscience
burns with the heat of God's Displeasure; no^ Christ's blood being sprinkled
upon the Conscience, cools and pacifies it And in this sense Christ is compared
to a River of water, Isa. 32. 2. When the Heart burns, and is in an agony,
Christ's blood, is, like water to the fire, it has a cooling refrigerating
Virtue in it.

6. Christ's blood, is a comforting 6.
blood; it is good against fainting Fits. Christ's blood, is, better than Wine:
Though Wine chears the Heart of a Man that is well, yet it will not cheer his
Heart when he has a fit of the Stone, or when the Pangs of Death are upon him:
But Christ's blood will cheer the Heart at such a time. It is best in
affliction, it cures the trembling at the Heart. A Conscience sprinkled with
Christ's blood, can, like the Nightingale, sing with a Thorn at its Breast. The
blood of Christ can make a Prison become a Palace. It turned the Martyrs Flames
into Beds of Roses Feriuntur Martyrs gaudent; mortuntur and ecce triumphant;
quare? quia sanguine crucis perfusi mortem metuunt sed sperant.
. Christ's blood gives comfort at the hour of Death: As an Holy Man once said
on his Deathbed, when they brought him a Julip; No Julip like the Blood of
Christ!

7. Christ's blood is an Heaven procuring blood 7. Per latus Christi nobis
patescit in Caelum i^troitus. Bern.
. Israel passed through the red Sea to Canaan: So through the red sea of
Christ's blood, we enter into the Heavenly Canaan: Heb. 10. 19. Having boldness
therefore to enter into the holiest by the blood of Jesus. Our sins did shut
Heaven, Christ's blood is the key which opens the gate of Paradise for us
Morimur per lignum sc^entiae, orimur per lignum Crucis.
. Hence it is Theodoret, calls the Cross, (...), the Tree of Salvation. Because
that blood which trickled down the Cross, distills Salvation. Well then may we
prize the blood of Christ, and with St. Paul, determine to know nothing but
Christ crucified, 1 Cor. 2. 2. Kings Crowns are only Crosses, but the Cross of
Christ is the only Crown.

3. Does Christ offer his Body 3. Bran.
and blood to us in the Supper? Then with what solemn preparation should we
come to so sacred an Ordinance! It is not enough to do what God has appointed,
but as he has appointed, 1 Samuel 7. 3. Prepare your hearts unto the Lord. The
Musician first puts his Instrument in Tune, before he plays. The Heart must
first be prepared, and put in Tune, before it goes to meet with God in this
solemn Ordinance of the Sacrament. Take heed of rashness and irreverence. If we
come not preparedly, we do not drink, but spill Christ's blood, 1 Cor. 11. 27.
Whosoever shall eat this bread, and drink this Cup of the Lord unworthily,
shall be guilty of the body, and blood of the Lord; That is, says Theophylact,
he shall be judged a shedder of Christ's Blood. We read of a Wine-cup of fury
in Gods hand, Jer. 25. 15. He that comes unpreparedly to the Lord's Supper,
turns the Cup in the Sacrament into a Cup of fury Calicem sangninis mutat in
calieemfuroris* Novarinus.
.

Oh with what reverence and devotion should we address our selves to these holy
Mysteries! The Saints are called prepared Vessels, Romans 9. 23. If ever these
Vessels should be prepared, it is when they are to hold the precious Body and
Blood of Christ. The sinner that is damned, is first prepared. Men do not go to
Hell without some kind of preparation, Romans 9. 22. Vessels fitted for
destruction. If those Vessels are prepared which are filled with wrath, much
more are those to be prepared, who are to receive Christ in the Sacrament. Let
us dress our selves by a Scripture-glasse, before we come to the Lords Table
(...). Theophylact.
: And, with the Lamb's Wife, make our selves ready. Rev. 19. 7


Quest. How should we be rightly qualified, and prepared for the Lords Supper?

Answ. If we would come with prepared hearts, we must come,

1. With Self-examining-hearts. 1 Cor. 11. 28. But let a man examine himself,
and so let him eat of that Bread. 1.
It is not enough that others think we are fit to come, but we must examine our
selves. The Greek word, to Examine, (...), is a Metaphor taken from the
Goldsmith, who does curiously try his Metals. So before we come to the Lords
Table, we are to make a curious and critical trial of our selves by the Word.

Self-examination being a reflexive Act, is difficult Malumus vitium excusare,
quam excutere. Senec.
. It Is hard for a man to look inward, and see the face of his own Soul. The eye
can see every thing, but it self.

But this probatory work is necessary: Because,

1. If we do not examine our selves, we are at a loss about our Spiritual
estate; we know not whether we are interested in the Covenant, or whether we
have a right to the Seal.

2. God will examine us. It was a sad question the Master of the Feast asked,
Mat. 22. 12. Friend, how came thou in hither, not having a Wedding Garment?
So it will be terrible, when God shall say to a man, How came thou in hither
to my Table with a proud, vain, unbelieving heart? What have thou to do here in
thy sins? Thou pollutest my holy things. What need therefore is there to make
an heart-search before we come to the Lord's Supper? We should examine our sins,
that they may be mortified; our wants, that they may be supplied; our graces,
that they may be strengthened.

2. We must come with serious hearts. Our spirits are feathery 2.
and light; like a Vessel without Ballast, which flotes upon the water, but
does not sail. We flote in holy duties, and are full of vain excursions, even
when we are to deal with God and are engaged in matters of life and death. That
which may consolidate our hearts, and make them fix with seriousness, is, To
consider, God's eye is now especially upon us, when we approach to his Table.
The King came in to see the Gnests Mat. 22. 11.
. God knows every Communicant, and if he sees any levity and indecency of
spirit in us, unworthy of his presence, he will be highly incensed, and send us
away with the guilt of Christ's blood, instead of the comfort of it.

3. We must come with intelligent 3.
hearts. There ought to be a competent measure of knowledge, that we may discern
the Lords body: As we are to pray with understanding, 1 Cor. 14. 15. So ought
we to Communicate at the Lords Table with understanding. If knowledge be
wanting, it cannot be a reasonable service Romans 12. 1.
. They that know not the mystery, feel not the comfort. We must know God the
Father in his Attributes, God the Son in his Offices, God the Holy Ghost in his
Graces. Some say, they have good hearts, yet want knowledge: We may as well call
that a good eye, which wants sight.

4. We must come to the Sacrament 4.
with longing hearts: Say as Christ, With desire I have desired to eat of this
Passover Luke 22^. 5^.
. If God prepares a Feast, we must get a Stomach. Why has the Lord frowned
upon his people of late, but to punish their surfeit, and provoke their
appetite? As David longed for the water of the Well of Bethlehem, 2 Samuel 23.
15. So should we long for Christ in the Sacrament. Desires are the Sails of the
Soul, which are spread to receive the gale of an Heavenly Blessing. For the
exciting holy desires and longings, consider:

1. The magnificence and royalty of this Supper: It is (...), an Heavenly
Banquet. Isa. 25. 6. In this Mountain shall the Lord of Hosts make unto all
people a feast of fat things, a feast of wine on the lees Hae su^ suaves
delitiae, hic bibuntur flumina ^ellis, liquoris balsami Caelestis. Ber. de Caen.
. Here the juice of that Grape which comes from the true Vine. Under these
Elements of Bread and Wine, Christ and all his benefits are exhibited to us.
The Sacrament is, omnium aromatum (...), a repository and storehouse of
Celestial Blessings. Behold here life and peace, and salvation set before us!
All the Dulcia fercula, the sweet delicacies of Heaven, are served in at this
Feast.

2. To provoke Appetite, consider what need we have of this spiritual repast.
The Angel persuaded Elias to take a little of the Cake, and Cruse of water,
that he might not faint in his Journey, 1 King. 19. 7. Arise and eat, because
the Journey is too great for thee. So truly we have a great Journey from Earth
to Heaven, therefore had need recruit our selves by the way: How many sins have
we to subdue? how many duties to perform? how many wants to supply? how many
graces to strengthen? how many adversaries to conflict with? so that we need a
bait by the way; by feeding upon the body and blood of the Lord, We renew our
strength as the Eagle.

3. Consider Christ's readiness to dispense Divine blessings in this Ordinance.
Jesus Christ is not a sealing Fountain, but a flowing Fountain. It Is but
crying, and he gives the Breast. It Is but thirsting, and he opens the Conduit.
Rev. 22. 17. Let him that is athirst, come; and whosoever will, let him take
the water of life freely. As the clouds have a natural propenseness to drop
down their moisture upon the Earth: So has Christ to give forth of his
gracious virtues and influences to the soul.

4. There is no danger of excess at this Supper. Other Feasts do often cause
Surfeit, it is not so here. The more we take of the bread of life, the more
healthful we are, and the more we come to our spiritual complexion. Fullness
here, does not increase humors, but comforts; in spiritual things there is no
extreme. Though a drop of Christ's blood be sweet, yet the more the better; the
deeper the sweeter, Cant. 5. 2. Drink abundantly O beloved. In the Original it
is, Be ye inebriated (...) Praeelara ebrietas quae sobrietatem ment^ operatur.
Ambr. de Sacram.
with my love.

5. We know not how long this Feast may last: While the Manna is to be had, let
us bring our Omer: God will not always be spreading the Cloth. If people lose
their stomachs, he will call to the Enemy to take away.

6. Feeding upon Christ Sacramentally, will be a good preparative to
Sufferings. The bread of life will help us to feed upon the bread of
affliction. The Cup of Blessing, will enable us to drink of the Cup of
persecution. Christ's blood is a wine that has a flavor in it, and is full of
Spirits. Therefore Cyprian tells us, When the Primitive Christians were to
appear before the cruel Tyrants, they were wont to receive the Sacrament, and
then they arose up from the Lords Table, as Lions breathing forth the fire of
heavenly courage Tanquam Leones ignem spirantes.
. Let these considerations be as sauce to sharpen our appetite to the Lords
Table. God loves to see us feed hungrily upon the bread of life.

5. If we would come prepared to this Ordinance, we must come with penitent
hearts 5. Cur, O anima, te non transfigit gladius doloris. Austin.
. The Passover was to be eaten with bitter herbs. We must bring our Myrrh of
Repentance; which, though it be bitter to us, it is sweet to Christ: Zac. 12.
10. They shall look upon me whom they have pierced, and mourn over him. A
broken Christ is to be received into a broken heart. We that have sinned with
Peter, should weep with Peter. Our eyes should be broached with tears, and our
hearts steeped in the brinish waters of Repentance. Say, Lord Jesus, though I
cannot bring sweet Spices, and perfume thy body as Mary did, yet I will wash
thy feet with my tears. The more bitterness we taste in sin, the more sweetness
we shall taste in Christ.

6. We must come with sincere hearts. The Tribes of Israel being straightened in
time, wanted some legal Purifications; yet because their hearts were sincere,
and they came with desire to meet with God in the Passover, therefore the
Lord healed the people, 2 Chronicles. 30. 19. Bad aims will spoil good actions. An
Archer may miss the mark, as well by looking asquint, as by shooting short.
What is our design in coming to the Sacrament Finis no^ilitat opus.
? Is it, that we may have more victory over our corruptions, and be more
confirmed in holiness? Then God will be good to us, and heal us. Sincerity,
like true Gold, shall have some grains allowed for its lightness.

7. We must come with hearts 7.
fired with love to Christ. The Spouse was in a burning fit of love, Cant. 2.
6. I am sick of Love. Let us give Christ the Wine of our love to drink, and
vveep that we can love him no more. Would we have Christ's exhilarating
presence in the Supper? let us meet him with strong indearments of affection.
Basil compares Love to a svveet Ointment: Christ delights to smell this
perfume. The Disciple that did love most, Christ put him in his bosom.

8. We must come with humble hearts. We see Christ humbling himself to the
death; and will an humble Christ ever be received into a proud heart (...).
Chrysostom.
? A sight of God's glory, and a sight of sin, may humble us. Was Christ humble,
who was all Purity? And are we proud, who are all Leprosy?. O let us come
with a sense of our own vileness. How humble should he be, who is to
receive an Alms of Free Grace? Jesus Christ is a Lilly of the Valleys Cant. 2.
1.
, not of the Mountains. Humility was never a loser. The emptier the Vessel is,
and the lovver it is let down into the Well, the more water it draws up: So
the more the Soul is emptied of it self, and the lovver it is let down by
humility, the more it fetches out of the Well of Salvation. God will come
into an humble ^eart to revive it, Isa. 57. 15. That is none of Christ's
Temple, which is not built with a lovv Roof.

9. We must come with Heavenly 9.
hearts. The mystery of the Sacrament is Heavenly, what should an Earth worm
do here? He is not like to feed on Christ's body and blood, who, with the
Serpent, eats dust. The Sacrament is called (...), a Communion, 1 Cor. 10. 16.
What communion can an Earthly man have with Christ? First there must be
Conformity before Communion: He that is earthly, is no more conformed in
likeness to Christ, than a clod of dust is like a Star. An earthly man makes
the World his god, then let not him think to receive another God in the
Sacrament: Oh let us be in the Heavenly Altitudes, and by the vving of grace
ascend!

10. We must come with Believing 10.
hearts. Christ gave the Sacrament to the Apostles, principally as they were
Believers. Such as com^ faithless, go away fruitless. Nor is it enough to have
the habit of faith, but we must exsert, and put forth the vigorous actings of
faith in this Ordinance Habitus sine exercitio, similis est taciturnae lyra.
Claud.
.

1. Let us exercise the eye of faith. Faith has an Eagle's eye, it pierces
into things far remote from sense (...). Chrysostom.
. Faith takes a Prospect of Heaven, it discerns him who is invisible, Heb. 11.
27. It beholds a beauty and fullness in Christ; it sees this beauty shining
through the latice of an Ordinance. Faith vievvs Christ's love streaming in his
blood. Look upon Christ with believing eyes, and you shall one day see him
with glorisied eyes.

2. Exercise the mouth of Faith Quid par as dentem, and ventrem? Creed, and
mand ucasti. Aug.
. Here is the bread broken. What use is there of bread but to feed on? Feed
upon the bread of God. Adam dyed, we live by eating. In the Sacrament whole
Christ is dished-out to us, the Divine and Humane nature; all kind of virtue
comes from Him: Mortifying, mollifying, comforting. Oh then feed on him. This
grace of Faith, is the great grace to be set on work at the Sacrament.

Quest. But does the virtue lie simply in Faith?

Answ. Not in faith considered purely as a grace, but as it has respect to the
Object. The virtue is not in faith, but in Christ. A Ring which has a
precious stone in it which will staunch blood; we say, the Ring stauncheth
blood, but the virtue does not lie barely in the Ring, but in the stone in the
Ring. So, Faith is the Ring, Christ is the precious stone; all that faith does,
is to bring home Christ's merits to the soul, and so it justifies; the virtue is
not in faith, but in Christ.

Quest. But, Why should faith carry away more from Christ in the Sacrament,
than any other grace?

Answ. 1. Because, Faith is the most receptive grace; it is the receiving of
gold enricheth: So faith receiving of Christ's merits, and silling the Soul
with all the fullness of God, it must needs be an enriching grace. In the Body,
there are Veins that suck the Nourishment which comes into the stomach, and
turn it into blood and spirits. Faith is such a sucking vein, that draws virtue
from Christ, therefore is called a precious faith, 2 Pet. 1. 1.

2. Faith has more of Christ's benefits annexed to it, because it is the most
humble grace. If Repentance should fetch Justification from Christ, a man would
be ready to say, This was for my tears; but Faith is humble, it is an empty
hand, and What merit can be in that? Does a poor man reaching out his hand,
merit an Alms? So that, because faith is humble, and gives all the glory to
Christ and Free Grace, hence it is God has put so much honor upon it; This
shall be the grace to which Christ and all his merits belong.

Therefore above all graces, set faith a work in the Sacrament Per sidem
Christi sanguinem sugimus, and inter redemptoris nostri vuln^ra linguam
figimus. Cypr.
. Faith fetches in all provisions. This is the golden Bucket that draws water
out of the Well of life. But there is a Bastard-faith in the World. Pliny tells
of a Cyprianstone, which is in color and splendour like the Diamond, but it is
not of the right kind; it will break with the Hammer: So, there is a false
faith which sparkles and makes a show in the eye of the World, but it is not
genuine, it will break with the Hammer of persecution. Therefore to prevent
mistakes, that we may not be deceived, and think we believe when we presume; I
shall give you six differences between a sincere faith, which is the flower of
the Spirit; and an hypocritical faith, which is the fruit of fancy.

1. An Hypocritical faith is easily come by. It is like the seed in the
Parable, which sprung up suddenly (...).
, Mar. 4. 5. A false faith shoots up without any convictions, and
soulhumblings: As Isaac said, Genesis 27. 20. How came thou by thy Venison so
soon? So, how comes this man by his faith so soon? Sure it is of an
heterogeneal nature, and will quickly wither away Sol^nt praecocia
s^bitoflaccescere.
: But true faith being an Outlandish Plant, and of an heavenly extract, is
hardly come by; it costs many a sigh and tear, Acts 2. 37. This spiritual
Infant is not born without pangs.

2. An Hypocritical faith is afraid to come to trial. The Hypocrite had rather
have his faith commended, than examined. He can no more endure a
Scripture-trial, than counterfeit Metal can endure the Touchstone. He is like a
man that has stollen-Goods in his House, and is very unwilling to have his
House searched: So the Hypocrite has gotten some stollen-Goods which the Devil
has helped him to, and he is loath to have his heart searched; whereas true
faith is willing to come to a trial, Psalm. 26. 2. Examine me, O Lord, and prove
me, try my reins and heart. David was not afraid to be tried by a Jury; No,
though God himself were one of the Jury. Good Wares are never afraid of the
light.

3. An Hypocritical faith has a slight esteem of true Faith. The Hypocrite
hears others speak in the commendation of faith, but he wonders where the
virtue of it lies; he looks upon faith as a Drugg, or some base Commodity that
will not off; he will part with all the faith he has, for a piece of silver;
and perhaps it might be dear enough of the price: But that man who has true
faith, he sets an high value upon it; he reckons this grace among his Jewels
Plus sulget fides, quam aurum. Aug.
. What incorporates him into Christ, but faith? What puts him into a state of
Sonship, but faith? Gal. 3. 26. Oh precious faith! A Believer would not
exchange his shield of faith, for a Crown of gold.

4. An Hypocritical faith is lame on one hand Sublata quacunque part
integran^e, Tollitur totum.
. With one hand it would take Christ, but it does not with the other hand give
up it self to Christ. It would take Christ by way of surety, but not give up it
self to him by way of surrender; whereas true faith is impartial, it takes
Christ as a Savior, and submits to him as a Prince. Christ says; With my
Body, and my Blood I thee endow; and faith says, With my soul I thee worship.

5. An Hypocritical faith is impure. The Hypocrite says, he believes, yet goes
on in sin. He is all Creed, but no Commandment. He believes, yet will take
God's Name in vain. Jer. 3. 4, 5. Wilt not thou cry unto me, My Father, thou
art the guide of my youth! behold thou have done evil things as thou could.
These Impostors would call God their Father, yet sinned as fast as they could.
For one to say he has faith, yet lives in sin, is as if a man should say he
were in health, yet his vitals are perished; but a true faith is joined with
sanctity, 1 Timothy 3. 9. Holding the mystery of faith in a pure Conscience. The
Jewel of faith is always put in the Cabinet of a good Conscience. The Woman
that touched Christ by faith, felt an healing virtue come from him: Though
faith does not wholly remove sin, yet it subdues it.

6. An Hypocritical faith is a dead faith; it tastes no sap, or sweetness in
Christ. The Hypocrite tastes something in the Vine and Olive, he finds
contentment in the carnal luscious delights of the World, but no sweetness in a
promise; the Holy Ghost Himself is spiritless to him. That is a dead faith,
which has no sense or taste: But true faith finds much delectation in heavenly
things. The Word is sweeter than the Honey comb, Psalm. 19. 10. Christ's Love is
better than Wine, Cant. 1. 2. Thus we see a difference between the true faith
and the spurious. How many have thought they have had the live Child of faith
by them, when it has proved the dead Child. Take heed of presumption, but
cherish faith: Faith applies Christ, and makes a spiritual concoction Accedis
ad Christum non carne sed cord; edis Chri^um non de^te, sed fide. Aug.
of his Body and Blood. This Supper was intended chiefly for Believers Luke 22.
19.
. Christ's Blood to an unbeliever, is like Aqua-Vitae in a dead man's mouth, it
loses all its virtue.

11. We must come to the Lord's-Table 11.
with charitable hearts. 1 Cor. 5. 7. Purge out therefore the old leaven. The
leaven of malice will sour the Ordinance to us. Though we must come with
bitter tears, yet not with bitter spirits. The Lords Supper is (...), a
Lovefeast (...), etc. Ignatius ad Trall.
. Christ's blood was shed, not only to reconcile us to God, but one to another.
Christ's body was broken, to make up the breaches among Christians. Howsad is
it; that they who profess they are going to eat Christ's flesh in the Sacrament,
should tear the flesh one of another! 1 John 3. 15. Whosoever hates his
brother, is a Murderer. He who comes to the Lord's-Table in hatred, is a Judas
to Christ, and a C^in to his brother. What benefit can he receive at the
Sacrament, whose heart is invenomed with malice? If one drinks down poison, and
presently takes a Cordial, surely the Cordial will do him no good. Such as are
poisoned with rancour and malice, are not the better for the Sacrament-Cordial;
he that does not come in charity to the Sacrament, has nothing of God in him;
for, God is love, 1 John 4. 19. He knows nothing of the Gospel savingly, for it
is a Gospel of peace, Ephesians. 6. 15. He has none of the wisdom which comes from
Heaven, for that is gentle, and easy to be entreated, Jam. 3. 17. Oh that
Christians were (...), (as Ignatius speaks) rooted and cemented together in
love. Shall Devils unite, and Saints divide? Did we thus learn Christ? Has not
the Lord Jesus loved us to the death? What greater reproach can be cast upon
such a loving Head, than for the Members to s^ite one against another? The good
Lord put out the fire of contention, and kindle the fire of love and amity in
all our hearts.

12. We must come hither with 12.
praying hearts. Every Ordinance, as well as every Creature, is sanctified by
prayer 1 Timothy 4. 5
. Prayer turns the Element into spiritual Aliment Oration mutat elementum in
alimentum.
. When we send the Dove of Prayer to Heaven, It brings an Olive-leaf in its
mouth. We should pray that God would enrich his Ordinance with his presence;
that he would make the Sacrament effectual to all those holy ends and purposes
for which he has appointed it; that it may be the feast of our graces, and the
funeral of our corruptions; that it may be not only a sign to represent, but an
instrument to convey Christ to us, and a Seal to assure us of our heavenly
Jointure. If we would have the fat and sweet of this Ordinance, we must send
prayer before, as an Harbinger, to bespeak a blessing.

Diverse are so distracted with worldly cares, that they can scarce spare any
time for prayer, before they come to the Sacrament. Do they think the Tree of
blessing will drop its fruit into their mouth, when they never shaked it by
prayer? God does not set his mercies at so low a rate, as to cast them away
upon those that do not seek them Ezekiel. 36. 37.
.

Nor is it enough to pray, but it must be with heat and intenseness of soul.
Jacob wrestled in prayer, Genesis 32. 24, Cold Prayers, like cold Suitors, never
speed. Prayer must be with sighs and groans Deus susp^ria audit.
, Romans 8. 26. It must be in the Holy Ghost, Judev. 20. He who will speak to
God, says St. Ambrose, must speak to him in his own language which he
understands, that is, in the language of his Spirit.

13. And lastly, we must come to the Lords Table with self denying 13.
he^rts. When we have prepared our selves in the best manner we can, let us
take heed of trusting to our preparations. Luke 17 15. When ye shall have done
all these things which are commanded you, say, We are unprofitable servants.
Use duty, but do not idolize it. We ought to use duties, to fit us for Christ;
but we must not make a Christ of our duties. Duty is the golden path to walk
in, but not a silver Crutch to lean on. Alas, what are all our preparations?
God can spy an hole in our best garments Vae homini sieum trutina discutias,
etc. Aug.
. Isa. 64. 6. All our Righteousnesses are as filthy rags. When we have prepared
our selves as hoping in God's mercy, we must deny our selves as deserving his
Justice. If our holiest services be not sprinkled with Christ's blood, they are
no better than shining sins, and like Uriah's letter, they carry in them the
matter of our death. Use duty, but trust to Christ and Free Grace for
acceptance. Be like N^s Dove; she made use of her wings to fly, but trusted to
the Ark for safety.

We see how we are to be qualified in our addresses to the Lord's-Table. Thus
coming, we shall meet with embraces of mercy. We shall have not only a
representation, but a participation of Christ in the Sacrament; we shall carry
away not only panem, but salutem; We shall be filled with all the fullness of
God Ephesians. 3. 19
.

4. Has Jesus Christ made this Gospel-banquet? Is he both the Founder Bran. 4.
and the Feast? Then let poor doubting Christians be encouraged to come to the
Lord's-Table. Satan would hinder from the Sacrament, as Saul did the people
from eating honey, 1 Samuel 14. 26. But is there any soul that has been humbled
and bruised for sin, whose heart secretly pants after Christ, but yet stands
trembling, and dares not approach to these holy Mysteries? let me encourage
that soul to come: Mark. 10. 49. Arise, he calls thee.

Object. 1. But I am sinful and unvvorthy, and what should I meddle with such
holy things?

Answ. Who did Christ die for but such? 1 Timothy 1. 15. He came into the world to
save sinners. He took our sins upon him, as well as our nature. Isa. 53. 4. He
bare our griefs. In the Hebrew it is, (...) our sicknesses. See thy sins (says
Luther) upon Christ Aspice peccata tua bumeris Christi imposita; tum dices,
peccata mea, non sunt mea, sed aliena. Luth
, and then they are no more thine, but his. Our sins should humble us, but they
must not discourage us from Christ; the more diseased we are, the rather we
should step into this Pool of Siloam. Who does Christ invite to the Supper, but
the poor, halt, maimed? Luke 14. 21. That is, such as see themselves unvvorthy,
and fly to Christ for Sanctuary. The Priest was to take a bunch of Hyssop, and
dip it in blood, and sprinkle it upon the Leper, Lev. 14. 7. Thou who have the
leprosy of sin upon thee, yet if, as a Leper thou do loath thy self,
Christ's precious blood shall be sprinkled upon thee.

Object. 2. But I have sinned presumptuously against mercy? I have contracted
guilt after I have been at the Lord's Table, and sure Christ's Blood is not for
me?

Resp. It is indeed grievous to abuse mercy: It was the aggravation of
Solomon's sin; his heart was turned from the Lord, which had appeared unto him
twice, 1 Kings 11. 9. Presumptuous sins open the mouth of Conscience to accuse,
and shut the mouth of God's Spirit, which should speak Peace: yet cast not
away your Anchor, look up to the blood of Christ; it can forgive sins against
mercy. Did not Noah sin against mercy? who, though he had been so miraculously
preserved in the Flood, yet soon after he came out of the Ark, he was drunk.
Did not David sin against mercy, when after God had made him King, he stained
his soul with lust, and his robe with blood? Yet both these sins were washed
away in that Fountain which is set open for Judah to wash in, Zach. 12. 1. Did
not the Disciples deal unkindly with Christ in the time of his suffering? Peter
denied him, and all the rest fled from his colors: Mat. 26, 56. Then all the
Disciples forsook him, and fled: Yet Christ did not take advantage of their
weakness, nor did he cast them off, but sends the joyful news of his
Resurrection to them, Mat. 27. 7: And of his Ascension, John. 20. 17; Go to my
Brethren, and say unto them, I ascend to my Father, and your Father. And lest
Peter should think, he was none of the number that should be interested in
Christ's love, therefore Christ dispatcheth away a special Message to Peter to
comfort him: Mar. 16. 7. Go tell the Disciples and Peter, that he goes before
you intoGalilee there shall you see him. So that where our hearts are sincere,
and our turnings aside are rather from a defect in our power, than our will,
the Lord Jesus will not take advantage of every failing, but will drop his
blood upon us, which has a voice in it, which speaks better things than the
blood of Abel He. 12. 24.
.

Object. 3. But I find such a faintness and feebleness in my soul, that I dare
not go to the Lords Table?

Resp. Thou have the more need to go: Drink of this Wine for thy often
infirmities, 1 Timothy 5. 23 Were it not strange for a man to argue thus, My body
is weak and declining, therefore I will not go to the Physician; he should the
rather go. Our weakness should send us to Christ; his blood is mortal to sin,
and vital to grace. Thou say, thou have defects in thy soul; if thou had
none, there would be no need of a Mediator, nor would Christ have any work to
do: Oh therefore turn thy disputing into believing, be encouraged to come to
this Blessed Supper; Thou shall find Christ giving forth his sweet
influenences, and thy grace shall flourish as an herb.

Object. 4. But I have often come to this Ordinance, and find no fruit? I am
not filled with comfort?

Answ. God may meet thee in an Ordinance, when thou do not discern it. Christ
was with Mary, yet she did not know it was Christ. Thou think Christ has
not met thee at his Table, because he does not give thee comfort.

1. Though he does not fill thee with comfort, he may fill thee with strength.
We think we have no answer from God in a duty, unless he fill us with joy; yes,
God may manifest his presence, as well by giving strength as comfort. If we.
have power from Heaven to foyl our corruptions, and to walk more closely and
evenly with God, this is an answer from God. Zach. 10. 12. I will strengthen
them in the Lord. If Christian, thou have not God's arm to embrace thee, yet if
thou have his arm to strengthen thee, this is the fruit of an Ordinance.

2. If God does not fill thy heart with joy, yet if he fills thy eyes with
tears, this is his meeting thee at his Table. When thou look upon Christ
broken on the Cross, and considerest his love, and thy ingratitude, this makes
the dew begin to fall, and thy eyes are like the fish-pools in Heshbon Cant: 4.
7.
, full of water: This is Gods gracious meeting thee in the Sacrament; bless his
Name for it. It is a sign the Sun of Righteousness has risen upon us, when our
frozen hearts melt in tears for sin.

3. If thy Comforts are low, yet if the actings of thy Faith be high, this is
Gods manifesting his presence in the Supper. The sensible tokens of Gods love
are withheld, but the soul ventures on Christ's blood; it believes that coming
to him, he will hold out the golden Scepter Joh. 6. 37.
. This glorious acting of faith, and the inward quiet that faith breeds, is the
blessed return of an Ordinance, Mic. 7. 19. He will turn again, he will have
compassion upon us. The Churches comforts were darkened, but her faith breaks
forth as the Sun out of a Cloud. He will have compassion on us. This acting of
faith makes us in a blessed condition; Blessed are they which have not seen,
yet have believed Joh. 20. 24.
.

Object. 5. But I cannot find any of these things in the Sacrament; my heart is
dead and locked up, and I have no return at all.

Resp. Wait on God for an answer of the Ordinance. God has promised to satiate
the soul Promissa Deicadunt in debitum
. Psalm. 107. 9. He silleth the hungry soul with goodness. If not with gladness,
yet with goodness; the soul must be filled, or how can the promise be
fulfilled? Christian! God has said it, therefore wait. Wilt not thou believe
God, unless thou have a voice from Heaven? The Lord has given thee his
promise; and is it not as good security to have a Bill under a man's hand, as
to have it by word of mouth? Be content to wait a while; mercy will come. God's
mercies in Scripture, are not called speedy mercies, but they are Sure mercies,
Isa. 55. 3.

5. Has Christ given us his Body 5. Bran.
Blood? Then when we are at this Gospel-Ordinanc^, let us remember the Lord
Jesus there. The Sacrament is a Christ-remembring Ordinance. 1 Cor. 11. 25.
This do in remembrance of me (...). In mei comm^morationem reddit Ambrosius.
. God has appointed this spiritual festival, to preserve the living memory of
our dying Savior. A Sacrament-day is a Commemoration-day.

1. Remember Christ's Passion Memori^m passionis meae, a^imis vestris recolit^.
Estius in loc.
. Lam. 3. 19. Remembering the wormwood and the gall. I may a little alter the
words. Remembering the Vinegar and the ^ll. If the Manna was to be kept in the
Ark, that the memory of it should be preserved: How should the Death and
Suffering of Christ be kept in our minds, as a memorial, when we are at the
Table of the Lord?

2. Remember the glorious benefits we receive from the broken Body of Christ.
We usually remember those things which are advantageous to us. Christ's broken
Body is a Screen t^ keep off the fire of God's wrath from us; Christ's Body
being broken, the Serpent's head is broken. Christ being broken upon the Cross,
a Box of precious Jewels is broken open: Now we have access to God with
boldness; the Blood of the Cross has made way to the Throne of Grace: Now we
are made Sons and Heirs; and to be Heir to the Promise, is better than to be
Heir to the Crown. Christ having dyed, we are made near a kin to the blessed
Trinity; we are candidates and expectants of glory. The bloody way of the
Cross, is our Via lact ea, our milky way to Heaven. Jesus Christ drank Gall,
that we might drink the hony-streams of Canaan. His Cross was stuck full of
Nails, that our Crown might be hung full of Jewels. Well may we remember
Christ in the Blessed Sacrament!

But it is not the bare remembrance of Christ's Death is enough. Some who have
a natural tenderness of spirit, may be affected with the History of Christ's
Passion; but this remembrance of Christ has little comfort in it. Let us
remember Christ in the Sacrament aright.

1. Let us remember Christ's Death with joy. Galat. 6. 14. God forbid that I
should glory, save in the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ. When we see Christ in
the Sacrament crucified before our eyes, we may behold him in that posture as
he was in upon the Cross, stretching out his blessed arms to receive us. O what
matter of triumph and acclamation is this! Though we remember our sins with
grief, yet we should remember Christ's sufferings with joy. Let us weep for
those sins which shed his Blood, yet rejoice in that blood which washes away
our sins.

2. Let us so remember Christ's Death, as to conform to his Death. Phil. 3. 10.
That I may be conformable to his death. Then we remember Christ's Death aright,
when we are dead with him; our pride and passion are dead. Christ's dying for
us, makes sin die in us: Then we rightly remember Christ's crucifixion, when we
are crucified with him; we are dead to the pleasures and preferments of the
World. Gal. 6. 14. The world is crucified unto me, and I unto the world.

6. If Jesus Christ hat^ ^ven us this Soul-festival for the strengthening Bran.
6.
of grace; let us labor to feel some virtue flowing out of this Ordinance to
us; let not the Sacrament be a dry breast. It were strange if a man should
receive no nourishment by his food. It is a discredit to this Ordinance, if we
get no increase of Grace. Shall leanness enter into our souls, at a feast of
fat things? Christ gives us his Body and Blood, for the augmenting of Faith; he
expects that we should reap some profit and income; and that our weak
minute-faith, should flourish into a great faith. M^t. 15. 28. O woman, Great
is thy faith! It were good to examine, whether after our frequent Celebration
of this holy Supper, we have arrived at a great Faith.

Quest. How may I know, Whether I have this great Faith?

Resp. For the Solution of this, I shall la^ lovvn six eminent Signs of a great
Faith; and if we can show any one of them, we have made a good proficiency
at the Sacrament.

1. A great Faith can trust God 1. Sign.
without a pavvn; it can rely upon Providence in the deficiency of outvvard
supplies, Hab. 3. 17, 18. Although the Figtree shall not blossom, neither
shall fruit be in the Vines, the labor of the Olive shall fail, etc. yet will
I rejoice in the Lord, etc. An Unbeliever must have something to feed his
senses, or he gives up the Ghost. When he is at his Wealths end, he is at his
Wits end. Faith does not question but God will provide, though it sees not
which way provisions should come in. Faith does not fear Famine Fides fa^um
non formidat.
. God has set his Seal to it, Verily thou shall be fed, Psalm. 37. 3. Faith
puts the Bond in suit. Lord, says Faith, Will thou feed the Birds of the Air,
and wilt not thou feed me? Shall I want, when my Father keeps the Purse? A good
Christian with the Rod of Faith, smites the Rock in Heaven; and some honey and
oil, comes out for the recruiting his present necessities.

2. Sign.
2. A great Faith is a wonderworking Faith. It can do those things which exceed
the power of Nature. A great Faith can open heaven, it can overcome the world 1 John 5. 4.
; it can master a complexion-sin 2 Samuel 22. 24.
; it can prefer the glory of God before Secular interest Romans 9. 1.
; it can rejoice in affliction 1 These. 1. 6.
; it can bridle the intemperancy of passion; it can shine forth in the
hemisphere of its relations; it can do duties in a more refined sublimated
manner, mixing Love with Duty, which mellows it, and makes it taste more
pleasant. It can antedate Glory Fides attingit inaccessa, prospicit novissima.
, and make things at the greatest distance to unite. Thus the Springhead of
Faith rises higher than Nature. A man by the power of Nature can no more do
this, than Iron can of it self swim, or the Earth ascend.

3. A great faith is firm and steadfast; weak faith is frequently shaken with 3.
Sign.
fears and doubts. A great Faith is like an Oak, that spreads its roots deep,
and is not easily blown down. Col. 2. 7. A great Faith is like the Anchor, or
Cable of a Ship, that holds it steady in the midst of storms (...). Chrysostom.
. A Christian who is steeled with this heroic Faith, is settled in the
Mysteries of Religion. The Spirit of God has so firmly printed heavenly truths
upon his heart, that you may as well remove the Sun out of the Firmament, as
remove him from those holy Principles he has sucked in. Behold here, a Pillar
in the Temple of God Rev. 3. 12
.

4. A great Faith can trust in an 4. Sign.
angry God; it believes Gods love through a frown Ion. 2. 4.
. A vigorous Faith, though it be repulsed and beaten back, yet it will come on
again (...).
, and press upon God with an holy obstinacy. The Woman of Canaan was three
times repulsed by Christ, yet she would take no denial from him; she turns
discouragements into arguments, and made a fresh onset upon Christ, till at
last by the power of Faith she overcame him. O Woman, great is thy Faith, be it
unto thee as thou will, Mat. 15. 28. The Key of her Faith unlocked Christ's
bowels, and now she may have what she will from him. When once she had gotten
his heart, she might have his treasure too.

5. A great Faith can swim against Tide; it can go c^oss to sense 5. Sign.
and reason. Corrupt reason says as Peter, Master, Pity thy self. Faith says,
It is better to suffer, than sin. Reason consults safety; Faith will hazard
safety, to preserve Sanctity. A Believer can sail to Heaven, though the Tide of
Reason, and the Wind of Temptation be against him (...). Chrysostom.
.

Abraham in the case of sacrificing his Son, did not call Reason to the
Councel-board: When God said, Offer up thy son Isaac, it was enough to pose not
only fleshly wisdom, but even Faith too; for here, the commands of God did seem
to interfere. In one command, the Lord said, Thou shall not murder; and behold
here a quite contrary command, Offer up thy son. So that Abraham in obeying one
command, seemed to disobey another.

Besides Isaac was a son of the Promise; the Messiah was to come of Isaac's
line Hebr. 11. 18.
; and if he be cut off, where shall the World have a Mediator? Here was enough
to amuse, and puzzle this holy Patriarch; yet Abraham's Faith unties all these
knots, and the bloody knife is made ready.

Abraham believed that when God called for it, it was not Murder, but
Sacrifice; and that the Lord having made a promise of Christ's springing out of
Isaac's loins, rather than the promise should fall to the ground, God could
raise up seed out of Isaac's ashes. Here was a Gyant-faith, which God himself
did set a Trophy of honor upon. Genesis 22. 16. By myself have Isworn, says the
Lord, for because thou have done this thing, and have not withheld thy Son
(...).
, thine only Son, That in blessing I will bless thee, etc.

6. A great Faith can bear great 6. Sign.
delays. Though God does not give a present answer to prayer, Faith believes
it shall have an answer in due time. A weak faith is soon out of breath, and if
it has not the mercy presently, it begins to faint; whereas he who has a
strong puissant faith, does not make haste Isa. 28. 16.
. A great Faith is content to stay God's leisure. Faith will trade with God for
time. Lord, says Faith, If I have not the mercy I want instantly, I will trust
longer; I know my money is in good hands; an answer of peace will come. Perhaps
the mercy is not yet ripe, or perhaps I am not ripe for the mercy. Lord, do as
it seems good in thine eyes. Faith knows that the most tedious Voyages have the
richest returns; and the longer mercy is in expectation, the sweeter it will be
in fruition Quo longius defer tur, (...) suavius laetatur.
.

Behold here a glorious faith; if we have such a faith as this to show, it is a
blessed fruit of our Sacramental converse with God.

But I would not discourage Infant-believers. If your grace be not risen Caution
to the bigness and proportion of a great Faith, yet if it be of the proper
kind, it shall find acceptance. God who bids us receive him who is weak in
faith Romans 14. 10
, will not himself refuse him. If your Faith be not grown to a Cedar, yet if it
be a bruised Reed, it is too good to be broken, Mat. 12. 20. A weak Faith can
lay hold on a strong Christ. A Palsy hand may tie the Knot in Marriage.

Only, let not Christians rest in lower measures of grace, but aspire after
higher degrees. The stronger our Faith, the firmer our Union with Christ, and
the more sweet influence we draw from him.

This is that which honors the blessed Sacrament, when we can show the
increase of grace; and being strong in faith, bring glory to God Romans 4. 17
.

7. Has Jesus Christ provided such a blessed Banquet for us? He does not Bran.
7.
Nurse us abroad, but feeds us with his own breast, nay blood; let us then
study to answer this great love of Christ. It Is true, we can never parallel his
love; yet let us show our selves thankful. We can do nothing satisfactory, but
we may do something gratulatory. Christ gave himself a sinoffering (...)
for us, let us give our selves a thank-offering to him (...).
. If a man redeem another out of Debt, will not he be grateful? How deeply do
we stand obliged to Christ, who has redeemed us from Hell Cum ei donavero
quicquid sum, quicquid possum, nonne est tanquam scintilla ad ad solemn, gutta
ad sluvium, granum ad acervum? Non hab^ nis^ minuta duo, Corpus and Animam,
etc. Bern. flor.
!

And let us show our thankfulness four ways.

1. By Courage. Christ has set us a Copy; he did not fear men, but endured the
Cross, and despised the shame. Let us be steeled with courage, being ready to
suffer for Christ, which is (as Chrysostom speaks) to be baptized with a
Baptism of blood. Did Christ bear the wrath of God for us, and shall not we
bear the wrath of men for him? It is our glory to suffer in Christ's quarrel. 1
Pet. 4. 14 The Spirit of God, and of glory rests upon you (...). Chrysostom.
. Let us pray for furnacegrace: Be like those three Children, Dan. 3. 17. Be it
known to thee, O King, that we will not serve thy gods. They would rather burn,
than bow. Oh that such a spirit as was in Cyprian, might survive in us! who,
when the Proconsul would have tempted him from his Religion; and said to him,
Consule tibi, Consult for thy safety: says Cyprian, In so just a cause there
needs no consultation. When the sentence for his death was read, he replied,
Deo gratias, Thanks be to God Sermon. Aug. de Cyp^.
. We know not how soon an hour of Temptation may come; Oh remember Christ's
Body was broken, his blood poured out; we have no such blood to shed for him,
as he shed for us.

2. Let us show our thankfulness to Christ by fruitfulness Lignum aridum factus
er at in Adamo, sed per gratiam Christi pomifera arbor pullulas^i. Ambros. de
Sacramento.
. Let us bring forth the sweet fruits of patience, heavenly-mindedness, and
good works. This is to live unto him who dyed for us, 2 Cor. 5. 15. If we would
rejoice the heart of Christ, and make him not repent of his sufferings, let us
be fertile in obedience. The wise men did not only worship Christ, but presented
unto him gifts, Gold and Frankincense, Mat. 2. 11. Let us present Christ with
the best fruits of our Garden, let us give him our love, that flovver of
delight. The Saints are not only compared to Stars for their knowledge, but
Spice-trees for their fertilness Christ delighted in the breasts of his Spouse,
because they were like Clusters of Grapes, Cant. 7. 7. The blood of Christ
received in a spiritual manner, is like the water of jealousy, which had a
virtue both to kill and make fruitful Numb. 5. 27, 28.
. Christ's blood kills sin, and makes the heart fructify in grace.

3. Let us show our thankfulness to Christ by Zeal. How zealous was Christ
for our Redemption! Zeal turns a Saint into a Seraphim. A true Christian has a
double Baptism, of water, and fire: he is baptized with the fire of zeal
Zelus est gradus intensus purae affectionis.
. Be zealous for Christ's Name and Worship. Zeal is increased by opposition; it
cuts its way through the Rocks. Zeal loves Truth most, when it is disgraced
and hated. Psalm. 119, 126, 127. They have made void thy Law, therefore I love
thy Commandments above Gold.

How little thankfulness do they show to Christ, who have no zeal for his
Honor and Interest! They are like Ephraim, Hos. 7. 8. Ephraim is a Cake not
turned. Baked on one side, and Dough on the other. Christ does most abominate a
luke vvarm temper: Revel. 3. 15. He is even sick of such Professors. They who
write of the situation of England, say, that it is seated betvveen the torrid
and frigid Zone, the Climate is neither very hot nor cold. I vvish, this were
not the temper of the people, and that our hearts were not too like the
Climate we live in. The Lord cause the fire of holy zeal to be always burning
upon the Altar of our hearts.

4. Let us show our thankfulness by universal subjection to Christ. This is to
make the Lord's Supper in a spiritual sense, a feast of Dedication (...).
Suidas.
, when we renew our Vovvs, and give up our selves to God's service. Psalm.
116. 16. Truly I am thy servant, I am thy servant: Lord, all I have is thine.
My head shall be thine to study for thee; my hands shall be thine to work for
thee; my heart shall be thine to adore thee; my tongue shall be thine to praise
thee.

8. If Jesus Christ has provided so Bran. 8.
holy an Ordinance as the Sacrament, let us walk suitably to it. Have we
received Christ into our hearts? let us show him forth by our heaven line^.

1. Let us show forth Christ by our heavenly words. Let us speak the Language
of Canaan. When the Holy Ghost came upon the Apostles, they spoke with other
tongues, Acts 2. 4. While we speak the words of grace and soberness, our lips
smell as a perfume, and drop as honey.

2. Let us show forth Christ by our heavenly affections. Let our sighs and
breathings after God, go up as a cloud of incense. Col. 3. 2. Set your
affections on things above. We should do by our affections, as the Husbandmen
do by their Corn; if the Corn lie lovv in a damp Room, it is in danger to
corrupt; therefore they carry it up into their highest Room, that it may keep
the better. So our affections, if set upon the Earth, are apt to corrupt, and
be unsavory; therefore w^ should carry them up on high above the World, that
they may be preserved pure; breathe after fuller discoveries of God; desire to
attain unto the resurrection of the dead, Phil. 3. 11. The higher our
affections are raised toward Heaven, the sweeter joy we feel. The higher the
Lark flies, the sweeter it sings.

3. Let us show forth Christ by our Heavenly Conversation: Philip. 3. 20.
Hypocrites may in a pang of Conscience have some good affections stirred, but
they are as flushings of heat in the face, which go and come. But the constant
tenor of our life must be holy. We must shine forth in a kind of Angelical
sanctity. As it is with a piece of Coin, it has not only the King's Image
within the Ring, but his superscription without: So it is not enough to have
the Image of Christ in the heart, but there must be the superscription without,
something of Christ must be written in the life.

The scandalous lives of many Communicants are a reproach to the Sacrament, and
tempt others to Atheism. How odious is it, that those hands which have received
the Sacred Elements, should take Bribes! That those eyes, which have been
filled with tears at the Lords-Table, should afterward be filled with Envy!
That those teeth, which have eaten Holy Bread, should grind the faces of the
Poor! That those lips, which have touched the Sacramental Cup, should salute an
Harlot Sunt lotis mani bus, sed illotis operibus. Ber.
! That that mouth which has drunk Consecrated Wine, should be full of Oaths!
That they who seem to deisie Christ in the Eucharist, should vilify him in his
Members! In a word, That such who pretend to eat Christ's Body, and drink his
Blood at Church, should eat the bread of wickedness, and drink the wine of
violence in their own houses! Prove. 4. 17. These are like the Italians I have
read of, who at the Sacrament are so devout, as if they believed God to be in
the bread; but in their lives are so profane, as if they believed not God to be
in Heaven. Such as these are apt to make the World think that the Gospel is but
a fancy, or religious Cheat. What shall I say of them? They do with Judas,
receive the Devil in the Sop, and are no better than Crucifiers Conculcant
Daminum, and sanguinem dulcissim^ vi^is ducunt pollutum. Bern.
of the Lord of Glory. As their ^in is heinous, so their punishment will be
proportionable, 1 Cor. 11. 29. They eat and drink damnation to themselves. If
one of the Vestal Nuns who had vowed her self to Religion were deflored, the
Romans caused her to be buried alive Plutarch.
. Such as have a Sacramental vow upon them, yet afterward deflore the
Virginity of their souls byscandalous sins, God will bury them alive in the
flames of Hell.

Oh that such a luster and majesty of holiness did sparkle forth in the lives
of Communicants, that others may say, These have been with Jesus! And their
Consciences may lie under the power of this conviction, that the Sacrament has
a confirming and a transforming virtue in it!

4. The fourth Use is of comfort to God's people. Use 4. Consolation.


1. From Christ's body broken, and his blood poured out, we may gather this
comfort, That it was a glorious Sacrifice.

1. It was a Sacrifice of infinite merit. Had it been only an Angel that
suffered; or had Chaist been only a mere man, (as some do blasphemously dream
Poterit h^c opinio Hebioni convenire qui nudum homin^m etc. Tertul.
) then we might have despaired of salvation; but he suffered for us who was God
as well as man Non fuit (...), sed (...).
. Therefore the Apostle calls it expressly, Sanguis Dei, the blood of God, Acts
20. 28. It is man that sins, it is God that dies. This is a sovereign Cordial
to Believers. Christ having poured out his blood, now God's justice is
completely satisfied. God was infinitely more contented with Christ's
sufferings upon Mount Calvary, than if we had lain in Hell, and undergone his
wrath for ever. The Blood of Christ has quenched the flame of Divine fury: And
now what should we fear? All our Enemies are either reconciled, or subdued; God
is a reconciled Enemy, and sin is a subdued Enemy. Who shall lay any thing to
the charge of Gods Elect? It is Christ that dyed, Romans 8. 34. It Is reported
when Satan once appeared to Luther, and thought to affright him, Luther showed
him that Scripture, Genesis 3. 15. I will put enmity between thee and the Woman,
and between thy seed and her Seed, it shall bruise thy head; whereupon Satan
vanished. So when the Devil shall accuse us, let us show him the Cross of
Christ. When he brings his Pensil, and goes to paint our sins in their colors,
let us bring the Sponge of Christ's blood, and that will wipe them out again.
All Bonds are canceled; whatsoever the Law has charged upon us, is discharged.
The debt-book is crossed with the blood of the Lamb.

2. It was a Sacrifice of eternal extent. The benefit of it is perpetuated.
Hebr. 9. 12. He entered in once into the holy place, having obtained eternal
redemption for us In^ Christi (...) ifici^m ad (...) (...), (...) mansu^
^luisse. Estius.
Therefore Christ is said to be a Priest for ever, Hebr. 5. 6. because the
virtue and comfort of his Sacrifice abides for ever.

2. Christ's Blood being shed, 2.
Believers may lay claim to all heavenly privileges; Wills are ratified by the
death of the Testator. Hebr. 9. 17. A Testament is of force after men are dead.
It is observable in the Text; Christ calls his blood, The blood of the New
Testament Sanguis quo foedus solenniter sancitur. Grotins.
. Christ made a Will or Testament, and gave rich Legacies to the Saints, pardon
of sin, grace, and glory, the Scriptures are the Rolls wherein these Legacies,
are registered, Christ's blood is the sealing of the Will. This blood being
shed, Christians may put in for a Title to these Legacies. Lord, pardon my sin,
Christ has died for my pardon. Give me grace, Christ has purchased it by his
Blood. The Testator being dead, the Will is in force. Christian, Art thou not
filled with joy? Art thou not possessed of Heaven? yet thou have this confirmed
by Will. A Man that has a Deed sealed, making over such Lands and Tenements
after the expirement of a few years, though at present he has little to help
himself with, yet he comforts himself when he looks upon his sealed Deed, with
hopes of that which is to come. So, though at present we enjoy not the
privileges of Consolation, and Glorification, yet we may cheer our hearts with
this, the Deed is sealed, the Will and Testament is ratified by the
bloodshedding of Christ.

3. Is Christ's Blood shed? here is comfort against death. A dying Savior
sweetens the pangs of death 3. Mors obiit ^orte ^risti.
. Is thy Lord Crucified? be of good comfort, Christ by dying has overcome
death. He has cut the lock of sin, where the strength of death lay. Christ
has knocked out the teeth of this Lion: He has pulled the thorn out of death,
that it cannot prick a Believer's Conscience. Hosea 13. 14. O death, I will be
thy plague. Christ has disarmed death and taken away all its deadly weapons,
that though it may strike, it cannot sting a Believer. Christ has drawn the
poison out of death, nay, he has made death friendly Mertis aculeum retud it
Christus, and ^im infregit; jamque fit peccati abol^tio, and ad vitam meliorem
transitio. Rivet. in Genesis c. 2. Exercit. 21.
. This pale Horse carries a Child of God home to his Father's house. Faith
gives a propriety to Heaven, death gives a possession: What sweet comfort may
we draw from the Crucifixion of our Lord! his precious blood makes the pale
face of death to be of a ruddy and beautiful complexion.

Use ult. Here is a dark side of the Cloud Use 5. Terror.
to all profane persons who live and die in sin, they have no part in Christ's
blood. Their condition will be worse, than if Christ had not died: Christ who
is a Loadstone to draw the Elect to Heaven, will be a Millstone to sink the
wicked deeper in Hell. There is a Crew of sinners who slight Christ's blood,
and swear by it; let them know his blood will cry against them. They must feel
the same wrath which Christ felt upon the Cross; and because they cannot bear
it at once, they must be undergoing it to Eternity 2 These. 1. 9.
. So unconceivably torturing will this be, that the damned know not how to
endure it, nor yet how to avoid it.

Sinners will not believe this till it be too late. The Mole is blind all its
life, yet, as Pliny says, it begins to see when it dies Oculos iucipit aperire
moriendo quos clausos habuit vivendo.
. Wicked men while they live, are blinded by the god of this world 2 Cor. 4. 4.
; but when they are dying, the eye of their Consciences will begin to be
opened, and they shall see the Wrath of God flaming before their eyes, which
sight will be but a sad Prologue to an Eternal Tragedy.

FINIS.
TO THE READER.
Christian Reader,
I Have (according to my promise) superadded a few lines, suiting a Sacramental
Discourse. The Subject is so excellent and sublime, that I cannot speak enough
of it, nor well enough. What can be more sacred, than the observing Christ's
last Will and Testament, Do this in Remembrance of me. We are to be so solemnly
affected at the Holy Supper, as if we were receiving it among the Apostles from
Christ's own hands Eo affectu debetis esse imbuti, ^um sumitis Eucharistiam,
perinde ac in illa ipsa Christi ^ssetis vespera, adeoque coena, eidemque
accumbereti^ thoro, (...) abipso Christo acciperetis sacrum istud (...).
. This mysterious Ordinance is to be perpetuated till Christ's coming to
judgment, 1 Cor. 11. 26. Patet, ritum hunc Eucharistiae duraturum usque ad
finem mundi. Ca^vinus, Groti^s, Theophyl:
The Supper of the Lord is a (...), or foret ast of that Marriage-Supper of the
Lamb, Rev. 19. 9. which made Damascen pray, Lord, let me receive this Supper,
as an Earnest of my future Heaven. But into what a degenerate age are we
fallen, when the most weighty tremendous Points of Religion are called in
question. To such a Climax of impudency are some risen, as to vilify
Ordinances, oppugn Christ's Divinity, deride the in-habitation of God's Spirit
Romans 8. 9.
; and deny praying by the Spirit. These are they who would cause the Holy One
of Israel to cease from before them, Isa. 30. 11. They would turn all Religion
into a Romance, and leaven the World with Atheism. I wish they have not sinned
the sin unto death 1 John 5. 17.
. If once the Truths of God iose their authority in Peoples hearts, then is a
fatal stop put to all solid Practical Piety. God grant that the more others
decry the Sanctity of the Gospel, the more we may reverence it. They have made
void thy Law, therefore I love thy Commandments, Psalm. 119. 126. Such as have
experienced the sweetness of Truth in their own Souls, know how to estimate it.
I should be glad if this short ensuing Discourse, might render the Lord Jesus
more precious and eligible in our eyes, and add one cubit to our faith. O happy
Ordinance of the Supper that causes such endearments of love between Christ
and the Soul; and begins those sacred Nuptials, which shall be for ever
solemnized in the Kingdom of God. But I avo^d Prolixness: hoping for a blessing
from on high upon these endeavors. I rest

Yours affectionately in the service of the Gospel. Thomas Watson.
Feb. 19. 1668.
The Fiery Serpents.
Numb. 21, 6, 7, 8, 9. And the Lord sent Fiery Serpents among the People, and
they bit the people, and much people of Israel dyed; Therefore the people came
to Moses, and said, We have sinned, for we have spoken against the Lord, and
against thee; pray unto the Lord, that he take away the Serpents from us: And
Moses prayed for the People; And the Lord said unto Moses, Make thee a Fiery
Serpent, and set it upon a Pole; and it shall come to pass that every one that
is bitten when he looks upon it shall live. And Moses made a Serpent of
Brass, and put it upon a Pole; and it came to pass, that if a Serpent had
bitten any man, when he beheld the Serpent of Brass, h^ lived.
IN this Portion of Holy Scripture, there are two things considerable. The
people of Isreal's being stung, and the manner of their Cure.

1. Their being stung with the Fiery Serpents; where observe,

1. The occasion of God's sending these Fiery Serpents.

There were two Sins provoked the Lord to inflict this Punishment.

1. Their Murmuring, ver 5. The People spoke against God and against Moses,
Wherefore have ye brought us up out of Egypt to die in the Wilderness? for
there is no bread, neither is there any water, Speaking against God and his
Prophets go together. They spoke against God and against Moses. The Chaldee
reads it, They murmured before the Lord. Murmuring is a speaking against God;
and it proceeds from distrust, Psalm. 106. 24. They believed not his Word, but
murmured. So in the Text, There is no bread, or water; they thought they should
die in the Wilderness, and then they spoke against God. Murmuring is the
daughter of Unbelief. And observe the Time when they murmured; it was
immediately after an eminent and glorious deliverance, ver. 3. The Lord harkned
to Israel, and delivered up the Canaanites, and they utterly destroid them and
their Cities. And behold the requital they make God for this signal mercy! They
murmur against him. What? to find fault with God! and just after a Deliverance?
the Lord being highly provoked, sent Fiery Serpents among them, and much people
of Israel dyed, ver. 6. Fiebat magna strages. August.


Oh, how suitable to their Sin was this Punishment. Israel did burn in heat of
Passion, and God made their Flesh burn with extreme heat: Their Speeches were
venomous, and they were punished with venomous Serpents (...). Chrysostom. ad Pop.
Ant^ Hom. 19.
. Hence observe,

Doctrine 1. Of all Sins God can Doct. 1.
least bear the sin of Ingratitude To be delivered, yet murmur! God presently
sent Fiery Serpents to avenge his quarrel. Israel did not only forget God's
Mercies, Psalm. 106. 13. but abuse them. To be ungrateful for mercy, is, like
Absalom, who as soon as David kissed him, and took him into favor, plotted
Treason against him Vas pertusum (...)
. 2 Samuel 15. 10. Like the Athenians, who, in lieu of the good Service Aristides
had done them, banished him out of their City Plutarch.
. Like the Mule who kicks the Damm after she has given it milk. Ingratitude
(says Cicero) has nothing of evil wanting in it Nihil mali non inest. Cic. ad
Attic.
. It is a sin that leaves a People without excuse; if God let loose his
Judgments, and send Fiery Serpents, they have nothing to say, Ezra. 9. 10. And
now O our God what shall we say after this? after what? ver. 9. Mercy has been
extended to us in the sight of the Kings of Persia, yet we have forsaken thy
Commandments. What shall we say after this?

Use. Let our Ingratitude be deeply laid to heart. This puts an accent upon
sin, and makes it (...), out of measure sinful. How many are the worse for
mercy. They make a dart of God's Mercies, and shoot at him; he gives them Wit,
and they serve the Devil with it; he gives them an Estate, and they feast their
Lusts with it. Are these worthy to be Guests at the Lords-Table who lift up the
heel against him? Will God welcome such into his presence, as know not how to
use kindness? Oh that this sin may fill our faces with blushing. Take we heed
for the future of following this bad example in the Text. Let us turn all our
Murmurings into Hosan^ahs. Let us praise God for his Mercies, and serve God
with his Mercies.

2. The second cause of God's sending 2.
the Fiery Serpents, was, Their slighting of Manna. ver. 5. Our soul loatheth
this light bread. The Septuagint Panis inan. P. Fagius.
renders it, (...), this empty bread. It is spoken in contempt. Israel counted
Manna vile in respect of other meat. Manna is called Angels Food; but they call
it in disdain light bread. This Manna was miraculous, it came from Heaven in an
extraordinary way; and mystical: It was a type and figure of the Lord Jesus,
who is called the bread of Life, Joh. 6. 98. and the Hidden Manna Dat Pa^em De
is quem significabat Manna, ipsn^ scil: Dominum Jesum Aug.
, Rev. 2. 17. The contempt therefore of Manna was a contempt of Christ; for
this, God sent Fiery Serpents.

Doct: 2. The slighting and despising Doct. 2.
the Lord Jesus is a God-provoking sin. This was Isreal's Crime, the despising
of Manna; which was not only corporal food, but a Type of Christ their
spiritual food; this greatly incensed the Lord, and made him send Fiery
Serpents among them. Thus, when we despise Christ and prefer our lusts before
him, as Israel did Leeks and Onyons before Manna, then come the Fiery Serpents.

Use. Let us take heed of growing weary of Christ, this blessed Manna. At first
Israel did highly esteem Manna, they ran out to gather it, Happy was he that
could get Manna. But this Food from Heaven, which at first was so sweet to
their Palate, within a while was loathed and contemned. Our nature is such, that
we are apt to disesteem the richest blessings when they are common. If Pearls
and Diamonds were plentiful, none would value them. If the Sun did shine but
once a year how would it be prized; but because it shines every day, few admire
this Lamp of Heaven. Take heed of despising Jesus Christ, Mat. 22. 5. If God
was so angry with Israel for slighting of Christ when he was hid under a Type;
how angry will he be with those who slight Christ, after he has been visibly
revealed, Hebr. 10. 29. Of how much sorer punishment shall they be thought
worthy, who have trod under foot the Son of God. Jesus Christ is a
super-eminent blessing; a magazine and storehouse of all good Things Communi^
the saurus. Luth.
. And the love of God was never so much seen as in giving of Christ; therefore
to slight Christ, is to slight the love of God.

Quest. But who dares slight Christ?

Resp. It is a slighting of Christ to slight his Gospel, and offer of Grace;
and has not this been England's Sin? have not we formerly nauseated Manna? did
not we grow curious and wanton, and esteemed the Manna of the Gospel
light-bread, and was not the Lord provoked with us? Did not he send, though not
Fiery Serpents, yet a Fiery Rod among us in this City, that has burnt down our
Dwellings? Christians, I beseech you take heed of this for the future. If God
indulge you with Manna again, beware of surfeiting on the bread of life. The
loathing of Manna is the next way to the losing of Manna. God will take away
his Mercies if they are undervalued. If you play with the light, God will put
out the light.

2. The Punishment it self, which was Fiery Serpents. These may be understood,

1. Literally they were called Fiery Serpents.

1. Because they were of a fiery color.

2. From the effect, They were Seraphims, Burners (...) ussit, cremavit.
. For when they did bite the people, they did burn with extreme heat and thirst
Morsum ardentes infigebant, at que simul toxicum. Munsterus, Clarius.
. The Septuagint translates them* Killing Serpents (...).
. Many of the people died, ver. 6.

2. These Fiery Serpents may be understood mystically. So these Serpents were
first a Type of Satan, called the old Serpent, Rev. 12. 9. He is indeed a
Serpent for his subtilty. The Hebrew word for Serpent comes of a Verb that
signifies to use subtilty (...)
. Genesis 3. 1. So Satan is a Serpent In Serpente maxima est astutia, and dolus
nocendi: non pedes habet ut ejus vestigia audiantur, in ejus itinere ve lut
lenis est gressus non rectus. Aug.
very subtle in his temptations; he has his (...) his depths, Rev. 2. 24. and
his (...), his devices, 2 Cor. 2. 11. The Devil does with his artificial
varnish put a fine gloss upon his Temptations, that he may the better draw men
to his lure; he either hides his malicious designs. or colors them Magis rever
a metuendus est daeinon fallens, quam saeviens. August.
.

2 These Fiery Serpents were a Type of Sin.

Doct. 3. Sin is a Fiery Serpent. This Serpent is bred in our nature; it is
within us Serpents vitia tua s^nt. Aug. in Psalm. Tom. 8.
. We would think it sad, to have Spiders and Serpents in our bodies; as it is
said of Maximinus the Emperor, his body bred vermin: But it is worse to have
the Serpent of Sin in our Souls. Sin is a Serpent.

1. For its Poison. Sin has invenomed us, and that is the reason we swell. Why
does one man swell with Pride, another with Passion, another with Lust? he is
poisoned. If one had achild whom he dearly loved, mortally poisoned; how would
he grieve for it? Our Souls are poisoned, yet we grieve not. How often do sinners
poison the Sacramental Cup!

2. Sin is a Serpent for the sting of it. It Is the (...). Sin at first shows
its color in the glass, afterward it bites as a Serpent, Prove. 23. 32. Sin is
a Serpent with four stings. 1. It stings with guilt, Romans 3 19. 2. With horror
of Conscience, which is Limen inferni; Judas and Spira felt this; all the
racks, strappadoes, and tortures in the world are but Ludibria and risus, a
sport in comparison of this deadly sting; no outward comforts can ease a
Conscience stung with sin, no more than a Crown of Gold can cure the Headache.

3. Sin stings with death, Romans 5. 12. and death by Sin. Sin is the wild Gourd
that Adam gathered and eat; and the next news was, There is death in the 2
King. 4. 40.
pot.

4. Sin without Repentance stings the Soul with damnation. This Fiery Serpent,
brings to the Fiery Furnace, I have rcad of the City Amycle in Italy destroyed
by Serpents Pliny.
. Such a destroying Serpent is sin.

Use 1. See the sad condition of wicked men! They make light of sin, but sin is
a Fiery Serpent crept into their bosom. When the Serpent has bitten one (says
Pliny) the venom and contagion of it spreads all over his body. Sin has
invenomed men all over; their hearts are full of poison, Romans 1. 29. Being
filled with all unrighteousness. Their Tongues spit forth the poison of the
Serpent in Oaths and Curses, Psalm. 58. 2. The poison of Asps is under their
Tongue.

This may serve to humble God's own people; though they have the meekness of
the Dove, yet they have aliquid serpentis, something of the evil evil of
Serpent in them. Though the curse due to sin is taken away, yet the venom of
this Serpent does in part remain: They have much love of the World, much
Unbelief much unmortified Passion. Among Christ's Disciples there was Pride and
Emulation. Tho Christians have something of God's Spirit in them, yet they have
something which is Serpentine. This Viper of sin will not be shaked off till
death. Oh how may this humble the best of God's Saints. The Bishop of
Alexandria when Egypt was converted to the Faith, destroyed all their Idols but
one, that so looking upon that, they might see their folly, and abhor
themselves for their Idolatry. So God suffers not sin to be perfectly abolished
in this life, he leaves some corruption in the heart, Something of the Serpent,
that his people may loath themselves in the dust. What need have Believers to
drink Christ's Blood in the Sacrament, which is the best antidote against the
poison of the Soul.

3. See that which may raise in us abhorring thoughts of sin. It is a venomous
Fiery Serpent; will any man hug a Serpent? Oh look not on the sine coat of the
Serpent, but the sting. It stings with the wrath of God. Pursue sin with an
holy malice, Mortify the deeds of the flesh, Romans 8. 13. It is an happy thing
when a Christian can say, Though the Serpent be not dead, yet i^ is dying. Kill
this Serpent or it will kill you.

4. If sin be a Fiery Serpent, then be sensible of the malignity and virulency
of this Serpent, feel your selves stung. Feel your Hypocrisy and Infidelity.
We are ready to think what a fearful thing it was to be bitten with the Fiery
Serpents. We have a worse Serpent bites us, and the misery of all is, we are
stung and are asleep, Ephesians. 4. 19. O that God would by his Spirit awaken us that
we may not sleep the sleep of death.

5. If sin be a Fiery Serpent with so many stings, then let us labor that
these deadly stings fastened in our Consciences may be healed. And that brings
me to the second Thing.

II. The manner of Isreal's Cure. 11.
verse. 8. Make thee a Fiery Serpent, (or Serpent of Brass) and set it upon a
Pole: and it shall come to pass that every one that is bitten, when he looks
upon it shall live: And Moses made a Serpent of Brass, and put it upon a Pole,
etc. In which words there is the Signum, and the Signatum; the Sign, the Brazen
Serpent, and the thing signified, Christ the healer of Souls. So it is
interpreted by the Evangelist. Joh. 3. 14. As Moses lifted up the Serpent in
the Wilderness: even so must the son of man be lifted up, that whosoever
believes in him should not perish, etc.

Doct. 4. The Lord Jesus is the Doct. 4.
true Brazen Serpent that heals sinners stung with sin Morsus Serpent is
l^thalis, mors domini vitalis. Austin.
. For the further illustrating of this I shall show you,

1. The fit Analogies and resemblances between Christ and the Brazen Serpent.

1. The Serpent in the Wilderness resembled Christ in its materiality, the
Serpent was of Brass, not Marble, or beaten Gold: This being made of Brass did
Typifie Christ three ways.

1. Brass is an inferior Metal, and unlikely to produce such a noble effect.
What was a Serpent of Brass to heal one that was stung? If some Sovereign
Medicine or Antidote had been applied, if the balm of Gilead had been brought,
this had been likely to have wrought a Cure, but what is there in a Serpent
made of Brass to heal? This was a Type of Christ, it resembled the meanness of
his Person, he affected not outward pomp and state; he came into the World in a
mean Condition, There was no beauty in him that he should be desired, Isa. 53.
2. Who that had looked upon Christ with a carnal eye, would ever have thought
he should be the Messiah, the glorious healer of the World?

2. Brass is a solid firm Metal; which resembled Christ's Power. Job 9. 19. If
I speak of strength, lo he is strong. Therefore called, The Mighty God (...)
, Isa. 9. 6. Of what invincible fortitude was he, who could bear the wrath of
God and the sins of the World! He must needs be puissant who could break the
Gates of Hell, and triumph over Satan upon the Cross.

3. Brass does shine, but not dazzle the eyes. So Christ though he does shine
in his Godhead, yet his Human Nature does so allay the splendour of his Glory,
that we may look upon him now, and not be overwhelmed with the immenseness and
brightness of his Majesty.

2. The Brazen Serpent resembled Christ in its figure and shape. The Serpent
though it was made like a Serpent, yet it was no Serpens ille ^neus non erat
Pestifer, sed solum speciem forebat. P. Fagius.
real Serpent. Thus Christ (as the Scripture says) was in the likeness of
sinful flesh, Romans 8. 3. yet he was no sinner. He was made sin, but knew no
sin, 2 Cor. 5. 21. He knew sin in the weight, but not in the act. He was ab
omni macula alienus, he was purer then the Sun; he had no more sin than the
Brazen Serpent had sting or venom in it Suscipi^ndo sine culpa paenam, and
paenam sanavit and culpam. Aug. Tom. 10.
.

3. The Serpent in the Wilderness resembled Christ in its Erection and
Elevation. It was lifted up that all Israel might see it. It must not only be
framed but lifted up In extremitate hastis vexillaris ut eminus ab omnibus
conspici posset. Ar. Montan. Vatabl. ^rusius.
. So Christ must not only be made a Savior, but he must be lifted up. Now
Christ is said to be lifted up four ways.

1. Christ was lifted up in the Acclamation of the Angels, Luke 2. 7. Unto you
is born this day, a Savior, which is Christ the Lord; and suddenly there was
with the Angel a multitude of the heavenly host praising God, and saying glory
to God in the highest, etc. The Angels adored Christ, and were the Heralds to
proclaim the joyful news of a Savior to the World. Thus was Christ lifted up
in the Triumphs of Angels.

2. Christ is lifted up in the Preaching of the Gospel Ainswort.
. So he is an Ensign erected for all to look to, Isa. 11. 10. It is the
Ministers office to lift up Christ in the eyes of the World; to hold him forth
in his glory, and proclaim him as the only Messiah, and that there is no
Salvation in any other, Act. 4. 12 (...).
.

3. Christ was lifted up upon the Cross: The Pole was undoubtedly a Type of the
Cross, and the lifting up of the Serpent on the Pole was a Type of Christ's
being lift up upon the Cross. This was a blessed lifting up. Christ's lifting
up is our lifting up. Joh, 12. 32. And I if I be lifted up from the earth, will
draw all men unto me: That is, all that belong to the Election. For mercy runs
only in the channel of Election. O how happy was it for us, that this spiritual
brazen serpent was erected. Christ's being lifted up upon the Cross, is the
cause of our being lifted up to Heaven. And in the Sacrament is a solemn
Commemoration of Christ's Crucifixion.

4. Christ is lifted up in our hearts, by our contemplating, admiring, loving
him. It is not the lifting up of Christ on the Cross will save us, unless he be
lifted up in our hearts. When we prize Christ, and set him highest in our
thoughts and esteem, this is to lift him up in our souls. There are two chief
things a Christian has to do, to depress self, and exalt Christ.

4. The brazen serpent resembled Christ in the design of its being lifted up,
and that was intuition; when Israel were stung, they must look upon the Brazen
serpent; which looking employed a secret hope they had of cure. So Christ was
therefore lifted up on the Cross, that he may be looked upon by an eye of
Faith. The people of Israel needed not to have taken down the Serpent from the
Pole, and touched their sores with it; they were only to look on it, and they
were healed. So we need not go to fetch Christ down from Heaven (as the Papists
do who make him to be corporally in the Bread); no, if we do but look upon him
fiducially, we shall be cured of our sting.

Observe four Things about the Brazen Serpent. There were four cases in which
the Brazen Serpent would have done the people of Israel no good, though it were
lifted up.

1. In case the Brazen Serpent had been set up, yet if they had not fixed their
eye upon it, it would not have cured them. So though Jesus Christ be lifted up
as a Savior to the world; yet if this Brazen Serpent be not looked upon
believingly he will not save, Joh. 3. 18. He that believes not, is condemned
already. The Arminians dream of Universal Redemption, Christ dying
intentionally for all. The Brazen Serpent was made a Type of Christ; now the
Brazen Serpent cured not all persons, only them that looked upon it. So those
who either through ignorance, or stubbornness, look not on Christ by Faith have
no benefit by him.

2. In case the people of Israel had not looked upon this Serpent Alone, if
they had set up another Brazen Serpent by this, and looked upon both, they had
not received a cure. So after God has set up Christ to be a Savior, if any
shall presume to set up another Savior by him (as the Papists who look partly
to Christ, and partly to their Merits) they can receive no sanative virtue from
him. For us of the Protestant persuasion, to look upon our duties equally with
Christ, our prayers and tears, as expecting they should merit salvation, this
is to make two Brazen Serpents, to set up two Christ's, and then we cannot be
cured. We are to use duties, but to look beyond them to Christ. They are good
duties, but bad Christ's. If we trust to our duties for salvation, they will be
Fiery Serpents to sting us, not Brazen Serpents to heal us.

3. In case the Brazen Serpent was set up upon a Pole, if Israel had looked
only upon their sting, and not upon the Serpent, they had not been cured. So if
we look only upon our Sins, and through despair look not up to Christ, we have
no healing from him. To keep away from Christ because of our sins, is a
disparagement to Christ, as if there were more malignity and poison in sin then
virtue in this Brazen Serpent. Indeed we must look with one eye upon sin, but
with another eye upon Christ. Look on sin with a penitent eye, and on Christ
with a believing eye (...). Chrysostom.
. Weep for sin that slew Christ, but hope in the Lamb slain.

4. In case Israel had looked upon the Brazen Serpent, yet if it had been with
an eye of scorn or contempt, as despising that remedy God had provided, they
had not been cured; Jesus Christ is lifted up, but if he be looked upon as the
Jews looked upon him when he hung on the Cross, with an eye not of reverence
but disdain, he will not cure. The blasphemous Socinians look upon Christ only
as a mere man, and his blood not satis^ory or meritorious, these cannot be ^ved
by him Qui non erubescit crucifixum saluus fiet. August.
. Isa. 53. 3. He is despised of Men. To these he is not a Brazen Serpent, but a
consuming fire.

5. The Brazen Serpent resembled Christ in the issue and result of it. He who
looked on the Serpent had an infallible cure. So he that can but look wishly on
Christ by Faith is certainly sav^d. Joh. 3. 14. Whosoever believes on him
shall not penish. Our misery at first came in by the eye, looking upon the
apple undid us; but looking on Christ aright saves us.

2. I shall show the Transcendencies of Christ the Spiritual Brazen Serpent
above that in the Wilderness.

1. The Brazen Serpent was inanimate, it could repair life, not infuse life.
But Jesus Christ gives life to the World (...).
, Joh. 6. 33. Yea, a never-dying life, Joh. 3. 15. Eternal life. Life is sweet,
but this word Eternal, makes it sweeter.

2. The Brazen Serpent could cure only a sting in the body. The Lord Jesus
heals a more deadly sting in our souls. (...).
Psalm. 103. 3. So deep were these wounds that they could not be healed but by
deeper wounds made in Christ's side. He was fain to die to cure us.

3. The Brazen Serpent could cure only those who were within sight of it, such
as were afar off and in remote parts of the Wilderness, had not their sting
removed; But Jesus Christ cures none but them who are afar off, Jer. 2. 5. They
are gone far from me. The East is not so far from the West, as the sinner is
from God; but herein appears the virtue of our Spiritual Brazen Serpent, he
heals none but them who are afar off. Such as are not only aliens but rebels,
that live in the Devil's Territories, Christ works a cure upon them, and turns
them from the power of satan, Act. 26. 18.

4. The Brazen Serpent cured them that looked on it; but if they had wanted the
organ of fight, there had been no cure for them. What would a poor blind
Israelite have done? but Christ our Brazen Serpent not only cures us when we
look upon him, but if we want our sight, he enables us to look upon him. Christ
not only saves us when we believe, but he gives us power to believe, Ephesians. 2.
8. Christ anoints us with the eye salve of his Spirit that we may look up, and
looking up we are cured.

Use. 1. Information,

1 Branch. In this Mystery of the Brazen Serpent, see by what improbable means
God does sometimes effect great things. What was a Brazen Serpent? What
likelihood that this should heal one that was stung? it was a mere Image, a
shape, and this not applied to the wound, but only beheld and looked upon, yet
this wrought a cure. Reason would with Sarah have laughed at this. A bitter
Tree cast into the waters did dulcifie and make themsweet to drink of Sal
Elisaei sanavit terram sterslem, licet sal natura sua sterilitatem inducat.
Drusius.
. Clay and spittle cured the blind man; we would rather think it should put
out ones eyes that did see. What is there in the Rainbovv to prevent a deluge?
What is Bread and Wine in the Sacrament, that these Elements should be
consecrated to such an high mystery as to be a symbol of Christ's Body and Quid
magis rationi obstat quam mortu. um homsnem vivificare mundum, in illius cruce
and igno minia, humans ge n^is gloriam absconditam esse. P. Fagius.
Blood? What more strange then that a dead man should quicken the world? but
God loves to amuse and nonplus human wisdom, and bring great things to pass
by vveak contemptible means, 1 Cor. 1. 27, 28. This the Lord does.

1. That his Glory may shine forth the more. The less appears in outvvard means
the more of God is seen. The less beauty and splendour is in the Lodestone, the
more the virtues of it are admired. And the less outward Pomp is in the
instrument, the more Gods wisdom and energy is manifested.

2. God would have the World see what power is in his Institution. God
appointed the Brazen Serpent Fac tibi Presterem.
, therefore a word of Blessing went along with it to heal, Non in Serpente sed
in domini imp^rio vis posita.
Psalm. 107. 20. He sent forth his word and bealed them. In the blessed
Sacrament we are to look above the Elements; a word of Blessing goes along with
God's Institution to make this Ordinance effectual for the sealing up of Christ
and all his benefits to us.

2. Bran. In this Mystery of the Brazen Serpent, see what infinite need we
stand in of Christ. What would a stung Israelite have done without a Brazen
Serpent? if Balm be needful for one that is wounded, if an antidote be needful
for one that is poisoned, then Christ the Brazen serpent is needful for a soul
stung with sin.

Yea, and what need have we to look often upon Christ in the frequent
Celebration of the Lords Supper, where Christ in a special manner is lifted up;
though we have looked upon this Brazen serpent formerly, yet still we have need
to look upon him, we are not perfectly healed. Indeed Israel if they had looked
but once on the Brazen Serpent, they were perfectly cured; but though we have
looked several times on Christ in the Sacrament, and can say by experience, We
have fetched virtue from him, yet we are not perfectly cured. Though the guilt
of sin be taken away, yet not the presence and inbeing. Our bloody issue is not
quite dried up; our wounds bleed afresh, our sins break out again. I appeal to
the best hearts alive, how often have they been stung with sin and tentation
since they looked last on Christ lifted up in the Sacrament. O what need then
to come often to this Ordinance. Herein the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper
differs from the Sacrament of Baptism which is to be administered but once,
this often, (...) Cor. 11. 26 (...)
. If we consider how strong our corruptions are, how weak our Graces, how
numerous our wan^s, it may make us come often to the Lords-Table, where we may
have an healing sight of Christ. He that wants Gold goes often to the Indies.
Our Spiritual indigence may renew our addresses to the Lord's Supper for
strength and comfort.

3. Bran. See in this Mystery the Cabinet of Free Grace opened, and God's love
sparkling forth! Three ways.

1. That God has provided Christ this Brazen Serpent as a remedy for stung
lapsed sinners. Oh infinite goodness of God, that when we had degenerated from
him by Apostasy, the Lord should take pity of us, and instead of brandishing
his flaming svvord, should erect a Brazen serpent, and make Christ known to us
in his healing virtues Mal. 4. 2.
. When the Angels sinned there was no Brazen serpent for them, God did not
send them to the Hospital to be healed, but to the Jail to be punished. They
are reserved in everlasting Chains, Jude 6. O rich Free Grace that has
indulged us with a remedy, and found out a way of cure for all our desperate
maladies!

2. See Gods Free Grace, that some should be healed of their sting and not
others. There are but a fevv healed. There is a time when sinners will not be
healed, Jer. 51. 9. We would have healed Babylon, but she is not healed; and
there is a time when sinners cannot be healed, Nah. 3. 19. There is no healing
of thy bruise. Now Christian, when most die of their vvound, that the Brazen
serpent should be sent to thee to cure thee! Oh stupendous Grace (...), etc.
Favorem indicat ac benevolentiam numinis, non tributam nostris meritis, sed ab
ipsius gratuita bonitate profectam. Erasm.
! that God should lay his left hand upon many of the rich and noble, and lay
his right hand upon thee; that Heaven should fall to thy lot; that thou
should be one of those few that are saved*; cry out in admiration, Lord how
is it that thou should show thy self to me and not unto the world Joh. 14. 22.
.

3. See God's Free Grace that he cures us upon such cheap terms. When we were
wounded so deadly, God did not put us to charges, we were not to bring money to
purchase our Cure; not rivers of Oil, or drops of blood, no, only look upon the
Brazen Serpent, and the Cure is effected. Isa. 55 1. Come without money, and
without price. We are not to pay for our Cure. Spiritual Blessings are too dear
for our purse to reach; Christ made a purchase for us in his Blood; all he
requires is to receive it and be thankful.

4. See how justly all wicked men 4 Bran.
perish. God has provided a brazen Serpent, a glorious Savior, that whoever
believes in his blood may obtain mercy. God beseeches, yea charge men to
believe, if therefore through 1 John 3. ^3.
folly they neglect Christ, or obstinacy refuse him, how righteous will God be
in pronouncing that last and fatal sentence upon them. They who perish under
the Gospel must needs be double damned; Hell's furnace will be heated seven
times hoter for them, because they put away Salvation from them, Act. 13. 46.
Pagans perish in the want of a Brazen serpent, and Christians in the Contempt
(...). Mat. 11 22. Quia ultra natura legem, etiam ^cripta lex vobis data est.
Brugens.
. Jesus Christ says, Come unto me all ye sinners who are stung with guilt, I
will heal you. I conflicted with my Fathers wrath, I was wounded, and out of
these bleeding wounds comes forth a sovereign medicine to cure you. But
desperate sinners love their disease better then their remedy. They had rather
die then look up to Christ for life, Psalm. 81. 11. Israel would none of me. Oh
strange delirium, the old Serpent after he has stung men has bewitched them,
that they mind not a Cure. Who will pity such as wilfully cast away
themselves? how will mercy slight their tears at last, and God's justice
triumph in their deserved ruin.

Use 2. Let us look in a right manner Use 2. Exhortation Bran. 1.
upon this Mystical Brazen Serpent, Heb. 12. 2. Looking unto Jesus. The Greek
word, (...), signifies the steadfast fixing of the eye upon some lovely
beautiful object. Faith will be of more use to us than any other grace. As an
eye (though a dim one) was of more use to a stung Israelite than any other
member. Faith discerns the Lords body. To encourage Faith; Consider,

1. Christ was lifted up upon the Cross purposely to cure us. Christ had no
other end in dying but to heal, his blood is a sovereign balm for a sinsick
soul. Such as feel the burden of their sins, need not question Christ's
willingness to save them, when the very design of his death was to cure, Psalm.
147. 3. He heals the broken in heart. Serpents (as Naturalists affirm) have a
(...) or great love to their young, and will hazard their lives for them ^sin.
lib. 9.
. So full of love was Christ our Mystical Brazen serpent, as to die for us, by
whose stripes we are healed, Isa. 53. 5.

2. Such as do not look up to Christ's merits do necessitate themselves to
damnation, Mar. 16. 16. He that believes not shall be damned. (...), Non solum
ut caeteri, bominum peribit, qui Des (...), non cognoverint, verum etiam ut
peccata sua hac in vita auxerit, vel eo ingratitudinis crimin^ quod oblatum
sibi Evangelium repulerit, it^ in altera gravioribus tam corporis quam animi
ad^icetur suppliciis, Bru.
. Had not Israel lift up their eyes to the Brazen serpent they had died for it.
If thou do not look up as David did; Psalm. 25. 15. Mine eyes are ever toward
the Lord, then thou must look up as Dives did, Luke 16. 23. In hell he lift up
his eyes. Oh therefore let us fix our eye upon the Brazen serpent, looking unto
Jesus. Let us look up to the sacrifice of Christ's blood, and to the cloud of
incense which he sends up by his glorious Intercession.

Object. 1. But I fear I have no Faith alive in my Soul, whereby I should look
up. Though Israel were stung yet they were alive; but how dead do I find my
heart?

Answ. We must distinguish between a Christian that is liveless, and that is
without life. A sick man is liveless, and has no mind to stir, yet he is not
without life: So Christian thou may be liveless, and thy grace dormunt; yet
the seed of Faith may be alive in thy heart. Did not David find his heart dull
and listless? though he was not dead in sin, yet he was dead in duty; why else
did he pray, Quicken thou me, Psalm. 119. 25. But that deadness which is in a
Believer, he is sensible of, which argues life; he mourns for it, and never
leaves till he has in the use of means recovered that agility and liveliness
of soul as once he had.

Object. 2. But if my Faith be alive, it is so weak, that I fear I shall
receive no benefit from the Brazen serpent?

Answ. If it be a true Faith though weak, it will fetch virtue from Christ.
Suppose an Israelite had had but one eye, and that eye had been sore, yet
looking on the Brazen serpent, he had been presently cured. Blear eyed Leah
might have been cured; though thy Faith be weak it will justify. Say as
Cruciger, on his death bed, Lord, I believe but with a weak Faith, yet I
believe Credo domine languida fide, sed ^amen fide.
.

Object. 3. But my sins are of that magnitude that I am discouraged from
looking up to Christ?

Answ. Captivate fear, and advance Faith Mark 5. 36.
. Suppose an Israelite had been more stung and bitten than others, yet by
looking on the Brazen serpent he might have been healed as well as they that
had but the least sting. Christ's blood believed in, cures the greatest stings.
What cannot the blood of God do? it cured Manasses three deadly stings,
bloodshed, Idolatry, Sorcery, 2 Chronicles. 32. 2, 3. The Brazen serpent can cure
the Crimson sinner, Isa. 1. 18. I speak not this that any should presume, but
that no brokenhearted sinner should despair.

2. Bran. Let us acknowledge God's wonderful mercy in bestowing the Brazen
serpent upon us. O bless God cordially for Christ (...), Chrysostom.
, who was lift up upon the Cross, and is held forth in the Sacrament, for our
consolation and salvation. How joyful was an Israelite that lay burning with
his sting, when he saw the Brazen serpent erected. We have infinitely more
cause to be joyful for Christ, whose blood delivers us from ^rath to come, 1
These. 1 10. What had become of us if Christ not pityed us and come into the
world. Had not Christ been lifted up, we had been thrown down to hell for ever.

Let us then bow the knee in all reverence, and with the leper that was healed,
return to give glory to God, Luke 17. 15.

Use 3. Comf. Let this cheer up the hearts of all true Believers. You that now
look upon Christ lift up upon the Pole, shall shortly see him lift up upon the
Throne. You that have seen Christ in his Crucifixion shall shortly see him in
his Coronation. In short, you that now behold Christ lifted up for you, shall
shortly be lifted up to him. And there you shall behold the wonders of his
love, the riches of his glory, and shall be for ever solacing your selves in
the light of his blessed countenance.

The Spiritual Vine.
John 15. 1. I am the True Vine.
THe Name of Christ is most fragrant, and because of the savor of his good
Ointments, therefore the Virgins love him Cant. 1. 3.
. Jesus Christ is the beauty of Heaven, and the joy of the heart Rev. 21. 23.
. In him all fullness dwells, Colos. 1. 19. In this flower is all sweetness. If
the Gospel be the field, Christ is the treasure hid in it. The knowledge of
Christ is so precious and delectable, that though St. Paul knew him before, yet
he desires to know more of him O The sau^is omnibus opnlentior notitia Christi
Aug.
, he would have more light from this Sun, Phil. 3. 10. That I may know him, as
he who has found a gold Mine, desires to dig out still more Gold. Jesus Christ
in Scripture is set out by several Metaphors.

1. He is compared to the Rose of Sharon, Cant. 2. 1. the Rose is the Queen of
Flowers. So sweet is this Rose of the Heavenly Paradise, that it makes us a
sweet savor to God. Ephesians. 1. 6.


2. Christ is compared to a Pearl of Price, Mat. 13. 46. other Pearls add no
realworth to them that wear them; but Christ this illustrious Pearl does; he
makes us worthy through his worthiness; Ez^k. 16. 14.

But among all the Metaphors and Allegories in Scripture, none does more lively
decipher, and set out Christ, than the Vine. He calls himself here, the True
Vine. The Vine (says Pliny) is to be ranked the highest among all the Plants
that grow.

Doct. 1. That Jesus Christ is a Spiritual Vine. The Analogies are these.

1 The Vine is of it self weak, and must be supported and born up: So the
humane Nature of Christ, was of it self weak, and was fain to be supported and
underpropped with the Divine Nature.

2. The Vine grows in the Garden, not in the Forest: So Christ this blessed
Vine, grows in the Garden of the Church. He is not known among the Heathen,
they being Forest ground are not the better for this Vine. To Israel pertains
the Glory, for unto them were committed (...), the Oracles of God, Romans 3. 2.

3. The Vine communicates to the Branches. Believers are called Branches of the
Vine, ver. 5. Christ shoots up his sap of Grace into these Vitis lignum (...)
asternm and dehile (...) radice sua per stipitem aut truncum nobilem illum
instillat palmitibus succum, quo imbuti possint uvas proferre: it a jesus vili
licet forma merito incarnationis mortisque suae instillat animi^ electorum
succum divinae gratiae quae possint edere insigma virtutum opera, etc. Brugens.
. Joh. 1. 16. Of his fullness have we all received. Then, let not the branches
grow proud; all comes from the root of the Vine. The Saints gifts and graces
are derived from Christ. Therefore he calls the Spouses Graces his Graces,
Cant. 5. 1. I have gathered my myrrh; not thy myrrh. The Branch has nothing
but what it receives from the Root Ita sunt palmites in vite ut viti nihil
conferant sed inde accipiunt unde florent. Aug.
.

4. The Vine has rare delicious fruit growing on it, it bears sweet clusters;
the promises are the clusters of Grapes growing on Christ the True Vine Habent^
^bera vere vino meliora. Bern.
. The Promises are said to be (...), in him, 1 Cor. 1. 20. the Promises are
made in Christ, and grow upon him as fruit on the Tree.

5. There are many things about the Vine useful besides the fruit. The Leaves
that grow on it (says Pliny) have a Physical virtue to allay heats and
inflammations; the Gumm that distills from it is good against Leprosy. So it is
with this Spiritual Vine, the Lord Jesus; he is exceeding useful, and full of
virtue. There is virtue in his Passion, Resurrection, Intercession; he pleads
for us as the Advocate for the Client; He perfumes our holy things with his
Incense. Christ's Prayer is the cause why our Prayers are accepted. Such
various excellency is in this Vine.

1. See the different Virtues in Use 1. Inform. 1 Bran.
Christ to the Godly and the Wicked. To the Godly, He is a Vine full of
Comfort; to the Wicked, He is not a Vine, but a Rock of offense. The Godly feed
on Him, the Wicked stumble at him; the Wicked are offended at the meanness of
Christ's Person, the Spirituality of his Doctrine, the Strictness of his Laws;
but to the Godly he is a Vine yielding most fragrant delicious fruit Una causa
varios habet effectus.
.

2. Bran. See the misery of men living and dying in sin, they are not implanted
into Christ; therefore do not at all partake of his precious fullness. The Vine
communicates influence only to its own Branches. The wild Olive has no fruit
from the Vine. Such as abide in the old stock of nature, Branches of the wild
Olive have no benefit from Christ. It is cold comfort to the Reprobate part of
the world that there is a Vine growing which bears the fruit of Salvation, as
long as they remain strangers to Christ, and hate to be united to him. Fire
will come out of this Vine to devour them.

3. Bran. See the Goodness of God! When we had forfeited the fruit of Paradise,
^e has given us a better tree then any grew there; he has enriched us with a
pleasant Vine. When Christ suffered, now was this blessed Vine nailed to the
Cross, now it was cut and did bleed Jam fuit vitis amputata. Bern.
, and Salvation comes to us in the blood of this Vine. The gleaning Grapes
here, are better then the World's Vintage. This Spiritual Vine,

1. Chears the heart Psalm. 104. 15.
,

Curam metumque juvat dulci lyaeo solvere. Horat.

Are we sad in the sense of sin, and think our selves unworthy to come to the
Lords-Table, this wine of Christ's blood is a Cordial (...).
; It is both the Price, and Seal of our Pardon.

2. It strengthens: the Vine has a strengthening virtue. So when our Graces are
spiritually consumptive, by tasting the fruit of this Vine, we renew our
strength; in the Holy Celebration of the Lord's Supper fresh influence is
communicated to us. This Spiritual Vine did invigorate the Saints and Martyrs
of old, and infuse a spirit of Magnanimity into them. That I may raise the
Saints esteem of Christ, and that they may come to the Sacred Supper with more
eagerness to drink his Blood; I shall show wherein this True Vine surpasses in
glory all other Vine-Trees.

1. In the Vine there is something unuseful. Though the fruit of the Vine be
sweet, yet the wood of the Vine is unuseful; it is good for nothing. Ezekiel. 15.
3. Shall the wood be taken thereof to do any work? or will men take a Pin of it
to hang any Vessel upon? But it is not so with Christ; there is nothing in this
Vine but what is useful. We have need of Christ's Humane Nature to suffer, of
his Divine to satisfy; we have need of his Offices, Influences, Privileges,
there is nothing in Christ we can be without.

2. There are variety of Vine-Trees. But there is but one True Vine that brings
Redemption to Mankind. The Papists would fetch comfort from more besides
Christ; From the Angels and the Virgin Mary. The Angels themselves are
beholding to this Vine the Lord Jesus, they are by Christ confirmed in their
obedience that they cannot fall Austin.
; And as for the Virgin Mary, it is not her milk that saves but Christ's blood.
The Virgin Mary though she was Christ's Mother, yet she calls Christ her
Savior, Luke 1. 47. The Virgin Mary is saved, not by bearing the Vine, but by
being ingrafted into the Vine.

3. The Vine bears but one sort of fruit; it is all but Grape: But the Lord
Jesus bears several sorts of fruit.

1. This Vine bears the the fruit of Justification, Romans 5. 9. Being justified
through his blood: In Justification there is remission of sin, and imputation
of righteousness. A Believer triumphs more in the Righteousness of Christ
imputed, than if he had Adams righteousness in innocence; nay then if he had
the Angels righteousness: for now he has the Righteousness of God, 2 Cor. 5.
21. Without this, a sinner is put into a continual Ague of Conscience; but by
virtue of Justification, he arrives at an holy Serenity, Romans 5. 1. Being
justified by faith, we have peace with God.

2. This Vine bears the fruit of Sanctification, 1 Cor. 1. 30. He is made to us
Sanctification. A man may have pleasant fruit growing in his Orchard, and
others be never the better for it: but holiness in Christ is diff^sive; this
fruit is for all the Elect, they are made holy with Christ's Holiness.

3. This Spiritual Vine bears the fruit of Consolation; Cant. 2. 3. His fruit
was sweet to my taste. This is a bunch of Grapes by the way; when a Believer
has tasted some of this fruit from Christ, he has had such Transfigurations
of soul, and been filled with such ravishing delight, that he could be ready to
say as Paul, Whether in the body I cannot tell. He has been put in Heaven
before his time.

4. A Branch may be cut off and^separated from the Vine. But no Branch shall be
ever separated from Christ this Heavenly Vine. The Arminians tell us, A
justified person may fall away finally. Is not Christ a perfect Vine? He is not
perfect, if a living Branch may be plucked off from him. Has not Christ said
of his Elect, They shall never perish, neither Imbelles sunt oves (electorum
emblem^ta) sed non tanta erit ab extra (...), quanta eas rapere queat e
mamanibus Christi. Brugens.
shall any man pluck them out of his hand, Joh. 10 28. If any Branch be plucked
away from Christ, it is either because Christ is not able to keep it, or
because he is willing to lose it. He is able surely to keep it, for he is
strengthened with the Godhead: and he is not willing to loose it, for why then
would he have shed his blood for it? So that no Branch shall be ever separated
from the Celestial Vine. You may sooner pluck a Star out of the Sky, than a
true Believer from Christ. Indeed Hypocrites who look like Branches, fall off,
but they were never really in the Vine. They were in Christ by Profession, not
by Union. They were tied on to the Vine, but not ingra^d. An Elect Branch can
no more perish than the Root.

5. The Wine that comes from the true Vine is better than any other. 1. Wine
from the Grape delight^ the Palate, and revives the Animal spirits; but Christ's
blood chears the Conscience. 2. One may take too great a quantity of Wine, and
then it bites as an Addar (...). Chrysostom.
. But it is otherwise with the Wine which Christ gives, we cannot have too much
of it; as a man cannot have too much health. Christ's blood is Pardoning and
Pacifying; and the more we drink of it, the better; the deeper the sweeter
Cant. 5. 1.
; the death of the Soul is not by drinking too much of Christ's blood, but by
refusing to drink. 3. Wine will cheer a man when he is living, not when he is
dead. Wine in a dead man's mouth loses its virtue; but Christ's blood has such
a flavor in it; it does so sparkle, and is so full of spirits, that it will
fetch life in them that are dead. If they are dead in sin, the blood of Christ
makes them revive. Joh. 6. 54. He that drinks my blood, has eternal life. 4.
The Wine that comes from the Grape does but cheer man's heart, but that Wine
which is distilled from Christ the Heavenly Vine chears God's heart. The Lord
did smell a sweet savor in the Wine of Christ's Blood; and was so infinitely
pleased and delighted with it, that for this he spared all Mankind.

Use 2. Labor to be real Branches Use 2. Exhor. 1 Bran.
of this Spiritual Vine. What was the old World the better to hear of an Ark,
unless they got into the Ark: So what are we the better to hear of a Vine
unless we are in this Vine.

Quest. How shall we know that we are in this Vine?

Answ. 1. By being ingrafted into the Vine. Faith is Vinculum unionis, the
ingrafting grace. And herein Faith has a peculiar excellency above other
Graces. Other Graces make us like Christ, but Faith makes us one with Christ
(...). Chrysostom.
. Other Graces make us lively Pictures of Christ, but Faith makes us living
Branches of Christ. By Love and Humility we imitate Christ; but by Faith we are
implanted into him, as the graft or siens is in-oculated into the Tree. Let us
therefore examine whether we have this ingrafting Grace. Faith admires Christ's
beauty, confides in his Merits Sibi isti fidere, non (...) fidei sed Perfidi^e.
; submits to his Laws; Faith gives up its will, its love, its life to Christ.
Faith has two hands, with one it takes Christ for its Sinoffering, with the
other it gives up it self to Christ as a Burnt-offering.

2. We may know we are in the Vine by receiving influence from the Vine. 1. A
vital influence, Joh. 5. 21. The Son quickneth whom he will. And this life from
Christ is evidenced by sensation; we are sensible of the first ebullitions and
risings of corruption, Romans 7. 23. and of the least ebbings of grace, Hebrew.
5. 14. Who have their senses exercised, to discern both good and evil. 2. A
Sanctifying influence: The root of this Vine being holy, makes all the Branches
holy. Has Christ diffused some of his Divine Unction into us? are our hearts
consecrated? do we set our selves against every evil? as there is a conflict in
the stomach between the spirits of Wine and Poison. Do we forsake fin not only
out of Policy but Antipathy? Are we by the power of Grace transformed and made
Partakers of the Divine Nature? Are we meek, humble, zealous? Is the fiame of
our heart Spiritual, does our pulse still beat aster God? Is our aim sincere?
Do we not only advance but design God's Glory? behold here a sanctifying virtue
derived from Christ into us, and we need not doubt but we are Branches of the
true Vine, and shall grow and flourish in him to eternity.

2. Bran. You that are Believers stand and wonder that when you were by nature
the Vine of Sodom; Deuteronomy. 32. 32; a Vine in your blood, Ezekiel. 19. 10; a wild
Vine, which not only cumbred the Ground, but poisoned it, That God should take
such degenerate Branches and plant you into Christ, and make you partake of the
spiritual juice and fat of this Vine, (...), O the unfathomable depth of Gods
love! you who are the Branches of this Vine, let me beseech you love the Vine
that bears you; kiss and embrace Christ. Let your Souls sound forth Hallelujahs
to the whole Trinity. Admire God the Father in sending a Vine from Heaven:
Admire God the Son who was a bleeding Vine for you. Admire God the Holy Ghost
who has by his mighty Power implanted you into this Vine. Turn all your sullen
discontents into triumphant songs. You are now made living Branches who we^e
once dead; holy Branches, who were once unclean; you now bear Grapes, who did
once bring forth Thistles. Oh make melody in your hearts to the Lord. Admire
and celebrate Freegrace; It is well that there is anEternitya coming, and that
will be little enough to praise God.

Use. 3. Here is a breast of Consolation to all who are implanted into Christ
this Spiritual Vine: Let the Times be what they will, you have never so much
cause to be sad as you have to rejoice, 2 Cor. 6. 10. As sorrowful, yet always
rejoicing (...).
. Harken to me thou Branch of Christ; what though thou have little in the
world? seeing thou partakest of the blessing of the Vine, even of all the
fullness of God, Ephesians. 3. 19. What though thou art reproached? Opprobria assulae
Crucis.
It is honor enough that thou art in Christ; This Vine being a Plant of
Renown, casts a glory upon all the Branches Isa. 28. 5.
. What though thou art told by the Tempter that Christ does not love thee? Thou
may reply, Am I ingrafted into Christ? is the holy sap of his Grace infused
into me? and does he not love me? What though thou art persecuted; be of good
cheer thou have a life hid in the Vine, Col. 3. 3. Your life is hid with
Christ. Fear not; if thou can not live without mole^ation in a Wilderness,
thou shall grow in Paradise. When Basil was threatened with banishment, he
comforted himself with this, Either I shall be under Heaven, or in Heaven Aut
sub Coelo aut in Coelo.
. Oh how may all the Branches of the true Vine flourish with joy! Let death
come, they may triumph: death shall destroy Sin, and perfect Grace.

In particular, there is comfort to all the real Branches of Christ, in these
four Cases.

1. It is comfort under fear of Spiritual barrenness; I am afraid, says the
Saint, I shall grow dead at last, and be like that barren Figtree in the Gospel
which was cursed. But for thy comfort know, that the Branches of this Spiritual
Vine never cease yielding fruit. Indeed ordinary Vine-Trees though they are for
a time fruitful, yet when they grow old, they grow barren; but the Branches of
the true Vine are never so old as to be past bearing, Psalm. 92. 14. They shall
still bring forth fruit in old age. Believers the longer they live, the more
full they are of Faith 2 These. 1. 3.
; the more perfumed with Love. The Church of Thyatira, the older she grew the
better she grew. Her last works were more than her first, Rev. 2. 19. What a
deal of fruit did Paul bring forth not long before his death! This light shined
brighter before his setting, 1 Cor. 15. 10. I labored more abundantly than
they all. So long as there is a fullness in Christ, Believers shall not want.
This Holy Vine being replenished with sap, the Branches cannot choose but be
fertile, Joh. 14. 19. Because I live, ye shall live also. Because the Root
lives, therefore the Branches shall flourish with fruit.

2. It is comfort in case of wrongs and injuries, especially when endured for
Christ's sake. The Lord Jesus is sensible, and will one day vindicate his
people. The Vine is sensible of all the injury done to the Branches, Exodus 3.
7. I have seen, I have seen the afflictions of my people. Not only have I seen
them with an eye of inspection, but affection. Christ bleeds in the Saints
wounds. He who knows their Sufferings feelingly, will avenge them speedily.

3. It is comfort under fear of falling away, I am afraid, says a Christian, I
shall tire before I get to Heaven. Either I shall be blown down by Satan's
Temptation, or faint under sufferings, Oh remember thou art a Branch in Christ,
and thou can not be broken off; thou have Omnipotency to support thee. Adam
when he grew upon his own root of innocence withered, but thou growest upon
Christ's root, therefore thy Grace shall flourish into Perseverance. Though
thou were but as a bough that hangs half on the Tree, thou should never drop
off, because Christ holds thee: It is not thy holding Christ, but Christ's
holding thee preserves thee; He repells the force of Temptation, over-pours the
rellicks of corruption, increases the spark of Grace; 1 Pet. 1. 5. Kept by the
power of God. The Greek word is, (...). Kept as in a Garrison.

4. It is comfort in case of the World's hatred. Hieroni blessed God that he
was counted worthy to be one whom the World hated. What though thou art
maligned and hated? God loves all the Branches of the True Vine; nay, he loves
them as he loves the Root, Joh. 17. 23. That the World may know, that thou have
loved Them as thou have loved Me. It is the same love for kind, though not
degree. 1. God the Father loved Christ ab aeterno, from eternity, Joh. 17. 34.
Thou lovedst me before the Foundation of the World. And so he loves Believers,
Eyhes 1. 4. He has chosen us in him, before the foundation of the world. Our
love to God began but late Sero nimis te amavi domine. Aug*
. We may remember the time when we had no love in our hearts sparkling toward
the Deity; but God's love to us bears date from Eternity. 2. God's love to
Christ is a love of immutability; and so it is to Believers. The Sun of
electing love having risen upon them never sets. Death may take away their
life, but not God's love; Isa. 54. 10. The Hills shall be removed, but my
kindness shall not depart from thee. The Lord may change his love into a frown,
but he will never change his love into hatred. God can no more hate a Believer
then he can Christ; for a Believer is part of Christ, he is Christ-mystical.
What a comfort is this, God loves the Branches as he loves the root, and the
fruit of God's love to the Elect-branches appears in two things.

1. In pruning of them. He prunes them by affliction. We are apt to think, when
God afflicts us he does not love us, an Husbandman loves his Vine never a whit
the less, because he prunes it. Affliction is God's Pruning-Hook, he prunes us
to make us bring forth the peaceable fruits af Righteousness, Hebr. 12. 11. God
had rather have the Branches bleed, then be barren. Joh. 15. 2. Every branch in
me that bears fruit, he purgetb it that it may bring forth more fruit. All
this is Love. It is God's love that he will rather lopp and prune the Branches,
then let them grow wild.

2. In Transplanting them into Heaven. The Branches of Christ will thrive best
when they are transplanted; and good reason, because then they will grow in a
better soil. Christ desires to have all his Branches which are scattered up and
down in the World to be with him. Joh. 17. 24. Father I will that those which
thou have given me be with me Ejusdem mecum gloriae consortes. Brugens.
. The Elect will never be happy till they are transplanted, Then they will grow
quietly. In Heaven there will be no Bramble to tear the Vine-Branches, none of
the Red Dragon's Race. Then all the Branches will be sweetly united in love.
Then they shall grow in the Sunshine. God's Countenance will be ever shining
upon them. In this life they partake of Christ's Grace, and hereafter they
shall partake of his Glory.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 2. marg. for re read rei. p. 9. m^rg. for myeris r. mysteriis. p. 21.
marg. r. (...). p. 111. marg. r. mortis.

Books to be sold by Thomas Parkhurst at the Golden Bible on London-Bridg.
1. AN Exposition of Temptation, on Mat. 4. verse. 1. to the end of the eleventh.

2. A Commentary on Titus.

3. David's Learning: A Comment upon Psalm. 32.

4. The Parable of the Sower, and of the Seed, upon Luke 8. 4.

A Learned Commentary or Exposition on the first Chapter of the second Epistle
to the Corinthians, by Richard Sibbs, D. D. fol.

The view of the Holy Scriptures. By Hugh Broughton. Fol.

Christianographia, or a Description of the multitude, and sundry sorts of
Christians in the world, not subject to the Pope. By Ephr. Pagitt. Fol.

A Learned Commentary on the fourth Chapter of the second Epistle of St. Paul
to the Corinthians, to which is added, First, A conference between Christ and
Mary. Second, the Spiritual Man's Aim. Third, Emanuel, or Miracle of Miracles,
by Richard Sibbs, D D. 40

An Exposition on the five first Chapters of Ezekiel, with useful observations
thereupon by W. Greenhil. 4to.

The Gospel Covenant, or the Covenant of Grace opened: Preached in New England,
bp Peter Bulkeley. 4to.

Gods Holy Mind touching Matters Moral, which himself uttered in Ten Words, or
Ten Commandments; Also an Exposition on the Lords Prayer, by Edward Elton, B.
D. 4to.

Fiery Jesuit, or an Historical Collection of the Rise, Increase, Doctrines
and Deeds of the Jesuits. Exposed to view for the sake of London, 4to.

Horologiographia Optica; Dialing Universal and Particular, Speculative and
Practical; together with the Description of the Court of Arts, by a new Method,
by Sylvonus Morgan. 4to

Praxis Medicinae, or the Physicians Practice, wherein are contained all inward
Diseases from the head to the foot, by Walter Bruel.

Regimen Sanitatis Salerni, or the School of Salerns Regiment of Health,
containing Directions and Instructions for the guide and government of Man's
Life, 4to.

Heart-treasure: or a Treatise tending to fill and furnish the head and heart
of every Christian, with soulinriching treasure of truths, graces, experiences
and comforts.

A Glimpse of Eternity. by A. Calcy.

The Re-building of London encouraged and improved in several Meditations: by
Sam. Rolls.

Moses unvailed, by William Guild.

Little Books for little Children; with Manuels for Parents, by Thomas White.

Closet-Prayer, a Christians Duty, by Oliver Heywood.

Old Man's Memento, and Young Man's Monitor, by J. Mayuard, D. D.

FINIS.

