SONGS AND POEMS OF LOVE AND DROLLERY

By T. W.

Printed in the Year, 1654.

To my most obliging Friend E. M. Esquire.
SIR,
IT was not by my endeavor, but permittance only, that these trifles were
preferred to the Press; nor had the persuasions used procured so much from me,
but that upon strict Examination, I conceived them to be good for nothing, but
to be printed. For since the late Deluge of Ignorance overflowed this Land, it
fares with Books, as with Men; the light and frothy float and flourish, whilst
the Grave and Solid sink and perish. Having thus abandoned them to the ignominy
of an Impression, 'twould be absurd to beg from you a candid opinion of them,
which has been already denied them by my self. And therefore I ask no pardon
for the Errors of the Contents, but for the boldness I take to present you
therewith, and to subscribe my self

(Sir) Your most Faithfully Devoted Servant, T. W.

SONGS AND POEMS OF LOVE AND DROLLERY.
Song.
COme all you discontented souls,
And here lay down your Loads;
Drinksack which want and woe controuls
And care it self corrodes.
The world is never bad,
Whilst good Wine may be had,
Nor can it much oppress ye,
Though the Anger of al
Other gods on ye fall,
So Bacchus only bless ye.
(Chor.)
Then to Bacchus, then to Bacchus
Let Us be betake us,
Whose streams will dry
The weeping eye,
And make our griefs forsake us.
2.
Are you deprived of those you loved,
yet let your heart not sink;
Such crosses to the wise have proved
provocatives to drink:
He had a gallant Soul,
Who called for a full Boul,
When one of his Sons was slain;
And being told anon,
That another was gone,
He cried, Fill't up again.
(Chor.)
Then to Bacchus, then to Bacchus, etc.
3.
Did the successful foe overthrow
In battle all your powers?
Drink sack, and you will never feel the blow,
But count the next day yours;
When the Giants by Scalado
Stormed heaven in a bravado,
The trembling Gods were shrinking,
Till Bachus in 'em works,
And makes 'em fight like Turks:
Heaven was preserved by drinking.
(Chor.)
Then to Bacchus, then, etc.
4.
Is your just Cause batr'd of success,
By the bribed Judges Art?
Drink Sack and it shall only press
His conscience, not your heart.
Does the undeserved frown
Of your King keep you down
From power and dignity?
Then your cups freely take,
And your self they will make
A Prince as great as he.
(Chor.)
Then to Bacchus, then, etc.
5.
Mourn not, if she whom you adore
will not to grace admit ye;
Your tears will make her pride the more,
And laughter move, not pity.
To pine and look pale,
Is no way to prevail,
But take this course that is better,
Drink Sack till your face
Has a plump ruddie grace;
You Will get, or else forget her.
(Chor.)
Then to Bacchus, then, etc.
6.
Have plundring Rebels made you poor,
Then let them in no part
Enjoy your grief, as well as store,
But envy your light heart.
Drink about, and about,
Drink in season, and out;
Drink deep, and then confide you,
That the world well will go,
Or if it do, or no,
You Will care no more than I do.
(Chor.)
Then to Bacchus, then to Bacchus,
Let Us betake us,
Whose streams does dry
The weeping eye,
And make our griefs forsake us.
SONG.
QUickly drawer bring us up,
More Wine yet, and a larger cup,
That of the same draught I may first,
Quench, and again renew my thirst;
With other sweets we soon are cloyed;
Wine's more desired the more enjoyed:
Were Pallas here, who could endure
To hear her talk 'bove half an hour?
Appollo too with his golden Lyre,
Would with each strain waste your desire;
Venerian sports till morning please:
But then grow loathed as the disease.
It Is Bacchus only can delight,
And still preserve the Appetite;
Often may he then my throat supply,
With constant floods to keep it dry.
SONG.
FAir Cloris in a gentle slumber lay,
Sleep taking rest,
In her calm breast.
Whilst her veiled eyes seem to eclipse the day.
The wanton Sun
Would court her fain,
Peep't here and there,
But all in vain.
The leafie bows a guard had made,
Planting between their envious shade;
Whereat he chid his idle beams, that he
Should want an eye whereby himself might see.
A Song in Prison.
I Am no captive, I, I find,
My soul still free and unconfined;
And though my body have the doom,
To be cag'd up in a close room;
Yet since my mind is guiltless, this
No bondage, nor no thraldom is.
Let such for captives truly go,
Whose guilty souls do make them so;
When numerous crimes linked and combined:
Like pondrous chains fetter the mind:
When thoughts are black and gloomy, this
True bondage, and true thraldom is.
But when a spotless Innocence
Shall witness that no foul offense,
But Loyalty unto my King
Caused my restraint; who will not bring
A testimony straight, that this
No bondage nor no thraldonme is.
SONG.
YOu silly mortals that address,
With more devotion then success,
Your wishes to some powerless gods,
To gain their love, or shun their rods,
Be ruled by me, and I Will be bold,
To lay the Devil to a groat,
That you shall prosper in your vote,
Worship no god but gold.
(Chor.)
Gold, Gold, O behold,
Thou delight and the cheer
Of the sight and the ear;
We Will thy power adore,
And thy favor implore;
Angels from thee have Wings to touch
The lofty stars, O grant us such,
That to Heaven we may sore;
Hell's only for the poor.
2.
The power of Jove that is held so big,
Compared to Gold's, not worth a fig;
His thundering godhead strength did lack
To lay weak Danae on her back;
She against all assaults did hold,
Her Virgin fort, until there came
A shower of gold to storm the same.
The God of Power is Gold:
(Chor.)
Gold, Gold, O behold, etc.
3.
Cupid, the Active god of Love,
Who often has triumph't over Jove,
Could never yet subdue a heart,
But when he used a golden dart;
And Ladies now that seem most cold
When amorous youth for favor begs,
Open a rich purse, will open their legs.
The god of Love is Gold;
(Chor.)
Gold, Gold, O behold, etc.
4.
In vain for help the Soldier goes,
To blustering Mars against his foes;
All he can does not worth a doyt,
If Gold be not in the exployt.
'Twas by the Oracle once told,
He that his foe will overthrow,
With Gold not Steel, must strike the blow:
The god of War is Gold.
(Chor.)
Gold, Gold, O behold, etc.
5.
Kings that aw Nations with their frowns,
Are made so by their golden Crowns;
And subjects often we see give over
Their duty, when their Prince grow's poor;
The gods themselves we should behold,
If Gold inflame not Piety,
Would without Priests and Altars be,
A God of gods is Gold.
(Chor.)
Gold, Gold, O behold, etc.
6.
Would you be noble? Gold's the thing,
Can make you cozen to a King.
Or grave and wife? it is in its power
To make you privy Counselor,
All doubtful strifes be can unfold;
And whither it the juster cause
Determined oftener then the Laws:
The God of Judgment's Gold,
(Chor.)
Gold, Gold, O behold, etc.
7.
It Is want of Gold does cause all ill,
And makes men steal, defraud and kill,
And th'costly sins they cannot Act
They envy, and more guilt contract:
But such as store of treasure hold,
Do eat and drink and play fine pranks,
They kiss their Wench, and give God thanks,
The God of virtue's Gold.
(Chor.)
Gold, Gold, O behold, etc.
8.
Then you that seek a pleasant life,
For Gold, make sale of Friend or wife;
Shift all Lands and Religions too,
Till Gold vouchsafe to dwell with you.
But if he still himself withhold,
And there remain no farther hope,
Betake your selves unto a rope,
Hang they can get no Gold.
(Chor.)
Gold, Gold, O behold,
Thou delight, and the cheer,
Of the sight and the ear,
We Will thy power adore,
And thy favor implore,
Angels from thee have wings to touch
The lofty stars, O grant us such,
That to Heaven we may sore:
Hell's only for the poor.
SONG.
NOw fie upon the Peevish Sect
Of virtuous handsome Women,
Who when they are wooed to sport, object
Honor and Heaven unto men.
The Attributes of Chaste and Cold
Become the ugly and the old;
But she whose face is fair, her mind
May best adorn, by being kind.
The cruel Beauty does prevent,
And frustrate Natures end;
Or is a loathed Instrument,
To plague men that offend.
All fruits, their sweetness have to feast
The taste; And when they do it, are blessed:
But that is accursed, that does invite
And Tantalize the Appetite.
Did the Celestial Lamps alone
Without an influence,
Appear but to be gazed upon,
They Would gain small honor thence;
They Are nor adored for their bright show,
But 'cause they warm and mix below,
So heavenly Beauties both inspire
With wonder, and content desire.
And may (my Sylvia) thine prove such,
Thus being admit'd by me;
Let me enjoy it now as much,
And I will worship thee.
Now quickly say, if I must be
Thy Martyr, or thy Votary:
For thou to me can prove no less,
Then either Saint or Murderesse.
The Compounders Song.
1.
COme Drawers, some Wine,
Or we will pull down your sign;
For we are all joval Compounders.
We Will make the house ring
With healths to the King,
And confusion unto his confounders.
2.
Since Goldsmiths Committee
Affords us no pity,
Our sorrows in Wine we will steep 'm;
They forced us to take
Two Oaths, and we make
A third, that we never mean to keep 'm.
3.
And first, who e're see's,
We Will drink on our knees,
To The King; may they choke that repine:
A fig for the Traitors
That look to his waters,
They Have nothing to do with our Wine.
4.
And next here is a Cup
To the Queen; fill it up,
Were poison we would make an end on it,
May Charles and she meet,
And tread under feet
Both Anabaptist and Independent.
5.
To the Prince and all others
His Sisters and Brothers,
As low in condition as highborn;
We drink this and pray,
That shortly they may
See all those that wrong them at Tyborn.
6.
And now here is three bowls,
To all gallant souls,
That for the King did, and will venture;
May they flourish when those
Who are his and their foes
Are damned and ram'd down to the Center.
7.
And last let a glass
To our Undoers pass,
Attended with two or three curses;
May plagues sent from hell
Stuff their bodies as well
As Cavaliers Coin does their purses.
8.
May the Canibals of Pym
Eat them up lymb by lymb,
Or a fever scorch 'em to Embers;
Pox keep 'em in bed
Until they are dead,
Or compound for the loss of their members.
9.
And may they be found
In naught to abound,
But heavens and their Countries anger;
May they never want factions,
Doubts, fears and distractions,
Till the Gallow tree takes them from danger
Rotundos.
ONce I a curious eye did fix
to observe the tricks
Of the Schismatics of the times,
To find out which of them
Was the merriest theme,
And best would befit my rimes.
Arminians I found solid,
Socinians were not stolid;
Much learning for Papists did stickle:
But ah ha ha ha ha ha ha, Rotundos Rot.
ah, ha ha ha ha ha ha, Rotundos Rot.
It Is you that my Spleen does tickle.
And first, to tell must not be forgot
How I once did trot
With a great Zealot to a Lecture,
Where I a Tub did view,
Hung with apron blew,
'Twas the preachers as I conjecture:
His use and doctrine too,
Were of no other hue,
Though he spoke with a tone most mickle
But ah ha ha, etc.
He taught amongst other pretty things,
That the Book of Kings
Small benefit brings to the godly,
Beside he had some grudges
At the book of Judges,
And talked of Leviticus odly;
Wisodm most of all,
He declares Apocriphall,
Beat Bell and the Dragon, like Michael.
But ab, ha ha, etc.
Against humane Learning next he enveys,
And most boldy says,
It Is that which destroys Inspiration;
Let superstitious sense,
And wit be banished hence.
With Popish premeditation;
Cut Bishops down in haste,
And Cathedralls as fast
As corn that is fit for the syckle.
But ah, ha, etc.
I heard one say, if her knee he did touch,
He could tell thus much,
If a sister did crouch at Communion,
Then thrusting up his hand,
He never made a stand,
Till he came where her fork had union;
But she without all terror,
Beleiving 'twas an error,
Did laugh while her tears down trickl'd.
But ah, ha, etc.
Oh then her Spleen he tickled.
Indeed quoth she with much modesty,
Good brother you be
Of a certainty much too high,
O, no, no, no, quoth he,
Is not thy knee
At the upper end of thy thigh?
And now I find by handing,
That thou will take it standing,
Of me thine own sweet mickle.
But ah, ha
O then her spleen he would tickle.
Their teachers like to wild Asses wince,
At their Sovereign Prince;
And I heard (not long since) one demanding,
If there must needs be one,
Might not I fit a throne,
As well as the tub that I stand in;
And how well would a Crown
Sit on my head so rown,
But we will have no man so mickle.
But ah, ha ha, etc.
If once they get a seditious hint,
It must out in Print,
Though there is matter in it to o'return all;
And if they write in meeter,
They think there is nothing sweeter,
Unless it be old Tom Sternhold;
Their Papers will serve those
That have need to pick a rose,
Or else too good for the pickle.
But ah ha, etc.
Thus they will never leave off to palter,
Till at last a halter
Does the case quite alter with such men;
They Will wish they would never forgon
The old Religion,
And learned a new of the Dutchmen:
They Will surely constant be,
When to the triple-tree
They Are tied, be they now never so fickle.
But ah, ha, etc.
Oh then my Spleen you will tickle.
God bless the King, and Queen also,
And Yorks Duke too,
And the other three more, with the Captain,
May all their treacherous friends,
And their foes miss their ends,
And their own devices be trap't in:
And may our noble Charles find
Rebels never more perilous
Then Herrings that lie in the pickle.
But ah ha etc.
O then my, etc.
ZEAL OVERHEATED, Or A Relation of a lamentable fire which happened in Oxford,
in a Religious Brothers Shop, who though he labored in all men's vocations, yet
were his trades fewer then his tricks to fetch over the wicked, that he might
afford the godly a better pennyworth.
To the Tune of Chivey-Chase.
1.
ATtend ye Brethren every one,
And listen with a pair
Of swaggring ears that have out-grown
By many an inch the hair.
2.
Of Popish flames I will relate
To you a dismal story,
Which turned a Zealots Shop of late
Into a Purgatory.
3.
There dwells in Oxford near the place
Where holy Cornish teaches,
One that in all trades had such grace,
The wicked he over-reaches.
4.
This Brother first a stoic was,
Peripateticall;
For about the world as he did pass,
His wealth he carried all.
5.
But when his sin had made his pack
Too heavy for his Shoulder,
I'th'foresaid place he eased his back,
And turned a stayed householder.
6.
In all vocations by and by
He grew so great a meddler,
That though The Exchange his Shop stood nigh'
You Would take him for no Peddler.
7.
By slight of tongue he could fetch over
All sparks that came unto him,
Except those which two nights before
Christide were like to undo him.
8.
When he to sleep himself had set,
And dreamed of no worse fires
Then those his zeal, and's little peat
Kindled in his desires.
9.
He heard some cry fire, fire, amain,
And say that he was slack;
Great John of all trades would again
Be brought to his first Pack.
10.
Then hasting down to see what burned,
The smoke his breath did stop,
Alas, his new Exchange was turned
To a Tobacco shop.
11.
His wife came too at the report,
Her clothes hung in such pickle,
As she had new come from the sport,
After a Conventickle.
The second part.
12.
And first in these sad flames she spied
A spruce Geneva Bible,
With gilded leaves and strings beside,
That were not contemptible.
13.
But with less grief he could have seen't
(As he then said to some one)
Had but the Apocripha been in it,
And Prayers that we call common.
14.
The Practice there of Piety,
And good St. Kathrine Stubs
Were Martyrs, which often quoted he
Had heard in several tubbs.
15.
Then being of his Dods bereft,
And Cleavers all and some,
You may presume that there was left,
Of Comforts never a crum.
16.
A Chest of Cambrick and Holland
Was turned to a box of tinder,
His Virgin Tapers out were brand,
The Extinguishers could not hinder.
17.
They that his Taffaties did see
And various Ribbons, strait
Concluded that in burnt silk he
Was largely worth his weight.
18.
Of smoking Canes there lay great store,
His eyes had soon espied them,
They never were truly fired befoe,
As he had often belied them.
19.
His hobby horses erst so tame
Small babes of grace might run
A race upon them, now became
Hot as the steeds in the Sun.
20.
Mirrours and perspectives then might
Be burning Glasses called;
The Fever was so hot that night,
That Perriwiggs grew balde.
21.
Then moustraps, fly flaps, and whole shelves
Of whipps, with others some
Such fatal instruments, themselves
Suffr'd a Martyrdom.
22.
And to conclude, the flame being done,
Some that were there did swear,
Though Christmas was not yet begun,
That 'twas Ashwednesday there.
23.
Dear Brethren then be not so hot:
For if unto your harm,
Your zeal like this take fire, I wot,
You Will wish you were lukewarm.
24.
God bless this Land, and keep it Aye
Against all that oppose:
And let the Supreme head bear sway
in stead of the Supreme nose.
Another. The price of Annarchie.
To the tune of Mad Tom.
ALL you that would no longer
To a Monarch be subjected,
Come away to Guildhall,
And be there liberal,
Your wish shall be effected.
(Chor.)
Come, come away, bring your gold, bring your Jewels*
Your silver shaped or molten;
If the King you would have down,
And advance to the Crown
Five Members and Kimbolton.
2.
Regard no Proclamations,
They Are subjects fit to jest on:
Harry Esling's far
Better then C. R.
It Is resolved upon the question.
(Chor.)
Come, come away, bring, etc.
3.
Ye Aldermen first send in
Your Chains upon these Summons,
To buy ropes ends
For all the Kings friends,
They are Traitors against the Commons.
(Chor.)
Come, come away, bring, etc.
4.
Your Basins large, and Ewres
Unto this use allot 'em;
If e're you mean
Your hands to wash clean
From the sins by which you got 'm.
(Chor.)
Come, come away, etc.
5.
Send in your Cann's and Goblets,
Ye Citizens confiding;
And think not scorn
To drink in a horn
Of your own wives providing.
(Chor.)
Come, come away, etc.
6.
Ye Brethren strong and lusty,
The Sisters exercise ye;
Get babes of grace,
And spoons apace,
Both Houses do advise ye.
(Chor.)
Come, come away, etc.
7.
Your Gold and Silver Bodkin,
The Parliament would ha'both;
Which often does make
A louse for to take
A journey upon the Sabbath.
(Chor.)
Come, come, etc.
8.
You that have store of money
Bring'thither, and be thrifty;
If the Parliament thrive,
'Twill so contrive,
You Will have back four of fifty.
(Chor.)
Come, come away, etc.
9.
Let the Religious Seamstresse
Her silver Thymble bring here;
'Twill be a fine thing
In deposing a King,
To say you had a finger.
(Chor.)
Come, come away, etc.
10.
Your Child's decayed whistle
May here obtain admittance;
Nor shall that cost
Be utterly lost,
You Will have for it an Acquittance.
(Chor.)
Come, come away, etc.
11.
If when the business ends
Your Plate you would recover,
Be sure you may
The chief heads that day
On the Bridge or Tower discover.
(Chor.)
Come, come away, bring your gold, bring your jewels,
Your silver shaped or molten;
If the King you would ha'down,
And advance to the Crown
Five Members and Kimbolton.
Another, In Defense of Women.
1.
FUll many a Ballad has been made,
and railing Poem writ
Against poor Women, as if they had
of goodness never a whit.
But I Will prove it in spite of any man's nose,
That e're writ against them in verse or in prose,
That some women are good: A hard task I have chose,
And will ask a great deal of wit.
2.
(...) young man once had got a fine less
he loved above all other,
Who for his sake did swear by the Mass,
she would leave both father and mother.
But when sh'ad got Rings and Gloves many a pair,
She quarrelld and kicked him down the stair;
(...) not this Girl good? To draw in an Heir
And make a younger Brother.
3.
There is a poor friend of mine that is wed
to one who every stitch
Cries out she never had come to his bed,
had it not been for some witch:
She claw's his face like any wild cat,
And his eyes till he see no more then a bat;
This Woman is excellent good (that is flat)
To cure a man of the Itch.
4.
Some Women there are who will not, all night,
permit you to take any sleep,
To cure their itching appetite
will make you not able to Creep.
They Will rise about noon, put on their gay cloth
And away to a feast how e're the world goe^
Such women are wondrous good (God know^
To hang, but not to keep.
5.
A Woman I know that cannot endure
to eat unless by stealth;
Her self in her closet she will immure,
and say, It Is for her health.
The Plover and Partridge is all her diet,
Her husband eats beef when he can come by
I Will maintain she is good (who ever deny it
To none but to her self.
6.
Some are in Religion very profound,
and for the Gospel stickle;
They Will suddenly bring the Pope to the ground
though now he be never so mickle.
He Will as soon he laid on his back, they never fe^^
As themselves when the brothers are moved by the spirit;
They are heavenly good at the sport (I dare swear it)
After a Conventickle.
7.
There is a sort whose freedome's such,
you will think you have got a treasure,
Their naked arms and breasts you may touch,
and kiss them without measure.
But when to be at the main stake you put in,
They Will not do it to shame themselves and their Kin;
They Are good -- to draw on you the guilt of the sin,
And bar you of the pleasure.
8.
Some so affect so be in fame,
pure and immaculate,
That if they hear but Cupid's name
they are displeased thereat.
If you touch but their hand, you have a pish and a fie,
But offer to kiss, and for help they will cry;
These Women are purely good, -- say I,
The Lord he knows for what.
9.
The last I Will commend are high coming Lasses
that all subjection scorn;
If their husbands displease'em they are in sad cases
they'ad better lead on a forlorn;
But take a good cudgel to cure all this,
And apply't to their sides till you make them pi^^
You Will find that such Women are not much (...)
To breath a man well in a morn.
10.
Now if any Poet can give more praise
then I have done to smocks,
With all my heart he shall wear the Bays,
and I will sit in the stocks:
Or if there be any will yet be so stout,
As to say they are all naught, we will not f^ o^
For to tell you the troth, I went about,
To maintain a Paradox.
A LETANY. Upon Occasion of a Journey to Bath.
1.
FRom going to Bath with little money in my purse;
From staying there after all is spent, which is worse,
And from a drawers visit when I am ready to horse.
Good Mercury defend me.
2.
From an old German Quack yclipp'd Doctor Bavie,
Whose skill is not half so much as his knavery,
And ten to one will rather kill'ee then save'ee,
Good Mercury defend me.
3.
From his Purges and Vomits, his Powders and Jellie,
With more fot's own good then yours he does sell'ee,
And from meddling with the Tapsters wife with a great belly.
Good Mercury, etc.
4.
From Ladies that take Physic before they be sick;
That they may with better metal answer the (.),
Who copulate thrice a night, yet call 't a lewd trick,
Good Mercury, etc.
5.
From such as in Bath use to sing a Hymn,
From a Barber that on Sunday mornings refuses to trim,
From living a Traitor, and dying like Pym
Good Mercury, etc.
6.
From a Preacher that is as fat as the Bull Basan,
And bellows out such Doctrines as would amaze one,
From his Font of pewter, and his face that is brazen
Good Mercury, etc.
7.
From his thanks to God for saving in Childbed pain,
A woman that is from a Church a mile off or twain,
And perhaps preparing for the same Business again,
Good Mercury, etc.
8.
From a Colonel that vapors as if he were Mars,
Yet will take a blow on the face, and a kick on the arse,
And so suffers more in Peace then he did in the Wars
Good Mercury, etc.
9
From a Captain that keeps a horrible stir,
And when he is called Rascal, cries, Your servant Sir,
That will challenge a Mastiff, and not fight with a Cur,
Good Mercury, etc.
10
From an Hostis that reckons the same thing again,
And brings in the same Items to several men;
And from such as call to pay before it be ten
Good Mercury, etc.
11
From a rainy day when I have never a Cloak,
From foul ways when I ride in boots that do soak,
And from a Town without drink when I am ready to choke
Good Mercury, etc.
12
From a stone horse that is right and sound limb and wind
Yet tires and leaves a fair Lady behind;
And from an Inn where I Am forced to take such as I find,
Good Mercury defend me.
13.
From uncivil Creditors that threaten to sue me;
From gaping after Wealth which will never come to me;
And from being a Poet, for that will undo me,
Good Mercury defend me.
Cupidinis Cestrensis Calentura.
YOur pardon Cupid, I Will not love a jot,
This Climate is too hot;
Under Loves Equinoctial here we are
Just perpendicular,
Where flames in downright doing must be drenched
Or they will n'ere be quenched:
Talk of a Love that only mixes souls,
And the itch of flesh controuls,
That into hot embraces loathes to melt.
The Ladies swear you are gelt:
And vow had Plato taught here, th'Eunuch then
Should have been stoned again.
It is not a rich fancy, nor quick wit,
Nor Courtly phrase can fit;
From Lute and voice let skilful accents flow,
They Will call for Bobbing-Jo.
But bring smooth faces and good promising backs,
The only modish knacks;
I Will warrant them your own without more stir,
Or if they do demur;
How you are yarded both in flesh and Land
Is all on which they stand.
Hence it is, that Hymen's here so often invoked
That we are almost choked
With constellations of Links. Sure this
Town is no Gods but his;
Men that before had vowed a Covenant
To Mars, do here recant,
And sell the honor they might gain by fights
For soft and vain delights.
Our Cyprian Ladies here do triumph still,
Conquer abroad who will.
The dearth of men dame Shipton prophesi'd,
They safely may deride.
For sure I think they could (were all men gone)
Keep up the sport alone;
Just as among themselves when men they miss
They use to dance and kiss.
Let none misconster me, I tax not all,
A parcel's good, though small;
There are some witty fair ones in the place,
Adorned with every Grace;
Such as conform to modest Venus Laws,
Worthy of all applause,
When I acknowledge this, who will blame my muse,
And say she does abuse?
For to her self who ever shall apply't,
Trust me, I Will not deny't.
But such as against my Verse complaints do make,
And cry my Ink's too black,
That coat of shame on their own persons draw,
Which I but stuffed with straw.
To certain Prisoners, who had appointed a Drinking-Match.
BRavely resolved: you mean the world shall see
You have not yet lost all your liberty;
You Are but restrained from Virtue, you have still
An unconfined freedom to do ill.
Cannot you be mad by chance, but it must be
Consulted and resolved to a decree?
It Is crime enough to be o'reta'ne with Wine,
But to be drunk with purpose and design
Admits no pardon: yet with such delight
And pomp you act it, as you would merit by it.
Reclaim for Heavens sake, drink no longer then,
You may forget you are prisoners, not men;
Know you are amongst your foes, who will joy to see
Your crimes as much as your captivity,
And thence become more confident and bold
Then from their Pulpets, Almanacks and Gold;
For it is too good a Logic which infers,
Slaves unto so much vice, must needs be theirs.
But (Sirs) I not admire your strange delight
To drink so much, as how you can come by it;
I know your pockets have a long time been
Empty, and free for th'Fiend to frisk therein,
And amongst your friends, though you are dry at the heart
Your Credits would not pass for one poor quart:
Have foes more faith, or have you lighted on
A more confiding generation?
Make use on it; yet remember well this thing,
Though now you drink without a reckoning,
The time may come, when after there shall be
Exchanges to procure your liberty,
That you again may prisoners become
TO imprimis, item, and the total sum;
Take heed lest then with pensive hearts you pack
To the Brick-building; trust me there is no Sack.
But friends, I wish that what I Have said unto ye
May a prevention prove, not Prophecy.
I Will visit you e're many Suns do shine,
And if in the numerous Deluges of Wine
All Grace be not already wracked and sunk,
I Will work you sober, or my self well drunk.
To Sir E. L. at LONDON.
GOod Sir, to you for your kind Letter
I think my self much more a Debtor
Then you or I are to Tom Dennis,
To whom we owe both Pounds and pennies,
For you therein much love express
Both in your Sack and soberness
When rich Canary warmes your blood,
And you begin to chew the cud
Of Loyalty, and boldly swear
You Will live and dye a Cavalier*
When all sad thoughts as fast do quit'ee,
As poor Malignants do the City,
When some loud thundering Ordinance rings
From the first and second house of Kings.
When Charles and Mary have gone round,
And some great men who still prove sound;
And when to the three Country Lasses
You Have sacrificed as many glasses,
Then you, I find, with Wine that sparkles
Much like a fire made of Char-coles,
Cry Sirs, a health, if such your leave is,
To honest Dick; Let come, quoth Bevis;
Quoth Uncle Will, I Will not forgo it
For truly Dick's a pretty Poet;
And yet me thinks, what er's the matter,
For's poverty he might be better.
True, (quoth my friend) but you know he
Has a worse fault then is Poetry,
Which makes his fortunes go awry all,
That is, he is honest still, and Loyal.
To this your Love (Sirs) I yield store
Of thanks, but admiration more,
That Wine, which makes men's thoughts aspire
As high as Phaetons, or higher,
Should give you such humility
As to descend to think of me.
But then (Sir) when you are out of drink,
And call for paper, pen, and Ink,
And write to your own Lady Nannie,
And the other two, who next of any
You best affect, and to Sir Trevor,
That you should think of poor Dick Lravor,
And send him too a large Epistle,
Believe me, Sir, it makes me bristle,
And fancy straight (or I Am a Varlet)
My old freiz Jump is Plush or Scarlet,
And that I am as spick and span
All over as a Committee-man:
But I do fear I am too long,
And injure much the pressing throng
Of businesses, which will not leave you
To come and kiss, and play with Nephew.
Farewell then, only let me say over
A word or two in form of Prayer:
God send you soon free from the thral
And tyranny of Goldsmiths Hall;
That Gulf of all the Kingdoms store,
That grave of Treasure, which is more
Insatiate then a Whore that is bold,
Or Tophet that is ordained of old.
Where men must give more then the widow
(Praised in the Text for bounty) did do;
For she bestowed there no more pelf.
Then what belonged unto her self;
But here men are constrained to undo
Themselves, their wives and children too;
Nay more, this place wants not a plot
To swallow Infants e're they are got.
Now were some upright Judge found out
I Would wish him to decide this doubt
Of Lunsford, and of Goldsmiths Hall,
Which was the greatest Cannibal;
For Lunsford never, I Will be sworn,
Devoured a Child that was unborn.
Heaven, Sir, at length will set you free,
Mean time let this your comfort be,
That all men now must there be waiters,
But Loyal Beggars and false Traitors.
All that are here, wives, maids and men,
And Jack that snores from ten to ten,
Wish you as well as e're they can do,
And so does Trig, and Boy, and Quando;
But none like him who will be ever
Sir, your true servant, Richard Leavor.
Pray Sir, be so much my engager,
As to commend me to the Major,
My friend the Esquire, and all you see,
That love the King, and you, and me.
Sir George, and Jack who will not cog,
Your Uncle Powel, and I quoth Dog,
Do oftimes drink your health in U'sk
Till heads grow light, and evenings dusk.
Upon the Shrewsbury Committie, canvass'd by Mitton, in Election of Knight of
the Shire, An. 1646.
SHame to your Tribe, have you State Jesuits
Of the Salopian Conclave lost your wits?
How comes it (Sirs) that one man, and he too
No fine Text-marring man o'th Law, like you,
Out-quirks your Honors thus? whom we looked on
As Machiavels of Reformation,
Whose close and intricate designs we doubt,
Heaven, minded to prevent, could scarce track out;
And at whose counsels Satan stands by,
Not to instruct in craft, but edify.
You bragged to come with such a blustering train,
Should make your (Flood) out-noise the troubled main
And strike the emulous party deaf, as such
Who dwell where Nilus Cat'racts roar so much:
Yet Mitton, who was then indeed, as far
Short of your suffrages as your selves are
Of his small merits, struck you all as mute
As Charletons dearly loved fish, the Trout:
And wrapping you like fools in Canvass thus,
Exposes you to Cavaliers, and us
A copious scene of mirth, such as this age
Nere saw o'th'Fortune, or the Red-Bull Stage*
Some sour faced Lecturer of more Zeal then sense,
Would raise this comfortable Doctrine hence.
"That Mitton needs not fear the wiles and powers
"Of Pope nor Devil, since h'as conquered yours.
But why your Armed men? came they to see
That Votes in the Election might go free?
Faith, if they had, the work had been more short,
The Sheriff needed not to adjourn the Court;
For of the multitudes you brought, for one
Loved you, ten feared your Inquisition:
No, 'twas to keep that awe there, which your cursed
Wild Bulls of Sequestration gained you first,
You brought'm not to fight, yet on my word,
Clive, till he broak it, was man o'th'sword,
And may, for an adventure done of late,
Be called the Giganto-machist o'th'State;
Once he encountered with a Cavalier,
Big as a Mountain, or as his own fear,
Which all his faith could not remove, though th'man
Be known to be a Solifidian:
Yet having prayed, he nimbly charged his foe,
Nor gave him leisure to return one blow,
But hacks on, till the Giant by some spell
Became a gate-post; was it not wondrous well?
Yet here he leaves him not, but hews a main,
Till his good sword at length broke short in twain.
But had it held, h'ad beat the post that day
Into a man again, and ran away.
Were you not all thus brave, when gallantly
You sang a hymn, and stormed Oswaldstrey?
But why was not that desperate courage shown,
When the bold enemy was in the Town?
'Twas then, Go on brave Mitton, fight for Christ
And's Gospel, our Devotion shall assist;
So by the assistance of the Heavenly Powers
He took't for Gods cause, now must leav't for yours.
So toiles the Badger till the hole be fit,
Then comes the Fox and stinks him out of it.
For these your high deserts let each man's wish
Be as he fancies: mine shall be but this,
That for your sakes both Houses would think fit
An Order pass to sequester the wit
Of that bold Satyrist, who so did knot
His Verse, to lash our honest brother Scot,
That now the smart often puts him to a pawse
Whether or no he shall forsake the Cause.
When you have been so jerk't, I know you will thence
Grow honest, and so poor by consequence.
A DIALOGUE Betwixt a CAVALIER and a LADY, Upon Occasion of a sudden Alarm in
the night.
Lady. DEar, prethy stay, why do thou haste
As if this Trumpet were the last,
And called thee from the grave: I doubt,
Ah me, it rather calls thee to it.

Cavalier Fear not, sweet Nymph, it bids me go
And give that fate unto the foe,
And teach his insolence what it is
Thus to disturb a Lovers bliss.

Lady. But see it is dark, and Mars r'th'night,
Unless with Venus, will not fight;
Believe it. Dear, no enemy
So fit to combat now, as I,
Here strive till morn, and it shall be
Good omen, first to conquer me.

Cavalier. No, I Will reserve that sweet Defeat
To crown, and make the rest complete:
When I have spent much blood before,
Here 'twil refresh to spend yet more.

Lady. Yet e're you go, dispatch my pain,
Leave not a Maidenhead half slain.
Dear make an other pass.

Cav. No more:
The God which Soldiers most adore,
Great Honor, bids me use my might,
For Reputation first, and then delight.

(Chor.) Tyranny Honor makes the brave
And noblest mind the greatest slave,
Where ever he commands, we go,
And leave our dearest friend to meet a foe.

To a Lady, who promised him a Winding Sheet.
MAdam, I thank your bounty, which thinks fit
To send me in clean linen to the pit.
Well, when my brace of shirts are worn out, which
Can last but three months, though I escape the Itch,
And shift but once a fortnight: I Will no more
For Dowlass and course Holland run of the score,
They are no lasting Ware, for I do still
Give'em to the Tinder-box or Paper-mill,
Or to my Landress, against her Cradle goes,
Long time e're I have paid for them (God knows:)
And what is worse, I do not know, I swear,
Whether my shirts or credit are more sear;
Oaths steeped in Ale and Wine cannot invite
The stony-hearted Mercer now to write,
Though 'twere from lice to save me, and diseases,
Item, for six else more --, even what he pleases:
No, my dear Madam, my recourse shall be
For linen henceforth to your Charity,
Which I may easily gain, I need but dye,
And you will shirt me to eternity.
To Jean of Chippen-Norton.
TEll me no more that Chastity
amongst Vestals did reside,
Or that in Cells or Cloisters she
does chiefly now abide:
Where Vows make chaste, it may be sed
An Oath is rather kept, then Maidenhead.
They that with bolted doors and spies,
from temptings are secured,
Or in their own deformities
more safely are immured:
Such Virgins rather may be sed
Not to have lost, then kept their Maidenhead.
Give me a Girl whom Gold does woo,
fit time and place allure,
That from her own warm temper too
Temptations does endure;
If she stand firm, it may be sed,
That she has truly kept her Maidenhead.
The praise (sweet Jean) to be thus chaste
has long been due to thee,
But what was Virtue yet at last
may prove necessity:
Resign it then e're it be sed
That thou have too long kept thy Maidenhead.
On the ARCHBISHOP of YORK'S Revolt.
SAy my young Sophister, what think of this
Chimera's real. Ergo Fallaris.
The Lamb and Tiger, Fox and Goose agree,
And here concorporate in one prodigy.
Call an Aruspex quickly, let him get
Sulpher and Torches, and a Laurel wet
To purify the place, but sure the harms
This Monster will produce, transcend his charms:
It Is Natures Masterpiece of Error this,
And rescues whatsoever she did amiss
Before; from wonder and reproach, this last
Legitimateth all her by-blowes past.
See a Geneva Metrapolitan,
An arch Prelatick Presbyterian,
A fierce blue apron'd Priest, a lawn sleev'd brother,
One leg the Pulpit holds, a Tub the other;
Lets give him a fit name now if we can,
And make the apostate once more Christian:
Proteus we cannot call him, he put on
His change of shapes by a succession:
Nor the Welsh Weathercock, for that we find
At once does only wait upon one wind.
These speak him not, but if you will name him right,
Call him Religion's Hermophradite:
His head i'th'Sanctified mould is cast,
Yet sticks the abominable Miter fast:
He still retains the Lordship and the Grace,
And yet h'as got a Reverend Elders place;
Such Arts must needs be his, who did devise
By crying Altars down, to sacrifice
To's private malice; where you might have seen
His conscience holocausted to his spleen.
Unhappy Church, the viper that did share
Thy chiefest Honors, helps to make thee bare,
And void of all thy dignity and store.
Alas, thine own Son proves the Forrest-Boar:
And like the dam-destroying Cuckoe, He
When the thick shel of's poor Welsh Pedigree,
By thy warm fostering bounty did divide,
And open, straight springs forth a Parricide.
As if 't were just, vengeance should be dispatched
On thee by th'Monster which thy self had hatched.
Despair not though, in Wales there may be got
As well as Lincolnshire an Antidote
Against the worst venom he can spit, though's head
Were changed from subtle gray, to poisonous red.
Heaven with propitious eyes will look upon
Our party, now the accursed Thing is gone,
And scourge the Rebels, who naught else did miss
To fill the measure of their sins, but His,
Whose foul unparalleled Apostasy
Like to his Sacred Character, shall be
Indelible; and's Infamy, with late
And happier ages, when impartial fate
A period to his days and sins shall give,
By some such Epitapth as this shall live.
Lo, here Yorks Metropolitan is laid,
Who Gods Anointed and the Church betrayed.
To the Isle of MAN. Upon Occasion of the Lord BYRON'S landing there.
HAil happy I Will, to whom the wind
And sea, are by their fury kind,
Whilst waves that threaten to turn over
Invade not, but protect the shore:
Thou that of late did only stand
As the Center of our Kings command,
But by hard fate art at this day
The whole circumference of his sway.
See a dear pledge of Loyalty,
The terror once of those whom he
Now shuns, brave Byron does repair
To pant in thy untaunted air.
Much has he toiled to hurt the foes,
Much to help friends as bad as those,
But of his Labors no one more
Has wearied him then giving over;
Yet to thy shore no griefs he brings,
No sad complaints o'th'state of things.
On what is lost, he will not lose
One word or thought, but rather choose
To search the means how to prevent
Our future hopes from like event:
His courage (though success withstood)
Like's cause, is still the same, still good.
Receive him then, and let him be
Welcome to thy good Lord and thee.
So may thy fertile Land and Seas
Abound in all things that may please
Great Derby and his highborn Spouse,
And make their loss less grievious,
Which only does perplex their mind,
Because their bounties thence confined.
May they soon cross the Seas to take
Their own, and vengeance; may they make
Their enemies as highly sad
And miserable as the are bad.
And may they come to thee (small spot)
For Recreation henceforth, not
For refuge. May thy rule persever
In this Land long, in this line ever.
The Isle of MAN.
FRom England, Scotland, Wales and Ireland,
By equal Leagues divided there does stand
An Isle in circuit not so great as fame,
To elder times known by Eubonia's name.
The Soil is not luxuriant nor ingrate,
Being neither Natures fondness nor her hate:
The Sugar canes, the Vine and Fig Tree there
No Natives are, nor strangers; but what e're
To sport man's nicer appetite is scant,
Comes there the price of what he cannot want;
Few ages since he that chief Rule did hold,
Was thence a King: the same power, but less bold,
In Title, whilst twelve Monarchs reigned,
Has in the Noble Stanlies blood remained.
But under none has it enjoyed a bliss
More eminent then it does under this,
Whose prudent care preserves it from the stain
Of foul Rebellion against its Sovereign.
And as in Swounings, life, when it is gone
From all parts else, stays in the heart alone:
So in this place, which, if to our Kings sway
You Will Members give, for its fit site, best may
Express the heart; still breathing you may see
All that is alive of his great Monarchy.
And though this Isle appear but as a Star
Of the least magnitude amongst those that are
In Charles his constellation, yet does she
Keep motion still in due conformity
To the Primum Mobile, nor is at all
Seduced or forced by the Eccentrical
Circumvolutions of the rest, but now
Does thence more regular and constant grow.
Just so a vigorous heat that closely is
Besieged by an Antiparistasis
Of hostile cold, conformes not to the same,
But still grows more it self, and turns to flame;
Nor has the King alone his old and due
Observance here, but even the Kings King too.
Religious duties; which in other Lands
Are cast by the wanton strife of tongues and hands
In new prodigious moulds, do in this place
Retain their Prim'tive comeliness and Grace;
Temples are Houses here (and they alone)
Of public Worship and Devotion,
And such at the Altar wait as are endu'd
With Science, and are called to it, not intrude.
So that sound Doctrine, clad in a rich sense
Flows from their Pulpits, which with Reverence
The people heard, and to this giving due
Respect, a thousand blessings more ensue.
The Husbandman buryes his seed 'th'out fear
O'th'Sequestrators sickle, nor does e're
Doubt who shall share the Flock, or milk the Kine
He fosters, or shall eat the fruit of's Vine:
(For though that Plant springs not in this cold clay,
Yet where so fat a Peace dwells, we may say,
(With Reverence to the Sacred Page) that now
Grapes upon thorns, and figs on thistles grow.)
Wives moan not their fled Husbands, who t'eschew
Their enemies, forsake their best friends too:
Their pregnant wombs by Times due Midwifry,
Not by affrights or griefs, disburdned be,
And their maturer Issues there escape
The barbarous Soldiers sword and Lustful rape.
But that which does most happiness afford,
Is the loved presence of their noble Lord
And Lady, not more eminent in blood
Then Virtue, and their Pledges fair and good.
That spot, alas, is now their whole estate,
Which was but an Appendix to it of late;
Swelling great Derby's Title, more then is Rent.
But 'twas by Providence that he was sent
From's Richer Territories, there to be
The refuge of distressed Loyalty,
Where now the good he does with what remains,
Comforts the unequal losses he sustains:
His sufferings he surveyes, as they express
His Loyalty, not his unhappiness.
And may not they nor th'time be long till's eyes
See his good deeds, his wrongs, and enemies
Fully requited; and in the intrim
May this small part of his Kings sway, by him
Be still preserved, as it is now, in fit
Obedience, till the rest conform to it.
AN EPITAPH ON Major OWEN And Captain EDWARD WIN.
REader, prepare thy eyes, I stand
Not to beg tears, but to command;
Which having read, if thou deny,
Thou art a verier stone then I.
Brothers by birth, and Twins since death,
At noon benighted, lodge beneath:
A Nobler pair no womb of clay
Shall bring forth at the last great day:
Their Lineage of good note, before
Commended them, and they it more.
Nature was of her gifts profuse,
For which they thanked her i'th'right use.
Souls sweetly tempered; bodies meant
To show men's shape most excellent;
Valor and Innoncence conjoined,
Height and humility of mind.
Faith to the Cause they chose, and friends
Served by them 'hout self-serving ends,
Indeer'd them to their Countries chief
Affection first, then to its geief.
Snatched hence in their most vigorous age,
By hostile sword and Fevers rage,
And then --. But Reader I Will give over;
Thy tears will let thee read no more,
To Capt. Segkar at B. sick of a Fever.
DEar Segkar, thy Disease which I before
So much lamented, now I envy more,
And praise the blessed distemper of thy blood,
Which makes thee happier then thy healthier could.
For say, who would not gladly entertain
A several Fever into every vain,
And take all Etna in his breast, might he
Be fair Francisca's Patient, like thee?
Who'd not be rather laid in thy sick bed,
Which is by her so often visited,
Then the most soft and wanton Down invade,
Where some fair melting Bride does lie displaid?
When she comes near the Bed, say, Do not find
More inward Joy and pleasure in thy mind
Then torment in thy sense? when she, to try
The dancing of thy pulses does apply
Her curious hand to thine, do not forget
(Inspired with happier flames) thy Fevers heat?
Complain not that thine eyes have lost the grace
Of motion, thou may fix them on her face;
Nor that thy looks are pale and meager; she,
'Cause they are so, so often does look on thee.
The Romans once a Fever did adore,
Lest it should hurt them; oughtst not thou much more
To consecrate thy sickness, which to thee
Is Author of so much felicity?
I dare not wish thee health, for that I guess
Would be to deprecate thy happiness:
Nor do I think it a blessing now, for know
I Am sick my self, because I am not so.
On MAURICIA'S Wound which she received from a Roundhead.
IT was when Traitors in the Text, did pass
For worthy Patriots in the Paraphrase,
And when 'twas voted Loyalty to fight
Against the King because he ruled by right,
That lo a cursed Rebellious crew, whose shame
Was lost with their allegiance; rudely came
And robbed the fair Mauricia and her mate,
Who does upon the Sacred Altar wait.
Slaves, did you not Divinity epsy
In his high function, and in her bright eye?
And could not this work on your stupid sense,
Nor that upon your feared conscience?
Me thinks the Holy and the fair might be
Secure from your State Licensed Thievery.
Reformed Justice might pass such a pair
And their Malignant Innocence spare,
But'las, who can expect Mercy from such,
Whose own sins have transcended it so much?
Rapine is scarce a Crime to hands that dare
Against Majesty advance the sword of War:
And now the villains here are bent upon
A fact, may vie guilt with Rebellion;
They make the naked Priest and woman feel
The sharp edge of the armed Soldiers steel:
Though Sex and Office render them unfit
To use the sword, they now must suffer it:
And had not some, who thirsted more for gain
Then blood, advised he should be Prisoner taken,
And not be made their Murder but their prize,
The Priest himself had been a Sacrifice.
Mean time, some barbarous wretch, who surely had
First in his parents bowels sheathed his blade,
And ripped up pregnant wombs, thence to contract
A hellish courage to perform this fact,
Made on Mauricia's head, through flesh and bone
With Warlike Weapon such incision,
That shapes without the 'ernal Organs aid
Might to her inward senses be conveyed:
A crimson torrent followed the stroke,
As water when the Prophet smote the Rock:
And that well tempered blood which often times had
Her cheeks in sweet becoming blushes clad,
Now stayneth them, her Vestments, and the ground,
But most of all, his soul that gave the wound:
Then part of her fair blush was massacred,
Each hair of which was worth a Roundheads head
And twice six bones, with more then Childbed pain
Were fet from the Ivory Cab'net of her brain.
Yet Heaven so pleased, nothing did thence proceed
Mortal: But all men's hatred of the deed
For which Roundheads themselves curse and condemn
The Author, as much as honest men do them.
How had the Firmament been decked with these
In The ancient time of Metamorphoses?
This lock had then aspired the keys, and wore
As many Stars as it did hearts before.
Blood then as well as milk had there been spread
To mark a path out for the Gods to tread,
And teach the morn to blush; then had these bones
Cashiered some monstrous constellations:
And for the Caytiffe there had fancied been
A plague in hell peculiar, as his sin.
But this high exemplary Loyalty
Shall in our Annals, not Romances be
Left for posterity to look upon,
Not for delight, but imitation;
And so secure Subjects allegiance more
Then the Evangelist sworn over and over.
And thus Mauricia by indulgent fate,
Even in her sufferings is made fortunate,
Succeeding Kings shall be her debtors hence,
And to her memory pay Reverence;
And present Majesty in its distress
May raise this comfort from her good success,
That though its wound be wide, and deep like hers,
And th'cure past good men's hopes and Rebels fears,
It may, like her too, at the length overcome
The danger, and survive its Martyrdom.
MAURICIA to a Lock of that Hair, sent to a Lady who requested it.
KNow little Lock, first from my head,
Now from my Cab'net banished.
That thou enjoyest a glorious fate,
And that a greater fame does wait
On thee, then all my hair beside:
Thou art their envy and their pride.
Thou fell'st not the approbrious sign
Of some disease or sin of mine,
Neither did thou, not felt at all,
By the friendly hand of Cisers, fall,
Clipped for some amorous device,
An incruental Sacrifice:
No, thou may boast that thy great doom
Did from the sword and Soldier come,
Which to my brain such passage made,
That if a second Pallas had
Been there, she might have issued thence
Without more torment to my sense,
Whilst from my head a stream did flow
Red as his sin who gave the blow.
Thus did thou fall (great little-Lock)
And thus thy Mistress stood the shock
Of savage Roundheads; which loathed name,
Shall from this fact contract more shame.
This brands the Rebel Author more
Then all his Treasons done before:
By those the Subject only is
Cast often, the very man by this,
Go then, and pray her, whose Divine
Hands must receive thee now from mine,
That she vouchsafe, when thou art come,
To consecrate thy Martyrdom
With kind respect, and place thee near,
Though but a foil, to her own hair.
Then may thou deem thy fate more high,
Then had Jove called thee to the Sky,
And decked thee with more Stars, then all
The drops of blood lost at thy fall.
AN ACCOUNT OF AN IRISH QUARTER.
FRom Carrick, where the noble Ormond met
Kilkennyes Supreme Counselors, to treat
For Irelands peace; After I had let fly
At the Lean half-boyl'd-fresh-bief Ordinary,
All my own shillings (and the truth to tell'ee)
One more I borrowed of my friend, Jack Belly:
'Twas time I thought to make a quick departure
With my Comrade Ned Griffith, to Free Quarter
So calling Ned, said I, He that long tarries
In this Town, will not find it like Beau-Maryes,
Where, when we wanted 12d, we could dine
Like Dukes, And only cry, Peg, this makes nine;
Here no kind Tapwife, nor confiding Cook,
Will let you eat and drink, and smoke by the book;
A just man (should we grant you of that sort)
Cannot live by Faith here, though there is Scripture for it.
But when your pockets empty, faith Sir, you
Must look your belly should be even so too.
To the Country then, where we will our Genius pamper
With Mustard and fat Bief, Mutton and Sampyer,
And yet no Trencher shall after a feast
Make us repent the fouling of the rest:
And reasons there are many to persuade one
That by our Landlord we shall be much made on,
For my Lord President has wrote a Letter
That he should treat us like our selves, or better.
And then for certain he is a man of Bounty,
For hark Ned, he is High Sheriff of the County:
Besides, he is of the Poors, and so must be
By consequence of our own family;
They say that he keeps dogs too, and will course
The Hare most fiercely, but the Fox far worse:
And faith Ned, you are a lad, whom any right
Good fellow will bid welcome at first sight:
Thy countenance so rosy, straight inveagles,
And (to say truth) we both are pretty Beagles.
This pleased Ned well, and straight we got two able
Horses, out of my Lord Lieutenants stable,
And to Colefine, 'twixt dinner time and supper
We marched with our Port-mantles at our crupper.
When we came there, we certain structures saw
All Perriwigg'd with rushes or with straw;
So even and like, Ned swore by his Creator
Some Leveller had been the Fabricator.
So that to us was not distinguishable
Which was the Mansion, which the Barn or stable.
Ned, he alights and leads (God bless us all)
His horse into his Worships very Hall,
And looking round about, cries in great anger,
Zowns, here is a Stable has no Rack nor Manger:
Peace Ned (quoth I) prithee be not so hasty,
This room's no stable, though it be as nasty;
I see a Harp and chimney too, and dare
Say, there was fire in it before the war,
So this is no place for your horse, you see,
It Is then for very Beasts I Am sure (quoth he;)
I wished him be advised what he spoke there,
For should such words come to the Sheriffs ear,
'Twas Gold to Silver that he would be at us
E're we were ware, with his Posse Comitatus:
Out Ned went laughing; I (as it is my fashion)
Fell straight into this serious contemplation,
If the High Sheriff such mean dwelling have,
O hone, O hone, what has his Under knave?
But searching further, one whose unsoald shoes
Like fetter, hung about his feers came to's,
And for our horses said he would show a room.
I asked him if he were the Sheriffs Groom?
No Sir, quoth he, I Am his firstborn, but can
For need, supply the office of his man.
I cried him mercy, wished him not be crossed;
So off my hat went, off went his almost.
He bade us go to the house; and so we took
Our way to the place Ned and his horse mistook:
And after we a little there had wandered,
In came the man, who proud to be our Landlord,
Who for his face and garb might pret'ly well
Pass English muster for Head Constable.
I with fit ceremony toward him went.
And gave him the Letter from the Lord President:
He took't and read it, and for ought I know,
We welcome were; but he never told us so.
Opening his mouth at length, he asked us how
Corn sold beyond sea; and if men did plow:
When, and for what occasion we came over?
And if we ever had been there before?
I answ'red so as pleased him well, I think,
For straight he bade the Butler fill some drink.
But seeing him in's half pint dish of wood
Sip like a maid; thought I, this man's no good
Companion, or else his drink's but small:
Both which did prove too true. And this was all
My comfort now, I hoped to find good fare,
And then for table-tipple, 'twas most rare.
And now for supper the round board being spread,
The Van a dish of coddled Onions led,
In The Body led a salted tail of Sammon,
And in the Rear some rank Potatoes came in.
To comfort Ned, said I, a short repast
Must serve this wednesday night, 'cause it is a Fast;
But Master Sheriff the next meal will mend it
To our content. Quoth Ned, I pray God send it.
We sat, and soon had made of it, I trow,
A clean board, if our napkins had been so:
But opening one of them, (I tell ye truth)
My stomach was got full before my mouth.
Some houswifes would give groats apeece for these,
To have the washing of them for the grease.
At length, it came into my fancy, that
They might be Relics, oiled with holy fat,
And that the Apostles, when the Paschal Lamb
Was eaten, wiped their fingers on the same.
My Landlord fed well; and seeing us to eat
Nothing, he bade us welcome to his meat:
And having done, he crossed himself all over;
His Supper had done so for us before.
When bed time came, he bade one with a light
Conduct us where we were to lodge that night.
He had himself gone with us (I dare say)
But that his Chamber did not lie that way:
So to a room we came, of which it is all
I Will say, 'twas correspondent to the Hall.
Quoth Ned, I Will not unsheath, though I am drowsy,
These sheets were used before, and may be lousy.
What then, said I? do thou not know, thou noddy,
Fresh linen is unwholesome for the body?
And lice are here no more an infamy
Then red hair: they are the Nation's lechery.
So down we lay, to sleep full well inclined;
But through the gaping wall came such a wind,
That from my head my nightcap (this is true)
To the farther side of all the room it blew:
And had there been in my fantastic pate
As many Wind-mils as I saw of late
Near Wexford, 'twould have whirled 'em all about:
And from my nose ere since, like a Still-snout,
Such distillations fall, you would guess by this,
My head were what the Prophet wished his.
Now 'cause we could not sleep, we fell to pray,
More then we used, but 'twas for naught but day.
By the Lord, quoth Ned, the Sun, if he should sup
And lodge like us, at midnight would get up:
And I should tumble less, and sleep more, had I
In stead of thee (deer Tom) some handsome Lady.
But there is no night so long, but has its morn,
And so had this; which if we had been born
Stark blind, we had not been so glad to see:
No alarmed Soldier could more quick then we
Leap from his bed, and sooner dress himself:
So down we went, and played till hour the twelf;
Then was the table covered, but the same
Linen I saw for fish and flesh meals came.
Dishes as formerly were brought in od,
Pork, Pork, and Pork; two boiled and one sod.
I Will hang for it, but he thought us Scots or Jews,
And brought's meat not to eat, but to refuse.
But we fell on with all our main and might,
Urged by two reasons to it, hunger and spite.
His napkins fatness, leanness of his meat,
Nor want of salt could hinder us to eat,
Nor henceforth shall; his Eves and Embers too
Shall save him naught, at one meal we will eat two,
Devouring swines flesh, so that he shall dress
Some better meats, in hopes we will eat less;
And so live and endure, til we shall be
Released next General Jail-deliver.
Mean time, if any man think I have told
More then the truth, let him come and behold
And finding things not thus, I shall desire
He Will call me (what I would I were) a Liar.
And let that man that shall dislike my Rhimes,
Know that I have made better twenty times.
Nor was my Muse in fault now, but the Liquor;
Had this bin stronger, that had been much quicker.
Who drinks the like, I Will hold my ink and pen on it,
He Will write as bad.
God bless my Lord Lieutenant.
A PASTORAL DIALOGUE.
Thirsis DEar Silvia, let thy Thirsis know
What it is that makes those tears to flow
Is the kid that used to play
And skip so nimbly, gone astray?
Has Cloris flowers more fresh and green?
Or is some other Nymph made Queen?

Silvia. Thirsis, do thou think that I
Could grieve for these, when thou art by?

Thy. What is it then?

Silv. My father bids
That I no longer feed my kids
With thine, but Corydons; and wear
None but his Garlands on my hair.

Their. Why so (my Silvia) will he keep
Thy Lambs more safe whilst thou do sleep?
Will the Nymphs envy more thy praise
When chaunted in his Roundelayes?

Silv. No Thirsis, I my Kids must join
With his, 'Cause they are more then thine.

(Chor.) Parents, cruel as the Rocks,
Join not their children, but their flocks.
And Hymen 's called to light his Torches there
Where Fortune's, not Affection's equal are.

To his RIVAL, Kissing a Glove which he had got from SYLVIA.
FOnd man! why do thou now adore
What thou did so much execrate before?
Whilst from thy wanton touch it did secure
Fair Sylvia's hand; nor would
Permit the tender Lillies should
From any hot-breath'd kiss a blast procure.
Whilst to the Relick thou do thus
Pay thy Devotion, thou art impious
Against the Saint. For that which thou did hate
When it upon her hand
A consecrated Veil did stand,
Thou now ador'st, when it is reprobate.
Yet hug that toy, had kiss it more
And nearer, then it did her hand before,
For it is the perfect emblem of thy fate.
Though thou like it do waste
Thy self in serving her, at last
Thou shall like it too be a Reprobate.
To SYLVIA, On a Bracelet of her Hair.
KNow, Sylvia, that your curious twist
Which charm's my heart, and deck's my wrist,
On which I gaze so often, and pay
Thousands of kisses every day.
Is not so much my love and care,
'Cause it is composed of your hair,
And yet it truly may be sed
Sunbeams are wov'n of courser thread.
Nor do I therefore liked so much,
Because I find the art is such,
That if Arachne, when she strove
With Pallas, the like Web had wove,
She had her skill and wrath overcome,
And gained a Triumph, not a doom.
No, Sylvia, I the truth will tell,
I do not therefore liked so well
Because it is thy hair and Art,
But that it is thy gift (dear Heart.)
SYLVIA Singing.
TEll me no more to what rare sound
The Stars do dance their Round.
For did they hear the Music of this voice.
They Would not forbear
To leap down from their Sphere,
And for this Harmony forsake that noise.
And tell not me with what sweet strain,
The dying Swan, in vain
Flatter's approaching death; for could she give
Such notes as these
Fates rigor to appease,
They Would prove not a Prediction, but Reprieve.
To him that heats this Countes-charm
No Siren can do harm.
Ulysses was not half so safe, when fear
Unto the Mast
With cords had bound him fast,
As had these accents held him by the ear.
A DIALOGUE.
Their. COme Sylvia, freely let us enjoy
Loves chiefest sweets; for being coy,
We make those flames, which he has sent
For our delight, our punishment.

Sylv. What would my Thirsis more then this,
Thus chastely to embrace and kiss?

Their. Alas, my Sylvia, these are toys
Which but prepare for after joys.
Like to those meats we eat before
A feast, to make our hunger more.
We mix moist lips to raise in two
Bloods, a desire to mingle too.

Sylv. To join them so, is to commit
A kiss, and poison love with it;
Sacrificing chaste desires
In wanton and polluted fires.

Their. What can unchaste or wanton be
That Is done in such obscurity?
Where there is no conscious eye nor ear,
Action's no more then wishes are.

Sylv. I, but the Gods, who see our night,
And hear our silence, will espy't,
And punish too.

Their. No, Sylvia, this
Thou know their own example is:
It Is safe to err with them.

Sylv. The bold
Poets alone such fictions told.

Their. They rather feigned, who made that sin,
The Gods so much delighted in.

Sylv. Thirsis, I yield, but fear I shall repent,

Thy. Thou will, that thou no sooner did consent

(Chor.) What e're the rigid Sages of old time
Did love and practice most, they made a crime
To the rude vulgar, and did thus devise,
That no man should be happy but the wise,

To SYLVIA, Going to an Enemies Quarters.
STay, Sylvia, stay, and let thine eyes
From gloomy nights protect our Skies.
Let not their glorious beams convey,
To our Antipodes the day.
But if they are decreed to go
From our Horizon to the foe,
Cloud them with frowns, that through the world
A general darkness may be hurled,
So we the better shall sustain
A loss, which is to them no gain.
Or if thou will at full display
Every Beam and every Ray.
So shall those Suns, whilst men admire,
Consume, not warm them with their fire:
And by that glorious light of theirs
Make, and destroy Idolaters.
But stay not long (sweet Nymph) for so
May thy return procure our woe,
Whilst we, like men, who for long space,
Have been confined to some dark place,
Shall, being restored to that light
By which we see now, lose our sight.
To SYLVIA Frowning.
NO, Sylvia, it is not your disdain,
Nor scorn, nor cruelty, nor hate
Shall make my sadder verse complain,
Or my well kindled flame abate.
Such goblins fright Love from a coward-heart:
But one resolved like mine, can make them start.
Contract thy brow, and let thine eye
Dart Thunderbolts of anger still,
Storm me with all the Artillery
With which Love's Rebels use to kill:
I Will not retreat till I or Conqueror be,
Or Martyr of thy cruelty and thee.
Shoot, Sylvia then, and spare not till
Thy Magazine of anger's spent,
If I survive and love thee still,
I know thou then must needs relent.
Patience in sufferings oft-times has overcome
A Tyrants rage, and made him change his doom.
But if I fall into thy hate
And stubborn scorn a Sacrifice,
I shall be happy in that fate
Whilst with me all my torment dies
Thus shall my constancy for thy disdain
Either begin my bliss, or end my pain.
AN ELOGY On the Death of SYLVIA'S Beagle.
YE Ladies all, that feel remorse
When with a cold your Patrat's hoarse,
And think you sin, if you are jolly,
When your poor Monkey's melancholy:
Come and assist the tenderhearted
Sylvia's grief for the Departed.
A Beagle of so neat a frame,
That Venus gave her her own name,
And for her Chariot, sh'ad been snatched,
But that she could no where be matched.
Her Pedigree was of good note,
For Or and Sables was her coat,
Wherein such smoothness did reside,
As made the very sight to glide.
Her body slender was, and such
Might well make Sylvia's lap her couch:
And yet she was not small enough
To be conveyed away 'n a Muff.
She never lost the company's favor
Offending it with an ill savor;
And what a greater wonder is,
She never for the Owner smelt amiss.
In such fit places still she eased
Her belly, that she never displeased
The Chambermaid. Nor would she eat
At any time forbidden meat.
She lately had a safe Delivery
Gf young ones three, as smooth as Ivory;
But e're that they could look about'em,
She went to the other world without'em;
And this she did, because she hoped
Her Mistress sure would them adopt.
Whose comfort now is, that the Bitch
Died not of the Halter, Mange or Itch,
But what great men their lives have cost'em,
It Is known she died of an Aposteme.
To his FRIENDS, Comforting him after Sylvia 's Departure.
GOod Sirs forbear, who e're strives to beguile
Me of my woe,
Or labors to betray me to a smile,
He Is my cruel foe:
For all these tears you see, did I
Receive from my departing Sylvia's eye.
When we incorporated in our last
Embraces, stood
Like Janus head inverst from hers, she cast
Into mine eyes this stood,
And told me whilst it there did stay
That no new slames could enter in that way.
Safe then within these Cisterns let them lie,
That every tear
When next we meet may make my Loyalty
Clear, as it self appear.
Then shall those waters which she set
To guard my breast from flames, give hers new heat.
The three Incomparable Ladies at K. Castle.
HEnce, hence, unhallowed tongues, and move not here
Know this is not your Sphere;
This place, like the Irish Soil, allows
Nothing that is venomous.
What e're is loosely done or spoke,
Does wrath, not mirth provoke.
(Chor.)
For here the three chaste Sisters present be
Who constitute each room
Wherein they deign to come,
A Temple Sacred unto Modesty.
Who enters here, must speak, what e're he says,
With the same breath he prays.
His guilt, whose language shall be found
To bear a looser sound,
Then at the Altar may be owned
Shall not be there atton'd.
(Chor.)
For here the three chaste, etc.
But he, who with a breath as cool and sweet
As Zephyrus, does greet
The tender flowers in May, can cheer
Not blast a modest ear,
May here be welcome, and find some
Taste of Elysium.
(Chor.)
For here the three chaste Sisters present be,
Who constitute each room
Wherein they deign to come,
A Temple sacred unto Modesty.
A CAROL for Christmas Day.
COme, come Cavaliers,
Leave your doubts, leave your fears,
And grieve not at thought of old matters.
You owe to this Day
That which shall never be a prey
To the Traitors.
Then sing and rejoice,
Raise your heart, raise your voice;
Your joys at this time do not smother.
Let all sorrow be waved
As you hope to be saved.
To sigh for one sin is another.
This Day there did come
From a pure Virgins womb
A Savior your sins to atone,
Let the Parliament care
And Rebels despair,
That have none.
But with our best notes,
In spite of all Votes
His praise this Day shall be sounded,
Who left Heaven that he
Might render all free
From Hell, but the Devil and the Roundhead.
An ANTHEME For Christmas Day.
HAil the most blessed of all Days,
By whose resplendent rays,
He first begun
To see who made the Sun.
In Miracles, this one
Outvyes the six days of Creation.
Man to Gods image made, that time
Of wonders was the prime:
But here we can
See God unmade to the shape of man.
Omnipotence is weak,
The Word it self knows not to speak.
And what may yet
Far more astonishment beget,
The immortal God did this endure
That so he might procure
Unto himself a power to dye;
And to us mortal men,
Who were his Rebels then,
A power to live eternally,
For this high love, what thanks shall we return?
What Incense burn?
All he requires is only this,
That we would make his sufferings our bliss.
That from the Manger where he lay
This Sacred Day,
We would permit that he may come
And in our hearts find nobler room.
But hearts are mangers too, whilst sin
Feeds there: Let Us cast it out, and take him in.
A CAROL.
1.
BOldly, boldly, Christmas here
Still in thy own old shape appear;
And make no scruple to come forth
With all thy stratagems of mirth.
None here has a hand
In The great work of the Land:
But all are at leisure
With pastime and pleasure
To render due honor to Christmas.
2.
Endless toil and fruitless pains
To him that this great Feast profanes.
When he should sleep, let him contrive
A thousand projects, and none thrive.
Nor let his ghost have
Repose in the grave
But wander and fright
His brethren by night
Who give nor due honor to Christmas.
3.
But rejoice we, whom this Tide
With such a Jewel has supplied,
As no Sabaeans lawless bands
Nor Feind shall wrest out of our hands.
A better world's ours,
Be this in the powers
Of The Saints that are mortal,
And will be cut short all
For giving no honor to Christmas.
4.
Drown the thought in Wassal Bowls,
Of what we lost to save our souls.
The Thieves that snatched our Goods away
But like hand-Cormorants did prey,
At length a Hemp-string
Their necks shall so wring,
That they will again
Disgorge all amain
Whilst we give due honor to Christmas.
5.
If the Mountain-Harp and Crowd
To harmless mirth may be allowed
The Drum and Trumpet we will be willing
To leave to such as live by killing.
Give us Beer and Wine,
We Will never repine
At those that will soak
In blood, till they choke.
But render due honor to Christmas.
6.
In this humble Jollity
The Conquerors height and greatness we
Envy no more then that of's Nose,
Or of the Crimes by which he rose.
Let him on with his Work
To humble the Kirk,
And's Destiny follow
From thence to the Gallow,
Whilst we give due honor to Christmas.
Another Carol for Christmas Day,
LIft up your heads and hearts, all you that be
Oppressed by prosperous villainy.
And let your Countenance this time as clear
As is your conscience, appear.
That wretched eye profanes these Sacred Rays,
That is with tears possessed
For any earthly interest,
And is not worthy to see better days.
2
That power by which the Air did first begin
Now borrowes it to breath therein:
He that like Raiment put on Light, does dress
Himself in humane nakedness.
Thus he is our Representative, and thus
The Almighty's irony
Applied to him's a verity,
Behold God is become as one of us.
3.
Here then, ye loyal souls, come here and take
A cure for all that makes you ache.
This Day presents such sufferings as will drown
The sad remembrance of your own.
Still let the Serpents of this age bite on,
Let them new poison brew,
It Is lost all that they spit at you,
For lo, this Day holds forth the Brazen one.
4.
Are you in banishment? To salve your woe
Think that the King of Kings was so.
Or in restraint? Let all complain^s be dumb,
God was once dungeon'd in a womb.
What though you have lost your store by the licensed theft
Of The bowelless Committee
And Sequestrators of less pity.
The Lord of All, was of himself bereft.
5.
All this, and death, he for your sake endures
In whom was found no guilt but yours:
And for his Cause will not you suffer too,
As cheerfully as he for you?
Th'Oppressor's glory, and your misery
Death quickly terminates,
And then shall you exchange Estates,
And have them settled to eternity.
A CAROL.
PReethy Roundhead, now forbear,
Come not near,
Christmas here does domineer.
Here are sports, and songs, and Music,
Which perhaps,
Which perhaps, Sir, may make you sick.
2
'Twil perplex your holy eye
To espy
When we dance, though modestly.
And you will hence be more offended;
With the light,
With the light all sport is ended.
3
And to grieve your godly ear,
Songs I fear,
Of our Saviors birth you will hear.
Here his mother you will find Sainted,
And your selves,
And your selves called Devils painted.
4.
If you love your nose, O fie,
Come not nigh,
All the house does smell of Pie.
Nor would you the sent eschew, Sir,
Half so fain,
Half so fain as we would you, Sir.
5.
For the taste, indeed, here is great
Store of meat,
But your Saintship may not eat;
For the meat, which we provide all
Offered is,
Offered is unto this Idol.
6.
Venture then no farther on,
Get thee gone:
But least thou should go alone,
Take for company I pre-thee
From this place,
From this place all sorrow with thee.
Thus Latin'd,
1.
FOres jam, Rotunde, has
Fugias,
Regnat hic Nativitas.
Lusus hic and cantilenae,
Tibi quae,
Tibi quae futurae poenae.
2.
Dolor erit oculis,
Videris,
Cum nos in tripudiis.
Et plus eris hinc confusus;
Desinit,
Desinit Cum luce lusus.
3.
Nove piis parcamus
Auribus,
Christum natum Canimus.
Matter hic est Diva dicta,
Ipsi vos,
Ipsi vos Daemonia picta.
4.
Aedes (naso cave sis)
Epulis
Fragrant Natalitiis,
Nidor tibi nec infestus
Plus quam tu
Plus quam tu nobis molestus.
5.
Dapes ecce hic lautas,
Sed ne has
Tangat vestra Sanctitas,
Quicquid est in mensa situm,
Esse duc
Esse duc Idolothytum.
6
Ocyus ergo hinc jam Te
Proripe,
Sed ne careas comite,
Sum tibi in sodalem
Omne hac
Omne hac a domo malum.
On Mrs. F. P. Discovered at her Devotion in Holywell
INto the Spring, whose copious flowings be
A Monument of Martyred Chastity,
The fair Francisca, that she might commend
The Well to more Devotion, did descend,
With feature so Divine, that you would ghess
She rather were the Saint, then Votaress.
With swifter course the streams to court her glide
And murmuring, seem the envious stones to chide,
Which stay their haste: And now they had possessed
What ever was beneath her Ivory breasts.
But these did yet appear above the same
Like the white Rocks, which gave this Isle a name.
At length she kneeled, and then they reached her lip,
Which they with smiling smoothness wooed to sip:
The waters thirsting to be drank by her
More then for them the long choked Heart did e're.
But swelling to it, she rose, as if she thus
Meant to revenge the fate of Tantalus.
An hour is well nigh spent, whilst with such heat
Of pure Devotion, she does there repeat
Her powerful Orisons, that whilst she pray'th
The benumbed Fountain proves a sweating Bath.
And now, her Rites performed, she takes her leave:
The waters striving to detain her, cleave
Fast to her Veil, but when alas, they found
'Twas vain, they sadly dropped in tears to the ground.
Now if the stories I have read before,
Were Truth or Fable, I Will enquire no more.
For seeing Francisca in it, I can tell,
That I discovered there a Miracle.
And thus much of it, henceforth I Will confess,
It Is Sacred, though but from this Votaress.
A Hymn to St Winifrid, sung by Her Priest whilst Ms E. M. was at Her Devotion
in Holywell.
Blessed Saint, to whose renown this Well
Flows a perpetual Miracle,
Be present now, and give success
To th'wishes of this Votaress.
Chorus.
Who comes not her own spots to cure,
But bathes to make thy Spring more pure.
It Is neither her necessity
Nor sin, that brings her on her knee;
For pure and like thy self She Is come
In all, but in thy Martyrdom.
Chor.
She comes not her own spots to cure,
But bathes to make thy Spring more pure.
It is to honor thee, and bring
More Votaries unto thy Spring,
That such as did blaspheme before,
By Her example may adore.
(Chor.)
But She that has no spots to cure,
Does bathe to make thy Spring more pure.
Then from the cold protect Her sense,
Let Her not go thy Martyr hence,
But strait conform with some warm beam,
To Hers, the temper of the stream.
(Chor.)
So She that has no spots to cure.
Shall bathe and make thy Spring more pure.
On the Death of the Right Honorable the Lord BYRON, who died in France.
Called from the wrath to come; to's Native Seat,
Byrons unspotted soul has made retreat.
See how Heaven welcomes Him! ye Blessed Powers,
We, to Your Joys and His, would now add ours,
Did not our too-just Jealousies and Fears
Of plagues ensuing, call for sighs and tears.
Must not approaching Thunder needs dismay,
When the protecting Laurel's snatched away?
The Wheat into the Barn being taken, we know
What fate the Tares are doomed to undergo.
Excuse our sorrow then; when such men steer
Into the Harbor, desperate storms are near.
And who can hope th'Incursion to escape
Of Vengeance, when a Moses quits the gap?
That Rome, when Pagan in the Head (like us)
And Christian in some limbs, was prosperous,
The Fathers of those ages attribute
To the Prayers of them whom it did persecute.
And sure, his Intercession for his foes
Has thus long kept us from deserved woes.
But since he lest to speak, no gracious voice
Remains to drown our sins obstreperous noise.
No spotless hands, like his, lift up to gain
Pardon for those, which blood and rapine stain:
No heart 'powrs forth such true Devotion,
As may the Hypocrisy of ours atone.
How to do well, we long since lost the skill,
And now the hopes of Grace, when we do ill.
And thus (bright Soul) thy putting off thy clay
Becomes our Funeral; but thine own Birth day:
Death has performed a double Office here,
Of Midwife, and of Executioner.
Thou now begin'st to live, when thou giv'st over,
And stoodst but candidate for life before.
'Twas but a borrowed blast thou did resign,
The lasting breath of Fame is now made Thine.
Heroes in their own time only be,
And truly flourish with Posterity:
Fruits of past years preserved, more precious grow,
And loved by those who loathed 'em on the bough.
Nor is it a single birth, thou come forth Twins,
Born to live both with men and Cherubims;
In spite of thy Proscribers, thou art by fate
From exile called to triumph over their hate.
Here shall thy memory dwell, and thy great name
(Their terror once) shall now be more their shame,
Whilst thy Celestial Spirit to Heaven does climb
There to be crowned, for what was here thy crime.
And though thy fate were incruental, we
In The list of Loyal Martyrs will write thee.
For he who in a just Cause does oppose
His life to dangers, and all else does lose,
Not moved thereto by Avarice, spleen, or pride,
But that the Righteous is the wronged side:
For's Courage, Cause, and Conscience sake must pass
Muster amongst Martyrs. And such Byron was.
AN EPITAPH On the Right Honorable The LORD BYRON, Buried in France.
REader, A Stranger does lie here,
No Native so well worth a tear;
It Is Byron, whose Progenitors
Seven Ages since were famed, and Ours
Transplanted hence to English ground
They flourished there, for faith renowned.
In Honor and Possessions great,
In War and Wisdom most complete;
Yet all the Virtues of His Race,
Nay, of Mankind, hold but the place
Of several Items, which did come
United here in the total sum.
His Youth (small portion of's short span)
Did soon give place unto the Man.
To grow and fade he lost no time,
All his ten Lustres were his prime.
The Academy, Court, and Camp
Marked him theirs, with their noblest Stamp.
The Arts and Tongues, pure and refined,
In him, like well set Jewels shined:
And though he used 'em not for fame,
Yet it, unsought for, greater came.
His Prince he followed in the height
Of Peace, when Ease and soft Delight
Eunuch a Court. But the Warlike Pike
Requiring hands, Achilles like,
He caught and used it in such wise,
That th'Courtier seemed but his disguise.
With courage, calmness of the mind,
(The Lion with the Lamb) was joined,
By Passion Reason was obeyed,
And Reason by Religion swayed;
Which he with knowing Zeal professed
As Conscience moved, not Interest,
And argued for it, not with strife
Of words, but Sanctity of life.
And thus resolved and firm remains
In God's Cause and his Sovereigns,
Till by successful Treason thrown
Hither, (to make his worth more known)
He here exspiring, did entrust
This place with his Renowned dust.
And well it was that he did lay
His own concealed in Foreign clay.
For at home, so immoderate
Was good men's love, and bad men's hate,
That there his Relics would the Object be
Both of Profaneness, and Idolatry.
An Epithalamium, Upon the late Nuptial ACT.
IO to Hymen, who re-knits the hands
Of The late Divorced pair in Nuptial bands;
No doubt the union will last firm and long;
Bones broken (if well set) become more strong.
Justice and Priesthood by Supreme Decree,
For mutual helps sake must remarried be.
A fitter match was never made in this Land.
The one wants eyes, the other cannot stand.
But when the blind and lame do both unite
Into one Beggar, there are legs and sight.
Men can no longer say now, that our State
Their Clergy, Jeroboam like, create
Out of the lowest of the people, when
They do ordain the Peace, and Quorum-men.
Nor will the assertion hold good, though they say,
That these are formed too of no better clay.
For as the Levite is commissioned
By th'Justice, so by the Levite he is Sir John'd.
Just thus, where red and white appear but single,
The cheek's deformed, but Heavenly where they mingle.
Now as in Buildings, so in Laws it is found
What that man raised, this levels with the ground.
Our deceased Patriots were the Bishops bane,
These consecrate themselves now, and ordain;
And it is most fit, that such as do possess
Their Lands, should execute their Offices.
'Twas well their Wisdoms they did not invade,
For then this worthy Act had never been made.
Nor must all holy Rites the honor have
To be performed by the Wise and Grave.
It Is Matrimony only has this Grace,
Which though in the Sacraments it has no place,
Over them and other Duties may insult:
High Priests do this, the rest Quicunque vult.
But though in all Degrees Wedlock before
Was honorable, and will hence be more:
Yet wise men fear (our frailty's such) there will
Be Fornication found amongst us still.
Nay they will be guilty (Casuists say) o'th'Fact
Who copulate by virtue of this Act,
And that (but I believe 'em not a word)
Their Issue will be Bastards on Record.
FINIS.

