A Further DISCOVERY of that Generation of men called QVAKERS: By way of Reply
to an Answer of James Nayler to the Perfect Pharisee.

Wherein is more fully laid open their Blasphemies, notorious Equivocations,
Lyings, wrestings of the Scripture, Raylings, and other detestable Principles
and Practices.

And the Book called, The Perfect Pharisee, is convincingly cleared from James
Naylers false Aspersions; with many difficult Scriptures (by him wrested)
opened.

Published for the building up of the perseverance of the Saints, till they
come to the end of their Faith, even the salvation of their souls.

Mat. 16.18. Upon this Rock I will build my Church, and the gates of Hell
shall not prevail against it.

Rev. 2.23. Unto you I say, and unto as many as have not this Doctrine, and
which have not known the depths of Satan, as they speak, I will put upon you
none other burden: But that which you have already, hold fast till I come.

Gateside, Printed by S. B. 1654.

Christian Reader.
Since our Publishing of the Perfect Pharisee, as we find we bless God it
has been prosperous, to the no small satisfaction and establishing of his
people, who with an humble and sober spirit, have been willing to try the
spirits whether they be of God. So we see it has provoked the spirits of those
Quakers, to more obstinacy, bitterness, and railing, As in the pouring out of
the fourth Vio^, Men were scorched with great heat, and blasphemed the Name of
God, and repented not to give him glory. Now, though truly we must profess,
with Reverend Mr. Eaton, Writing concerning the same people, in his Epistle to
his Book called, The Quakers confuted, That we cannot apprehend that there is
any hope of convincing these persons of the error of their way, so far are
they under the very power of the spirit of delusion, and professed enmity to
the Ordinances of Christ Jesus our Lord: Yet, for the further securing, and
fuller satisfying of the people of God, we are induced to Answer this Reply of
James Nayler, for the clearer manifesting of the wickedness and folly of these
men, and their Principles: And though it cost us new revilings, and more bitter
cursings from this People which we fully expect: Yet what are we, and our
Names, though troddon under foot so Jesus Christ may have the glory, and his
people the advantage of our standing for the truth.

But that thou may know the nature of their Answer, thus it is; We charge
them to hold seventeen Blasphemous and Heretical Doctrines, besides their
other principles and practices, in our Book expressed, and what he says to
them; we have given thee a short account in the Draught subjoyned to our
Epistle, Wherein thou will easily see with what full proof we have testified
those things concerning them, though the tongues of these (...) accustomed to
nothing more, then to rail, do so confidently charge lies upon us: But we are
sure and confident in the Lord, that we have spoken that of them, which will
(if not already, as it does to all impartial Readers) fully, undeniably, and
convincingly appear to be truth, if thou read the clearenesse of the evidence
of this ensuing Treatise.

Reader, If thou have Read our former Book, thou will find our Arguments and
assertions against the blasphemous Doctrines of these men, fully strengthened
by plentiful variety of evident, plain, convincing Scriptures; to which thou will find James Nayler in his Reply, answering not one word. Certainly, the
demonstration of the spirit of God, either has convincingly silenced him, and
stopped his mouth (for how ready is he to catch at any trifling appearance of
advantage?) or what can thou, or any man imagine of him, but that Scripture
is nothing to him, nor his soul under any obedience unto, or conscience of the
truth of God? either of which, What a miserable and deplorable state of soul,
does it speak, when men can stand out in their blaspemies against the light of
Conscience?

It shall be our work in this ensuing Treatise, in following James Nayler in
his Reply, to answer all such Scriptures as he impertinently and injuriously
wrests, and to clear the truths of God from their being misapplyed to his
horrid Principles. By which, and other occasional passages in this Book, thou will find a more full and plain manifestation of these men, and discovery of
the mystery of iniquity working in them. Consider what thou Read, and the
Lord give thee understanding in all things.

Tho. Weld. Rich. Prideaux, Sam. Hammond. Will. Cole. Will. Durant.


A short Draught of James Naylers Answer to the Book called, The Perfect
Pharisee.
Quakers Positions.
1. EQuality with God. This we proved by six Evidences. He denies but two of
them, which yet we shall prove under the hand of witnesses, and his very
Answers do amount to an asserting of it.

2. No distinction of Persons in the Godhead. This is denied by them; but we
shall by further testimony clear it to be theirs.

3. That the soul is a part of the Divine Essence. This he excepteth not
against, nor takes any notice of our Arguments, but is full of bitter Railing.

4. That Christ is in every man, and in the Reprobates held under corruption.
This is confessed clearly, though seemingly denied; only one expression is
shuffled, which is yet proved by testimony under hand.

5. That Christ was but a Figure, and Example. This is denied by him, and
miserably shuffled; yet we evidently prove it, even by their own Books; and
other testimony.

6. That men are not justified by that Righteousness which Christ in his own
Person fulfilled, without us. This is not denied, though so wicked a Doctrine,
but a new asserted, and no tittle of an answer to our Arguments.

7. That men are justified by that Righteousness which Christ within them
enables to perform. This we proved by six evident testimonies, two of which
Nayler only shuffles in; but we shall clear them, and answers nothing to
plain ^cripture against them.

8. That God and Man cannot be wholly reconciled, till he be brought to the
state of the first Adam, and able in h^^ o^ne power to stand perfect. This he
denies, but we prove from his own words it clearly is, and must be his
^eaning.

9. He that commits sin, and is not perfectly holy, can never enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven, unless there be a Purgatory. This he denies to be so in
his Book, and rayleth, as if we charged a lie upon him; but we shall further
clear it, though in his own answer he partly confesses it.

10. No real Saint but he that is perfectly holy, etc. This he confesses, and
answers only by railing, but takes no notice of the Scriptures, against that
Principle.

11. Every man has a light within him sufficient to guide him to salvation,
without the help of outward light. He confesses all, but answers nothing.

12. No need of outward teaching, etc. He denies one testimony of ten, which
yet is true; but confesses the Doctrine, and falls a railing.

13. Scriptures not the Word of God, but a Declaration of the conditions of
them that spoke them. This he denies not: we proved it by five testimonies. He
answers by one Scripture grossly perverted; and two others ignorantly applied,
but gives no answer to many Scripture arguments against it.

14, Spirits not to be tried by Scripture. This we proved by three testimonies,
none of which, nor the Position is denied; but goes about to prove it, and
falls a railing.

15. No sense, meaning or exposition to be given, or studying of Scripture.
This we proved in four testimonies; he confesses, goes about to prove it; but
answers not a word to fourteen evident Scriptures, but falls a railing grossly.

16. They cry down Baptism, and the Lords Supper, as types and shadows. For
this we gave four proofs, which he denied not, and we further prove it. He
shuffles from Baptism in general to the business of Infant Baptism, and
falls a railing.

17. No mediate cull to the Ministry. Denies not the Proof, but falls miserably
a railing, as if he would power out his gall upon us.

As for the rest of his Reply, to what we charged upon them as their Principles
and Practices, there is such palpable shufflings, such miserable weakness,
and such horrible railing as that we should not have meddled with it at all; but
that we believe it is the design of God to lay more and more open the spirits
of these men.

THis Book, pretending to Answer us is thus subscribed, By one whom the World
calls James Nayler. About man being called by names given them by their Parents.
We are ^ot a little jealous that there lies a mystery of iniquity in that very
style and expression. For first, God himself (whom to think to follow any
sinful expression or custom, were no less then blasphemous) calls men by
their Names of distinction given by Men. Genesis 22.11. God said unto him,
Abraham. Hannah called her son Samuel. 1 Samuel 1.20. She called his name
Samuel, etc. and afterward when the Lord appeared to him to call him out to
the work of the Priesthood, chap. 3.4. and 6. and 8. verses, The Lord called
Samuel, and called him again so the second and third time; here its evident,
that God himself calls him by the Name that his Mother gave him. Acts 9.4.
there Jesus Christ from Heaven calls him Saul, Saul, a Name given him before
his conversion. Christ when upon Earth, calls his Disciples by the Names given
them at their Circumcision; as Philip, John, Simon son of Jonas etc. The
Apostles do so constantly, as Festus, Agrippa, Gaius, Aristarchus, etc. and
this without such a mysterious preamble, as one wh^^ the World calls Festus,
Agrippa. etc. You see how these pretend^r to Scripture, depart from Scripture,
as if they would include God and Christ under the carnal observations of the
World, or else teach them to speak.

2. It is apparent, That these very men do constantly call themselves by these
Names, as James Nayler does in an Epistle at the end of Farneworths Book;
George Fox in a Pamphlet lately Printed; and the very men of their Generation
call them so, without any such preamble.

The mystery of ^^e (...) ^riting t^emselve (such w^o the World c^ll so and so).
3. But shall we tell you where the mystery lies? We are satisfied, that this
expression is merely to cloak their pretense to an equality with God. Our
reason is evident: For in this very Answer of Naylers, page, 4. where he relates
Fo^es his evad^ng of the charge against him, that he said, He was equal with
God* Nayler thus hints, that Fox being asked, whether he spoke this of George
Fox as he was a creature? To this he answered, I deny George Fox, he is dust,
and must be dust; but I and my Father are one. Is not this as plain as the
Sun, that he therefore denies George Fox, that he may deny his being a
creature, one that must return to dust, that so he may set up and assert his
oneness with God. Compare but this with that usual expression of theirs in
their Books, Whose name in the flesh is James Nayler: Whose name in the flesh
is John Audland, etc. and it will be more apparent. But more of this you have
in our Answer to their Reply to the first Article.

In the Epistle in the said Answer Written by A. P. he calls us, About the word
Priest
the Priests of the North, a word on purpose given us to our reproach. Surely
their pretended meekness, should have taught them other expressions; though
truly we find, and the Reader may, even in this their answer, find more
cursed railing, then we receive from the worst of men; yet, our suffering in
that kind from them also, is not small. But A. P. might know, that every
Priest was to offer both gifts and sacrifices for sin, and that we wait not
upon any such work; and that the Gospel knows no Chief Priest, but the Lord
Jesus, who is a Priest for ever after the order of Melchisedek; not any Priests
at all properly, but the Saints, metaphorically ^^lled a Royal Priesthood:
and shall the style of the Lord Ies^^ and his Saints be a reproach in the
mouths of Quakers?

He goes on, and tells the world, That we (...) all strangers to that sort of
people called Quakers, except one. A. P. (who is none of the least of that sort
of people) cannot but know, that he is too well known to all of us. Secondly,
Three of these five also have had cause to know many more of them, as M.
Taylour, John Audland, Stubbs, Holmes, Atkinson, Hedgshon, Ayry, etc. and
others from whom we suffered disturbance in our public Ministry; and some of
these also, are pretenders to be eminently sent forth. Thirdly, Though all of
us were strangers to their persons, yet are we not strangers to them in their
writings, and so, if it be possible to know them by their Papers (which they
industriously scatter up and down) we know them fully. But whither tends this
aspersion, that they are strangers to all of us, save one; but to make the
world believe that we have taken up these things against them by report? But we
hope, the Reader by this time, understands the nakedness of the slander, and
the subtilty of A. P.

W. C.
As for that evidence which one of us gives concerning their principles and
practices, which A. P. under the name of Reports, would insinuate into the
people, as if they were lies; the Reader shall observe, that the most of these
evidences, are not at all contradicted by Nayler in his Answer, but passed
over, which we take as confessed by him; others only evaded, which yet shall
appear to the Reader in the ensuing answer, to be either such things, as he
was an eye or ear witness of, or shall be fully confirmed by undeniable
testimony. A. P. goes on, and tells the Reader, that in this answer, What is
truth is owned, and what is false is denied; truly, he could not, in so few
words, have spoken more untruely to prepossesse the Reader: but we beg the
Reader, as to that, to suspend his judgment, till he have fully read the
ensuing Discourse, wherein, whether any thing have been charged on them that is
false, and whether Nayler have done faithfully in owning what is truth, will
appear at large.

In the Preface of James Nayler to his answer, he tells you, The Man of sin,
and his ^orkings in the last times Revealed.
That Christ now appearing in his Saints, to discover the man of sin, with
all his deceits and deceiveable workings; now all the powers of darkness are
gathered against him, Gog and Magog. As for those deceits and deceiveable
workings, truly these blasphemous Doctrines of these men, with their
Diabolical delusions and quakings, will make it appear where the man of sin
is now working. To open this, we shall stay the Reader a little.

Agreement betwixt Papists and Quakers.
1. It is as claere as the noone day, 2 These. 2. chapter. Rev. 12.3. Rev. 13.
Rev. 17.4.5.9.10. that the Papal Apostasy and state is The Antichrist, so
often Prophesied of in Scripture. Now it is as plain^ that the very
distinguishing Doctrines and practices of these men are such, as are the maine
principles of that man of sin in opposition to Jesus Christ.

Papist Bell. l. 2. de justif. cap. 7.
1. The Papists deny the imputed righteousness of Christ for justification, and
in scorn and derision, call it, A putative Righteousness.

Quak.
These also from the same spirit, deny the imputed Righteousness of Christ for
justification: And Nayler himself, before the whole Court at Appleby,
discoursing with W. C. about justification by righteousness of Christ imputed;
not only denied it, but in a sleighting way ended his discourse thereabout,
with this language, That which is without, is without; So George Fox affirmed,
That he that is borne of God is justified by Christ alone, without imputation,
Saul's Errand, page 12.

Papist Bell. l. 2. de justif. cap. 3.
2. The Papists in their controversies with us, do positively affirm, that
justification is by inherent Righteousness. Hence Bellermine, Stapleton, etc.
with the rest do positively affirm, that (...), is only justum facere per
inherentem justitiam, that to justify, is only to make righteous by inherent
righteousness.

Quak.
So these men do as confidently affirm, that they are only justified by
inherent righteousness, or that righteousness within, which Christ within
them enableth them to perform. See our proof Perfect Pharisee, page 10.

Papist Bell. de ju^tif l. 4. c. 11. 12. 13. 14
3. The Papists again do confidently conclude, that a man may perfectly keep
the whole Law; Hence their neglect of the righteousness of Christ, their
works of supererogation, and the like.

Quak
So the Quakers, their great assertion as a challenge to all, is, that every
Saint is perfect: that it is p^ssible to be perfectly holy, and without sin
Perfect obedience to the Law of God is their great Principle, which they
confidently cry up more then any.

Papist Bell. l. 3. de verbo Dei. c 4.
4. The Papists affirm, that the Scriptures, or the Written Word of God, are
not the supreme Judge of sp rits

Quak
So these people, that the spirits are not to be c^yed by Scripture. So A. P. in
the Book he but forth called Several Papers, p 19. The Wo^lds touchstone is
without them and they try the spirit by the letter, etc. but the Saints
touchstone is within. So that though they agree not what shall be, yet both of
them consent in denying the Scripture to be the judge of spirits.

Papist
5 The Papists call the Scripture, a^^ ad letter, a nose of wax, a sc^bbard
without a sword. Co^erus in Euchir. page 44 Pighius, lib. 1. cap. 4. So
Melchior Canus says, It is most certain, the Written Word is only for Babes,
and is no way necessary for those that are grow^e; as is more fu l Melchior
Canus, defens. each fid. contra confess Wor^berg cap. 36.

Quak.
So these men also not only c^y down the necessity of the written word, see
the perfect Pharisee, page 20. but also call it, a dead letter, a carnal
letter, that they are but a declaration of them that spoke it. So Melchior
Canus again says, the Gospel is not the Scripture; as Farnworth in his Book
Discovery of Faith, scoffs at our saying, the four Books of Matthew, Mark,
Luke and John are the Gospel, page 1^.

Papist
6. The great argument by which the Papists do go about to establish the truth
of their way, is Immediate revelations, and pretended miracles; the want of
which, they upbrayd the Protestant Ministers, and charge us to be no Church

Quak
So the Quakers do in their pretense to an immediate call, and their supposed
miracle of quaking. So A. P. the Word of the Lord came to me saying. So
Audland, the Word of the Lord came to me: but of that more hereafter.

Papist
7. The Papists do place much of their holiness in their Eastings, beggarly
apparel and forsaking the World, as they call it, as their l^^ing mewed up in
convents, and cloisters, their wandering up and down as Hermits, and begging
Friars, etc.

Quak.
So these men is known to place abundance of their holiness in Fasting,
beggarly apparel, wandering up and down the World, etc. we might add much
more; but here you may see how the man of sin in these men in their
compliance with the principles and practices of the Romish way, breaks out in
his deceit and deceive^ble workings.

2. He is a st^anger in the Book of God, as to the discovery of Antichrist,
The spirit of error the spirit of Antichrist.
who does not observe the spirit of God mightily unvailing Antichrist by the
revealing of the spirit of error in him; for 1 John. 2.18. there it plainly
appears, that horrid errors are of that affinity with the Antichrist, that
when he would describe that man of sin in the last time he calls the
Heretics by that very name, Now are there many Antichrists, whereby we know
it is the last time, etc. Now besides those which we have named, the Reader
will easily observe such a mass and heap of Arminian, Socinian, Familisticall
errors in their Doctrines laid down in the Perfect Pharisee, that he may
c^earely observe where the spirit of Antichrist works in all deceiveablenesse
in this last time.

3. Lastly, It is the Saints bulwark against the Papists, while they call for
our miracles, that the spirit of God clearly holds forth, that the coming of
the man of sin is after the working of Satan, with all power and signs, and
lying wonders, 2 These. 2.9. So Rev. 16.13. the three unclean spirits, ver. 14.
are the spirits of Devils working miracles, to gather together, etc. Now this
further evidenceth the spirit of the man of sin, acting in them, and their
way. As for his Gog and Magog, Rev. 20.8. to which Naylor compares our Books,
being set forth against that generation: truly we cannot but smile at the
weakness of the man, for who knows not that Gog and Magog referrs to the time
of the Jews conversion, when God will pluck up the Kingdom of the Turks and
Saracens, and is to be after the expiring of the thousand years, as that
chapter is exceeding clear.

Reader, we entreat thy pardon for this digression, though ttuely, when we came
to consider, that his expression of the man of sin, our spirits could not but
strike in with this call of providence, to lay naked that mystery of Babilonish
iniquity which works in these men.

Difference in judgment about discipline, no breach of a joint appearance
against the methods of Satan.
In the next place, thou will find him (that he may compare us with Herod and
Pilat conspiring against Christ) thus charging us, These sive formerly could
scarce agree in any thing, no not in that which they call the worship of God,
etc.

First, A. P. accuses us, to have taken up the things we wrote against the
Quakers by report, whereas he says, that people was not known to any of us,
except one; let him now tell us whether James Nayler takes not up things by
report, who we believe, never saw the Face of four of those five, whom he so
boldly charge.

2. But is it true, that we can fears agree in any thing? This is a charge, we
wonder he has such a brazen forehead, to raise against us. Do we not all
agree? and is not our real agreement known in all the Doctrines of the
Gospel? As for matters of discipline, we do really confess there is some
difference in judgment amongst us. But first, Does this make us like Herod and
Pilat, who hated the very principles of the Gospel, and (as Nayler says) could
not agree in any thing. Secondly, Paul and Peter had their difference in point
of judgment as to Circumcision, Gal. 2.14. So thirdly, Paul and Barnabas had
their difference, in another case, Acts. 15.39. But fourthly, That rule of the
Apostle, we hope shall be our rule, Phil. 3.16. If in any thing ye be otherwise
minded, etc. Nevertheless whereto we have already attained, let us mind the
same thing, let us walk by the same rule. Fifthly, And as the Apostles
abovesaid, notwithstanding their particular differences, even in judgment; yet
agreed to oppose the enemies of Christ, and the gross Heresies then springing
up: so by the assistance of our God, we have been enabled cordially and
industriously, to agree in promoting the work of the Gospel; and we are
confident in the Lord shall further be. But does not, this savor of abundance
of malice, when he says, they could not agree in any thing, no not in the
worship of God? etc. Could we not agree in the worship of God? or does he know
what the worship of God is? or what difference is betwixt worship and
discipline? surely if he had, his conscience must check him, for charging such
a lie upon us. But this it seems A. P. does report, and James Nayler will
report it.

Further, he goes on, and tells the Reader, We are not afraid to speak evil
of their forsaking the world, the pride and lusts of it; and these (he says)
we call, a sinful neglect of their Families, trivial observations, and belly
the Apostle, saying, he calls them rudiments of the World. Reader, that thou
may see the wilful (and we are afraid) malicious mistake of the man; we
shall give thee our own words as they are in our Epistle, thus, There is
indeed something which pretends to holiness in this generation of men: as the
meannesse of their apparel, sometimes more then ordinary abstinence, their
forsaking the World (though to a sinful neglect of their Families and
Callings) and many trivial observances, which the Apostle calls, The rudiments
of the world. Col. 2.23. Now,

1. In this the Reader may clearly see, our willingness to speak the
fairliest that we in conscience could of the ways of these men, for we say,
that these things there named, do indeed pretend to holiness, and have a show
of humility, they are out own words; so far were we (as he would charge us)
from speaking evil of any thing that does but look like a command of Christ.

2. He most grossly charge us, that we speak evil of, Forsaking the World,
the pride and lusts of it, and that this we call, a sinful neglect of their
Families, and trivial observances, when as its as clear as if it were written
with a Sun-beame, that we do no such thing. For, Is there any one tittle in
these our words, concerning their forsaking the pride and lust of the world? we
h^pe we have so much of the dread of God upon our souls, as that it shall not
enter into our hearts, to set a Pen to Paper, to plead for the lusts and pride
of the world. But what wickedness is this, to foyst those falsehoods into our
Epistle, which we never spoke.

3. It is a sinful neglect of their families and callings which we speak
against, Sinfulness or neglect of Ca^l^^gs and families.
(for this we know to be a sin) but we speak not against a forsaking of the
world in its proper Gospel-sence, we say that they do sinfully neglect their
Callings, that's apparent in their constant wanderings up and down, Fox and
Nayler themselves are two evident examples of it. And for the sinfulness of so
doing, we refer you to these Scriptures, 1 Timothy 5.8. If any provide not for
his own, and especially for those of his own house, he has denied the Faith,
and is worse then an Infidel. 2 These. 3.10. We commanded, that if any would
not work, neither should he eat: For we hear there are some amongst you
walking disorderly, working not at all. 1 Cor. 7.20. Let every man abide in the
same Calling wherein he was called, art thou called being a servant, care not
for it, etc. ver. 24. Let every man in the calling wherein he was called,
therein abide with God. How does this reprove their practice and prove the
sinfulness of their neglect of their Callings. Object.
But if they should say, That the Apostles left their Callings and followed
Christ. Answer.
It is true, the Messiah had his Disciples following him. But first, Paul after
the Ascension of Christ, does leave a standing rule in the Scriptures for
Christians to abide in their callings; Commands the aged Women that were
Believers, that they be keepers at home, Tit. 2.5. Reproves the lightness of
the younge^ Widows, When they wax wanton against Christ, they learn to be
idle, wandering about from house to house; and not only idle, but tatlers also,
and busybodies, speaking things which they ought not, as 1 Timothy 5.11.13. [The
very Picture and pattern of the Women-Quakers.]

2. Before they left their callings in the world, its evident they had an
immediate call from Christ. Mark 1.17. Jesus said unto them, Come ye after
me, etc. where he immediately calls Simon and Andrew; James and John, calls
also Philip. See John 1.43. and Matthew from the receipt of Custom. Mat. 9.9.
We know these men will pretend to the same immediate call; but we have fully
answered in the perfect Pharisee p. 45. 46, to the vanity of that pretense.

3. They were called forth to an Office and public work in the Ministry,
which was not a neglect of their Callings, but a changing of them. Now th^s
public work of Ministry, these men will not sure pretend they are called to,
for they do cry down all Churches, and Ministerial employment, as to outward
teaching, as wholly needless.

4. And lastly, Paul after this reproves Christians for leaving their callings,
2 These. 3.10. 1 Timothy 5.13. which had not been if their example had been binding.

The nature of forsaking the wo^l rightly stated.
4. As to a right forsaking of the world according to the mind of Christ, we
must again say, It lies not in a Monkish changing of apparel, not wearing of
a band, and giving over to labor in their callings, it lies in no such thing;
but it eminently consists, in these two things.

1. A crucifying of affections to the world, so that the soul sits loose as to
all the possessions and comforts of it, and can see so much in Jesus Christ as
to satisfy it self, by which we are preserved in an holy indifferency as to
the things o this world, and can freely submit to the Lord, as to any
providence in things below. And so we can affirm, that a man may forsake the
world, and yet enjoy his possessions in it. Abraham, Jacob, Nebemiah, David
etc. men all of vast possessions, and yet true forsakers of the world. Were not
those believe ^^ich, whom the Apostle charge, 1 Timothy 6.18. that they be ready
to distribute, etc. but their forsaking of the world, was in this, that they be
not high minded, nor trust in uncertain riches; not in their leaving their
Families and callings; but that 1 Cor. 7.29.30 31. Let them that have Wives, be
as though they had none; they that rejoice, as though they rejoiced not; they
that buy, as though they possessed not; and they that use the world, as not
abusing it; for the fashion of this World passes away.

2. It consists in a willingness of spirit to part with these things when
thereunto called; which is in case of competition betwixt Christ and our
enjoyments; in reference whereto, the Saints have need to sit down beforehand
and reckon this, the charge of the Gospel may cost them one day their dearest
comforts, as it costs us the scandals and reproaches of our Persons as this day
from these Quakers. See this Mat. 10.37. He that loves father and mother more
then me, is not worthy of me.

And the case being thus opened, if any shall nourish their idleness, under a
pretense of forsaking the World; we dare freely tell them, that they make the
Scriptures a slave unto their lusts, and walk contrary to the plain rules of
it.

5. Lastly, there is another false charge laid upon us, as that we do call the
forsaking of the World, pride and lusts, a trivial observance, the rudiments
of the World, and will worship. We have showed already, that we spoke not a
syllable in that Epistle of the pride and lusts of the World, (that foysted in
by James Nayler) We now add, that it is as malicious a scandal; to say, we
c^ll forsaking of the world, a trivial observance, etc. The quakers beggarly
elements
The Reader may see we speak of their trivial observances as of another
business, things distinct from that of forsaking of the world: And because he
would so palpably wrest our words, we shall tell him what those trivial
observances of theirs are; such as these, their not saluting, not putting off a
Hat before a Magistrate, their thouing every man, not calling men Masters, ana
such like; like those of the Apostle, Col. 2.21. of touch not, taste not,
handle not: Now as such as these, as to a souls placing his holiness and
religion in them, we dare boldly call, Beggarly elements, and the rudiments of
the world; so we yet again say, that he that shall place so much of his
perfection in such trivial observances as these, he walks indeed in a show of
wisdom, in humility, and will worship, and neglecting the body, (not in any
honor) to the satisfying of the flesh, that is, to the satisfying of the
fleshly principle of Legal righteousness, puffed up and fed with such acts of
will worship.

Having thus traduced us, he begins to cry up his own followers, for their
obedience to the commands of Christ. We wonder how they can so much as pretend
to obedience to the command of Christ, The disobedience to the commands of
Christ, and the Ordinances.
when it is evident, that the whole generation of them, will not submit to his
righteousness, establishing a righteousness fulfilled in themselve: Nay, it is
their great work, to deny his righteousness fulfilled in his Person to be
imputed to us for justification; As also, they deny many other truths, with a
full opposition to Gospel Ordinances, Prayer, Supper, Baptism,
Church Government, Ministry: whom can he persuade that such as these are
brought up to obedience to the commands of Christ?

Who are the persecutors betwixt us and them discovered
Lastly, In the conclusion of his Preface he tells you, that they are persecuted
by us: In which accusation, we shall appeal to the Reader. Whether they be the
persecuters of him that is borne after the spirit, or we? For first, It is
evidently known, that while we are carrying on the work of the Gospel in our
respective Congregations peaceably; some of them have come no less then
threescore miles to revile us, and smite us with the tongue of bitter
reproaches, in public Congregations, nay, even in the time of exercise, to
the great hindering of the seed of the Word, which questionless is the design
of Satan in those their confusions. And are we the persecuters?

2. If causing such tumults, and their such bitter slanders of us in the time
of worship, have brought them at any time within the compass of Law, we must
tell them, that that was a suffering as evil doers; and no persecution, if it
be a sin to break the Peace and traduce and take away the good names of
others. Yet even in such cases also, they may remember, how many of the were
discharged the Town, without Imprisonment? and such as were Imprisoned, how
soon released?

3. If reproaching with the tongue be persecution (for what else was Ishmaels
persecuting of Isaac, to which that texts relate Gal. 4. what was it Genesis 21.9.
but Ishmael mocking Isaac?) we may say, we have had as large measure thereof
from this people, as might fill pages to set down in particular.

4. If our B^oke be the persecution, Paul's zeal against wicked principles and
unlawful practices may as well be called persecution, as our pleading for the
truth of Christ against opposers, we being set for the confirmation and defense
of the Gospel.

We now proceed to take notice of his answers to the Positions they have
asserted; the first is,

Position 1. Their Equality with God.
George Fox affirmed, He was equal with God. James Nayler answers, and says,
that it is false that George Fox did say, that George Fox was equal with God.

Nayler in his reply, does not deny our proof at all, when we say, that George
Fox said these words, I am equal with God; he does not except against this at
all.

2. Naylers further reply plainly does evidence it also; where he confesses
that George Fox, when he was asked, Whether he was equal with God, said, I
deny George Fox, he is dust, etc. but I and my Father are one. Where he
clearly asserts his oneness with God, as to equality, (for that was the
question the Justices put to him.) So that our proof against him stands clear
by his own confession.

Now the strength of Naylers answer lies in this evasion, which we doubt not
but any that have their eyes open, will discover to be the subtilty of the
Serpent, viz. he does not deny that George Fox said, He was equal with God;
but denies that he said that George Fox was equal with God; where Nayler makes
Fox to distinguish ignorantly, and make a difference betwixt George Fox, and
himself, so that though George Fox is not equal with God; yet he that is
called George Fox is equal with God. Now to this blasphemous evasion, we thus
answer.

1. If George Fox for his blasphemy, be turned into Hell; what will become of
him? that is what will become of that person that is called by the name of
George Fox?

2. Is not the name always given for the distinguishing of the person; yea,
even when they are in a blessed state, translated from corruption. Mat. 17.3.
there appe^red Moses and Elias talking with him; they were Moses and Elias
still, though in a state of glory. So that the person is understood and
distinguished by the name; and therefore by the name George Fox, must be
understood in our Book, the person distinguished by that name; we were never
so childish as to think, that a bare name, without its relation to the person
distinguished by ^it, any should cry up to an equality with God; we speak of
the person understood by George Fox. Such cobweb answers, and childish
evasions, may satisfy such deluded spirits as Nayler; but we cannot but in the
fear of the Lord cry out, Oh! the plotted blasphemy of these men.

3. Did ever any of the Saints of God in the old or new Testament distinguish
in this way? Did not Paul say, Paul a servant of Jesus Christ, not saying, I
deny Paul, Paul is dust, and must to dust, but I am a servant of Jesus Christ?
what unscripturall and ridiculous language is this?

4. Hence you may see, it was not without reason, that we were jealous of a
mystery of iniquity lying under these distinctions, betwixt George Fox, and
himself; and in these words, one whom the World calls James Nayler; and in
Francis Howgill his paper, called A woe to Kendall, one whom the World calls,
F. H.

5. The very evasion that Nayler uses, is a very great demonstration to us,
that George Fox asserted he was equal with God. For Nayler confesses he was
present when George Fox was asked whether he spoke this of George Fox as he was
a creature. Now here is a clear confession, that George Fox did say, He was
equal with God, that's confessed he spoke this; only the question was about
the sense of these words, and whether he spoke them of himself as a creature.
What ever the person were that asked Fox that question, we would leave this
upon his conscience, what apprehensions he had of Fox? For by the necessary,
and infallible rules of reason, there is nothing that has a being, but either
a creature, or a Creator; and if Fox have an other consideration (as that
question clearly implies) besides that as a creature, it must necessarily, be
as a Creator, and so his equality with God is asserted. Well, it is confessed he
spoke these words. 2. In this answer he denies George Fox as a creature; the
meaning thereof as given in answer to that question, must be this, that George
Fox as a creature denies to be equal with God; but that he, as under some
other consideration is equal with God, he denies not; nay asserts it, when he
says, I and my Father are one.

6. We cannot but press it upon the Reader, that in the^e debates, about
equality with God, it had been easy for Nayl^r or Fox, to have declared their
total inequality with God, and not so to have deluded the people in such fond
distinctions as I am equal with God, and yet George Fox is not equal with
God; nay, this debate certainly, was an eminent call to them to disclaim it,
if this wretched principle had not filled their hearts; yet in stead of our
ingenious denying of this blasphemy, their whole work is falsely to assert it
under the cloak of subtle and unscripturall, nay, blasphemous distinctions and
evasions.

John 10.13. opened.
Now for the Scriptures he so blasphemously abuses, they are these two. First
John 10.30. I and my Father are one; this Scripture, that it is properly and
incommunicably spoken of Christ, God and Man, and cannot be applied to any
mere creature, we shall thus make evident. The Person there spoken of is first
in the 9. ver. the Door. I am the Door, by me if any enter in, he shall be
saved. Is George Fox the door? 2. That Person spoken of affirms, ver 18. that
he has power to lay down his life of himself, and power to take it up
again. Has George Fox that power? 3. In ver. 26. He says to the Jews, Ye
cannot believe, because ye are not of my Sheep. Dare George Fox say so? The
reason why men do not believe, is it because George Fox has not elected them
from Eternity. 4. That Person there spoken of faith, ver. 27.28. My Sheep hear
my voice and I give unto them eternal life; neither shall any man pluck them
out of my hands. Is it not blasphemy for Fox to assert these things of him
else? 5. He also says, My Father that gave them me, is greater then all, ver.
29. Did the Father give the Elect to George Fox? Now ver. 30. this Person of
whom these things are spoken, it is, who is one with the Father. And you may as
well ascribe the other five considerations to George Fox, or any mere
creature, as this, that he and the Father are one. But oh! the greatness of
his ignorance of God, of Christ, of Scripture, of himself, which is the cause
of such most wretched blasphemies.

1 Cor 6.17. opened.
This next Scripture is, 1 Cor, 6.17. He that is joined unto the Lord is one
spirit. The design of the Apostle there, being to dehort from Fornication,
upon the account of that union that is betwixt the Fornicator and the Harlot,
ver. 16 they are one body: for two, says he, shall be one flesh, does add a
further reason to the Saints, he that is joined to the Lord is one spirit. V.
15. Shall I then take the members of Christ, and make them the members of an
Harlot, God forbid? Now that this Text does not hold forth a Believers equality
with God, will thus appear. For first, The strength of the Apostles argument
in this place, is by the membership of a Believer to Christ, to prove the
exceeding sinfulness of taking a member of Christ, and making it a member of
an Harlot: all the union it holds forth betwixt us and Christ, is only as we
are members of the Lord Jesus. Now the membership of a Believer with Christ, is
nothing to prove his equality with God. For first, The implantation of a
Believer into Christ being by Faith in his death, and Faith it self being a
finite grace, can no way bring the soul into an inf^nite equality 2. Besides,
Paul after membership by Faith in Christ, yet complained of a body of sin,
which utterly disclaimes all equality with God.

2. The nature of this union speaks no physical oneness; for as there is no
physical oneness betwixt the Fornicator and the Harlot, neither are they
physically one body, though so ca led, out of a relative respect so neither is
there any such physical oneness betwixt Believers and Christ. And without the
souls physical oneness^ with God, there can be no equality betwixt it and
God; nay, if Christ were not essentially one with the Father, neither could he
be equal with the Father.

Having thus seen the full meaning of these Scriptures, we believe (Read^r^
thou will wonder how the Justices could hear the Scriptures so bla^phemously
abused, and yet be satisfied, as Nayler pretends, they understanding his
affirming his equality with God, of the spirit of Christ in him. For, did they
think, that the spirit did essentially dwell in Fox? how then came they to be
satisfied, when Fox attributes that to himself, which is the spirits property?
or, how comes he to be the same essentially with the spirit of God? or, did
they conceive, the spirit in Fox, to be the graces or fruits of the spirit? how
then could they be satisfied, it so; in as much as those fruits of the spirit
are in their best capacity, but a new creature, and so in no way equal with
God? But were they all satisfied? How then was it, that Mr. Sawry, a Member of
the late Parliament, and as unprepossessed as any of the Justices then present,
was so fully satisfied, that Fox was really, and by confession guilty of those
blasphemous words, that he said he was equal with God, that he openly declared
against him in the presence of them all, and urged the Justices, that Fox was
clearly guilty of that blasphemy by his own confession before them all. Now
for what he adds, concerning Dr. Marshall his Oath, That one of the Justices,
who was present at Lancaster, when Fox spoke these words, did openly there
witness against Marshals false Oath in the hearing of the open Court. Let the
Reader know,

W. C.
1. It Is true that Justice did so, in the hearing of one of us; but did it in
such a way, with his head hanging down, and a low voice, that spoke clearly
enough to observant hearers, he had more will to accuse him, then either
confidence or reason. 2. That Justice was Coll. Benson, it is true, he was at
Lancaster, and it is as true, he was a Quaker long since, and before that time,
and had made it his work to ride up and down about that business, to get Fox
discharged from his blasphemy; and what such a partial evidence is, to
gainsay the Doctors Oath, let the Reader judge, 3. Besides, the Dr. swore it,
and so did Mr. Altham; but Coll. Benson only whispered it, or said it at the
utmost. 4. It was fully evidenced after in Lancaster, before the whole Country
5. But to discharge our selves, and to clear up the truth beyond all denial,
we have here given you the testimony of the said Dr. Marshall and Mr. Altham
sent to us, and dated at Lancaster, Ian. 19. 1653.

George Fox said, That he that sanctifies, and they that are sanctified, are
one, and they are equal.

George Fox being asked, Whether he was equal with God? answered thus, I am
equal with God.

The truth of these two Articles against George Fox, we have already witnessed
by deposing our Oaths before the Magistrate at several times, and still
witness, though now our testimony be not so necessary as formerly, since the
observant Reader may discern, what we witness more generally held out in
their own Books, perticularly in the Book entitled, Saul's Errand to
Damascus, page 8. line. 8. See also their answers, page 5. 6. and 10.

Jan. 19. 1653. William Marshall. Michaell Altham.



Nayler said. He was as holy, just, and good as God: against which, Nayler thus
excepts, It is an untruth, and was never spoken by me n^r ever did it enter
into my thoughts; but is a lie, raised up by the father of lies, the Devil,
and vented by his servants, to make the truth odious, and so goes on, denying
that ever Will. Baldwinson heard him say so, etc. We thus answer.

James Nayler makes no conscience of lies; as we have given thee the
testimonies of Dr. Marshall, and Mr. Altham for the former; so we here give
thee a large account of the proof of this horrible blasphemy under the hand of
Will. Baldwinson.

January 14. 1653. Sir,
YOu Writ to me to certify you of some Words that I heard from James Nayler
and Richard Farnsworth, as they call themselves amongst us. I my self went to
George Bateman his house in Underbarrow, called the Crag, and there was a great
deal of people come in to the house, and Nayler and Farnsworth sitting beyond
a Table upon a Bench; and there Nayler speaking, and teaching Perfection, and
to be attaind to in this life, and to be without sin; this teaching so did
trouble me, as being contrary to the Word of God, that I stood up before the
Table and spoke these words, Friends, do you hold that a man may attain to
that height of perfection in this life to be as perfect, as pure, as holy and
just as God himself? And they jointly replied, Yea, and they were so. And one
in the house spoke and said, My question was not to the purpose? And I answered
and said, But it was, because I knew no such thing by my self. And after these
words, they began to teach, that every man had a light within him, if hearkened
to, would teach, guide and save him: And I replied again and said, how is it
that our Savior Christ says, There is no man comes to me, except my father
which sent me draw him; before God and Christ draw, where is my light? and to
this they spoke not one word; so I went home from amongst them, But the day of
the Month, nor the Month I set not down, I not fearing the danger of this
Heresy. All these words were spoken in the same house in the night time.

Will. Baldwinson.
We do testify this to be Will. Baldwinsons own testimony.

Tho: Walker. John Myriell. John Wallace.





2. Here thou have our innocence vindicated; and now what reason has Nayler to
call us the servants of the Devil, and venters of lies? when as thou see his
denial of that testimony, is but the backing of his own blasphemy with a
notorious lie, which must needs fly in in his face, if he have any spark of
conscience left in him.

3. This full testimony gives a further discovery of their Positions we
formerly laid down; as first, Their asserting perfection in this life, and to
be without sin, As also secondly, Not only Nayler, but Farnsworth also
affirmed, he was as holy, just, and good as God for so says Will. Baldwinson,
they jointly replied, Yea, and they were so. Thirdly, That every man has a
light within him, if harkned to, will teach, guide and save him.

Thus we can bless the Lord that our being forced by Nayler his charging us
with lies, to vindicate the truth has been an occasion to discover the
blasphemies of these men more apparently and convincingly unto all.

But we wonder how they dare deny these things? or why Nayler should stand
disputing against these testimonies? when their being equal with God is fully
laid down in Foxes own words in Print; See Saul's Errand to Damascus, page 8.
and line 8. He that has the same spirit that raised up Jesus Christ, is equal
with God. And again thus, line 11. etc, As Jesus Christ which is the mystery,
has passed before, so the same spirit takes upon it the same seed, and is the
same where it is made manifest. Where it is clearly his design to show, that
there is the same hypostaticall union betwixt the spirit and our nature, where
the spirit dwells, as was betwixt the Divine nature, and the Humane in the Lord
Jesus.

George Fox affirmed, He was the Judge of the World. Nayler denies it not, but
replies, by justifying that expression; And tells us, we are grossly ignorant
of Christ, and rayles at us exceedingly. For this he quotes 1. Cor. 6.2.3. Know
you not that the Saints shall judge the World. Hence he abuses the Scripture
to infer, that George Fox is the Judge of the World.

1 Cor. 6.2. opened.
For the opening of this Scripture, know first, That the Father has committed
all judgment to the Son, John 5 22. Acts 17.31. God has appointed a day in
which he will judge the World in righteousness by that Man whom he has
ordained, whereof he has given an assurance unto all men, in that he has
raised him from the dead. Where you see plainly, the Father has eminently
appointed Jesus Christ alone, that man to be the Judge of the World. How then
comes George Fox to be Judge of the World? for the Scripture does but hold
forth One to be the Judge of the World, even the Lord Jesus, whom the Father
has therefore furnished with all necessary qualifications, viz. of infinite
power, infinite knowledge, infinite presence, things absolutely necessary for
the Judge of the World, 1 Cor. 15.^5. Again, It is one thing to Judge the
world, and much another thing to be the Judge of it; there is very much
difference betwixt these two: but George Fox must be, either the judge, o^ none
it seems. 3. It is not said, the Saints do judge the world, (that is proper to
the Lord Jesus) but it is said, they shall judge the world, they shall judge
Angels, the Apostles kept very strictly and closely to the expression of the
future, clearly holding forth, that he means of their judging of the world at
the end thereof, and the resurrection of the dead, according to that of Christ
concerning the Apostles in the day of judgment, Mat. 19.28. Verily I say unto
you* that you which have followed me in the regeneration, when the Son of man
shall sit in the throne of his glory, ye also shall sit upon twelve thrones,
judging the twelve tribes of Israel. We shall not need to speak of the manner
of their judging, as Justices at the Bench, by subscription, or assent to the
righteous proceedings of the Lord Jesus at that day.

And is it not still apparent to be a blasphemy for Fox to say, he is the judge
of the world? And can the abusing of this Scriture help him? And what reason
has Nayler to charge us with gross ignorance, and rail upon us upon this
account; but we have laid this open enough to any Reader. Only this we shall
add, in Saul's Errand to Damascus, page 6. it is objected against Fox, that he
professed himself to be, the Eternal judge of the world; not only the judge,
but the Eternal judge; and this he does not at all deny, but blasphemously
goes about to justify it. This is suitable to that which one of these Quakers
lately wrote to an eminent Officer in the Army, who told it himself to one of
us, viz. Look to the light within thee which cannot sin, whereby thou will
judge and determine Godlike.

His next justification of that title, is bottomed upon that 1 Cor. 2.15. 1
Cor. 2.15. opened.
The spiritual man judges all things. To which we answer, that he that is
acquainted with the Original, will easily perceive that the word judges in
the 15. ver. is the same with that in the 14. ver which is rendered discerned
(...), ver. 15. (...), so that the meaning of the expression is no more, but
the spiritual man discerns all things; All things, viz. (...), the
spiritual mysteries of the Gospel: this is evident, that these all things are
(...), for the Apostle is speaking of the Mysteries of the Gospel, ver. 7. the
wisdom of God in a mystery; he is speaking of such things, ver. 9. which God
has prepared for the^ that love him; and ver. 11. the things of God. ver. 12.
the things freely given to us of God; ver. 13. things spoken of, such things as
are ver. 16. the mind of Christ; So that Nayler is wide to seek when he
applies this as he does: the spiritual man it is true, does discern the
mysteries of the Gospel and mind of Jesus Christ; these things of the Kingdom
of God are not known to the man, or Princes of this World: but what is this,
to prove this? therefore it is lawful for George Fox to say, he is the Judge
of the World. Did ever Paul, or any of the Apostles conclude from their spirit
of discerning that they were the ^udges of the World? Will a discerning of the
mysteries of the Gospel, raise up men to sit in Christ's Throne, and to judge,
and condemn, and pronounce irrevocable sentence against others, (as the
practice of some of the Quakers is?) That spirit of discerning is there only
attributed to the spiritual man, as to the mysteries of the Gospel; Will a
discerning of Gospel mysteries, prove a power to discern the fi^al state and
condition of souls, what i^ shall be to all eternity? Is there not a large
ignorance of their own hearts, even in such as have a large measure in
Knowledge of Gospel Doctrines? And is not this the Prerogative of God, to
search the hearts? Ier. 17.10. Ioh. 1.25. And is discerning and judging all
one? 1 Timothy 5.24. Some men's sins are open before hand; yea, God does now fully
discern and know the states of souls; yet the judging of the world speaks
more then a bare act of Knowledge and discerning. For there is a time, when
that God that knows the thoughts of men's hearts, yet does not execute this
sentence of judgment upon their souls; Eccles. 8.11. Rev. 6.10. How long, O
Lord, etc. do thou not judge, etc. but God has the day of his wrath, and of
the revelation of his righteous judgment, Romans 2.5. So that he that shall
consider how far short discerning does fall of this sort of judging, how
far short discerning of Doctrines does fall of either judging or discerning
the future and final state of souls; how evidently this Scripture is wrested
to lift up sinful creatures into a blasphemous arrogance of the very
Attributes and Office of Christ, will easily see, how sinfully Nayler has done
to serve the Antichristian pride of Fox, who, as God 2 These. 2.4 will needs fit
in the Temple of God, and show himself that he is God.

George Fox was called by one of those Quakers, the Son of God. Nayler says,
You that are offended that one shall witness the Son of God, show that you
are ignorant of the new birth, etc. 1 John 3.1.2. Behold, etc. that we should
be called the Sons of God. Now blush for sh^me that you should be Ministers of
the Letter, and are ignorant ^f it. Thus far he.

How Christ the Son of God: how the Saints are Sons.
That Jesus Christ is only the Son of God essentially, and according to
Scripture expression emphatically and distinguishingly called the Son of God
is very clear; Mat. 16.16. Simon Peter answered and said, thou art Christ the
Son of the living God. This is that ^amous confession of Peter which Christ
said, Flesh and blood had not revealed to him, which is in that express^on
raised up to such a pitch, that it is impossible it should be meant in the
o^dinary notion of the Sons of God, as when applied to regenera^e persons, as
is plain by these two eminent expr^ssions of flesh and Blood has not revealed
this unto thee; and upon this confession (not upon Peter's person) ver. 18. Upon
this Rock I will build my Church, and the gates of Hel^ shall not prevail
against it. Consonant to this is that, upon the miracle wrought by Christ, Mat.
14.33. they in the Ship, worshipped and said, of a truth thou art the Son of
God. Can George Fox testify his being the Son of God by such a miracle? Nay,
Heb. 1.5 you have a challenge for the distinguish^ng Sonne-ship of Christ; Unto
which of the Angels said he at any time, thou art my Son, this day have I
begotten thee. ver. 8 But unto the Son he says, Thy throne, O God, is for
ever and ever. Here you have his Son ship vindicated from being communic^b^e
even to the very Angels; though in other places called, the Sons of God, Job
1.6. Job. 38.7. when the Sons of God shouted for joy. Thus we have proved the
essential Sonne-ship of Christ, and how that expression, the Son of God is
emphatically and distinguishingly given to him, so as not to be communicable to
the best of creatures. For the creatures of God, when any of them are called
the Sons of God, it is upon one of these two accounts. 1. Either of Creation,
Luke 3.38. Adam i^ called, the Son of God. 2. Or of Adoption, Gal. 4.5. to
redeem them that were under the Law, that they might receive the adoption of
Sons. We know what the adoption of Sonne-ship of Believers is, and do bless
God that this manner of love is given us, that we should be called the Sons
of God, 1 John 3.1. But first, Either hence to appropriate Christ his
incommunicable title of being by eternal generation the Son of God. Or
secondly, from that adoption, to assert an equality with God, we can account no
less then blasphemy. Now let the Reader know, that the reason why we produced
that expression of George Fox being called the Son of God by one of that way,
was to prove their conceits, of an equality with God. Had Nayler confessed
that his looking upon Fox, etc. as son by adoption, does not carry him up to
l^o^e upon them as equal with God, we should not have troubled the Reader
further as to this particular: but in stead of confessing, he goes about to
prove what the other had asserted; so that we have reason still to see that
name of Son but made a cl^ake to usher in Foxes his in ruding into, being
distingui^hingly and emphatically called the Son^e of God, and being (^cc^^ding
to his own woe ds) equal with the Father. But if they will sti l play with the
Phrase of the Son of God; yet the understanding Reader will ob^erve, that
that expr^ssion, was but one of the six Proofs we gave, that they had asserted
an equality with God, three of which are already evident b^yond ex^eption.

There are two more deep and pertinent pro^fes against them as to this* One is.
That their usual expression is th t hey can see men's hearts; questionless,
this is Gods in ommunicable Attribute, Jer. 17.10. I the Lord se^rch ^he
hearts. The other is an expression us^d by Nayler, himself to o^e of us to
this purpose, How God should reve le any thing to him, ^^^l e, viz. Nayler, not
know it. As if God knew nothing, but Nayler knew it. Oh the h rriblenesse of
such exp^essio^^ the Reader may wonder with what patience we can wr^te such
thin^s. Yet these two so fully speaking to prove that they assert an equality
with God, Nayler wholly passes over, though himse^fe was the a^^ertor of one
of them.

So that it still stands fully evident against them, that they do assert an
eq^ality with God.

Reader, If thou wondre^ at the length of our answer to this particular, truly
the dread of the great God has been here in upon our souls, and we think no
time or pains too much to vindicate the honor of our dread Lord, and his
Son Jesus Christ, remembering that his glory he will not give to any other.

Position 2. That there is no distinction of Persons in the Godhead.
Nayler objects, That such a Position is not in Saul's Errand to Damascus; and
says, we have not any proof for what we here accuse of.

George Fox in Saul's Errand to Damascus. page 12. being asked, Whether there be
one individual God, destinguished into Father, Son, and holy Ghost.
Answered, It was but a busy mind so to ask, etc. (so little respect he has
to that saving mystery of the Trinity) this that Book will witness. And that
we had reason to infer this Position to be a principle of their way, will
thus appear.

1. If Nayler had taken notice of our Book, he might have considered these
words immediately following, With other assertions of the same kind, known to
some of us. Now had he considered this, he might have seen, that we did not
gather that this denying of the Persons, etc. was their Principle, only from
what Fox lays down in Saul's Errand to Damascus, page 12. but from that of
Fox, together with other assertions of the same kind, known to some of us: We
know it to be there Principle, by comparing that expression of Fox, with what
our selves did know from others of them; those truths compared, were our proof
of that assertion, as the Reader will presently fully see.

2. Had we had no other ground, but that expression of Foxes, when he says,
Its a busy mind to enquire, etc. this had been enough? For certainly, if Fox
think it to be a busy mind to enquire it, its clear, he does not believe it
himself, as he would not have it to be a matter of any others Faith.

3. But thirdly, Does he say, we have not any proof for what we here accuse
of? Let both him, and all men know, that we have not charged that assertion on
them, without sufficient evidence. Tomlinson, an eminent man in that way, in
his Book called, A Word of Reproof to the Priests, page 4. line 20. boldly
affirms, the spirit to be no other but Christ himself in flesh. Is not this
to deny the Trinity, and take away the distinction of Persons in the Godhead?
2. One of us does know, this was the Principle of Mr. Taylour, Coll. Benson
etc. and so it was not asserted without reason, and their own spirits and
consciences will bear me witness. W.C.
3. A godly Minister in Westmoreland wrote to us, that one of his charge being
perverted to become a Quaker, affirmed, that there was one God b^t no such
thing as a distinction of Persons in the Godhead; and spoke many words
passionately against it.

And now whether there is not just cause to charge them with maintaining this
blasphemy, will be fully manifest; and how un^ighteously Nayler has so reviled
us upon this account. But we leave him to the Lord to rebuke.

Position 3. That the soul is a part of the Divine Essence.
Nayler only replies, What the soul is you know not, who live in the fall,
and are vain contenders and pleaders for sin; and so goes on grossly
railing.

W. C.
And one of us does still affirm that he was an ear witness of it. Secondly,
Here we might very well expect, that since he could not deny our proof, he
should answer to our confutation of that blasphemy. Against which we have given
six reasons, but instead thereof he falls a railing, as if a Rabshakehs spirit
were divine Rhetoric. And what says he? He says, We know not what a soul
is, and that we plead for sin, etc. and seek gain from our quar^ers etc.
This is h^s answer to our arguments. We shall not trouble the Read ^ with
answering their scandals, and reviling^ b^t s^^ the e^ample of Christ before
our eyes, 1 Pet 2.23. who when he was reviled, reviled not again.

Position 4. That Christ is in every man; and in the reprobates he is held
under corruption.
Nayler answers thus, When will you cease to add your lies to slander withal?

Nayler himself confesses, that he said, That if an Indian were there, he
should witness against him, viz. W. C. for affirming, that Christ did not
dwell in the Indians that never heard the Gospel. For the said W. C. did he not
think the conscience of James Nayler feared, durst appeal to himself,
whether that discourse was not about every man's having a light within them, and
that light to be Christ, so that he cannot but remember, that he affirmed
Christ to be a light within the very Indians. Secondly, Nay further, lines 16.
17. Nayler most ignorantly reasons, that Christ is in the most vile in the
World, else he cannot judge them. Certainly had the man any spark of
conscience or ingenuity left, he durst not in the same page, and with the same
breath, deny and affirm the same Doctrine.

that Christ in the reprobates is held under corruption? let all that were
there be witness against thee.

Naylers charge. For that Position of theirs as we laid it, consists of two
parts; and Nayler might clearly have seen, that he is brought only as a
proof to the first part of it, viz. That Christ is in every man; for all he is
charged with, is, that he extended the in-dwellings of Christ to Indians; and
therefore it shares but of the fullness of his gall, thus to pour it out
without cause. The proof of the second part, viz. that Christ in the
reprobates is held under corruption, we laid down in our second proof, in a
Letter of John Audlands to Edward Briggs, which Letter Nayler does not deny.
For having told him, he was damned; yet he also tells him, that he crucifieth
Christ within him, etc. What is this, but to affirm Christ under corruption?
But to make this further clear, this Nayler himself in Edward Briggs his
house used this expression, Father, raise up thy own Son from under bondage,
as we have it from his testimony under his hand in a certificate dated Ian, 14.
1653. And to put it yet out of all possibility of denial, that the juggling of
these men may further yet appear in denying their own Principles; We give you
a part of a dispute betwixt M. Sanderson a Minister of the Gospel, and several
Quakers at Peircebridge, December. 12. 1653. attested by the subscriptions of ten
several persons, part of which concerning the thing in question, we have given
you word for word.

Quaker. Is not Christ the true light in every man? speak.

Mr. Sand. Where Christ is, he rules as a King, but in all he does not so
exercise his Government. Therefore etc.

Quaker. In some, he is kept under corruption, and this I witness, he is
subdued in me; this I pawn my salvation upon.

Mr. Sand. Its Blasphemy to say that a finite corruption should keep under an
infinite Christ, this is to make corruption stronger then Christ.

Quaker. Well, if a man obey the light within him, he will be happy, etc.

How undenyably does this convince this man of his faithless and perfidious
dealings, in seeking most unworthily to shuffle off a Principle so fully owned
by them, Heb. 6.4.6 opened and vindicated.
viz. that Christ in the reprobates is held under corruption, yea,
notwithstanding his so confident denial of this principle; yet Nayler
immediately forgets himself, and falls to proving of it in justification of
Audlands Letter, from Heb. 6.4 6. that its impossible to renew them again to
repentance, since they crucify to themselves the Son of God afresh, and put
him to an open shame; whence he would prove, that Christ Jesus is in the
reprobates, because they crucify afresh the Son of God.

1. Let the Reader ob^erve, it is not said, they crucify the Son of God in
themselves but to themselves. How then does this Text speak any thing to the
upholding of his error?

2. Those the Apostle writes to were Hebrews, the Jews; such as were of that
people that crucified and put to death the Lord of life. Now, as it does not
follow, that because they crucified him upon the Cross, therefore he was in
them; so neither does it follow, that Jesus Christ is in reprobates and
apostates, because they crucify him afresh unto themselves. This is enough to
show, that though Apostates do crucify the Son of God to themselves; yet it
no way follows, that Jesus Christ is in every man, and in the reprobates is
under bondage. And for as much as it is affirmed, that those Apostates there
spoken of, are included under an impossibility of salvation it must necessarily
follow, that if Nayler will suppose that Christ does dwell in those, then he
must affirm that Christ does dwell in those whose sins are unpardonable, that
have fined a sin against the holy Ghost.

John 1.9. this is that true light that lightneth every man that comes into
the world.

John 1.9. opened.
For the opening of this Scripture, you are to know, that John is speaking here
of the Eternal Word, In the beginning was the Word, all things were made by
him, etc. so that his design is to manifest the Divinity of Jesus Christ, and
the Creation of the world by him; in which Creation, he enlightneth every man
that comes into the world; He was in the world, and the world was made by him;
these being the words immediately following that expression of enlightening
every man etc. Its clear as can be, that that light is that which was
implanted in the souls in the first Creation. Now that this light which in the
first Creation was implanted in the soul, and so is in every man that comes
into the world, is 1 Neither Christ. 2. Nor a Knowledge of Christ as Mediator.
3. Nor is a light sufficient to bring to Gospel salvation, we shall fully
clear, and so discover how miserably this Text is wrested by them.

L^ght in all m^^^^^ not Christ in all men.
1. That that light there spoken of, which is implanted in the soul in the
first Creation, is not Christ, will thus appear. First, Its a light Created by
Christ in the soul, and so cannot be Christ himself unless they will
blasphemously affirm Christ to create himself. 2 For this light with which he
enli^^^n^th the soul, most either be by creation, or by hypostaticall union,
viz. by the dwelling^ of the Divinity of Christ in every man, as he was
personally in the humane nature, when the Word was made Flesh, and dwelt
amongst as; which how horrid a blasphemy were it to assert, and how loathsome
would it be to any that knows but the first Principles of the Gospel. And here
we must again tell James Nayler of his wicked blasphemy, in affirming, that
Christ as Man dwells in him, which though we proved against him in the Book he
pretends to answer; yet he wholly passes that over in silence without a tittle
of exception, which we cannot but interpret, as his confession, that it is his
Principle,

Light in all gives yet no knowledge of a Me^iator.
2. That that light, which by Christ in the creating of the world is implanted
the soul, is not a Knowledge of Christ as Mediator, we shall thus evidence.

1. First, This was the light of the first covenant, viz. a covenant of works,
which did not a^ all hold forth or make out a Mediator, for it was that light
which was given forth in the first creation, in which Adam stood only under a
covenant of works, neither needed a Mediator before his fall; upon which fall*
the first light of a Mediator broake out in a promise, The Seed of the Woman
shall break the Serpents head, as in Genesis 3.15^ ver.

2. The knowledge of Christ as Mediator, the Scripture parely holds forth, as a
matter of mere Revelation given forth by God in the second covenant, and not
implanted in the soul in its first creation. Mat. 13.11. to you it is given to
know the mysteries of the Kingdme of Heaven, but to them it is not given. If
Christ do enlighten every man in the Knowledge of himself as a Mediator, how
then comes this Scripture to speak so distinguishingly? to you it is given, to
them it is not given; which exception of Christ, does clearly deny the quakers
universality, that its given to all. To thi^ is parallel that of Christ to
Peter, when by the Fathers peculiar revelation, he understood Jesus to be
Christ. Mat. 16.17. Blessed art thou Simon bar Iona, for flesh and blood has
not revealed this unto thee, but my Father, where he cleares Peter's Knowledge
of Christ as Mediator, not to be from any principle of light cr^ated or
natural Knowledge, but from a peculiar revelation f om the Father, and
pronounces him blessed upon the account of that distinguishing discovery. How
fully does that place of Paul for ever dash any pretense to a power to know
Christ as a Mediator by that natural light which is in every man that comes
into the world. 1 Cor. 2.14. the natural man receives not the things of the
spirit of God, for they are foolishness unto him, neither can he know them,
for they are discerned spiritually. There the Apostle gives the reason why no
light implanted in our natures in the creation, can discern the things of the
spirit of God, because they are spiritually discerned; where he makes an
opposition betwixt natural and spiritual light, and puts an impossibility
upon discovering Christ by the light of Nature. We may add that, ver. 9.10.
Eye has not seen, Ear has not heard, neither has it entered into the heart
of man to conceive, etc. but God has revealed them unto us by his spirit.

3. That that light which by Christ in the creating of the world is implanted
in the soul, is not a knowledge of Christ as a Mediator, will appear by
undeniable examples; for there are multitudes of men and women, without
contradiction never knew the Lord Jesus as a Mediator, though it must be
confessed, they had a rational or natural light. Those thousands of Saints
that went over into new England, fully experienced it, that there is not the
least hint of a Christ implanted in those Indians, one of us having often
conversed amongst them, can also fully witness it; as is more fully also
evident by the confessions of many of them in Print, who have been converted by
the Ministry of Mr. Eliot, of which we spoke in the Perfect Pharisee, page 19.

But may not these Scriptures fully confound these men's pervertings of that
Scripture. Read Psalm. 143.19 He showed his Word unto Jacob, his statutes and
judgments unto Israel; he has not dealt so with any people, and as for his
judgments they have not known them Psalm. 79.6. Power out thy wrath upon the
Heathen that have not known thee. Col. 1.26. the disponsation of God is given
to fulfill the Word of God, even that mystery which has been hid from ages and
generations. But let Paul determine the contrary, to whose judgment we shall
desire to stand, 2 These. 3.2. All men have not Faith.

Light in all not sufficient to save
3. That this light which by Christ in creating of the world is implanted in
man, is not sufficient to bring to a Gospel salvation, is also plain from what
we have convincingly proved, that this natural light may be in thousands that
never knew the Lord Jesus as a Mediator: and John 17.3. this is life eternal,
to know thee the very God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent. So that there
is an utter insufficiency and incapacity in this light to bring to salvation.
So that though A. P. has lately expressed his abhorring the distinction
betwixt natural and spiritual light; yet our Lord Jesus and the Apostles are
so full in it, that they are of more authority with us, then the novell opinion
of A. P.

Thus you see this Scripture fully vindicated from their wrestings; for hence
it is apparent, that though Jesus Christ (by whom the Father made the world,
Heb. 1.2.) in his creation of man did enlighten, and create a principle of
light, and natural reason, and understanding in the soul (which we have
proved is eminently there understood) yet this proves nothing for the Quakers,
that either therefore every man that has a reasonable soul Christ dwells in
him, or that he knows Christ, or that his natural light can possibly suffice
to bring to Gospel salvation.

Naylers next defense is this ridiculous argument, If Christ be not in the most
vile in the world, etc, how shall he judge every one according to their
thoughts, as well as according to what they do? must he proceed as carnal
Judges do, by proof, or confession, and no further?

Christ in you the hope of glory, Col 1 27. so that Scripture speaking of
Christ in you, speaks of him, as being the hope of glory where he dwells: And
is Christ in Devils and damned souls the hope of glory? For ge^^^er the
Quakers nor we are in this controversy at all disposin^ concerning the
abiquity of the Divine Nature, by reason of which he is above all, and through
all, and (...) all. But of Christ in us, in that sense the Gospel uses the
expression, viz. as a saving light and principle, the hope of glory.

2. How ridiculous is it from Christ's knowing all things, to infer, that he
dwells in all? can he not know things unless he dwell in them? Does he not
know the inward motions of Brutes, Horses, Fishes? etc. and is it Scripture
Language from thence to infer his dwelling in them? Oh! the vainenesse and
frothinesse of such a spirit; and how are these men given up to blasphemy. We
shall conclude with that of David, Psalm. 11.4. The Lord is in his holy temple,
the Lords throne is in Heaven: his eyes behold, his eyelids try the children
of men.

He has another argument, that Christ dwells in the Saints; which we know, in
its Gospel sense; but not in Naylers, that Christ as man dwells in them: but
how absurdly and un-scripturally does this conclusion follow, therefore Christ
does dwell in all.

Thus you see our proofs fully confirmed, his lies confuted, his perverted
Scriptures cleared and answered, and the folly of his arguments fully opened,
though he has not answered one of our arguments, and many Scriptures against
that Doctrine.

Position 5. That Christ in the Flesh, with all he did and suffered therein,
was but a Figure, and nothing but an Example.
O deceitful spirits, etc. are those words expressly found in Saul's Errand to
Damascus, as you say they are, let that Book be witness against you, and your
lying slanders to all that read it.

Saul's Errand. He that shall but look upon that Book, page 2. page 8. page 14.
shall begin to know the impudence of James Nayler, page 2. 9. line last, in the
schedule annaxed to the Lancashire Petition to the Council of State, you have
this charge, Richard Hubbethorn wrote, that Christ's coming in the Flesh, was
but a Figure. Now, are we liars in affirming those words are expressly found
there? Nay, further, in page 8. where Hubbethorne answers to that charge, we
will give you his own words, Christ in his people is the substance of all
figures, types and shadows, fulfilling them in them; but as he is held forth
in the Scripture-letter without them, and in the flesh without them, he is
their example or figure, which is both one, that the same things might be
fulfilled in them, that was in Christ Jesus. Could a man have spoken more
plainly to affirm what we asserted of him? And do we add our own
imaginations to make them odious; when we say, according to their principle,
those things that are held forth of Christ without us (as Hubbethorn says)
must be acted over again within us; and so Christ must be borne of the Virgin
in us, and Judas, and Herod, and Pilate must be in us to betray and crucify
him. Is not this the plain assertion of Hubbethorn? the same things must be
fulfilled in us that was in Christ Jesus, as he was held forth in the
Scripture-letter, and in the flesh without us. And this we also proved by an
assertion of George Bateman. page 29. to which Nayler answers nothing.

But further, it shall yet appear, that its clear in Saul's Errand to
Dam^scus, page 14. where George Fox express^^y says, Christ his flesh is a
figure, for every one passes thr^ugh the same way that Christ did, who comes
to know Christ in the flesh.

What a seared conscience must this man need^ have that when this Doctrine is
expressly found in those evid^nt pl^ces in that Book, yet has the impudence,
against the light of conscience, to say, Let that Book he wi^nesse against
y^u, and your lying slanders herein to all that read it. But both you and we
shall both learn what th^s man and his way i^.

N^yler w^ote to one in Lancashire, viz. That ^e that expects to be saved by
him that dyed at Jerusalem, should be deceived; which ^s a m^st (...) by
untruth etc and so he goes on ^a^ling.

that Christ was but a figure, was not Naylers Letter, in which that other
passage is, we mistook N^yle^ for Hubbethorne and that it was in a Letter from
Hu^betho^^e written to one in Lancashire. Take this ensuing Testimony of Mr.
Moore, a godly Minister in Lancashire.

RIchard Hubbethorne wrot^, that the c^mmi^g of Ch^^st i^ the flesh, is but a
figure, or an ^ol^ing (...) in (...) and actions amongst men, those things that
he will truly, spiritually, and really do in the spirits of his people at his
second coming. This but being objected against him, as denying the Lord that
bought us. He replied in another Letter, Thou do not understand what I meant
by that expression, etc. These words being often objected to the Quakers, and
particularly to George Fox, though some of them made an answer to the but, yet
none of them deny it in these parts that I can hear of. These Letters were
sent to Henry Holme, and are now in my hands.

Kellet in Lancash. Jan. 16. 1653. William Moore.

Thus you have our confession of our mistake, only of the Name, you see the
truth of the thing convincingly evidenced.

But that it is a filthy untruth that Nayler wrote such a Letter in which were
those words, He that expects to be saved by him that dyed at Jerusalem, should
be deceived; we answer.

First, Nayler may know that we do only affirm, that Doctor Marshall did
object this against him at Applehy, and Master Jacques, Minister of Bolton in
Lancashire, sent his promise that he would make it appear. Had Nayler denied
that either of these two were true, he might have charged us with a falsehood;
but this he does not, he dare not do. 2. Though Nayler do so cry out against
this as a slander, yet he that considers this their Principle, that Christ with
all he did in the flesh is but a figure (which is proved to be their principle
beyond exception) will wonder why Nayler should look upon this as a slander,
when it is the necessary consequence of that wicked Doctrine; for if Christ
were but a Figure, I should no more expect to be saved by him, then by the
figures and types of the Law. But because the man so loudly cries out against
this as being a filthy untruth that ever he wrote such a Letter (though he deny
not what we say, that this was objected against him by D. Marshall, and that M.
Jacques engaged to justify it) yet we have affixed M. Jacques Testimony to
satisfy the world of our clearenesse from the scandals and wicked reproaches
of Nayler, and this sent is under his Hand and Scale.

JAmes Nayler in a Lettor which he writ to Henry Holme, gave out this
expression, If thou expect to be saved by him that dyed at Jerusalem, thou art
deceived.

Hoc unum test. John Jaques.

Naylers answer, whereby he shuffles this Position, and that evasion is this,
We do own and confess that Jesus Christ in the flesh is a figure or example;
as if figure and example were all one. To which we answer.

Jesus Christ not a Figure.
1. We challenge James Nayler to show one tittle of Scripture wherein Jesus
Christ is called a Figure. The first Adam is called a Figure, Romans 5.14. the
Tabernacle called a Figure, Heb. 9.9. but Jesus Christ is never called a
Figure; and therefore it is a sinful shuffle of James Nayler thus to confound
an Example and Figure.

2. If he be a Figure, we again affirm, he must typifie some thing; but we
refer you to our Book (as to Christ not being a Figure, or only an example)
where we have laid down many Scriptures and arguments, to which he answers
nothing, Perfect Pharisee, page 8. 9.

Position 6. That men are not justified by that righteousness of Christ, which
he in his own Person did fulfill, without us.
Reader, thou will see in our Book we had four proofs for this; three of
which Nayler denies not; and for the fourth we refer thee to Mr. Iaque^
testimony: so that as to the truth of the assertion we must take it for granted
especially considering what George Fox says, in Saul's Errand to Damascus, page
12. He that is borne of God is justified by Christ alone without imputation.
This gives us to understand the meaning of Naylers answer to that Position thus;

That righteousness Christ has performed without me, was not my
justification, etc. until Christ appeared in me, etc. and appeared in me my
righteousness, sanctification, justification, and redemption, etc.

Fox denying imputed righteousness in plain terms.
1. Let but the Reader compare this of James Nayler, with that expressi^n of
George Fox viz. he is justified by that alone without imputation; and that of
Authory Hodgson viz I believe to be saved, not by the righteousness of Christ
imputed to me, but by the righteousness of Christ inherent in me, which he
does not deny, he w^ll learn the meaning of Naylers wor^s to be clearly this
that Christ in a man is the matter of his just fication; so that though he
labor to color over the business in this answer, by saying, Christ was not
his justification, till he appeared in him; yet comparing his answer with these
testimonies, it will appear to be downright equivocation and shuffling.

Question betwixt Quakers and u^concerning the matter of justification, but the
time.
2. For Nayler cannot but know, that the question is not at all concerning the
time when Jesus Christ becomes actual y my justification, but concerning what
is the matter of our justification whether the righteousness which Christ in
his Person did perform, or the holiness which he works in us, be the matter
of our justification when we are justified? Now notstithstanding Naylers
shuffling its clear their sense is that whenever the soul is justified (for
we speak not of the time) the matter of its justification is not that
righteousness which Jesus Christ in his own Per on did perform without us. N
yler himself at Appleby in discourse asserted, He was justified by Christ in
him; and being there told by one of us, that justification is an act of God for
Christ's sake absolving me from the guilt of sin not done in me, but without
me in the Court of Heaven. Nayler said nothing to this but, that which is wi
hout is without. See Mr. Higginsons Book, page 78.

Further proof that Christ's righteousness is the matter of our justification.
Now that the righteousness of Christ performed without us, is the matter of
our justification whenever we are justified, hesides what we have laid down
undeniably from the Scriptures in the Perfect Pharisce, page 10. will further
appear by these testimonies, Rom 3.24. Being justified freely by his grace,
through the redemption that is in Jesus Christ; whom God has set forth to be a
propitiation, etc. Isay 53. He was wounded for our transgressions, and through
his stripes we are healed. Ver. 5.6. he laid on him the iniquities of us all,
ver. 11. he shall bear their iniquities: where Christ's merit or
righteousness, is the reason of the non-imputation of sin to the soul. But
what need we add more in a case, which is so full a Principle of the Gospel.
But of this enough, we shall add more in the next Position. As for reckoning
Drunkards and Swearers to have as much right to what Christ did and suffered at
Jerusalem, as we, we look upon it as one of his reviling fits and passions,
and leave him to the Lord to rebuke him. But this is all the answer he gives to
the many Scriptures against his Doctrine laid down by us.

Position 7. That men are justified by that Righteousness, which Christ within
us enahled us to perform, or (which is in effect, and some of them have
expressed) by inherent holiness.
We proved this to be their Doctrine by fix testimonies. None of which are
denied; only he quarrels at one expression in one of them, viz. the third,
which Nayler lays down, viz. We are not reconciled to God, till we be
perfectly holy, and able to stand so in our own power; he quarrels at the last
clause of this, of which we shall give you an account in the next Position,
whether it properly is to be referred: but the first branch of it, viz. we are
not reconciled to God, till we be perfectly holy, this he denies not, but
asserts again in his answer thus, No imperfect thing can be reconciled to God;
so that the charge stands clear against them, notwithstanding the heresy of
the Tenet, and the loud outcries of Nayler, as if we slandered him.

And to put it further out of question, we shall add these besides Naylers
confession in the present answer. New proof that quakers justificution is by
inherent righteousness
John W^lkinson of Hutton in the hearing of Mr. T W. Minister at Kendall, and
Mr. G. affirmed, that the light within men would not only discover sin, but
also redeem from it, and justify. Capt. Robert Lucas of Kellot in Lancashire,
attesteth under hand, that Robert Wither said, that men are saved by the works
of Christ, which he works in them, and makes them to work. (...) Cham
affirmed to Mr. T. and Mr. Gr. that holy and (...) walking with God, was a
Saints covering from the wrath of (...) so that this Principle stands clear,
notwithstanding his evasions.

that the light within men will bring to fe^re God, and so lead to
justification, does hold forth justification by inherent righteousness.

the light within, by bringing a man to exercise a pure conscience in the fear
of God toward God and man in uprightness, will so lead up to justification
and peace: what does this but plainly speak, that we are justified by
obedience to this light in the exercise of a good conscience toward God and
man: for, says he, it does so lead to justification etc.

that no imperfect thing can be reconciled to God is plain in Scripture. This
he lays down to prove (if it would serve) the truth of that Position, that no
are justified by i^herent righteousness.

Justification consistent with the Saints infirmities.
We answer, That Paul was reconciled to God is plain and that he was justified
which are the same Romans 5.1.9 10.11. but that Paul was imperfect, when yet he
was ^e^^nciled to God, Romans 7. will abundantly evidence He that ^^yes I am
carnal, and sold under sin. ver. 14 was not he t^en imperfect? What I do, I
allow not; what I would that I do not; but what I hate, that do I, ver. 15.
he that was in this condition, was he not imperfect? He that had a Law i^ his
members warring against the Law of his mind, and leading him i^to captivity to
the Law of sin, ver. 23. was not he imperfect? He that in the sense of his
body of death, cried out. Wretched man that I am etc. was not he imperfect? How
ignorant does Nayler discover himself to be of the conditions of the Saints of
God. Was not Peter imperfect, when he cursed and denied his Master, Mat. 26.72.
but that then he was in a justified state, we know none that ever questioned.
But this gross fancy of his own perfections, and ignorance of the mystery of
justification, runs him upon such bold assertions and desperate rock: as
these. What an uncomfortable Doctrine had this been to Paul, when he was
complaining of the body af his sin, to have told him, therefore he was not
justified, nor reconciled to God? with what a glorious Gospel spirit would Paul
have challenged such a man as he does Angels, Principalities, and Powers, Romans
8.37.38. It is God that justifies, who shall condemn me? It is Christ that
died; fetching out a pardon and justification from the blood of Jesus,
notwithstanding his own imperfection in the work of holiness.

of being justified by our own works, we deny, for it is he that works in
us to will, and to do, etc. and herein we deny selfe-workes etc.

Ce^^e^t of Papists and qu^ke^s about justification.
This is the old thread bare sh^f^lle of the Papists, when they are pressed by the
Protestants, and their justification by works or inherent holiness is
confuted by Scripture; they constantly answer as Nayler does: they deny their
being justified by their own works which flow from a Princip e o^ their own
power; but say, that the works by which they are justified are such as flow
from grace, or the workings of God within their souls. They say that by the
first, Bell. de justif. l. 1. c. 19
ne hominem justificare p^sse men cannot be justified; but, per opera qua ex
fide Christi and gratia fluunt homines justificari, by the works which flow
from Christ. All this while both Papists and Quakers all^^^ justification by
inherent holiness, not by the righteousness of Christ imputed, only they
pretend it is not by their own power. The full confutation of which Pop^sh and
Antichristian Doctrine we have laid down in the Perfect Pharisee at large.
page 11. and to which Nayler, according to his wonted presumptuous confidence,
answers nothing.

Position 8. That God and man cannot be wholly reconciled, till he brought into
the state of the first Adam, and able in his own power to stand perfect.
Nayler first excepts against this assertion, that the Book shall witness
against us, and says, man's being able to stand in his own power, was never
spoken by him nor thought by him; and says, that though the word be twice
repeated to stand in Gods power, yet they are not ashamed to wrest it to their
own power, etc.

Book which he says shall witness against us, has not so much as once the
words, to stand in Gods power, though Nayler say, those words are twice
repeated; for the quaere is in these words, Whether God created Man and Woman
perfect without sin, and able in his power to have stood, if they had not
forsaken his power, and consented to the wisdom of the Serpent?

The nature of the power of the first Adam considered
2. From these words, We considering the nature of the state of the fi st Adam,
to which Nayler says, man must be brought before he be reconciled could not
but gather, that standing in men's own power, must be the sense of those words.
Our reason is plain: For, That power which Adam had to stand in his state of
perfection, was given to him as the Prodigals portion into his own hand; but
the power that the Saints now are to stand by is a power in the hand of the
Lord Jesus, given to him as a feoffee in trust: for in this lies the difference
of the power in the sons of men in the first and second Adam: our standing in
the second Adam being by a power and support in the hands and dispose of the
Lord Jesus, by reason of which it is alone, that none can pluck us out of the
Fathers hands, Ioh. 10. And the standing of the first Adam being by that
portion of power which was entrusted in his own hands, without any promise of
assistance or perseverance from God. So that it is apparent, that when Nayler
says, Man must be brought into the state of the first Adam before he be
reconciled; he must mean, he must be able to stand in his own power, without
any engagement of support from God, for tha^ was undeniably the state of Adams
power. Let Nayler show us a tittle out of Scripture, where Adam had any thing
of promise or assistance for his standing, more then the power he had in his
own hands, which was his own power.

3. If yet Nayler will shuffle, that this is not one of the Doctrines of the
Quakers, we shall further convincingly clear it from the very words of George
Fox, in a Book entitled, To all that would know the way to the Kingdom, page
10. he profanely, and like a perfect Atheist, scoffs at the grace of God,
saying thus, And to you that tempt God, and say, Lord give us a sight of our
sins, etc. this light within you lets you see it, so you need not tempt God to
give you a sight of your sins, Foxes horrible ^eering at the gra^e of God.
for ye know enough etc. and give over tempting of God to give you a sight of
your sins. And to all ye that say, God give us grace, and we shall refrain
from our sins, there ye have got a tempting customary word, for the free grace
of God has appeared unto all men, etc.

Hence thou see Fox most wretchedly asserting these two things.

1. That to pray for sight of sin, and for power from sin, is a tempting of
God. 2. That to pray for light and power for the discovery of sin, and
refraining from it, are needless: for so he says, ye need not tempt God to
give you a sight of sin, and cease from saying, God give us grace for the
grace of God has appeared to all men: so that he plainly affirms, that all
men have both a light and power also, that they need not be beholding to God to
give them, nor to ask them of him; for he adds the reason, Why you need not
ask it of God, for you have a light within you and you know enough, etc.

Begging of l^ght and power the Saints duty
What a wretched Principle is this and how c^^trary to plain Scripture? If any
man lack Wisdom let him ask^ it of God? James 1.5. where the Apostle bids the
poor creature to beg wisdom of God, though Fox scoff at it. Open tha^ my
eyes, that I may see, Psalm 119.18 Give me understanding (...) 34.31.32. Surely
it is meet to be s^^d unto God, that which I see not, teach thou me. 1 Peter.
5.10 where Peter prayer the God of all grace m^ke you pe fect, stab^ sh
strengthen, settle (...), Ephesians. 3 14.16, for this cause I bow my k^e^s (...)
the Father (...) our Lord Jesus, that he would grant you to be strengthened
(...) might by his spirit Every good, and every perfect gif^, (...) down from
above from the Father of lights, James 1. ^er 17 Now here you may see the
practice of the Sain s, and the wickedness of Foxes profane jeering at the
grace of God, with sending men to their own light and power in oppositi^^ to
the grace of God: and how all the lies that Nayler charge on us, while he
denies this Position do fully fall upon his own head, while it is as
confiden^ly affe^ted by the g^^ (...) Master of this Babylonish mystery.

The second exception is this, You that say, that Adam (...) the state of
innocence was under a covenant of works, make it appear^ to all that know
Adams state, that you never knew it; for the Law, wherein is the covenant of
works, was added after etc.

Adam in innocence under a covenant of works.
What we have said at large about Adams being under a covenant of works, and
how much better a state the Saints are in by interest in Christ, then the soul
of the first Adem was, the Reader way find at large in the Perfect Pharisee,
page 12. 13. to which he has answered nothing, as his manner is; but we shall
further add.

First, Adam was under a covenant of living by doing, or by obedience to the
Law, which is plainly a covenant of works: who knows not this? In the day
thou eatest thereof, thou shall surely dye, Gen, 2.17.

2. Adam was under such a Covenant as had no Mediator, upon his breach of the
command, there was none by that Covenant to enterpose betwixt him and death;
which is a distinguishing consideration betwixt the two Covenants made with the
first and second Adam.

3. And for Naylers reason, He was not under the Covenant of Works, because
the Law was given after; we may laugh at his ignorance. Was the Law never
known, before it was written upon Tables of stone? Did God make Adam a
rational creature wholly ignorant of his will? Does the ingraving of the Law
in Tables of stone infer, that Adam had not the engraving of that Law upon
his heart, or that he was not under the command or covenant of that Law? but
that we have proved from those express words of covenant, in the day thou
eatest thereof thou shall surely dye.

We know not whether to think the ignorance of this man, or his impudence
greater, in answering nothing to what we have fully laid down against his
Doctrines.

Position 9. That no man that commits sin, or that is not perfectly holy, can
ever enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, unless there be a Purgatory.
Nayler thus excepts, There is not a word to that purpose, as you have set
down.

Whether any imperfect one shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, yea, or no?
and if not, then how shall one dying in sin; and where shall he be made
perfect and clean, seeing the tree must lie as it falls? and whether you own
a Purgatory, yea, or no? this he confesses to be his words. And is there not a
word (as he charge us) there to that purpose?

(...) qu^r^es (...) to a^^^^^ us.
2. But the Reader must know, that what he there in that Book lays down by
way of quaery, must be looked upon as his positive assertions, as thou will see
by the adjoining quaeries in the same page, where challenging those that are so
much offended at perfection, he puts these quaeries. 1. Whether any imperfect
one committing sin be the Im^ge of God, yea or no? where a man may plainly
see, he means such an one is not the Image of God. 2. Whether any can witness
the work of Redemption complete in them by Christ, while they commit sin?
where it is evident he intends the negative. So in this quaere, to resolve it
into a proposition; we appeal to his conscience, or the judicious Reader, that
whilst he puts ^his quaere as a challenge to those that deny perfection in
this life. Whether any imperfect and uncleave one that lives in sin, shall
enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, yea or no? and if not, how shall one dying
in sin? and where shall he be made perfect and cl^ane, seeing the tree must
lie as it falls? and whether you own a Purgatory, or no? we dare appeal to
them, we say, if it run not thus by way of assertion. That no unclean or
imperfect man can enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, unless there be a
Purgatory to wash away his sins that dies imperfect.

And now thou will see how unjustly this man rayles with open mouth, as if we
were the most wicked liars in the world, when the assertion is so evidently his
own, and will so appear to any that has but half an eye of common
understanding

They charge me to say, that no man that has sinned can enter into the
Kingdom, and as though I owned a Purgatory.

N^y^e^s shuffling.
Has sinned, what a miserable shuffle is this, and what a pitiful conscience
has this man? thy own eyes Reader will inform thee, that we have not such a
tittle in our Book* we charge him to say, No man that does commit sin, and
is not perfectly holy, can enter into the Kingdom; but who charge him to
have said, that no man that has sinned, etc. For charging him as if he owned a
Purgatory its like the former; surely the man was put to a pinch, when he falls
a doubling and shuffling so apparently. We say this must be his argument,
Either there must be a Purgatory to wash away the sin of him that dies
imperfect, or else he can never enter into the Kingdom of God. It seems Nayler
knows no other way, but a Purgatory to wash away his sin that dies
imperfect. But we look upon that clause, as the absurdity which Nayler thinks
to run us upon, if we will plead, that a man may dye imperfect and yet be
saved, then we must own a Purgatory; And so because he knew no other way to
wash away men's sins, Quakers Popery.
but either by perfect holiness here, or by a Purgatory, we found him out a
medium, even the blood of the Lord Jesus, which cleanses the soul (otherwise
as to its personal actings, very guilty) from all sin.

John 1.7. Does it say any are cleansed from sin while they personally act
sin? or the quite contrary?

Naylers juggling with Scripture.
How falsely does Nayler deal with the Scripture, and imitate the Father of
lies; when Satan tempted Christ, Mat 4 6, to cast himself down from the
Temple, he takes that of Scripture that would be thought serve his purpose, and
leaves out the rest; as may be seen by comparing it with Psalm. 91.11.12. Just
so deals Nayler with the Scripture and us, leaving out from that Scripture
that which immediately follows, If we say that we have no sin we deceive our
selves, and the truth is not in us; which would fully have made out the mystery
of perfect justification consisting with imperfect sanctification; its spoken
of Saints, that are actually cleansed by the blood of Christ, and yet are told
there is no truth in them; they make God a liar, if they say we have no sin.
That Text beyond exception also, Romans 4.5. To him that works not, but
believes in him that justifies the ungodly etc. he is silent unto, according
to his custom.

Position 10. No real Saint but he that is perfect, and perfectly holy in this
life, and does not sin.
Our several proofs, that this is their Principle, are not denied; but we are
reviled for manifesting this to be an error from Scripture, though he has not
answered one of the many Scriptures we gave against this Doctrine.

It soems there can be no greater offense to you, then to cry down sin, and
to grow up to perfection, etc. you plead for continuance in sin and
imperfection, etc. you plead for the Devils Kingdom, putting cleansing from
sin and perfection far off till after death, etc.

Denial of perfection, in this life is no pleading for sin.
1. Reader,If thou have read our Book of the Perfect Pharisee, thou will see,
we foresaw this language from them; where we told thee, we expect (from their
former usage in this kind) they will charge us with pleading for sin, page
16.17. where we showed, that discovering the imperfections of the best Saints,
lest they should live upon their own righteousness was no pleading for sin:
and this we proved from the practice of Christ, (discovering the imperfection
of the Churches) of the Spir^t, rehearsing the faults of the Saints; of Paul
crying out, of the body of his death. So that to discover it, is not to plead
for it, unless you will blaspheme the holy One of Israel. Had Nayler
considered these Texts, he might have spared the labor to repeat again a
cavil so fully answered; but he answers nothing,

2. But yet to make it more clear, that to say, perfection in holiness cannot
be attained in this life, is not to plead for sin and for the Devils
Kingdom: Consider first, The Kingdom of the Devil is not pleaded for there,
where there is a pressing of a continual wrestling and struggling in the power
of Jesus Christ against it, which pressing is our constant practice to our
people. For though it is plain from Scripture, that in the utmost attainements
of the people of God, still they see but in a glass, darkely, 1 Cor. 13. and
have not attained perfection, Psalm. 3.12. yet it is their duty to struggle and
wrestle against the body of their death and to press toward the mark, Phil.
3.14. Again, does the Physician meeting with a Patient in a consumption,
Telling a conceited perfectionist of sin, is to deal faithfully with his
soul.
who strongly conceives that he is in per^^^ health, though the Physician
demonstrate it, that there (...) such and such decays in his vital parts,
does he by declaring this, plead for his sickness? or rather by this means
plead for his use of effectual means for his recovery? For, the whole no^^
not a Physician, but they that are sick: And Jesus Christ cam^ not to call the
righteous, but sinners to repentance. Nay, will not all say rather, that the
Physician is more faithful to the sick^ man, then he is to himself? and more
an enemy to, and pleader against the sickness, then the man is that conceits
h^ is sound and perfect? This is the very case betwixt us and Nayler. Nayler
says, he is perfect; the Quakers say, they are perfect, and without sin; we
plead and say, he is not perfect nay, he cannot be perfect, while there is
such a body of de^^^ in him, and such a plague of sin running in his heart;
we tell him, that he that says he has no sin, is a ly^r, deceiv^^ himself,
and m^kes God a liar, and so do plead with him (not as he maliciously would
scandalize us, to lie still in the state, content to have the body of his death
work his (...) but to go out to the blood of Jesus Christ for cure, that
(...) quities may be pardoned, to fetch strength from the (...) of Christ, not
from his light within him, against the bub^^ (...) up of corruptions in the
heart, and press toward the (...) Whether now plead for sin, Nayler or we?
he that wi^^ (...) hear of the Saints being sick, or under any spiritual
imp^^fection, or we, that demonstrate their sin from Scripture that so they
may seek after the healings of the blood (...) Jesus.

The spirit convincing of sin, does not p^^^^e for sin.
3. What is the design of the discovery, and convictions (...) the sins of
men by the spirit of the living God? Is it (...) plead for sin? that
singular office of the spirit, John 16.^^ he shall convince the world of sin;
when God does set o^ secret sins, the secret sins of Saints before their eyes
is it (...) set up the Kingdom of the Devil? What blasphemy m^^^ Nayler bring
upon himself? or is it not evidently to pull do^^ the throne of Satan, and the
power of sin, which never weakened in the soul, till it be discovered and
never ^^^gt more securely and effectually, then in the heart of him that
secure, and confident he is complete and perfect, and says Rev. 3.17. I am
rich, and increased with goods, and stand in need of nothing, when he knows
not he is miserable, poor, blind, and naked.

Pleading for perfection here, is a pleading for sin, proved in seven
particulars.
4. We shall add no more but this, that pleading for this, that any of the sons
of men are perfectly holy, and do not sin, (which is the design of Nayler) is
really to plead for sin, and to set up and strengthen the bars of the
Kingdom of Satan.

1. That soul will never struggle after a better state, which lives in a
conceit of his perfection here, Romans 8.24. hope that is seen, is not hope: for
what a man sees, why does he yet hope for? how does this strengthen the
Kingdom of darkness? contrary to Phil 3.12.13.14. Romans 8, 23. 2 Cor. 5.2.3.
Phil. 1.21.22.

2. This is to cast a needlesnesse upon the precious blood of Jesus, it is a
tr^mpling under foot the blood by which we are justified, our propitia ion
being through Faith in his blood, Romans 3.25. What needs this fountain for sin
and uncleanness, Zach. 13.1. where there is no sin? What n^ed of a Savior,
where there is no sin? the whole need no Physi ian, Mat. 9.12. and what a
wickedness is this, to make the blood of Christ in vain? and what is it, but
as Nayler says, ^o co^^t the blood of the Lord Jesus as a common thing? Gal.
3.22.

3. Will such a soul ever go out to pardoning promises? and how does Satan by
such a Doctrine as this, at once destroy the necessity of the blood and of the
promises of Jesus Christ, such as these, Isay 1.18. though your sins be as
Scarlet, etc. Isay 43.25. I am he that blotteth out transgressions. Heb. 8.12.
Your sins and iniquities I will remember no more. Is not this evident from
the practice of Qu^kers, both in their speaking and writing? they never send
these souls whom they call damned to the pardoning promises and blood of
Christ; but to their own light to save them. What need of the promises of
pardon, when I have no sin? and was it not the Pharisees sin, Mat. 15.6.
Mark 7.13 to make the command of God of none effect? and is it not much more
the Quakers s^n, to make void the promises? Romans 3.3. Romans 4.14. So Heb. ^.2.3.
If the Word spoken by Angels ^as steadfast, etc. how shall we escape, if we
neglect the Word, which at first began to be spoken by the Lord.

4. Is not this also, this fancy of perfection, the great root of that great
sin against the Gospel, of selfe-righteousnesse? which the Apostle so much
declares against, Romans 9.31.32. Rom, 10.2.3. Gal. 5.4. for such is the
remaining pride that is in every one, that if they have any thing to glory in,
they will set it up, as their Idol in their hearts.

5. How can sin be mourned over, and mortified, when neither owned nor
discovered. We find blessed Paul, a Saint, of another Principle then James
Nayler pretends to, he, good man, complains of an imperfect state, 1 Cor.
13.12. I see but in part, he mourns over the body of his death. Romans 7.24. Oh!
wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me? But how shall we expect this from
such as hide their eyes from their bosom sins? there can be no sense of an
unseen, an unfelt, an unacknowledged sin. What is the reason why so little
mourning and mortifying? is it not blindness, and want of discerning sin in
the exceeding sinfulness of it in men's hearts.

6. This is to take away the end of Christ's convincing men of sin, which is
that free grace may superabound, Romans 5.20. What made Paul to cry out of the
exceeding abundance of grace, 1 Timothy 1.15. but the exceedingnesse of his
sins? I am the chief of sinners. David, though a man after Gods own heart,
yet the sight of his great sins, after he was in a justified state, this is
that which makes him cry out to the multitude of Gods tender mercies for
pardon. Psalm. 51.1. according to thy loving kindness, according to the
multitude of thy tender mercies, blot out my transgressions, etc. How shall a
Quaker see any glory in pardoning grace, as to its daily coverings of their
weaknesses, when they say, they are perfect, and do not sin at all.

The quakers sins discovered notwithstanding their pretense and pleading for
perfection.
7. This fancy of their perfections, is the hiding from their poor deluded
souls of those sins, which they are evidently under the power of, in the
eyes of any spiritual observer. For though they cry up their own perfections,
yet who knows not the sinfulness of their selfe-righteousnesse, of their many
blasphemies, Heresies, denying the Lord that bought them, raylings, pride,
lying, reproaching of the precious Ordinances of the living God, and Messengers
of Jesus? Alas, what observant eye does not read these evidently in their
books, writings, words, behaviors? Now who knows not, if Scripture be true,
these are woeful corruptions, and damning sins? And shall their fancy of
perfection be a covering to such abominations as these? No, no; the Prophet
Isaiah will tell them otherwise, Isa. 28.20. the bed is shorter then that a may
can stretch himself on it, and the covering narrower then that he can wrap
himself in it. Nay, their very pleading they are perfect, convinces them of
sin;
For Job a man of excellency and holiness, beyond any of them, says, chap.
9.20.21. If I justify my self, my own mouth shall condemn me; if I say I am
perfect, it shall also prove me perverse; though I were perfect, yet would I
not know my soul. But such broken reeds will one day pierce their hands, when
the King of terrors shall arrest the body, and the sorrows of death shall
compass them about, then their perfection will appear to be a dream. Oh!
that Nayler would think of that of Bellarmine, who had long disputed for a
perfection of holiness; but when he came to dye, then he came to see somewhat
of the rags of his own righteousness, and cried out, Lord have mercy on me,
not according to my workings, but according to thy mercies in Jesus Christ.
Reader, if God ever open these men's eyes, they will then see the need of the
blood of Christ, when the flames of wrath shall be burning up their straw and
stubble: but if the spirit of slumber shall keep them in blindness and in
bondage still, that they cannot see and will not own their imperfection; yet
when Christ shall come in flaming fire, how shall their righteousness shrivell
together as a scrowle, and be like stubble before the flame? then will the
vanity of that Quakers expressions be laid open, That holy and close walking
with God, is a Saints covering from the wr^^^ (...) God. Oh! let the Reader,
Psalm, 2.12. Kiss the Son lest he be angry; when his wrath is kindled ^^t a
little blessed are all they that trust in him.

E
As to this matter of perfection, the sum of the rest of his answer is to
plead for perfection here from these considerations. That this is the end of
Christ's coming, to present us perfect that not one jot or tittle of the Law
must pass, till all be fulfilled Romans 8.3.4. That God sent his Son, that the
righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us, and to dispute against
perfection here, is to make the commands of Christ, and endeavors of the
Saints, of none effect.

1 John 3.8. opened. How Christ destroys the works of the devil.
1. As for the first, that Christ destroys the work of the Devil, 1 John.
3.8. and to this end was made manifest. We answer, 1, Christ destroyed the
works of the Devil for his people, upon the Cross. Col. 2.14.15, and having
spoiled Principalities and Powers, he made a show of them openly tryumphing
over them in it. Heb. 2.14. Christ himself took part of flesh and blood, that
by death he might destroy him that had the power of death, viz. the Devil, Do
we then by denying perfection of inherent holiness in this life, make void the
end of Christ's coming, thus to destroy the works of the Devil? nay, we
establish it; for by discovering of imperfection, we send them to glory alone
in Christ crucified, Gal. 6.14.2. Christ destroys the works of the Devil in
his people also; and this is the constant carrying on of mortification in their
hearts, with his own spirit whereby he takes away the doimnion and reign of
sin. Romans 6.14. As in Paul, who though he had the spirit of Christ, and the
dominion of sin removed, and Christ daily destroying the works of the Devil
in him; yet still he had a Law in his members, warring against the Law of his
mind, Rom, 7.23. yet there was the spirit lusting against the flesh, and the
flesh against the spirit. Thus Christ exercises his conquering power in the
conflicts of his Saints. Now though sin in Paul where not wholly removed, or
destroyed at present, yet did not Christ lose this end of his being made
manifest. For first, as he had it in part in his daily conquering. So secondly,
he will have it in fullness, in his own appointed time, when the soul shall
see him face to face, then that which is in part shall be done away, and not
till then; as is clear, 1 Cor. 13.9.10. 3. There are ends of Christ's being
made manifest, which are not void, because they are not fulfilled in this
world, such as, the putting of the Saints into the possession of his fullness
of glory, the putting of all his enemies under his feet, etc. so that
perfection in holiness being one of these things, that are reserved for a
state of glory, we do not destroy the end of Christ's coming, when we plead
he shall attain this end in his own appointed time; and though the most holy
here are full of many infirmities, yet the day shall be when the works of
Satan shall be destroyed in them altogether, in the time appointed by the
Father: the Quakers may as well say, because the Saints are not now in glory,
therefore Christ has lost his end in dying. What we have said to this, both in
Christ's satisfying for souls, whereby he presents them perfect as to
justification, as also his destroying at death the whole body of sin, when
they enter into a perfect state of glory, will show the vanity of his second
plea; for though we be not perfectly holy in our selves in this life, yet we
are perfect as to justification, and complete in him, Col. 2.10. and though the
Saints be not completely holy at present; yet the day is coming when they
shall, even the time appointed by him that dyed for it, and purposes to
present us spotless at his coming; so that Christ loses not the end of his
coming.

Mat. 5.28. opened.
As to his third, that Mat. 5.18. not one j^t or tittle of the Law shall pass
till all be fulfilled; which he brings to prove perfection in the Saints, thus;
First. It is evident that he that is there spoken of in v. 17. as fulfilling
the Law is, the Lord Jesus. I came to fulfill it; and that was solely and alone
the work of Christ, both as he was the accomplishment of Prophesies, in the
Law or Book of Scripture, as he was the substance of all shadows in the Law
ceremonial; and as he in Person, did exactly as Mediator perform all the
duties of the Law Moral, that so by his obedience, many might be made
righteous. What, is this to prove perfection in the Saints, because Christ
fulfilled all righteousness.

2. But the natural and proper sense of this Text is clearly another
business; Christ is speaking here, that the Law, or the word of command and
prophesies shall stand good and sure; the word here is interpreted in the
repetition of them, Luke 16.17. not one jot shall fall; so here, (...).
not one tittle shall pass from the Law, it shall stand good and entire in it
self: Christ is not speaking as if the Law should be completely fulfilled and
obeyed by us; it shall stand in its force and authority, notwithstanding that I
am come; yet I came not to destroy it, but to continue it in its truth,
entirenesse and authority: like that Romans 3.31. Do we then make void the Law
through Faith? nay, we establish it. And that Isay 40.48. repeated 1 Peter 1.25
the grass withers, and the flower thereof fades, but the Word of the Lord
abides for ever. And what a non sensicall reason is this, to prove that the
Saints are perfect here, and do perfectly fulfill the Law, because the Law
shall not lose a tittle of its authority and entirenesse?

Romans 8.4. opened.
3. His third plea to prove the perfection of holiness in this life is, Romans
8.4. that the righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us. To which we
answer. First, The Apostle here ver. 1. is speaking of justification, there is
now no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus. Ver. 3. he lays down
whence that freedom from condemnation flows, and tells you, that what the Law
could not do, in that it was weak through the flesh, God sending his own
Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, for sin, (viz. by a sacrifice for
sin, or to satisfy for sin) condemned sin in the flesh* that is, when
man could not be justified by reason that sinful flesh could not satisfy the
Law, God sent his Son to satisfy for sin, that so the righteousness of
the Law might be fulfilled in us. So that though we personally cannot, and
could not perform it; yet, through our union with Christ, being dead with
Christ, Col. 2.20. quickened with him, Ephesians. 2.5. we have his righteousness
fulfilled in us. Thou will fullier understand that this place is meant of the
righteousness of Christ satisfying and fulfilling the righteousness of the
Law and so made ours by our union with him, if thou consider these observations,

1. It is no where said in all the Book of God, that the righteousness of the
Law is fulfilled in this life in any Saint, as to inherent holiness; nay the
contrary is here asserted ver. 3. the Law was weak through Faith. As also,
Romans 3.20. that a man is not justified by the works of the Law etc. 2. It is
Beza's note, that the righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled, (...), in
us; not (...), not of us, or by us. 3. Is not this to go about to confirm
justification by inherent holiness, against which you have had such undeniable
proof. 4. What is this, but to build up the old Popish notion of justification
by inherent holiness. 5. If any shall think that latter expression (who
walks not after the flesh, but after the spirit) shall tie this, fulfilling of
the Law in us to sanctification, we refer him to the first verse, where the
same words are used; and yet they are only laid down as a description of the
Persons to whom there is no condemnation; as they are laid down also as a
description of these persons that enjoy the fruit of that glorious work of
Christ fulfilling the Law, and satisfying it. So that this Text only holds
forth the satisfaction of the Law by Jesus Christ to be made really ours by our
union with him, as fully as if it had been performed in our own persons. But
as to justification by inherent holiness, or perfection of it in this life, we
have fully proved the contrary.

Lastly, He tells us we looked upon it as a strange thing, that Farnesworth
should say, No unclean thing can enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. When as,
that which we say, is no such thing, but a challenging of Farnsworth his
ignorance of the Gospel, that he can see no consistency with these two, A Saint
cannot be perfect here; And no unclean thing can enter into the Kingdom of
God. Is this to count the Scripture a strange thing? or is it not Farnsworths
gross ignorance, that he knows no way of entering into glory, unless he be
perfect before he dye? Is he not grossly ignorant of the maine mystery of
justification by the blood of Christ? May not a man be in part, unclean, by
reason of the imperfection of his present holiness and yet pure and spotless
too, as to justification, by reason of the imputation of the obedience of him,
who is the Lord our righteousness. This Reader, is their great Idol and
Diana, and therefore thou will pardon our tediousness, and clearly see how
blind these men are as to Gospel righteousness.

Position 11. That every man in the world has a light within him sufficient to
guide him to salvation, without the help of any outward light or discovery.
In his answer to this Position, he denies none of our proofs; but adds his
further profession of the same Principle, in these words; All the World shall
witness against you, that they have a light that lets them see when they
sin, which if they did mind, and obey would lead out of sin unto Christ
etc.

that Christ is the true light, and that he enlightneth every man, and that
where he is, there need no outward discovery.

true light, is confessed on all hands; but that Jesus Christ is in every man,
or gives a saving light to every man, we utterly deny: and we have plentifully
proved in our answer to the fourth Position. The first Text he proves it by,
is, John 1.9. He is the true light that lightneth every one. We have fully
opened this Text in our answer to the fourth Position, and convincingly showed,
it is not meant at all of any Gospel saving light, where we desire the Reader
to satisfy himself at large. Io. 8.12. opened.
For his second, John 8.12. I am the light of the World, he that follows me
shall not walk in darkness. This proves not that Christ does give a saving
light to the whole world; no more then that Text, 1 John 2.2 does prove that
the whole world shall have the benefit of Christ's propitiation. Secondly, the
words immediately following, might satisfy Nayler, that he is thus a saving
light only to them that follow him, who are Believers, drawn by the power of
the spirit of God. Cant. 1.4. No man comes to me except the Father draw me.
John 6.44.45. Every man that has heard and learned of the Father comes to
me: So that Christ is only the light of those that have learned of the Father,
and have been drawn by the Father, and follow him. Here is a clear
restriction of Christ's being a light, only to Believers, to them that follow
him etc. Io. 1.4.5 opened.
The third Scripture, John 1.4 5. the light shined in darkness, and the
darkness comprehended it not; is clear against him. For the Phrase of the
light shined in darkness, imports only, that Jesus Christ was Preached to
them, Christ came amongst them, and John Preached him to them. Ver. 29. Behold
the Lamb of God, etc. yet they were in darkness, for want of light they
could not so much as discover him, nor receive him; so far were they from
knowing Christ, or the world from having Christ a light in them all, that they
could not apprehend him, when he was Preached openly to them. His fourth Text
is, John 3.19. this is the condemnation, that light is come into the world, is
as full against Nayler, as the former: for it speaks this, that Jesus Christ is
the true light, was Preached to the World and discovered to them, when he had
before been a mystery, hid from Ages and Generations, Col. 1, 28. yet they
would not believe him, but loved to continue in that darkness, or ignorance
of Christ, which is in all by nature.

Now for the third branch of his answer, that where this light of Christ is,
there need no outward discovery. We answer, 1. We have abundantly proved, that
Jesus Christ is not in all, in out answer to his reply to the fourth Position.
2. We have also proved, That Jesus Christ neither is in all, nor does he
enlighten all, by giving every man a knowledge of the Gospel; this we have done
at large in the same place. 3. We have fully proved, that all men in the world
do need an outward light or discovery, and that it is the way of Christ his
making known himself by outward discovery, and Preaching the Gospel, in the
Perfect Pharisee, page 18.19, in six arguments, to which Nayler answer nothing.
Necessity of outward reaching, further proved.
All that he brings for it de novo, in his answer, is only his bare word,
without either argument or text; so that we need to say no more. Yet, ex
abundanti, we shall add. First, It was the wisdom of the Father to have the
Gospel Preached to every creature, and therefore did he send men forth to
publish it, Mark 16.15. Mat. 28.19.30.

2. It pleased the Father to own Preaching of the Gospel, with the conversion
of souls. Acts 2.41. 1 Cor. 1.21. I^ pleased God by the foolishness of
Preaching, to save them that believe

3. It pleased the Lord Jesus, when he was ascended up to Heaven, to give
officers for the perfecting of the Saints. Ephesians, 4.11.12. for the edifying of
the body of Christ.

4. It pleased him also to establish this as an everlasting Ordinance to
continue till the end of all things, Mat. 28 last. Ephesians. 4, 15. He that has
any sense of the wisdom of God, and submission to it, will not dare to say
with Nayler, that every man has a light within him, sufficient without the
help of any outward discovery, or to charge folly in doing all this upon him,
whose wisdom is admired, infinite, and acts nothing needlessely, and in
vain? But what dare not these men do, who dare lift up themselves in their
blasphemous pride, to be as pure as God,

2 Pet. 1.19. opence and vindicated.
There is one Scripture, 2 Peter 1.19. which is not brought by Nayler by way of
proof, but is most ignorantly wrested by him, to this their Idol, of light
within. We hinted how little the man had of any knowledge of Scripture, by his
so blind, and pitiful abusing this Text, in that former Book, Perfect
Pharisee, p. 19. We see he is yet as confident as he was; we shall only say,
that which is there called, the sure Word of Prophecy, 2 Peter 1.19. is that
word of Prophecy, which in old time holy men of God spoke, etc, v. 21. and to
this he bids them take heed, viz. to the Doctrine of the Prophets; where Peter
does not send them to the light within them, but to the Books and Words of the
Prophets, as Christ sends the Jews to the same Scriptures, John 3.39, Nay, the
Text is so far from hinting any light within, that the Apostle tells you,
these words of the Prophets were (...), a more sure Word then the voice that
came from Heaven, ver, 17. Thus the man has still the weakness to produce
Scripture, that fully destroys his own Principle.

We shall add no more, but from these words of Naylers, Where this light of
Christ is, there needs no outward discovery, wish the Reader to observe, That
it is not only the Publishing of the Gospel, by the Ministry that Nayler cries
down in this as useless, but also the very Scriptures, the written word it
self (being an outward discovery) must by the same reason be asserted
needless. Here is the Religion of these men that pretend so much to
perfection, and yet will not hear God in his Word.

Position 12. That there is no need of any outward teaching by Reading or
Hearing the Scriptures opened or applied, etc.
The Reader by his answer may observe, there is nothing said against our many
proofs; only one shuffle about the expressions of John Audland, who we said
affirmed, No need of outward teaching, which Nayler says is false; for the
words were, He needed no man to teach him; What a shufflle is this? or does
this deny what we say? does he not say, no need of outward teaching to
himself? But Nayler has this but by report, and the words were spoken in our
hearing. Nayler also (we observed in the last Position) asserts the same fully,
in these words, Where this light of Christ is, there needs no outward light or
discovery, etc. the rest of his answer is the grossest heap of railing and
lying, as we have seen. His railing will appear to all that reads it, and his
lying is as full; For he says, These promises you give to them that are in the
first birth, sow pillowes under every arme-hole; you Preach them up all
Believers, except some that refuse to give you hire, and them you prepare war
against: you say men must commit sin while they live, etc. who knows not
that knows us, the falsenesse of these lies, which he speaks out so freely,
as if they were as true as could be. But as their wickedness is fully known,
so the Lord will in due time discover what shall be given to a false tongue.

Ier. 31.31.32.33. Heb. 8, 10.11. they are both the same, They shall teach no
more every man his neighbor, or saying, Know the Lord etc.

Nayler himself confesses also, it concerns them only.

That great promise in Jer. 31.31. opened at large.
1. The children of God only are in everlasting covenant in the new covenant.
2. They that shall be thus taught, are such as have their sins pardoned. Will
Nayler say, that every man has his sin pardoned? he may as well affirm,
that all have their sins pardoned, as affirm that this promise belongs to all.
So that as in the point of pardon all flesh must signify not every man; so it
must be restrained also in the point of teaching, to those all that are the
people of God, and are interessed in the mercy of this everlasting covenant.

2. Though these people of God be thus taught of God; yet this excludes not the
use of outward ^eaching. Reader, besides the evidences of this we gave thee in
four arguments under our reply to his answer to the eleventh Position; If thou
would take the pains to read what we have Written in the Perfect Pharisee,
page 21. 22. in which we have convinced the needlesnesse of outward teaching,
even to the best of Saints, by plentiful arguments, and above thirty
undeniable, plain, evident Scriptures, thou will be fully satisfied; and
therefore we shall not trouble thee to repeat what we have said; only in a
few words to open the meaning of the expression, we shall add.

1. Know this promise was made good when the Saints were under outward
teachings, when the Apostles preached, when Elders were set over the Churches,
when Faith came by hearing, Romans 10. For in those times the spirit was
abundantly powered forth: yea, then was the time, when their Sons and Daughters
Prophesied; so that it is a promise consisting with outward reaching. 2. With
how much willingness did the Saints, when enjoying this promise, attend the
Apostle Doctrine, Acts 2.42. 3. Why does the Apostle write to the Hebrews to
teach them, if that were the meaning, that no man should teach his neighbor.
4. Nay, does he not say, Heb. 5.12. Ye^ have need that one teach you again
which be the first Principles of the Oraecles of God. 5. Paul blames them for
their forsaking their Church Assemblies, Heb. 10.25. Yea 6. Command^ these
Hebrews, Remember them that have the rule over you, w^e^ have spoken to you the
Word of God, Heb. 13.7. And 7. Iud. ver. 3. It was needful for me to Write
unto you, and exhort you. 8. Paul speaking of himself as to his Ministry,
says, Phil. 1.24. to continue in the flesh is more needful for you; and what
was it for? but as to their instruction, So that it plainly appears, this is
not spoken to exclude outward Preachings, but are to show the abundance of
spiritual Knowledge and light in Gospel Times, comparatively with the
dispensation the Jews were under, before the coming of the Lord Jesus But we
have abundantly proved the sense is not, cannot be, to take away the
needfulnesse of outward teaching.

VVarrant for division of Scripture into chapter and verse.
To excuse George Fox his juggling in a Concordance, he fall to abuse the
division of Scriptures into Chapters and Verses: It seems he has a mind to
cast all the dirt he can upon any outward light, though it be the Scriptures,
and though for nothing but this, and he says, the Hireling Priests have done
it to trade withal; thus does he ignorantly rail, though the Old Testament
was so divided and distinguished long before the coming of Christ, by the
Masorites into chapter and verse, about two hundred years before the coming
of our Saviou; and the most Learned say, that they were that Ecclesiastical
Senate, held by Ezra, Haggai, Zachariah, and Malachy, with diverse others; who
amongst others their eminent services, distinguished the Scriptures into
sections and verses. And as we find none of the Apostles, nor Christ himself
disalowing that division; so the Saints of God in our days, have ^ound
precious advantage by thus methodizing Scripture, though this man revile it
under the name of the work of Hirelings.

How he shu^fles in the rest about the Apostles Preaching and ordaining E^ders,
will info^^e thee fully how the man was puzzled in that business: and his last
expressions of saying, we tell men, they must commit sin, will inform thee
of his maliciousness. He would insinuate to the Reader, as if we pressed men
to sin. We have said so much of this, that we shall add no more, having
fully cleared, our pressing to all yea to the best, to strive after grea er
degrees of holiness daily, and that they must struggle after that perfection,
which yet they do not enjoy; but we see the man is vexed and so we leave him
to calm his spirits. We have been very full also as to pro^e the necessity of
teaching, to which thou may observe he answers nothing, and thereby see the
spirit of those men, that do stop their eyes against the plainest light; but
he that hardens his heart shall not prosper.

Position 13. That the Scriptures are not the Word of God, but a Declaration of
the conditions of them that spoke them forth.
He answers nothing, according to his custom, to our arguments, nor excepts
against our proofs, but labors to confirm the Position.

Christ is the Word; now if the Scriptures be the Word then there is two Words
of God, now prove that in Scripture, or that the Letter is ^aked the Word in
plain words.

the Word, is plain, John 1. and who knows it not,

The essential and declarative Word, not all one.
2. That the will of God contained in the Scripture, is the Word of God, is as
plain, besides the Scriptures we named ^n the Perfect Pharisee, page 24. Mark
7.13. Luke 11 28. Romans 10.17. John 12.48. we shall add these; Luke 8.11. the
Seed is the Word of God, ver. 12. then comes the Devil and takes the word
out of their heart, least they should believe and be saved; can the Devil take
Christ out of their hearts? 1 These. 2.13. When ye received the Word of God
which you heard of us, ye received it not as the Word of Men, but as it is in
truth the Word of God etc. This was the Word which the Apostles spoke; yea,
received it, which cannot be me^nt of Christ; he should have said, ye received
him, not as the word of men, but as it is in truth the word of God. This is so
plain a case, we shall not trouble thee further. And here thou may observe
there are two words of God; the essential and (...) declarative, and wonder
the man should be so weak as to bid (...) produce Scripture to prove this,
when the Scripture is so full of it to any that does but read it.

^ohn 1.2.3.

Scriptures not only a declaration of the conditions of Saints.
Again, we do own the Scriptures, to be the declarative Word of God, or a
declaration of the mind of God; but we say, the Quakers do destroy the
Scriptures Divinity and authority, when they call them only a declaration of
the conditions of them that spoke them forth. For as we pr^ved before, 1 They
shall be then no foundation for the Faith of Saints; for one man's condition is
not the foundation of another man's Faith. 2. The Scripture shall have no
authority over the soul of any, but he that is in the same condition, and has
experienced it, contrary to John 2.4 8. this is the reason why Nayler says,
they are not commanded to forbear to wear sh^oes in his Book, p. 21. if they
were, they should, as well as they are commanded, not to s^lute; whereas that
command (if it be in any part binding) Luke 10.4. requires both; but this will
tell thee, what is meant by their calling Scripture a speaking forth of the
Saints condition viz. it shall have no authority over them further then they
list, or have an impulse on their spirits, or they practice; for both the
commands are of equal auth^rity, yet he denies they are commanded one of them:
nay they are both in the same verse. Luke 10.4. Yea 3. This destroys the
divine authority of all Historical and Prophetical Scripture, which could not
be the Saints conditions when they spoke them; as also threatenings and promises
etc But see this at large Perfect Pharisee. page 24.25. We sha l say but this,
1 John 5.16. There is a sin unto death, I do not say that you should pray
for it. was this John's cond^^ion when he spoke it? did he exper ence in his
heart that he had sinned to death? 2 Pet. 2.22. The Dog is returned to his
vomit, etc. was this the condition of Peter that spoke it? but we are ashamed
of this wickedness and folly of these men.

Samuel, Jeremy, etc, it seems your understanding is not with the Apostle who
says, It was the Spirit of Ch is it that was in them, 1 Peter 1 11 and you say,
what Christ and his Apostles Preached, etc. was not Christ, the Father, or
Spirit, when as the Scripture says, Holy men of God spoke as they were moved
by the holy Ghost, 2 Pet. cap. 1, ver, 21.

The Quakers gross^ confounding of Christ with the written Word.
1, Consider Reader, how grossly he abuses, and perverts the Scripture, to
prove that the words that they spoke were Christ and the spirit, because it is
said, These holy men of God spoke as they were moved by the holy Ghost. What a
gross and blasphemous con^ounding is here of the word that those men spoke,
and the holy Ghost that moved them to speak; making the word spoken by a
finite creature, to be the everlasting spirit, the holy Ghost? The words were
committed to Paper and Ink, Rev. 1. Heb. 2.2. engraven in Tables, 2 Cor. 3.7.
Isay 30 8. write it before them in a Book, note it in a Book, etc. can this
be Christ, or the Spirit of God? and yet these are the things which they were
moved of the holy Ghost to write. Who knows not that it was the spirit of God
that moved them to write, that revealed the things they were to publish to the
world? but were those things that the holy Ghost moved them to write, were
those things Christ? were those things the spirit? What a miserable ignorance,
or judicial blindness is this, which certainly the righteous judgment of
God has given up this Generation of people to, because they received not the
truth in the love thereof, that they might be saved.

Position 14. That the Spirits are not to be tried by the Scriptures, etc.
This Position is not denied by Nayler; we proved it from three testimonies,
and Nayler in his answer adds his own defense thereof, without exception,
against any of our proofs. We shall take his arguments for defense thereof in
order.

The infallible spirit, which is the original of all Scriptures, is the trial
of all spirits, and that spiritual man judges all things, and by that spirit
the Saints was to judge of all spirits, and gave those up to Satan that was
for that end; as is plain, 1 Cor. 5 4.

The spirit not to be set in opposition to Scripture.
The force of this argument by which he would prove that spirits are not to be
tried by Scripture, lies thus; The infallible spirit is the trial of all
spirits; therefore spirits are not to ^e tried by Scriptures. To which we
reply, That this is no consequence at all and shall demonstrately prove it from
these several arguments.

1. To set the mind and will of the spirit in opposition to the spirit it
self, can be no Gospel argument. For the Scriptures are the infallible will of
the spirit, laid down as the rule of Saints believing, judging, and walking.
What a reproach had it been, when the spirit of God sent the Prophets to
reveal his will? or when Jesus Christ sent the Jews to search the Scriptures,
what a reproach had it been to the living God, for them to have answered, We
will not be judged, not will we judge of spirits or doctrines by that Word or
Scripture, we will stand to the judgment of the spirit it self, opposing the
spirit it self to its own will? How wicked a thing had it been in them? and
how ridiculous an answer is this in Nayler?

2. How is this to undervalue the wisdom of the holy Ghost himself, Bereans
commended for trying spirits by Scriptures.
Acts 17.11. who judges and pronounces the Bereans more Noble then those of
Thessaloniea in that they searched the Scriptures daily, whether those things
that were spoken by Paul and Silas were so, or no; in that they searched the
Scriptures; the Spirit prizeth them, for trying the Doctrines of Paul and Silas
by the Scrip^u^es the written Word. And how wicked a thing is this in the
Quakers to cry down this trying of spirits, and Doctrines of Scriptures, which
the spirit expressly ownes with such a signal testimony, as speaking out in
the soul such a spiritual nobleness.

3. It is confessed on all hands, that the eternal Spirit is the original of
Scriptures, and the tryer of Spirits; who ever questioned that? But our
question is, what the Saints are to try the spirits by? not whether the spirit
can try the Doctrines; No. But we affirm, that this eternal Spirit, has left
the written Word, as that which shall be the discovery, touchstone, and trial
of spirits, and Doctrines by authority and divine warrant from himself. See 2
Pet. 1.21. Holy men of God spoke as they were moved by the holy Ghost. 2 Timothy 3
16. All Scripture is given by inspiration of God, etc. John 5.99. Search the
Scriptures. Isay 8.20. etc. So that our asserting the Scriptu^es to be trial
of spirits, is but setting up the spirit in his own authority and throne, over
the spirits and consciences of men, and pleading with men that the spirit may
rule in his own way, and that they will try Doctrines by that Scripture which
the holy Ghost commands them to try the Doctrines by. And he that refuses that
touchstone which the spirit has laid d^wne for trial, does destroy the
authority of the holy Ghos, ^et him speak fantastically of trying by the
spirit what he will. But this reasoning of Naylers, is as if when the Lo^d
Protector should declare what is treason by Law in public Procl^mations, a
Justice of Peace should, when a Person were proved before him guilty of
treason, according to that Law; yet should say, he is not to judge what is
treason according to that Law, but he would appeal from the Law, to himself
for what is treason, though the Law had determined it before.

But in this case, to exclude the Scriptures, because the holy Ghost is the
original of them, is to destroy that plain truth, Subordinate: non pugnant,
things that act in a subordination, though about the same thing, do not
destroy one another usefulness or causality. Nay, the spirits being the
Original of all Scripture, this being confessed, does necessarily confess
their divine authority, for that trying of spirits for which they were given
forth by the inspiration of God.

2. As to that expression, the spiritual man judges all things, we have fully
spoken before in page 79. We know there is a spirit of discerning which
Believers have of Gospel mysteries; but what absurdity is this to infer,
therefore spirits are not to be tried by Scriptures? For that light which a
spiritual man has, is a Scripture light.

1 Cor. 5.4. opened.
3. How ignorantly is that 1 Cor. 5.4. produced to prove this assertion, when
Paul says, In the name of our Lord Jesus Christ when you are gathered
together, and my spirit, to deliver such an one to Satan, etc. Paul is not
trying of spirits, or judging of Doctrines, but exhorting the Church to
excommunicate the incestuous Person, and tells them, That his Apostolical
power shall go along with them in that sentence. The verse going before, tells
you what is the meaning of his spirit, where he says, I as absent in body, but
present in spirit, have judged already, as though I were present, concerning
him that has done this deed; that is, I in this Epistle do send you my mind
and my judgment, what you ought to do with this man that has committed
Incest, as fully as if I were present with you, and so you may go on at your
meeting to excommunicate him, having for so doing, not only the authority of
the Lord Jesus, but also the consent and judgment of me his Apostle. This is
that in those words, In the name of the Lord Jesus, and my Spirit. How does
this man heap up quotations, without any understanding of the mind of the
spirit in them; and with what exceeding ignorance does he apply such Texts to
his absurdities, as neither prove them, nor speak a tittle concerning them.

By this spirits were the spirits tried, before the letter was; therefore
spirits are not to be tried by Scriptures.

non sequitur is here. There was a time when the spirit had not given forth the
Written Word; therefore when the spirit does give forth a written Word, it is
not to be regarded. There was a time when the Law was not engraven in Tables of
Stone, therefore when it was engraven, the Israelites must not look upon it as
a rule of life, or judgment. There was a time when the will of God was not
written, was not Scripture; therefore when Christ bids you search the
Scriptures, you need not heed them at all. But we leave the Reader to laugh at
this absurd consequence The Bereans judged by another light then James Nayler
does who though they knew there was a time when Scripture was not written, yet
they tried the spirits and doctrines of Paul and Salas by the Scriptures. And
the Spirit it self inspired and moved holy men of God to write the Scriptures,
to leave them as a trial and touchstone of spirits, though once there was a
time when there was no written word. But oh! how does God infatuate men, when
they will not submit to the authority of his Word.

We have no guide but the letter (because we assert the authority of Scripture)
and adds, how many minds, how many forms, how many gods do ye worship? and
all pretend Scripture. If it be possible to rake up a reason out of a heap of
railing, this it is; Those that do uphold the Scriptures to be the trial of
Doctrines, do yet differ amongst themselves; therefore the Spirits or
Doctrines are not to be tried in Scriptures.

Quakers Popish argument.
This, as many other of their answers, is a known threadbare Popish argument:
they say, You Protestants cannot agree in your Discipline, and therefore, the
Scriptures are not to be the judge of Doctrines, but the infallible spirit of
the Pope. We hope God will discover them ere lon^ to be men merely acted by
the spirit of Antichrist; but we shall give you a full answer under these two
considerations.

Difference in non-fundamentals, no prejudice to the Scriptures being judge of
spirits.
1. First, as it reflects upon our selves: We say, to differ in discipline, is
not to worship several gods (as Nayler rayles) while it is known we hold the
head the Lord Jesus: but this we look upon as the spitting of his venom. When
Peter was for Circumcision, and Paul was against Circumcision, Gal. 2.13.14.
did they worship several gods? So those Acts 15. that contested in different
judgments, did they worship several gods? But this man cares not what he
says, so be may throw his dirt upon us, though he bewray his excessive
ignorance in it before the world.

2. As it fights against the Scriptures, being the judge and trial of spirits,
we shall show there is no strength in this exception at all. For the Scripture
loses not its authority for the trial of spirits by reason of the darkness
and different apprehensions of spirits. How dark were the Apostles in the
Prophesies of Christ's Resurrection? Luke 24 25. Fools and flow of heart, to
believe all that the Prophets have spoken etc. yet the Scriptures lost not
their touchstone authority upon the account of their darkness, though Christ
saw that truth of the Resurrection in the Scriptures spoken of, which they
could not apprehend: ought not Christ. ver. 26. to have s^ffo^ed these things
and to enter into his glory. Does not Peter say plainly, that in the writings
of Paul. there are 2 Pet 3.10. difficult things, and hard to be understood, and
such as the unstable and unlearned rest; and yet those Writings and Epist es
do not lose their authority, because of the diversities and darkness of
Believers thoughts. Scripture rightly understood will clearly discover every
spirit, and every Doctrine, though the best of men, knowing but in part, 1 Cor.
13.9. and so not fully taking in the genuine sense of Scripture, may have,
through their darkness difference of judgment in things less fundamental
But we may be weary in following such trivial arguments, only we would not
have the saints entrapped in any of Satan's snares nor the blessed word, that is
sweeter then honey, and the honey comb* subjected to the delusions of evil men.

Thus we have given thee the strength of his answer; only he adds his false
gloss upon that of Isay 8.20. Isay 8.20. vindicated.
by us objected against them in the Perfect Pharisee: the gloss is this,
Whereas you quote that place, To the Law and to the testimony; it is true, the
Law of the new Covenant is written in the heart by God, and the testimody of
Jesus is the spirit of Prophecy, and if any be not guided by and speak
according to these, it is because they have no light in them but without them.
But we answer, As he plainly by this overturnes all Scripture, and leaves no
rule but the Law written upon men's hearts, (which we have confuted in the
Perfect Pharisee, page 25.) so it is a gross perverting of the text and truth:
for it is clearly spoken of the Written Word, and the very next words
expresses it clearly; If they speak not according to this Word, the Hebrew
is full beyond exception, [cedabar hazzeh] according to this Word: so that that
text is no reference, that God makes to the Law written upon men's hearts, but
to the Law written in Tables of stone, which tables, were called the testimony,
and the Arc thereof called, the Arc of the testimony, Exodus 25.22. because
the Tables of stone in which the Law was written, called Exodus 31.18. the
tables of the testimony were laid up there.

We have fully shown in the Book called the Perfect Pharisee, page 26. the
sad fruits of this Doctrine of denying the Scripture to be the rule of trying
doctrines and spirits, that it is to open a gap to all the delusions of Satan,
and we instanced sin the known case of John Gilpin, who was sometimes a
Quaker, to which Nayler replies only thus, It is no more then if the chief
priests should have cited Judas to confute Christ, etc. as he consulted with
the priests to betray the truth; so John Gilpin has done now, who shall
receive his reward, and you priests also, as Nayler says. To which railing we
thus answer.

Shaking off the S^ripture the ^^ler to Satan's delusions.
1. That John Gilpin was thus acted by the Devil, is a known truth beyond
questioning. 2. That he did verily believe he was acted by Christ, when yet the
Devil acted him, is very apparent. Nay Atkinson, the boy that pretends to
answer that re^ation of Gilpin, does all along confess, that he was acted by
the Devil, is plain to any that reads that his childish and non-sensicall
piece of railing. 3. John Gilpin himself, ^^ee the Lord has delivered him in
mercy out of the snares of Satan, has fully confessed, that it was the spirit of
Satan, and not the Lord Jesus that then acted him. 4 And that all this grew ^ut
of his casting off the Scriptures searching to a light within: Take his own
words, page 15. of a Book called, The Quakers shaken. It was most just with
God to give me over to strong delusions to believe lies etc. as for other
provocations. s^ especially for rejecting the revealed will of God in his Word,
and hea^kning only to a Voice within me; nay, not only to l sten to the
Devils suggestions, but to embrace his Voice for the Voice of Christ. Thou
see now Reader what reason we had to say, this rejecting the Scriptures from
being the tryer of Doctrines does open an unavoydable gap to Satan's delusions.

2. But what reason has the man to say, in this, both John Gilpin and we have
consulted against Christ? Nay, have we not been pleading for Christ against
Judas, the desperate betrayen of his truth and Gospel? while we have been
discovering ^he subtilties of Satan in those that are acted by him, and
pleading for the authority of Christ in his word, against all the delusions of
the Devil. And as we can thankefully and comfortably look upon it, that God
has engaged us in so good a work; so we can look for our reward, not what
Nayler we believe could wish us (but how can he defy, when God has not
defied) but what Christ has promised to them that can forsake their names and
comforts, etc. for his testimony. It is no small sland^^ to say we have
consulted with John Gilpin, whose face none of us ever saw to our knowledge,
till after the Printing of his confession; but there is a day wherein God will
call every id^e word to an account, and then Naylers conceit of his perfection
will not take off the guilt of such apparent lies.

Position 15. That there ought to be no sense, meaning, or exposition given, or
studying of the Scriptures.
We had many proofs for this, that it was a Position of the Quakers, which he
denies not; we could add more, but 'ti^ needless, because Nayler in his
answer goes about to justify it (...) the sum of which lies in these two
exceptions.

The Scriptures are either perfect, or not perfect; if perfect, l^^ them alone,
and do not darken them by your invented wisdom.

Though Scripture be perfect in it self, yet needs expounding through the
darknet of souls.
To which we answer: The Scriptures were given out perfect by the Prophets and
Apostles; yet they gave them out i^ some places more darkely, and in some
places more clearly as Peter plainly confesses, 2 Pet. 3.16. that some
things i^ Paul's Epistles were hard to be understood, and laid down (...)
darkly, as that those that were unlearned, that is, not well a^quainted with
the mind of the holy Ghost in them, did wr^ them to their own destruction;
which shows the necessity opening and expounding Scriptures, unless we will
suffer m^ through their ignorance to run upon their own ruin. 2. Were the
Scriptures imperfect, or did Ezra add to them, because he gave the sense, and
caused them to understand the Reading? Neh. 3.8. 3. Does not Christ speak the
necessity of expounding Scripture, though it be perfect, when he said to the
Pharisees, Go learn what that means, I will have mercy and not sacrifice?
Mat. 9.13. Nay, does not Christ clearly assert the necessity of expounding,
when he says Mark 12.24. Do ye not therefore err, not knowing the
Scriptures? Ver. 26 Have ye not Read in the Book of Moses, how God spoke unto
him in the Bush saying, I am the God of Abraham, etc. he is not the God of the
dead, but the God of the living? where he op^n; the Scripture, and proves the
Resurrection from thence, wh ch lay but darkely hid in those words, had not he
that had the Key of David opened and expounded them. 4. The necessity of
expounding does not arise from the imperfection of Scriptures but from that
darkness that lies upon the spirits of the saints. For now we see through a
glass darkely, 1 Cor. 13. so that though the Scriptures be perfect in them
elves, yet thou see the necessity of the opening of them through the
imperfecti^n that is in us. This Christ and the Apostles knew, when they made
it a great part of their business in the teaching of souls to expound the
Scriptures,

You that have not that infallible spirit that gave them forth, what will you
judge, and open, and expound them with? etc.

God has revealed them unto us by the spirit; by the light of which spirit we
are taught to compare spiritual things with spiritual, 1 Cor 2.13. and so to
open the Scriptures; for though we are the least of saints, and Nayler thus
revile us: yet we can bless God for the in dwelling^ of the infallible spirit
in us, which communicates light to our souls in that measure that pleases
him, dividing to every man severally as he will.

The rest of that answer is a heap of bitter railing which is no more to us,
then the chafe before the wind, or the Viper upon Paul's hand, which comes
forth from the flaming of their contention, James 3.6. and we can shake off as
into the fire from whence it came.

Position 16. They cry down Baptism with Water, and the Lords Supper, as
being but types and shadows ceasing upon the appearance of Christ within them.
Nayler in his answer shuffles from that charge, and falls to except against
Infant Bap^isme.

Marshall, Mr. Baxter, Mr. Blak^, Mr. Si^enham, etc. (...) are loath to fill up
our Book with the discussing and clearing (...) that point (it being already
grown up to a bulk beyond (...) thoughts) and shall refer thee for
satisfaction in th^se (...) discourses. But let the Reader observe, that this
is but a (...) evasion of Nayler, for our proofs do evidently satisfy (...)
they cry down all manner of Baptism with Water, no^ (...) the Baptizing of
Infants, but of all, and its further app^^^^ by their practice.

Paul, 1 Cor. 4.14. Paul knew wha^ he spoke when he thanked God he had Baptized
no more; for Christ (says he) sent me not to Baptize, but to Preach.

1 Cor. 1 14 opened.
By these expressions, Nayler seems to make Paul look upon his Baptizing others
as a sin, and so to thank God that he Baptized no more. How is this to heap
sin upon Peter and the rest of the Apostles, who Baptized three thousand at
one time. Acts 2.41. Jerusalem and all Judea went forth to John to be Baptized
of him, and yet Jesus himself made and Baptized more Disciples then John. See
John 4.1. though Jesus himself Baptized none but his Disciples, what is this
but to make ^^ul condemn the practice of those saints, and oppose the c^^mand
of the Lord Jesus, Go and Baptize, Mat. 28.19.

2. But to give thee the full meaning of Paul's expression then shall find, 1
Cor. 1.12. he is charging them for factions, Ou^ said, I am of Paul, another I
am of Apollo, etc. and argues thus, Were you Baptized in the name of Paul? and
thence takes occasion to bless God, for not having Baptized many, lest any
should from thence have grown into a Faction; as himself gives the reason,
ver. 15. lest any should say, I have Baptized in my own name, and from thence
have made a Faction; so that he blesses God that since the Corinthians were
grown of such Factions and dividing spirits that providence had so ordered it,
that they had by his Baptizing so few of them, so little advantage to cry him,
or his name up in opposition to Apollos, Christ, or Ceph^^. Yet by the history
of the Acts of the Apostles, thou may observe, that when ever any were
converted by Paul, they were Baptized, Acts 16.15. ver. 33. Acts 18.8. many of
the Corinthians hearing, believed, and were Baptized. Acts 22.16. etc. But if
Nayler from that expression, Christ sent me not to Baptize, but to Preach, will
argue against Baptism, he will fully make void the express commands of Christ
for Baptizing, and charge sin upon the Apostles practice; so that in stead of
crying down expounding Scriptures we leave him to study what that expression
means.

For the outward signs of the Supper, do this in remembrance of me till I
come; but when he was come, then the Bread which they did break was the Body
of Christ.

(till he come) in the Perfect Pharisee, page 29. The Lords Supper an Ordinance
to the end of the world.
That those Corinthians to whom Paul wrote, and commands to use that Ordinance,
Do this in remembrance of me, till the coming of Christ, etc. were those in
whom he was spiritually come before, 1 Cor. 1.2. Yet notwithstanding that
spiritual coming, they were commanded to eat of the Bread, and drinks of the
Cup, to show forth the Lords death 1 Cor. 11.26. till he come; that is not till
his spiritual coming in the work of grace (that was past before) but his
coming in glory.

2. The life of saints here is a life of Faith, Heb. 10.38. the just shall live
by his Faith. Now for the nourishing and strengthening of Faith, he has left
the Seals of Bread and Wine, as the holders forth of his Body and Blood for
Faith to act it self upon; and therefore before Faith be swallowed up in
vision these are appointed as standing Ordinances by the Lord Jesus for the
establishing of it.

The rest of his answer is made up of such railing in stead of reasoning, and
such inconsistent expressions, that we shall only leave him to the Lord, to
deal with his conscience for the guilt of them.

Position 17. That there is no mediate Call to the Ministry.
He denies not our proof, and in stead of answering the many Scripture
arguments we gave in our Perfect Pharisee, page 32. for a mediate call to the
Ministry, he falls to a downright railing; though we have nothing we need to
add to the arguments we there laid down against this Position, meeting with no
answer to what we have written; yet we shall observe in the midst of his
raylings these things.

Naylers contradictions.
1. How flatly he contradicts himself, when he tells the Reader, page 19. l. 8.
the Apostles when they had gathered Churches out of the world, they ordained
them Elders of themselves? yet after says, l. 10. 11. these were ordained not
by man; and after, l. 13. 14. this ordination was not by man, nor by the
Churches, etc. the Apostles ordained them Elders; and yet those Elders were not
ordained by man: were not the Apostles men? And was not this a mediate call,
wherein the Apostles ordained them Elders in every City, Acts 14.23.

2. Though he lab^urs with abundance of bitterness to cry down any mediate
call; yet as he answers nothing to our Scriptures; so we cannot but (...) ^ve
how he is forced in the midst of his railing to confess the truth, saying,
page 19. l. 8. the Apostles ordained them Elders, which is that mediate call we
contended for.

Lastly, The substance of his railing is to tell us, that we are invested in
the Ministry by Magistrates Towns, and Parishes; when as, we do profess we
do not know a Minister in England that is ordained, or professes to receive
his ordination from a Magistrate, Town, or Parish.

2. All that the Magistrate, Town, or Parish do, is to provide maintenance
for th^se that labor in the Gospel; nay, the late Commission (which perhaps
Nayler drives at) never pretended to put any in the Office of a Minister, but
only provided maintenance for him in the propogation of the Gospel; so that
notwithstanding what he has said, we are still fully convinced of the
clearenesse of a mediate call to the work of public Ministry of the Word.

And thu^ we have followed him in every material expression, though ^e answers
nothing to our Scriptures, or Arguments: And though his great cavil be at our
testimonies, and upon this cries out (...) we published filthy lies; yet the
Reader will now clearly see, that of 55. proofs we laid down, he only
denies the truth of seven, which are yet fully cleared, and proved either by
the testimony of these that were the witnesses, under their Hands and Seals;
or by the demonstration out of their own Books, however Nayler labors to
evade and shuffle them. How unjustly we have been charged with lies, will now
appear; and we must seriously profess, that had it not been to clear up
those truths, which he charge with falsehood, and vindicating Scripture from
his gross perverting of them, his Book is so merely composed of railing, and
abusing us, and so beyond expectation sottish and senseless, that we should
not have thought it at all worth our answer or observation.

Were we not ready according to that rule, 1 Pet. 3.15. to give a reason of the
hope that is in us; and that Tit. 1.9.10.11. to convince gainesayers, (whose
mouths must be stopped) we should not have troubled thee, or our selves, with
answering such trivial exceptions as do hereafter follow, against what we
have proved so plainly from Scripture, against the Principles of the Quakers;
But that we may not seem to leave any stone unturned that may clear up the
truth to the spirits of the people of God; we shall proceed to the
consideration of that which follows in Naylers answer.

Principle 1. Not to salute any.
REader, though we have proved that this command Luke 10.4. of not saluting any
by the way, were but a particular case, and not generally binding (as we have
made evident by many Scripture Arguments, and the practices of the Saints) and
though we have fully proved the command of Christ imposes general salutation
upon saints, as a duty, as thou may Read Perfect Pharisee, page 31. 42. yet
thus he excepts.

Highway salutes.

To which we answer.

Highway Salutes are the known practice of Quakers, as when they meet any of
their own way in the streets, or other-where, their Phrase is, How do thou,
and their action, to take them by the Hand. And if that Text command against
Highway salutes, how contrary is their practice to it, Salute no man by the
way.

2. However the Quakers do contend against highway salutes, (though by their
own practice, Publican-like amongst one another, they contradict this
Principle) yet highway salutes were the practice of saints, when holy Jacob
met his Brother Esau by the highway, Genesis 33.3. He passed over before them,
and bowed himself before him seven times, until he came near to his Brother,
etc. Did nor gracious Abigail salute David by the highway? 1 Samuel 25 23. When
David was coming to her house, she went to meet him, and when Abigail saw
David, she hasted, and lighted off the Ass, and fell before David on her face,
and bowed her self by the ground. Thus you see the practice of the saints in
highway salutes.

3. Nay, it was not only the custom of the saints to salute by bodily
gestures, (...). Salutes of Primitive times.
but by words also, and words equivalent to what are used by the people of God
in England in their salutations. See 2 John 10. where John forbids them to
give the least countenance to the heretical venters of false Doctrines,
commands them not so much as to bid them God-speed; which clearly proves, that
that highway salutation, was a common thing in the Apostles days, and not to
be denied to any, but such wicked persons as the Apostle there speaks of in
carrying on their wicked Principles; If any man bring not this Doctrine,
receive him not into your house, neither bid him God speed. Hence Naylers
color, of taking the name of God in vain, we fully declare against peoples
using that Phrase without any sense of God upon their souls. Yet look upon
salutes as a command of Christ, and so wish all such as do use the name of the
blessed God in their salutes, either to keep a due regard of that Majesty upon
their spirits when they use his glorious name, or else to use some other
expression.

Mat. 5.47. If ye salute your Brethren only, what do you more then do
others? do not even the Publicans so? Where in stead of submitting to the
authority of the commands of Christ; He says thus, It is no command to them to
salute all, but a warning to them of their partiality.

Mat. 5.46.47. but with half an eye, will clearly see, that he must as well
except, that Christ does not command to love all, as to say, that Christ does
not command to salute all; when its apparent, that the very phrase and reason
in both commands, is the very same.

2. Sure this man does not understand himself, when he affirms, that this is
a command against partiality, in saluting; and yet is not a command to salute
all: for what is partiality in saluting? but this saluting some, and not
saluting all. What a ridiculous cavil is this, even to the contradicting of
himself?

3. As to his endeavoring by this ridiculous, and self contradicting
exposition, to charge us with partiality, as that we salute only those whom we
love, and who are rich, etc. we say it is a malicious slander; for it is
sufficiently known, we salute strangers, whose face we never saw before, and
the poor of the people, as well as the richest of them; nay, the very Quakers
themselves also: But how does this again fly in their Fa^es, who for the most
part carry with so much incivility to all, but to people of their own way.

Quakers. Where when we charge them for picking and choosing at the command of
Christ, such things in Scripture as do most agree with their humors and
fancies, thus, though they are forbid in the same place, Luke 7.4. to carry
money in their purses, or to wear shoes on their feet, as well as to salute
any by the way; yet we charge them in this, because they stand upon the one
command, and not upon any of the rest, and do evidently bring themselves
within the curse, Rev. 22. Nayler thus replies to it, page 21. l. 4. etc What
we do is not from the command that was to others,
but from command of the same power by which we are sent forth; and if we were
commanded to forbear wearing shoes, as well as we are commanded to forbear
your Heathenish customs, etc. we should be made willing to obey, as some have
done who have been commanded to go naked, etc.

Quakers, laid open; we can bless the Lord that has made them thus unvayle
themselves, and discover the rottenness of their hearts as to the authority of
the Scriptures, which they have so long by their juggling endeavored to
conceal. For here thou wi^t clearly see, that the Quakers look upon the
commands of Christ in Scripture, as having no sovereign or binding authority
over their consciences and practices, further then agrees with their own
Principles and fancies. For what means that expression? What we do, is not
from the command that was to others. This without controversy is utterly to
shake off the authority of the the Word. For 1. Was not the whole Word written
to others? Did any now alive live in those days when the Prophets or Apostles
writ their several Books? Were we of the Church of Corinth? or Philippi? Were
we of the seven Churches of Asia? or did we live in these days? Alas, there is
no command in Scripture but was given to others long before the days of our
Fathers; and shall no command given to others be binding to us? Let them Read
these convincing Texts, Romans 15.4. Whatsoever things were Written before time,
were Written for our learning; where Paul makes the Books of the Old Testament
binding to those who were not alive when they were Written; for the Romans to
whom he then Wrote, were borne many hundred years after the writing of those
Scriptures. 1 Cor. 10 11. All these things happened unto them for examples, and
they were Written for our admonition, upon whom the ends of the world are come.
2 Timothy 3.16. All Scripture to whomsoever Written, or to what man soever the
command was given before time, yet all Scripture is given by inspiration of
God, and is profitable for Doctrine, reproof, correction, instruction in
righteousness. So the 2 Peter 1.19. speaking of the Scriptures, that sure Word
of Prophecy, says, they do well to take heed to them, as to a light in a
dark place; though they were Prophesies and command^ given forth to other
persons many hundred years before. Thus you see that commands in Scripture
that were given forth to others, are yet of universal concernment unto all, to
those that lived not in those days, even such upon whom the ends of the world
are come.

For that other expression of Naylers, If we were commanded to forbear to
wear shoes, etc. what a wretched casting off is this of the yoke of Christ,
and a desperate picking and choosing in his commands, only what is agreeing to
their own fancies. I^ not this, to break his bonds asunder and cast his cords
from them. Psalm. 2.3. If we were commanded; Is not the revealed will of Christ
a command? Is one part of the same verse a command, (see Luke 10.4.) and not
the other part? Is nothing a command till they judge it so? How loose do they
hang in obedience to the Lord Jesus? they will obey, and not obey, as they
shall see cause* Praises be to our God that we have discovered them; Now we
understand the reason why Nayler answered none of our Scriptures; we perceive
he looked upon them as nothing to him: and now we clearly see the meaning of
their s^uffling^ about the Word of God and their scornful expressions about
the written Word, etc. So that we can boldly charge them from this place with
this horrid blasphemy, that the Quakers do affirm.


That the Scriptures have no authority over their consciences at all, nor any
command in Scripture that was given to others that binds them, save what
command they have an impulse upon their own spirits; for,

This is the great strong hold of Satan, and the snare, with which he entraps
them as he will.

^
From this Principle of theirs he goes about to prove the law fullness of people
going naked, and reviles us for speaking against it; and says they do it by
particular command from God. Reader, thou may observe. That Nayler denies not
what we wrote about their going naked in Perfect Pharisee. page 48. the Wife of
Edmund Adlington of Kendale going naked though the streets, Nov. 21. 1653. We
shall add more, because some that have less acquaintance with these people,
may seem to make question of it. On Monday October 28. 1653. there was one
Thomas Holme of Kendale went as naked as he was borne through the Market place
at Kirby Stephen on the market day; at his turning he said, Mark that
It is not I, but God that goes naked, etc. and so after a time, he went to
his clothes, which were kept in a Barn by four men of his Sect. And to show
that this is a fact they justify and plead for (in stead of mourning for the
horrible sin of it) Mr. Taylour a great ringleader of that people, came to
that Town the week after to seek Mr. Higginson, Minister of that place, as
he said, having a Message to him from the Lord, and being there in the Market
place, he very solemnly pronounced a woe against it, for rejecting that
Prophet of the Lord, which he had sent to do signs and wonders in it,
meaning, as those that heard him did conceive, that beast that went stark
naked through the Town a little before.

This we have from Mr. Higginson, under his own hand.

Thomas Castly, January 10. 1653. went shamelessely naked as he was borne
through the streets at Kendale. Edmund Nubyes Wife went through Kendale naked,
except that she had a shift on: and about the latter end of December last, she
came into the place of meeting of the Church at Kendale in the same posture.
Another of this Sect came in the same posture into Hutton Chapel at the time
of exercise about the beginning of January. Elizabeth Levens, and Miles Newby
went up the streets at Kendale in the same posture. This we have attested from
Mr. Walker a godly Minister at Kendale under his hand, by Letters bearing date
January 31. 1653. But were it needful to prove it, we could by sending into
places where these converse, fill thee with undeniable evidence hereof; but its
needless, because Nayler denies it not, but labors to justify them in this
sinful practice. As to the manifesting of the wickedness hereof, we shall
give thee these considerations.

1. No sooner had Adam and Eve fallen, and were stripped of their Innocence,
but they saw themselves shamefully naked, Gen 3.10. But God who knows the
working of corruption in the hearts of men after the fall, he himself clothed
them, lost their nakedness should appear, ver. 21. Unto Adam also, and to his
Wife, did the Lord God make Coats of Skins, and clothed them. And does not
this manifest the will of God against going naked? would he have clothed them,
if he would have had them continue in that nakedness?

2 But that you may yet see further, how odious being naked before others is in
the sight of God, the sad curse that Noah from the mouth of God laid upon Ham
the Father of Canaan, for not covering his Fathers nakedness, will appear
Genesis 9 22.23.24. etc. Ham the Father of Canaan saw the Nakedness of his
Father, and told his two Brethren without, and Shem and Japhet took a garment
and laid it upon both their shoulders, and went backward, and covered the
nakedness of their Fathers, and their Faces were backward, and they saw not
their Fathers nakedness; And Noah aweke from his Wine, and knew what his
younger Son had done to him, and said, Cursed be Canaan, etc. and he said,
Blessed be the God of Shem, anh Canaan shall be his servant, etc. God shall
enlarge Japheth, and Canaan shall be his servant, etc. Where you see, Ham is
bitterly cursed, and the curse entailed to all his Posteri y for that sin of
not covering his Fathers nakedness. And what then shall we think of such an
expression as Mary Collison a Quaker in Kendale used to these that covered the
nakedness of the Wife of Edmund Adlington, in the street at Kendale, That they
had hindered the work of the Lord? Oh! let them remember the curse of Ham, and
the blessing of Shem and Iapheth here expressed.

3. The Apostle arguing to the care that one Saint ought to have over another,
does it by a comparison of them with the body natural; and tells you 1 Cor.
12.23.24. those members of the body which we judge to be loss honorable, upon
these we bestow more abundant honor, and our uncomely parts ((...) See Romans
1.27. pudenda, indecora membra, instrumenta excretioni, and generationi
destinata) have more abundant comeliness; for our comely parts ( viz. Face,
Hands, etc.) have no need; mark that, the uncomely parts needed, yea they are
such parts, that (as the Apostle phraseth it) they lacked more abundant honor,
viz. lest their nakedness and shame should appear.

4. In the 2. Sam. 10 4. When Han^n the King of Amon had cut off the garments
of David's servants in the middle, even to their buttockes, etc. and sent them
away, the men were greatly ashamed, ver. 5. and David, in the sense of this
Wicked act, made war against the men of Ammon, and destroyed them; so
sensible was David of the wickedness of this act, of discovering the
^ckednesse of his servants.

5. 1 Timothy 2.9. The Apostle wills, that Women adorn themselves in modest
Apparel, with shamefastness and sobriety. And we leave it to the Reader to
consider, whether either going naked, or having nothing but their shift on, be
any ways according to the modesty, bashfulnesse, and sobriety, by the Apostle
commanded in that place.

6. To add no more, we shall conclude with laying before thee the wickedness
of this practice, besides that impudence, and immodesty, even such as nature
and ingenuity it self obhorres, this practice speaks: Oh! what a fuel is this
to the flames of lust, what accursed fires of Hell does it kindle in the hearts
of men? Does not the Apostle strictly charge all, to mortify their earthly
members, Col. 3.5. Fornication, uncleanness, inordinate affection, evil
concupisence, etc. nay, does he not say, ver. 6. For these things sake the
wrath of God comes on the children of disobedience. And 1 These. 4.4. he
charge every one that he should know how to possess his Vessel in
sanctification and honor, not in the lust of concupisence, etc. And what is
the horriblenesse of the temptation of such wicked practices? this is so
loathsome, and naus^ous to any sober apprehensions, that surely it will make
the very practisers of such things, to be a stink in their nostril^ and be
looked upon as a shame, both to Religion and Humanity, and we are fully
certified from several parts it does so already.

There is but one thing that we imagine can be pretended for this wicked
practice; and that is the Prophets going naked upon particular command; we
shall take that which is the fullest Scripture for it, Isay 20.3. opened.
Isay 20.3. and in that, answer all together. Where God says to Isaiah, Go
and loose thy sa^kecloth from off thy loins and put off thy shoes from thy
feet, and he did so, walking barefeet and naked.

1. We are fully satisfied, and we hope we have satisfied the Reader in the
Perfect Pharisee, page 45 46. 47, 48. that the pretenses of these men to
immediate calls, are bu^ mere delusions, and an apish imitation of the
Prophets. But what these Prophets did, was by a true immediate call from God,
which we own, though we abhor the pretense of these men to it, of the lying
and falsehood whereof we have informed thee fully.

2. Did either Jesus Christ, or the Apostles, when they came to publish the
everlasting Gospel, ever take up such imitation?

3. For the full meaning of that place, understand 1. Some will only
understand this thing as done in vision, Hos. 1.2. Take unto thee a Wife of
Whoredoms. 2. Others conceive it was really acted and with them we rather
close. But what was that nakedness? it was not the putting off all their
garments, that their sh^me should appear; but the putting off their upper
garments. For so the word naked is often used in Scripture, when a man goes in
his inner raiment only, without upper garments; so it is said of Saul, he in a
Prophetical rapture stripped off his clothes that is, his upper clothes, (for
the Jews used to wear an upper garment upon their long Cassacke, which was
close next their bodies) and lay down naked before Samuel, 1 Samuel 19.24. So in
Isay, 32.11 the women are commanded to strip themselves, and make them bare
(that is, to put off their bravery and better apparel, etc.) ^. This
nakedness is the putting off his Prophetical Robe, for the Prophe^s had an
upper garment of hair, to distinguish them from others. as you may plainly
see Zach 13.4. neither should they wear a rough garment to deceive. See 2
Kings 1 8. Mat. 3.4. this was such a mantle as dropped from Eliah, 2 Kings
2.13. and thus a Prophet wanting his Prophetical mantle or garment, is said to
be naked, and Scripture calls him naked. 3. What was Isaiah to signify by
this? you must know, his foretelling the shameful captivity of Ethiopia. ver.
3. was the intent of this command, how the Egyptian Prisoners were to be
handled; therefore he was to go stripped in that posture as Captives and
Prisoners use to be; Now the common usage of Prisoners, is not to leave them
quite naked, but to take away their best apparel, and to leave them under
ragged clothes, or such as was necessary to cover their shame; for can it be
imagined that they should be led stark naked from Egypt to Assyria so many
hundred of miles. 4. But to put all out of doubt that it was not meant of being
stark naked, can any man be so devoyd of sense, as to imagine the good man
went stark naked three years together? Read Isay 20.4. that time which the
Prophet went naked, was for three whole years.

Therefore let these people see how vainly they do bring in the practice of
the Prophets, though far different from theirs; and though acted upon that
call from God (which the Quakers but pretend to, does speak the lying spirit
they are acted by) how vainly we say these things are wrested by them to
bolster them up in such ways, as will make even a Heathen blush that has but
any remaining sparks of ingenuity.

Principle 2. Not giving any outward token of Reverence to Magistrate, Parent,
Master, or any other.
Quakers to justify their way, cast dirt upon the Saints in Scripture.
We have said so much to this, that we need say no more, only we must observe,
that rather then he will be convinced by Scripture light, this man cares not to
charge the chiefest of Saints with sin in this case, but that it was no sin in
them, that Scripture will fully speak, Romans 13.7. Render to all their due,
tribute to whom tribute is due, honor to whom honor. So that as there are
some to whom tribute is distinguishingly due; there are also some to whom
honor is due also, as we have proved at large, Perfect Pharisee page 33. 34.
to which the Reader may observe he answers nothing.

But he goes on with his ridiculous application of Scripture, viz. that of the
Commandment, Thou shall not bow down or worship, which is evidently spoken of
adoring graven Images made with hands, and this is Naylers text, against giving
outward tokens of honor to Magistrates or Parents, as though they were Idols:
as ridiculously does he also cite that Text, Pro. 25.26. A righteous man
falling down before the wicked, is as a troubled Fountain; which speaks only
the falling, perishing, crushing of the Saints by ungodly men, which is like
filth or mud stird up in a Fountain,

A. P. his Annotations answered.
There only remains the learned Annotation of A. P. Sure A. P. had some great
crotchet in his head, that he must needs stop it in the Margent, with his name
at the bottom; sure it is some demonstration. But what is it? There is a Power
without Persons, because the Keepers of the Liberties of England were no
Persons. We ask him, Were the Keepers of the Liberties of England, no body?
And was this honorable no body set up by the authority of Parliament, against
whom it should be Treason to act? But what is this to make Government without
Governors; Power without Persons to manage it? Were not the Parliament
Governors? or were the Parliament men who were the supreme Governors, Were not
they Persons? what were they? But what becomes of the Justices of Peace, will
they be content to be turned out of their being by A. P. But seriously A. P. if
there be Government without Governors, who shall punish sin? who shall make
Laws? who shall preserve the Peace? shall Government? when it is in no bodies
hands? But let him leave his wild notion, and look upon 1 Pet. 2.13. Submit
your selv^s, to, etc. whether the King as Supreme, or unto Governors, as unto
them that are sent by him. And Romans 13.4.6. he is the Minister of God to thee,
they are the Ministers of God attending on this very thing, and there he will
learn that him and them, and he and they, do signify not things, but Persons
in the power, not Government but Governors; so that we leave him amongst the
rest of his fancies to study Sir Thomas Moors Eutopia, or Plat^es
Commonwealth, where probably he may find a Government without any Persons to
Govern, or be Governed.

Principle 3. That no man must have the title of Master.
All he replies to this, is, that we bring the practice of men in the Old
Testament to disanull the commands of Christ in the New. We give the man leave
to lie and rail, as having nothing else to say. For if thou look into the
Perfect Pharisee, p. 34. 35. thou will see at least ten Scriptures out of the
New Testament fully discovering the vanity of this Principle, and the
lawfulness of calling men Sir or Master, besides the opening of what Christ
meant in that prohibition, Mat. 23.10. so that we need to add no more.

There are four things that they charge against the Ministry, to wit, 1. That
they love the high places in the Synagogues. 2. That they wear long Robes. 3.
That they stand praying in the Synagogues. 4. That they Preach for hire.

We dare without boasting say, we have by evident demonstration from the
Scripture shown at large, that these were the proper guilt of the Pharisees,
and no way applicable to the godly Ministers of England. See Pers. Pharisee, p.
35. 36. 37. 38. 39. 40. And we are saved the labor of further clearing those
points, for as much as Nayler returns nothing of answer to what we there laid
down. We only beg the Reader in these points to compare our Book and his
together, and we leave it to thee to judge. But as we have all along found
nothing but railing in stead of reason, and the poison of Aspes under his
tongue, in stead of the force of reason or Scripture; so he does here heap up
such a mass of bitter revilings, as thou have not seen: but we leave this
evil spirit in him to the Lord to rebuke.

In page 40. of the Perf. Pharisee, thou will find us repeating others of their
cavills against the Ministry, viz. Their having been at Universities. 2. Making
use of an houre-glasse. 3. Preaching upon a text. 4. Running to the powers of
the World to protect us. 5. Stealing from the Prophets. 6. Not tho^ing. Four
of these he answers nothing to; for the fifth he repeats that Scripture that is
against stealing the Word of the Lord from their neighbors; as if to name the
same charge again, were enough to prove it, though we have cleared it in the
Perfect Pharisee, That in quoting Scripture we do but follow the example of
Christ and the Apostles. See Perf. Pharisee, page 27. 28. and walk by
Scripture rule. And for the sixth, viz. thouing, we told him, that the not
tho^ing all, does no ways entrench upon any Attribute o^ command of God; and
being but an expression of a civil respect, as Sir, Master, most noble, most
excellent (which the Saints in the New Testament used) we told him, we saw no
cause why the same freedom in our dialect might not be used. Had he excepted
any thing against these, we should have answered him. The Quakers make the pure
language to which the Saints are redeemed, to be, when they begin to Thou all
men.
And for that pure language, which he says the Saints are redeemed unto, we
cannot but wonder at the lowness of the man's conceptions in the things of God,
to think the pure language to which God restores them, is to make them say,
thou and thee. Oh! the blindness of these men in the things of Christ; for
that pure language, Zeph. 3.9. imports, the peoples deliverance from Idolatrous
worship, shall no more call upon their Idols, nor call God by the name of their
Idols, Hos. 2.16. nor lispe the language of Ashdod. Neh. 13.24. but call upon
the name of the Lord, and serve him with one consent. Having gone through these
things in our Perfect Pharisee, we proceeded, page 41. to some considerations
of their practices.

Practice 1. Quaking.
For trembling and quaking we own it; but for grovelling on the ground, and
foaming at the mouth, are lies and slanders of your own inventing.

Quakers grovelling upon the earth when in their fits of possession.
Are they lies and slanders? Was not John Gilpin a Quaker? and when a Quaker he
tells you thus, in the Book called Quakers Shaken, p. 5. I could not stand upon
my feet, but was constrained to fall down upon the bed, where I howled and
cried, as is usual with them, in a terrible and hiddeous manner, to the great
astonishment of my Family. Pap 7. further, In the time of John Audlands
speaking, I was from the power within me drawn from the chair upon which I
sat, and thrown upon the ground in the midst of the company, where I lay all
night; all which time I was turned from my back to my belly, and so back
again, etc. Is not this grovelling upon the ground? How dare this man say they
are lies? Nay Atkinson, who would seem to answer that Book, in his pitiful
Pamphlet, page 11. says, he owned it to be of God. So in Quakers Shaken, page
10. he says, I was cast upon the ground, and lying upon my belly, I was forced
to lick the dust. Atkinson denies it not, but tells him, this is his portion.
And how can Nayler say, that these things are lies and slanders? We shall add
but one more, as to their foaming at mouth we shall give you this account under
the hand of Mr. Moore Minister at Kellet in Lancashire.

OVt of the Quakers coming to disturb our Congregation, fell into a trance,
her belly puffed up, her sides extended her backbone thrust out, her shoulders
stretched up, her whole body as a bladder when it is in blowing: Whereupon I
sent a maid to George Fox, to tell him, he had indeed alleged many Scriptures
for quaking and trembling but withal to ask him, what Scriptures he could
show one for swelling of the body, or foaming at the mouth: or where did he
ever read of any in those postures, save only such as were possessed with
Devils: He denied that any of theirs swelled, till she was pointed out, and
then he confessed it; upon which she asked him, whether lying was a sin?
because he had before denied that he committed any sin. Will. Moore.

Read and judge what thou now think of these men's actings and lyings.

As for our large discovery of the nature of quaking, owning it where there was
any real appearance of God to the Prophets, and showing a clear difference
betwixt these div^ne rep^ures, and the Satanicall quakings of these men, he
answers nothing at all, but only cavils at a word.

They call their Quaking their great perfection; which he says is false, etc.

great perfection in the eyes of these men which they do so much cry up, and
so much desire as such a precious attainement. W. C.
One of us does know, that Cap Ward, and Will. Cartmell, did express their
desires of it, and their hopes to come under that condition. Henry Houseman
said, speaking concerning quaking, he was not come up to that perfection yet.
We might add more; but John Gilpin tells you in Quakers Shaken, p. 5 that he
did earnestly desire that he might fall into quaking and trembling,
apprehending that he should thereby attain to the immediate discoveries of God
unto him. And is not that perfection? Why does Nayler still charge us with
slanders?

Practice 2. Railing.
Christ called the Jews the children of the Devil. etc. The Apostle calls men
dogs, wolves, etc.

railing at those persons they had never seen before; telling them, they were
Devils, damned, they saw the Devil in their faces, so that this appears to be
perfect railing; because not knowing the persons or actions of any such men,
nor any particular sin by them, yet they let fly their dreadful censures at
random. Thus we instanced in our Perfect Pharisee p. 46. in their railing at
Mr. H. T. Merchant of Newcastle, calling him a Priest, etc. and Gorge Fox
railing at Mr. Nichols in Carlisle, p. 48. telling him he was an hypocrite,
though he had never seen his face, nor knew his name. Now how is this bottomed
upon Christ's example, or the Apostles, who gave such expressions to none but
such as they had particular knowledge of, as to their sin, giving a reason
for such titles.

2. Those titles were given to wicked Herod, and to the teachers of false
Doctrines, Phil. 3. 2 Pet. 2. and we have fully cleared it we hope to every
man's conscience, who is not filled with error and prejudice, that we are
neither reproachers of Christ, or his Doctrine, but according to our talent,
have found mercy of the Lord to be faithful in carrying on the interest of the
Lord Jesus; and therefore we cannot but look upon it as their sinful
practice, in pouring out such language upon us.

3. He that does but read the Scriptures, shall find, that this is not the
ordinary language of Christ and his Apostles, it was very seldom, and very
solemn; and he that does but compare this, with the practice of quakers, shall
see a vast difference: for it is their common practice, and such words are as
familiar as any they use, as thou art damned, and I see the Devil in thy face;
nay, they are their usual first salute to all they meet withal. Was this the
Apostles way? take but any of their Books, and compare them with any of Paul's
Epistles, and as thou will see a spirit of sweetness and meekness in his, so
thou will observe such a continual froathing out of passion and bitterness in
these men, as will lay them naked, to be acted by a spirit vastly different
from that of Paul or any of the Apostles of the Lord Jesus.

4. But shall the holy zeal of Christ and his Apostles be wrested to be made a
patronage to their malicious raylings? Do they not by this means, labor to
take away the sinfulness of that railing, which the Apostle tells you is the
fruit of the flesh, and of which they that are guilty, shall never enter into
the Kingdom of God, 1 Cor. 6.9. But we referr thee for further information in
this to the Perfect Pharisee, page 44. 45.

Pract. 3. Their pretending upon all occasions to be sent by she^iall
Commission from God.
1. Here we having related by several passages of the quakers pretending to a
Commission from God, the ridiculousnesse of their Messages, and that pretense,
he plainly tells us, he will not justify them; and when he cannot shuffle it
off, he tell us, he can say nothing to it, because he knows not the things in
particular; though the persons (Reader, thou may observe) that are there
mentioned are of his familiar company and converse; and so thou will easily
think, had they been lies, we should have heard from him with open mouth: yet
the man will needs take the boldness to call them lies, though he confess he
knows not the particulars. Now Reader, judge of Nayler and his conscience.

2. He says, that they who were before the Magistrates, were invited to any of
our houses, is false. Oh! the confidence of this man, and how boldly dare he
rush upon a lie, or any thing, to make us odious. All we say is, that some of
them that came to Newcastle were invited to come to our houses by some of us.
If James Nayler will ask M. Tailor, if he were not invited by W. C. to his
house, when he was at that time at Newcastle, and did not come, he will see the
debauchednesse of his conscience; for W. C. does believe, M. Tailor has so
much honesty left, as not to deny it.

Quakers justify their cursing because such words are in Scripture and make
the Scripture a vvarrant for cursing.
As to George Foxes cursing M. Fetherston, which we quoted, p. 48. Perf. Phar.
all that Nayler replies is, that M. Fetherston confessed, all that Geo. Fox
spoke, was Scripture. What a ridiculous evasion is this of so great a sin?
Because there are such words in Scripture, therefore he may apply them as he
will. There are these words in Scripture, I am the Lord, and change not; he
sits upon the circle of the Heavens, etc. In the beginning was the Word, and
the Word was God; these expressions, because they are in Scripture, is it
therefore lawful to give them to any creature? Nay, dare Geo. Fox challenge
them to himself, because they are in Scripture? Or because such words, the Lord
smite thee thou painted wall; thou have lied against the holy Ghost; for whom
is reserved the blackness of darkness for ever; Are these true of G. Fox? or
may we therefore lawfully apply them to G. Fox? because they are such words as
are found in Scripture? Oh! what a ridiculous evasion is this? He may also
plead, that he and his followers may lawfully swear, because the words [sweare
and oaths] are to be found in Scripture; and then this generation will
perfectly come up to the necessary and experienced fruit of these principles,
viz. Ranting to a great degree whereof they are already attained in their most
impudent, obscene, and shameless nakedness.

The next exception is against our objecting Perf. Phar. p. 48. Christopher
Atkinson his immodest familiarity with a woman of that way etc. where Atkinson
challenges the proof of it: we shall only say, that that immodest
familiarity (if he will needs force us, from our modest covering of that
carriage, to speak out) it was his familiar Kissing of her, as we are fully
informed by the testimony of M. Walker and M. Wallas, and we cannot but account
it as a sinful behavior. But to weaken the strength of this testimony,
Atkinson tells the Reader, that M. Wallace said, It was no murder in him to
murder Christopher Atkinson, and the rest of the prisoners at Kendale.

Truly we are afraid this whole generation of men are in a confederacy of
lying; we have purposely sent to find out the truth of this foul challenge,
and shall give thee his clearing of himself word for word as we received it.

M. Wallace his vindication from Atkinsons lie.
HAving received a Paper from the Quakers that were prisoners containing
horrible blasphemies, viz. That they were the searchers of hearts, and saying,
Let them be accursed from God for ever, that will have Christ have any other
Body, but his Church. I spoke these words, and no more, in the hearing of many,
viz. (That I thought it was no murder in the civil Magistrate to put such
blasphemers as they were to death, it being according to the Law of God.) Read
Lev 24.10.16. Deuteronomy. 13. the whole chapter.
But that I ever said, It was no murder in me to murder them, or to put them to
death, I declare it to be a manifest lie.

Kendale Ian. 14. 1653. John Wallace.

We whose names are subscribed, did hear when M. Wallace spoke these words
above written, namely, these which are enclosed within the parenthesis, but no
more.

Thomas Barket. Miles Harrison.


Now let the Reader judge of what spirit these men are; and as for the railing
which Atkinson powers out by reason of this testimony like a flood upon W. C.
we his Brethren s^y, we hope he has learned that of Christ, 2 Pet. 2.23. who
when he was reviled, reviled not again, when he suffered, he threatened not,
but committed himself to him that judges righteously.

There is but one thing remains, And that is the account we gave, why we called
our Book the Perfect Pharisce, which thou may read in pages 49. 50. 51. and
so conclude. We therein prove from Scripture, that that Title was most truly
and properly applicable to them: to which Nayler answers so exceeding weakly
and raylingly, that we are resolved not to reply one word thereto, as having
said enough before to that purpose, to discover how weakly he struggles to
evade the clearenesse of these Scriptures against himself and that way.

Reader, thou will by this time, see the falsenesse of what Nayler speaks in
his word of conclusion to us five: as if we had uttered many untruths, and
false reports, taken up by hear say, without any ground at all, and diverse
things out of Books, which we have on purpose wrested to slander with, etc.
Thou will in this reply, see the fullest evidence we think that can be given
as to such cases, and all these particulars that he excepts against, made the
more apparent unto all. We profess before the Lord, that it (...) nothing we
have against their persons, that should any way lead us to wrest any of their
writings to make them odious: it is our only zeal for the truth and Saints of
the high God, that has carried out our spirits thus to expose our selves to
the revilings of all this generation, if by any means we might be serviceable
to the Gospel, and save our selves, and them that hear us.

Thou will find in the close of Naylers Book two leaves put forth in the name
of one, who says, his name in the Flesh is John Andland: it is such a perfect
piece of bitterness and railing, and no way in answer to our Book, that we
leave it for waste Paper.

Thus having been carried on by the Everlasting Arm, and drawn out by the
cords of Love to our dear Lord Jesus his Ordinances, and his Saints, to bear
witness to the true grace of God wherein we stand; we shall sit down in
comfort, and fly to him, who is a refuge from the storm, and a shadow from the
beat, when the bla^^^^ the terrible ones shall be as the storm against the
Wall.

FINIS.

