Academiarum Examen, OR THE EXAMINATION OF ACADEMIES.

Wherein is discussed and examined the Matter, Method and Customs of Academick
and Scholastic Learning, and the insufficiency thereof discovered and laid
open;

As also some Expedients proposed for the Reforming of Schools, and the
perfecting and promoting of all kind of Science.

Offered to the judgments of all those that love the proficiencie of Arts and
Sciences, and the advancement of LEARNING.

By Io. Webster.

In moribus et institutis Academiarum, Collegiorum, et similium conven^uum,
quae ad doctorum hominum seeds, and operas mutuas destinata sunt, omnia
progressui scientiarum in ulterius adversa inveniri. Franc. Bacon. de Verulamio
lib. de cogitat. and vis. pag^ ^nihi 14.

LONDON, Printed for Giles Calvert, and are to be sold at the sign of the
Black-spread-Eagle at the West End of Paul's, MDCLIV.

To the Right Honorable Major General LAMBERT.
RIGHT HONORABLE,
I Present not these rude lines, thereby to beg protection; for if they be not
able to stand of themselves, I desire they should no^ be supported by others;
but only because some years ago a short draught of them was brought to your
hands, and your Honor was then pleased to judge it worthy of your view and
consideration, which makes me bold to mind you of what then I intimated unto
you, which was and is thus much, That seeing divine Providence has made you
(with the rest of those faithful and gallant men of the Army) signally
instrumental, both in redeeming the English Liberty, almost d^owned in the
deluge of Tyranny and self interest, and also unmanacling the simple and pure
truth of the Gospel, from the ch^ins and fetters of cold and dead Formality,
and of restrictive and compulsary Power, two of the greatest blessings our
Nation ever yet enjoyed, I hope the same Providence will also direct you to be
assistant to continue the s^^e, against all the bitterness and cruelty of
those, who, having obtained liberty for themselves, care not though others be
bound up and persecuted, And moreover guide you to set to your hand and
endeavor for the purging and reforming of Academies, and the advancement of
Learning, which hitherto has been little promoted or looked into. And I am the
more imboldned in this confidence, having experimental knowledge and trial, not
only of your Honors Abilities that way, but also of your sincere affection
and unparalleld love to Learning, and to all those that are lovers and
promoters thereof; which have been the principal motives to incite me to tender
this rude Essay, and these few unpolished lines to your profound and mature
judgment, which, besides the good will of the Author, have little in them
worthy your deliberate consideration: Yet I suppose, if rightly weighed and
examined, there will appear something in them of necessary consequence for the
promoting of Learning, or at least to stir up some more able wits to make a
s^^^tiny into these things that are here controver^ed, which is the greatest
aim of my flagging desires. Bu^ l^st while I speak for truth and Learning, I
may speak my self in stead thereof, which is natures epidemical disease, and in
not glorying may seem to glory, I only leave them to your Honors ^^^jure, and
my self

Your Honors devoted servant, Io. Webster.
October 21. 1653.
To all that truly love the Advancement of Learning in the Universities of
Cambridge and Oxford, or elsewhere.
GENTLEMEN,
THough my Stoical and rigid humor might rather have induced me to have
practiced that severe Maxim, That men in publishing their writings should
neither make use of fear nor care, as having that sufficient testimony in their
own breasts of the sincerity of their intentions, and the perspicuity,
certainty and utility of those things they divulge, that they need not fear
their pains shall want protection, nor care for or fear the censures of men;
Yet knowing I have to deal with Creatures more humane, civil, debonayre and
ingenuous than the many headed multitude, out of tenderness to give any jnst
scandal or offense and out of care to give all candid and free spirits the
ultimate content that lies in my power, I will give some few reasons of this my
present undertaking, especially considering that he who goes about to censure
and refute the opinions of others, cannot but stand in need of an Apology for
himself.

Some, I make no doubt, will at the first sight of this artless Rapsody, look
upon me as some Goth or Vandal, Hunne or Scythian, coming like a torrent from
the Boreal and barren mountains of cold stupidity and dark ignorance, violently
laboring to bring a deluge or inundation upon all the pleasant Gardens of Arts
and Sciences, and to make an universal Conquest of all the flourishing
Kingdoms of ancient and long-esteemed Literature, thereby to erect the
Monarchy of feral bru^ishness and savage Barbarism. Well, whatsoever they may
or can think or say of me, I am sure they cannot more experimentally and
Apodictically Anatomize mine Idiocrasie than my self, nor be better acquainted
with my weakness, nescience, ignorance and errors than I am my self and I have
truly more to say against my self than all the world can say of me or by me;
yet if I may be thought to know the interior motions and intentions of mine own
heart better than others, then I can truly and cordially testify, that my soul
is altogether inscious and innoc^nt of any such purpose. Doubtless I may
through mistake and want of ability to discern what is truth, and what is
falsehood, what is true learning, and what is but opiniative, painted and
seeming miss the way, and shoot far from the mark; yet has my will and
affections no other end but only to hold out what is Homogeneous to truth, and
of real tendency to advance Science.

Others may imagine that confidence of self-sufficiency, or hope of fame and
vain glory, to be said to have attempted great things; or like Scaliger with
Cardan to think to gain credit, to intermeddle with the splendour of the great
name of Aristotle; or to be so audacious, being but as an Ant or Pygmie, to
undertake to combat with the Sons of Anac, in entering so boldly upon an
Examination of the Academies, which are, and have been the Fountains of
Learning, have been the motives that have had the most principal impulse upon
my spirits in this iuterpriz^; or that in the vain confidence of my abilities
in Oratory, I have played but Agrippa's Ape, to make a declamation against the
approved Scholastic learning thereby to be accounted more learned: To these I
plainly answer, my own breast is mine own Sanctuary and let them judge what
they please, for if affection to simple and naked truth had had no more
influence upon my spirit than desire of fame and repute, I could have been
willing to have been silent until I had been returned into that universal
silence into which all must go; and if I be not guilty of too much dubitation
with Pyrrho, I am not culpable of too much considence with Aristotle. But I
must needs confess, as I never attempted any adversary through the
encouragement of his weakness, so I never feared any because of his supposed
strength; those that teach in the Academies are but as others, and homo is a
common name to all men.

And if these men understood that I know better how to live without the most
men in the World, than many in the world know how to live without me, they
would never have judged me by their own measure, nor have imagined that either
fear or favor, repute or disrepute, could have drawn me to this undertaking.
And my unskilfulness in Oratory is so sufficiently manifest in these unelegant
lines, as it cannot be of much weight to beget a belief of gaining credit by
that means, whereof I am absolutely conscious I am utterly void; and if Agrippa
have done well, why should I be troubled to be accounted his imitator?

Others will look upon me as an absolute Leveller, and imagine that I would but
have the Tree dug up by the roots, that if I get none of the main timber,
yet I may have some of the tops, or at least to warm my self with the chips;
And will say, that as the Presbyters rooted out the Episcopants, yet it was but
to gather the Tithes into their own Barns; and as the Independents dismounted
the Presbyterians, yet it was but to ride in their saddle: so we that talk of
reforming the Academies and Schools, do it but that we might divide some of the
spoil, or step into the places of those that are turned out. Well, it is an
easy exposition to expound other men's aims by their own, and to judge what
others intend to do, because we our selves have either done or intend to do the
like in like cases; but facility and verity are not always twins, others are
not necessarily corrupt because we are so, minds as well as faces may have the
same difference. But however I must needs so far own Levelling, that I hold
plai^ dealing to be a jewel, and he that loves rugged, knotty and uneven paths
may choose them for me, I shall not willingly follow him therein; smooth and
plain ways to me seem more amiable, secure, and comfortable. For the Prelacy
though it sought to bow me, yet it could not break me; though the Presbyterian
pride did seem to threaten me, yet it could not hurt me, and the Independent
forms could never inform me beyond the basis of a better building than man can
erect: nor can the spoil of Academies ever please my mind, nor shall fill my
purse. And therefore I would have such to know that I am no Dean not Master,
President nor Provost, Fellow nor Pensioner, neither have I tyths appropriate*
nor impropriate, augmentation, nor State pay, nor all the levelling that has
been in these times, has not mounted nor raised me, nor can they make me fall
lower, Qui cadit in terram, non habet unde cadat. And he that would raise
himself by the ruins of others, or warm himself by the burning of Schools, I
wish him no greater plague than his own ignorance, nor that he may ever gain
more knowledge than to live to repent.

Some also will inquire who, and what I am, how bred and educated, that I dare
be so audacious and insolent to examine and oppose that learning, which has
been received and approved for so many years, as^ented unto, and extolled by so
many great wits and profound judgments, and defended, and patronized by all
the Academies in the Universe: and will think it fit I should give an account
of my self, that the world may judge of mine abilities, lest my shoulders be
found too weak to support so ponderous a burden. To all which I might return
this, Si respondere noluero, quis Coacturus fit? yet shall I not be so Cynical,
but plainly tell them that Hercules is easily known by his foot, and the Lion
by his paw, the Treatise it self will sufficiently speak both my strength and
weakness, my science and ignorance, and causes are best known by their
effects, and the tree by its fruits, and therefore they need no cleerer rules,
or means to judge by, than the things herein laid down. And if I know little
(as I am most conscious that I only know this, that I know nothing at all, at
least as I ought to know) let not my education be blamed, but my negligence and
stupidity, though I must confess I ow little to the advantages of those things
called the goods of fortune, but most (next under the goodness of God) to
industry: However, I am a freeborn Englishman, a Citizen of the world, and a
seeker of knowledge, and am willing to teach what I know, and learn what I know
not, and this is sufficient satisfaction to modest inquirers.

Furthermore, some may object and say, that this Treatise is but like Plato's
Republic, Sir Thomas Moor's Vtopia, or the Lord Bacon's new Athlantis, fraught
with nothing but Heterodoxal novelties, and imaginary whimseys, which are not
to be imitated, and are merely unpracticable. To this I answer, that
fantastical heads may very well be filled with such roving thoughts, and
conceited crotches, yet I would have them to know that in Plato's Commonwealth,
and Sir Thomas Moor's Vtopia, are more excellent things contained than figments
and impossibilities, though the general blindness, and curse upon the Sons of
Adam keep them from seeing or practicing any thing that may break the yoke or
remove the burden: and for the arcana et magnalia naturae, aimed at by Sir
Francis Bacon, they might be brought to some reasonable perfection, if the
ways and means that he has prescribed, were diligently observed, and persued;
and if these poor lines of mine contained but any treasure comparable to any of
their rich mines, I should set an higher Character of esteem upon them, than
now I ought, or they any way merit. And it is true, that supposed difficulty,
and impossibility, are great causes of determent from attempting, or trying of
new discoveries, and enterprises, for the sloathful person usually cries, go
not forth, there is a Lion or Bear in the way; and if Columbus had not had the
spirit to have attempted, against all seeming impossibilities, and
discouragements, never had he gained that immortal honor, nor the Spaniards
been Masters of the rich Indies, for we often admire why many things are
attempted which appear to us as impossible, and yet when attained, we wonder
they were no sooner set upon, and tried, so though the means here prescribed
may seem weak and difficult to be put into use, yet being practiced may be
found easy and advantageous. And I hope newness need not be a brand to any
endeavor, or discovery, seeing it is but a mere relative to our intellects, for
that, of which we were ignorant, being discovered to us, we call new, which
ought rather to mind us of our imbecility and ignoranee, than to be any stain
or scandal to the thing discovered, for doubtlesly he said well that accounted
Philosophy to be that, which taught us nihil admirari, and admiration is
always the daughter of ignorance.

And if some shall allege that here is nothing mine own but what is gleaned and
collected from others, and so is nothing else but a transcription, and that if
every bird take her own feather, I shall be but left naked and bare. Well,
suppose all this be true, and that nihil dictum quod non prius, yet is this no
more blameable in me than in others, for I confess the most of the Arguments I
have used have been borrowed from those learned Authors whose names I have
used, or whose writings I have cited, yet are there many things also of mine
own, at least the method and manner of arguing, so that I may say with
Macrobius, omne meum, nihil meum. And if the things therein contained be hinted
at and taught by others, then I only am not Paradoxal but they also, and I have
produced their testimony, that the world may see how many valiant champions
have stood up to maintain truth against the impetuous torrent of antiquity,
authority and universality of opinion; and though they be not so numerous, yet
are they no babes, but strong men, who fight not with the plumbeous weapons of
notions, Syllogism, and putation, but with the steely instruments of
demonstration, observation, and experimental induction, so that I hope I shall
not be accused of novelty and singularity, seeing I have so many noble Heroes
to bear me company.

However I may be censured, I intend not to asperse the persons of any, nor to
traduce nor calumniate the Academies themselves, but only the corruptions that
time and negligence has introduced there, but simply to attempt (according to
my best understanding) some reformation, not eradication of their customs, and
learning, which though I have (peradventure) but weakedly managed, yet I hope
my poor mite, with the can did and ingenuous will be accepted, and for the rest
I value them not, and I entreat the more able to supply what my want of
strength has left incomplete, and imperfect.

Lastly, I have rather intended this as an essay to break the ice to some more
able judgment, than as sufficient of it self to perform what is aimed at,
because I have neither performed what I should have done, nor what I could, but
only traced out some few clear things as a guide to higher and more noble
undertakings: In a word, if I have said or done any thing that may truly
advance Science, I have mine end, if otherwise, blame the weakness, not the
will of him, who subscribes himself,

Servant to all those that truly love Learning. Jo. WEBSTER.
October. 21. 1653.
Sagacissimo et doctissimo Viro Johanni Websterio carmen Acrosticon et
Encomiasticon.
J In an Egyptian darkness men do live,
O Overcome with Fancies which the Schoolmen give;
H High-building-Tower men, who such notions make,
N Nothing but Babel we from them can take.
W Weave now such damask, Webster, that this age
E Eternize may thy Name with the Grecian Sage.
B Build Thou a School, whose strong foundation may
S Sacred remain, when Thou art laid in Clay.
T Time then shall write in brazen sheets Thy Fame,
E Englands Guard-Angel shall preserve Thy Frame,
R Rebuking Schoolmen with Thy very Name.
R. H. N. and Medicus.

To the Reader concerning this Book, and his Worthy Friend, the Composer of it.
Who fears the same of Academick sense
Must blame this Author, saying, a bonny sconce
Is fitter for him, than a weed that springs
In any Grove, that is shadowed by the wings
Of Pegasus, that nimble Horse that runs
Among the Goths, the Vandals, and the Hunnes;
But we are Christians, say the men that bottle
All their Extractions out of Aristotle;
We are the men that must amuze the world
With what He has broached, and still amongst us hurled:
But here is a man that tells the truth indeed,
And shows our Human Learning but a weed,
A dream of yesternight, and no such thing
As men from Oxford, or from Cambridge bring.
Reader consider what he says, and mark
What Artifice of mischief lies i'th'dark,
How Ignorance has braved it out, and still
Goes veiled and masked under the name of Skill;
How men pretend to that which is Divine,
And yet discern not what is but Humane.
How earnest should we be, and valiant then
Against those Idols of the times, who when
They know not God, or what is taught by him,
Would yet in lower waters drink and swim
Of Human Learning? But how vain and odd
Is his conceit, that knows neither man nor God,
And yet would fain persuade the world that he
Can handsomely unfold each mystery?
Away with fond conceits, let us lament
Our not perceiving what may us content,
Which lies not in the Creatures view, much less
Can any see it, who themselves do bless,
In groping after that which men enhaunce,
And yet what is it, but mere Nescience?
Welfare the Author of this learned Book,
Whose pains from us frauds of this nature took.
(...). I. C. A. M.

The Contents.
Chap. I. Of the generral ends of erecting public Schools. Chap. II. Of the
division of Academick Learning, and first of that called School-Theology. Chap.
III. Of the division of that which the Schools call Humane learning, and first
of Tongues or Languages. Chap. IV. Of Logic. Chap. V. Of the Mathematical
Sciences. Chap. VI. Of Scholastic Philosophy. Chap. VII. Of Metaphysics,
Ethics, Politics, Oeconomicks, Poesy, and Oratory. Chap. VIII. Of their
Custom and Method. Chap. IX. Of some expedients or remedies, in Theology,
Grammar, Logic, and Mathematics. Chap. X. Of some helps in Natural
Philosophy. Chap. XI. Some Expedients concerning their Custom and Method.
ACADEMIARUM EXAMEN, OR THE EXAMINATION OF ACADEMIES.
CHAP. I. Of the general ends of erecting public Schools.
IT is a truth clearly evidential to all, who in a small measure have but
conversed with History, or are not absolute Infidels against the fidelity and
facts of former ages, that there have been few Nations so feral and savage, who
have not honored literature, and in some way or other have not instituted
means for the propagating of Learning. Which is sufficiently witnessed by the
most Nations of note; for the Indians had their Brachman's, and Gymnosophists;
the Persians their Magusaei, or Magicians; the ancient Gauls, and Britains
their Druides; the Jews their Rabbis, both Cabalists and Talmudists; and the
Graecians their Masters and Philosophers. The Egyptians also had their
Priests, who were men of great learning, and did but account of the Graecians
in point of knowledge as children, as one of them objected, Vos Graci semper
estis pueri; and this was that great learning, which Moses being skilled in, is
commended by S. Stephen, Act. 7.22.
(...), and Moses was instituted from a body in all the learning of the
Egyptians.

Now these had their Gymnasia or public Schools, wherein they instructed their
youth, Philostrat. in vila Apoll. Tyan.
as Apollonius Tyaneus witnesses of the Indians, and so St. Paul testifies of
himself, that he was brought up at the feet of Gamalie. Act. 22.3.
And doubtless in imitation of these Eastern Nations the Graecians erected
their Schools, and Academies; for Pythagoras, Democritus, Socrates, Plato and
others, having traveled into foreign parts, to participate of their knowledge,
and returning home abundantly enriched therewith, did open their Schools to
instruct their Countrymen, and to let them in some measure taste of the sweet
fruit of their far-fetched and dear-bought Science. Yet had they not (as far as
I can gather) any public salaries, but their merit was their maintenance, and
their excellency in arts, and diligent industry, the only Trumpet to blow
abroad their fame, and to procure them both advancement, and auscultators,

I shall not need to enlarge my self to speak of their antiquity, or the
commendable ends of their first erection, it being manifest that the chief
ends, in the institution of them amongst the Heathen, were first to enable men
for their undertaking in the Commonwealth; and secondly to fit them for the
service, or worship of their Idols, and imaginary gods; which ends (though
diversified in the object) were (in all probability) the same that Christians
aimed at in setting up their Schools and Universities: The first of which was
good, Politic, useful and profitable, inabling men for all kind of
undertakings, both military and civil, without which men do not much differ
from brute animants; the perfection of which is the greatest acquisition that
men in this frail life can be partakers of, and in comparison of which all
other worldly treasures are but as vapors and emptiness.

But the other end, namely by these acquirements to fit and enable men for the
Ministry, and thereby to unlock the sealed Cabinet of the counsel of God (as it
has been commonly received in judgment, and used in practice) has not only
failed of the principal end aimed at, but been quite contrary and opposite
thereunto. For every thing stretched and elevated beyond its own proper sphere
and activity, becomes not only vain and unprofitable, but also hurtful and
dangerous: Boni oculi, and usui necessarii, sed cum sine lumine aspicere
volunt, Chrysostom in epist ad Cor. 1. cap. 2. Hom. 6.7.
nihil eis species proficit, nihil propria vis, sed affert nocumentum, The eyes
are good, and necessary for use, but when they will see without light, the
species of things does not profit, their own virtue does not profit, but bring
nocument: So humane knowledge is good, and excellent, and is of manifold and
transcendent use, while moving in its own orb; but when it will see further
than its own light can lead it, it then becomes blind, and destroys it self.
So if the Academies had kept within their own sphere, and only taught humane
science, and had not in pride and vain glory, mounted into the Chariot of the
Sun like Phaeton, they had then neither disordered nor injured Theology that
is above them, nor the things of nature, which they account below them; nor had
they attempted to send laborers into the Lords Vineyard, Mat. 9.38.
which none but he himself alone can do; nor been negligent in that burden,
and labor, that was peculiar unto them, and incumbent upon them. And to clear
this we shall only touch some few arguments, because elsewhere we have said
more.

1. The chief scope and drift of the Gospel is to humble the proud, and
towering imaginations of lost man, and to let him see that he is
(notwithstanding the excellency of all his acquisitions) utterly blind, and
knows nothing as he ought to know. And so while this vain tradition pretends to
enable man to understand the mysteries of the Gospel, it makes him (through
confidence in his seize) incapable of being taught them, as Jobs friend
truly said, Ioh. 11.12. Gregor. li. 28 Moral.
vain man would be wise, though he be born as a wild asses Colt. Tanto fit
quisque vilior Deo, quanto pretiosior sibi, tanto pretiosior deo, quanto
propter eum vilior sibi, Every one becomes so much more vile unto God, by how
much more he is precious unto himself, so much more precious unto God, by how
much more because of him he is vile unto himself.

2. The end of the Gospel is to discover the wisdom of the world (in the
height of its purity and perfection) to be mere foolishness, 1 Cor. 1.19, 20
that so it may not be balanced or compared with those divine rays of
Caelestial light that the Spirit of God reveals in and unto man. Haec tota est
scientia magna hominis scire, August. sup. Psalm. 70.
quia ipsa nihil est per se, and quoniam quicquid est, ex deo est, et propter
deum est, This is the whole knowledge of man, to know that it is nothing of it
self, and that whatsoever it is, it is of God, and for God. But this opinion
makes man confidently walk on in the light of his own sparks, Isa. 50.11.
and by the fire that he has kinkled unto himself, and to prize it above the
glorious and given light of the Spirit of Grace, and therefore (as says the
Prophet) to ly down in sorrow. Ad veram sapientiam pervenire non possunt, Greg.
lib. 9. Moral.
qui falsae suae sapientiae fiducia decipiunt, Those can never attain unto true
sapience who deceive themselves in the confidence of their own false wisdom.

Gal. 1.1.1^. Mat. 16.17. Job 6.45.
3. The teaching of spiritual and Gospel knowledge is only and peculiarly
appropriated and attributed unto the Spirit of God, It is neither of man, nor
by man, flesh and blood reveals it not, but the Father which is in heaven; and
every Scribe fit for the Kingdom of heaven is taught of God. Doctus autem
scriba, qui Magisterium universalis scientiae adeptus, Nich. de cusa. de
filiatione dei.
habet thesaurum, de quo proferre potest nova et vetera, For the taught Scribe,
who having attained the Magistery of universal science, has a treasury out of
which he can bring new things and old. Now this tenent does attribute it to a
fleshly power, contrary to the truth of God, 1 Cor. 2.14.
which denies it to be in the power of humane acquisition. The natural man
receives not the things of the Spirit of God, for they are foolishness unto
him: neither can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned.

4. The weapons and instruments of a minister of the Gospel are of a more
transcendent and sublime nature, than those that one man can furnish another
withal, they are not carnal, 2 Cor. 10* 4, 5.
but spiritual, not mighty through us or our power, but through Christ, not for
the elevating and blowing up, but for the pulling down of strong holds, casting
down imaginations, and every thing that exalts it self against the knowledge
of God, Vid. Chrysostom. Sup. loc.
and bringing into captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ. Now is
it not manifest that all the Science that men or Schools can teach is but
carnal, and tends to exalt and not pull down the imaginations of man? and
therefore true of them, as one of the Ancients said, Nugas tenemus, Hieronim.
in epist. de duobus filiis.
et font veritatis amisso, opinionum rivulos consectamur, We hold trifles, and
the fountain of verity being lost, we follow the rivulets of opinions.

5. The Apostles and Disciples neither taught nor practiced any such matter,
but bad us beware of Philosophy, which is after the rudiments of the World,
Col. 2.8.
and not after Christ: Nay the Apostle forbad us even to speak or declare the
things of Christ in the wisdom of men's words, 1 Cor. 1.17.
because thereby the cross of Christ is made of none effect, 1 Cor. 2.4, 5.
and thereby men's faith does but stand in the wisdom of man, and not in the
power of God. There is a very remarkable and apposite relation recorded by
Chrysostom of two men disputing, the one a Christian, the other an heathen,
and the question betwixt them was, whether Paul or Plato were more eloquent,
the Christian arguing for St. Paul, and the heathen for his master Plato, of
whom he affirms that the Christian had the argument that belonged to the
^eathe^, and the heathen that which belonged to the Christian, and draws this
conclusion. Chry. Hom. 3. in 1 ad Cor. cap. 1. v. 17.
Si Platone disertior Paulus fuisset, multi non immerito asserere potuissent,
non gratia vicisse Paulum, sed facundia; ex quo satis constat, non in sapientia
humana praedicationem factam esse, sed in divina gratia. If Paul had been more
eloquent than Plato, many not unworthily might have asserted, that Paul had
been Victor, not by grace, but facundity, from whence it is sufficiently
manifest that the preaching of the Gospel was not made in the wisdom of man,
but in divine grace. Therefore is this teaching and practice contrary to the
Apostles rule and canon.

6. All things that by the Spirit of Christ are revealed unto, or wrought in
man, are for this end, to take away from the creature totally all cause and
ground of boasting or glorying, and to give the glory to God solely, to whom it
is due. 1 Cor. 1.29, 31.
He that rejoiceth, let him rejoice in the Lord, and let no flesh glory in his
presence. Non confidat praedicator, vel auditor verbi divini, de acumine
ingenii, de subtilitate scrutinii, Hug. de sanct. Victor. in Dida^calic.
de sedulitate studii: sed magis considat de bonitate dei, de pietate oraculi,
de humilitate cordis intimi, Let not the Preacher or hearer of the divine word,
trust in the acuteness of his wit, the subtilty of his scrutiny, the sedulity
of his study: but rather let him trust in the goodness of God, in the piety of
the oracle, in the humility of his inward heart. But this tenent of Schools
inabling men for the Ministry, teaches man to glory in his gotten learning,
and acquired parts, and so is contrary to the truth of Christ.

Object. 1. To this I know it will be objected, That Schools teach the
knowledge of tongues, without which the Scriptures (being originally written in
the Hebrew and Greek) cannot be truly and rightly translated, expounded, nor
interpreted: and therefore it is necessary that Schools and Academies should
teach these, as properly and mainly conducible to this end. To which I shall
give this free and clear responsion.

Responsi. 1. It is not yet infallibly concluded, either which are the true
original copies (especially concerning the Hebrew, and the Oriental languages)
the Jewish tongue having been often altered and corrup^ed by their several
intermixtures with, and transmigrations into other Nations; or that they have
been purely and sincerely preserved unto our hands. For Languages change and
alter, as fashions and garments. Multa renascentur, quae nunc cecidere,
cadentque; Neither have we any thing to assure us in this point, but bare
tradition and history, which are various, perplex, dubious, contradictory and
deficient. And that it which in it self is dubious and uncertain, should be the
means of manifesting the indub^table truth to others, seems not very probable
or persuasive.

2. Knowledge of tongues can but teach the Grammatical construction,
signification, and interpretation of words, propriety of phrases, deduction of
Etymologies, and such like; all which tend no further than the instamping of a
bare literal understanding, and all this may be, the mystery of the Gospel
being unknown, 2 Cor. 3 6.
for the letter kills, but the Spirit gives life. And Saul before his
conversion, and the rest of the Jewish Rabbis, understood the Hebrew and Greek
tongues, and yet by them understood nothing of the saving mystery of Grace, for
they stumbled at the stone of offense, and though they were Princes in humane
learning and wisdom, yet did they not know God in his divine wisdom, for had
they known it, 1 Cor. 2.8.
they would not have crucified the Lord of Life. And therefore is not tongues
the right key to unlock the Scriptures, but the Spirit of Christ, Rev. 3 7.
that opens, and no man shuts, and shuts, and no man opens.

3. This is built upon no surer a foundation than a traditional faith, for
oportet discentem credere, every man must believe his Teacher, and therefore
has no more in this but what is taught by man, who is not able to receive the
things that are of God, for they are spiritually discerned. So that in this
case he that understands the original tongues, in which the text was first
written, conceives no more of the mind of God thereby, than he that only can
read or hear read the translation in his Mothers tongue: For the reasons are
every way pareil, and parallel; for what difference is there between him that
relies upon his teachers skill, and he that relies upon the skill of a
Translator, are they not both alike, since they are but both testimonia humana,
full of errors, mistakes and fallacies?

4. The errors and mistakes that still remain, and are daily discovered in all
translations, do sufficiently witness men's negligence and ignorance, that in
the space of sixteen hundred years, have not arrived at so much perfection, as
to complete one translation, to be able to stand the hazard of all essaies, and
as the Herculean pillar with a ne plus ultra; especially if unto this be added,
the uncertainty (if not deceit) of all or the most Translations, men usually
pretending skill in the Original tongues, do draw and hale the word to that
sense and meaning that be^^ suited with their opinions and tenants, which is
clear in Arrius and those others that men have branded with the name of
heretics, (how justly God knows) and in those that many do call Fathers, as
Origin, Ambrose, and many such; and in these times the Papists, Socinians,
Arminians (as men have given them names) and those that have appropriated unto
themselves the name of being Orthodox: these all pretending exact skill in the
original tongues, do all wrest the Scriptures to make good their several
tenants, and traditional forms, which plainly demonstrates the uncertainty, if
not vanity, in boasting of, and trusting in this fleshly weapon, of the
knowledge of tongues.

5. Lastly, while men trust to their skill in the understanding of the original
tongues, they become utterly ignorant of the true original tongue, the language
of the heavenly Canaan, which no man can understand or speak, but he that is
brought into that good Land that flows with milk and honey, and there to be
taught the language of the holy Ghost, for he that is from heaven is heavenly,
Jo. 3.31, 32.
and speaks heavenly things, and all that are from the earth, do but speak
earthly things: So that he that is most expert, and exquisi^e in the Greek and
Oriental tongues, to him notwithstanding the language of the holy Ghost, hid in
the letter of the Scriptutes, is but as Hiroglyphicks, and Cryptography, which
he can never uncypher, unless God bring his own key, and teach him how to use
it, and otherwise the voice of Saints will but be unto him as the voice of
Barbarians, even as a sounding brass, and a tinkling Cymbal, as not giving any
perfect or distinct sound.

And therefore as nothing that I have spoken is intended against the learning
and use of languages simply, so I am not averse to men's endeavors about the
same, not their pains in perfecting translations, but could heartily wish it
were ten times more: yet principally I would have men to know, that it is the
Spirit of God only that freely gives men to understand the mysteries of the
kingdom of heaven, and if any good or benefit accrue unto the truth and Church
of Christ by the knowledge of tongues or translations, it arises not from
their excellency, but solely and only from the merciful operation of his
Spirit, Rom 8.28.
who works all and in all, and makes all things to cooperate for the benefit
of those whom he has called according to his own purpose.

CHAP. II. Of the division of Academick learning, and first of that called
School-Theology.
THere are three things concerning Academies, that do obviously offer
themselves to our examination; First, that Learning which is the subject of
their labors. Secondly, their method in the teaching and delivering it unto
others. Thirdly, their Constitutions and Customs, of which we shall speak in
order; and first of that learning which they subjectively handle; for they very
proudly, and vaingloriously pretending to make men Doctors in diverse Sciences,
and Masters, and Batchelors in or of Arts, it will be very necessary to
consider what these Sciences and Arts are, in or of which men are by them made
Masters, lest it prove that when men vainly boast, and imagine that they are
Masters of arts, they be Masters of none, but rather ignorant of all or the
most. It is no less ingenuous than true, Disserta. de Methodo. lib. page 3.
which the learned Renatus des Carts acknowledges of himself, That having
been from his very young years stimulated with a mighty ardor and desire of
knowledge, and having run thorough the course and Curricle of the Scholastic
studies, after which by custom and order he was to be received into the number
of the learned, even then (says he) Tot medubiis totque erroribus implicatum
esse adimadverti, ut omnes discendi conatus nihil aliud mihi profecisse
judicarem, quam quod ignorantiam meam magis magisque detexissem, I understood
my sel^ implicated with so many doubts and so many errors, that I did judge all
my desires of learning to have profitted me no more, than that more and more I
had detected mine own ignorance. Memorable, faithful, and vastly modest is
that free confession of that miracle of learning Baptist a van-H^lmont, Lib.
Stud. Author. page 16.
who when he had accomplished his course in Philosophy, and was to receive his
degree of a Master of Arts, ^e begun to examine what a great Philosopher he
was, and what science he had gained, says, Comperi me litera inflatum, et
veluti manducato pomo vetito plane nudum, praeterquam quod artificiose
altercari didiceram. Tum prius enotui mihi quod nihil scirem, et scirem quod
nihili, I found my self puffed up with the letter, and plainly naked, as though
I had eaten of the forbidden apple, except that I had learned artificially to
chide. Then first it was known to me, that I knew nothing, and what I knew was
of no value. And therefore modestly makes this conclusion; Peracto ergo cursu,
cum nil solidi, nil very scirem, titulum magistri artium recusavi; nolens, ut
mecum morionem professores agerent, magistrum septem artium declararent, qui
nondum essem discipulus, Therefore the course of my studies being finished,
seeing I knew nothing of solidity, nothing of truth, I refus^d the title of
Master of Arts, unwilling the professors should play the fool with me, that
they should declare me Master of the seve^ Ar^s, w^o as yet was not a disciple,
or taught. And I could wish that all those that boast of being Masters of Arts
had the true insight of their own self^insufficiency, then would they be more
willing to learn, than to undertake to teach.

The first usual div^sion of Scholastic learning is into Divine and Humane;
the first of which they commonly style by that improper and high-flown title of
School Divinity: and sometimes more modestly and aptly, School-Theology, and by
some Metaphysics, or Natural Theology, the Vanity, Vselessenesse, and
Hurtfulnesse of which we shall show in some few clear arguments.

First, the Vanity of it appears in this, that men and Academies have
undertaken to teach that which none but the Spirit of Christ is the true Doctor
of, Matthew. 23.9. James 3.1.
and so contrary to the truth call men teachers and masters upon earth, when we
have but one father (to teach these things) which is in heaven, and one true
Master (who only can disciple us in these things) even Christ, and so ought not
vainly (because of man's pretending to teach us those things in the ordinary way
of humane teaching) to be called, or to call one another Rabbis; Jam. 1.13.
for every good gift, and every perfect gift is from above, and comes down
from the father of lights, with whom is no variableness, neither shadow of
turning. I do not deny nor envy men the titles of being called Doctors and
Masters for their knowledge in natural and civil things, and for to have a
civil reverence and honor, but to have these titles given them as able, or
taking upon them to teach spiritual things, is vanity and pride, if not
blasphemy: For I must conclude with Chrysostom, Chrysostom. in Ep. ad Cor. 1.
cap. 2. Hom. 7.
Omnis ars suis terminis non contenta, stultitia est, Every art not content
with it own bounds, is foolishness. And therefore sober and Christian-like is
that conclusion of Cartesius speaking of Theology, Sed cum pro certo et
explorato accepissem, iter quod ad illam ducit doctis non magis patere quam
indoctis, veritatosque a deo revelatas humani ingenii captum excedere, verebar
ne in temeritatis crimen inciderem, Renat. des Carts in Method.
si illas imbecilae rationis meae examini subijcerem, et quicunque iis
recognoscendis, atque interpretandis vacare audent, peculiari ad hoc dei gratia
indigere, ac supra vulgarium hominum sortem positi esse debere, mihi
videbantur, But when I had received it for certain, and indubitable, that the
path which leads unto it, is not more open to the learned than to the
unlearned, and that the truths revealed of God do exceed the capacity of humane
wit, I did fear lest I should fall into the crime of temerity, if I should
subject them to the examination of my weak reason, and whosoever did attend the
handling and interpreting of those things, did seem to me to stand in need of
the peculiar grace of God for that work, and ought to be placed above the
condition of vulgar men. So that it is the proper and peculiar science and art
of the holy Ghost, which none can teach but God only, vid. Cusan, in Apol.
doctae ignorantiae, Bapt. van Helm. in promis. stud. author. et de venatione
scientiarum, Paracels. lib. de fundamento scientiarum et sapientiae, et in lib.
de inventione artium, et alios.

Secondly, from this putrid and muddy fountain does arise all those hellish and
dark foggs and vapors that like locusts crawling from this bottomless pit
have overspread the face of the whole earth, filling men with pride, insolency,
and self-confidence, to aver and maintain that none are fit to speak, and
preach the spiritual, and deep things of God, but such as are endued with this
Scholastic, and man's idol-made-learning, and so become fighters against God,
and his truth, and persecutors of all those that speak from the principle of
that wisdom, Iam. 3.15.17.
that is from above, and is pnre and peaceable: not consessing the nothingnesse
of creaturely wisdom, but magnifying, and boasting in that which is earthly,
sensual, and devilish. Hug. lib. 3 de Anima. cap. 6.
Frustra enim cordis oculum erigit ad videndum deum, qui nondum idoneus est ad
videndum seipsum, For in vain does he lift the eye of his heart to see God, who
is not yet fit to see himself. And therefore these thinking themselves wise,
they become fools, and proudly taking upon them to teach others the things of
God in the way of worldly wisdom, are not only untaught of God, but are
enemies to his heavenly wisdom. Excellent is that of the Cardinal, in his
discourse between the Doctor and the Idiot, for the Idiot says, Nic. de Cusa.
lib. idiotae.
Haec est fortassis inter te and me differentia, tu, te scientem putas, cum non
sis, hinc superbis; ego vero idiotam me esse cognosco, hinc humilior, in hoc
forte doctior existo, This perhaps is the difference betwixt me and thee, thou
think thy self knowing, when thou art not, from hence thou art proud; I
truly know my self to be an Idiot, from hence I am humbled, in this perhaps I
am more learned.

3. From this arises the dividing and renting of the seamless Coat of Christ,
which is indivisible, and admits no schism, but must pass all one way,
according to the lot of the Father. But how have they attomized the unity and
simplicity of that truth? when there is but one Body, and one Spirit, and one
hope in the calling of all Saints: Ephesians 3.4 5 6.
one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, one God and Father of all, who is above all,
and through all and in all. For first they have proudly under taken to define
Theology, as they have done other arts and sciences, and so make it habitus
acquisitus, and attainable by the wit, power and industry of man, when it is
peculiarly and only donum altissimi, and merely the fruit of grace, and that
also gratis datum: and yet sometimes they divide Sciences into two sorts,
Infusive, and Acquisitive, and number this as that which is infused, and yet
not remembering their own Dichotomy, do vainly pretend to teach men that which
is only instilled and infused by the Spirit of God: and therefore might more
exactly keep their own division, to have left that inspired knowledge, which is
only infused and given from above, to the teaching of the holy Ghost. And if
they would have considered Theology as natural, which is such a spark of
knowledge as can be had of God by the light of nature, and the contemplation of
created things, which in regard of the object may be called Divine, in respect
of the information, natural, and so kept it within its own bounds, Francis.
Bacon. de Verulam. lib. de aug scient. cap. 2.
it were tolerable; for, Hujus scientiae limits ita vere signantur, ut ad
Atheismum confutandum, and convincendum, and ad legem naturae informandam, se
extendant; ad religionem autem astruenda^ non proferantur, The limits of this
science may be so truly assigned or set out, that they may extend themselves to
the confuting and convincing if Atheism, and to teach the law or order of
nature; but should not be brought forth to assert or build up Religion.

Secondly, they have laid down positive definitions of God, who cannot be
defined but by his own Logic, Psalm. 36.9.
for with him is the fountain of life, and it is in his light that we see
light: and their own rules teach them that there cannot be a perfect
definition, where there is not a proxime genus; but he does supereminently
transcend all their whole praedicamental skale, nay the heaven of heavens
cannot contain him, how much less the narrow vessel of man's intellect, 1 King
8.27.
or the weak and shallow rules of Logical skill? and therefore if they had but
humbly and modestly attempted no more, but what is attainable by the poor
scintillary glimpse of natural light, and have confessed the same constantly
and freely, and that all their best descriptions of the immense and
imcomprehensible one, were but infinitely weak and short to make out his
ineffable wisdom, power, and glory, and so have used it but to convince
Atheists, or to make manifest the Cause of Causes, and Being of Beings, and not
thereby to have reared up an high-towring Babell of confused, notional,
fruitless and vain religion, it might have passed without reproof, and the
Schoolmen without condemnation. For if we could handle these high and deep
mysteries of God, and his Spirit, then ought we to have not the spirit of the
world (which is carnal wisdom and reason) but that Spirit which is of God, 1
Cor. 2.10, 12.
which searches all things, even the deep things of God, that we might know
the things that are freely given to us of God: and so to go out of our selves,
and out of the weak and rotten vessel of humane reason, into that ark of Noah,
which guided by the divine magnetic needle of Gods Spirit, can only direct us
to rest upon the mountains of Ararat, Genesis 8.4. Dan. ^.34.
even upon himself in Christ Jesus, who is the rock of ages, and the stone cut
out without hands, that crusheth and breaks in pieces all the strong images
of man's wisdom, power, strength and righteousness.

4. They have drawn Theology into a close and strict Logical method, and
thereby hedged in the free workings and manifestations of the Holy one of
Israel, who by his Spirit blows where he lists, Ioh. 3.8
like the wind, and men may hear the sound thereof, but cannot tell from whence
it comes, nor whither it goes: as though the holy Ghost had not had an higher
and more heavenly method and way to teach divine things in and by, than the art
of Logic (which is merely humane, and man's invention) seeing the foolishness
of God is wiser than the wisdom of men, 1 Cor. 1.25.
and the weakness of God is stronger than men, when indeed the Spirit of God
has a secre^, divine and heavenly method of its own, and only proper to it
self, which none can know but those that are taught it of God, and therefore
they only understand it, and speak out the things of God, 1 Cor. 2.13.
but not in the words which man's wisdom teaches, but which the holy Ghost
teaches, comparing spiritual things with spiritual. But these men accumulating
a farraginous heap of divisions, subdivisions, distinctions, limitations,
axioms, positions and rules, do chanel and bottle up the water of life (as they
think) in and by these, and again power it forth as they please, and this is
spiritual sorcery or enchantment, 1 Samuel 28.7.
like Saul, when God had left him, to seek for Baal Oboth, the Lord in a
bottle, or the Lord bottled up, Io. 4.14. Ier. 2.13.
and not to look for his truth as a fountain of life, or as a well springing up
to eternal life; and so forsook the Lord the fountain of living waters, to draw
water out of their own broken cisterns that will hold no water; these think
Abanah and Pharpar rivers of Damascus, 2 Kings 5.12.
better than all the waters of Israel, and that they may wash in them and be
clean; Isai. 12.13. Psalm. 40 4.
and are not willing to draw water with joy out of the wels of salvation, and
know not that there is but one River the streams whereof make glad the City of
God, the holy place of the tabernacle of the most high: when he that drinks
at any other fountain, shall thirst again, but this shall be and ever is a
wellspring unto eternal life.

5. If we narrowly take a survey of the whole body of their Scholastic
Theology, what is it else but a confused Chaos, of needless, frivolous,
fruitless, trivial, vain, curious, impertinent, knotty, ungodly, irreligious,
thorny, and hel-hatc'ht disputes, altercations, doubts, questions and endless
janglings, multiplied and spawned forth even to monstrosity and naus^ousness?
Like a curious spiders web cunningly interwoven with many various and subtle
intertextures, and yet fit for nothing but the insnaring, manacling and
intricating of rash, forward, unwary and incircumspect men, who neither see nor
know the danger of that Cobweb-Net until they be taken in it, and so held fast
and inchained. And while they pretend to make all things plain and perspicuous,
(by the assistance of their too much magnified Logic) puffing men up, by
making them think themselves able to argue and dispute of the high and deep
mysteries of Christ, and to conclude as certainly and Apodictically as of any
other Science whatsoever; they do but lead and precipitate men into the
caliginous pit of mere putation, and doubtful opination; making the word of
God nothing else but as a Magazine of carnal weapons, from whence they may draw
instruments to fight with and wound one another; or like a tennis ball to be
tossed and reverberated by their petulant wits and perverse reasons, from one
to another, until truth be lost, or they utterly wearied; while in the mean
time the power and simplicity of faith lies lost in the dust of disputations,
and they like Masters of Fence seem to play many doubtful and dangerous
prizes, seemingly in good earnest, and to the hazard of their lives, when in
verity it is but to inhance their own reputations, and to suck money out of the
purses of the spectators; so that their fit motto and impress may be,
Disputandi prurigo, fit ecclesiarum scabies. Now how vain this is in it self,
how pernicious, injurious, deadly and destructive to the truth of the Gospel,
the Apostle sufficiently admonishes us, warning Timothy to keep that which is
committed to his trust, and to avoid, (...), 1 Timothy 6.20.
profanos illos, de rebus inanibus clamores, and oppositiones falso nominatae
notitiae; profane, vain bablings and oppositions of science falsely so called;
2 Timothy 2.23. Tit. 3 9.
and also exhorts to eschew foolish and unlearned questions, which do
engender strife, and to Titus, that he should avoid foolish questions, and
genealogies, and contentions, and strivings about the law, because they are
unprofitable and vain: and therefore Chrysostone said well in the person of St.
Paul, Non veni syllogismorum captiones, non sophismata, non aliud quiddam
hujusmodi vobis afferens praeter Christum crucifixum; Chrysostom. in ep ad Cor.
1. cap. 2.
I came not unto you bringing the subtilties of Syllogisms, nor Sophisms, nor
any other thing of like sort, except Christ Crucified.

6. The whole Scripture is given that man might be brought to the full, and
absolute abnegation of all his wit, reason, will, desires, strength, wisdom,
righteousness, and all humane glory and excellencies whatsoever, and that
^elfhood might be totally annihilated, that he might live, yet not he, but that
Christ might live in him, and that the life which he lives in the flesh might
be by the faith of the Son of God, Gal. 2.20.
who loved him, and gave himself for him. But if man gave his assent unto, or
believed the things of Christ, either because, and as as they are taught of and
by men, or because they appear p^obable and consentaneous to his reason, then
would his faith be statuminated upon the rotten basis of humane authority, or
else he might be said to assent unto and believe the things, because of their
appearing probable, and because of the verisimilitude of them, but not solely
and only to believe in and upon the author and promiser of them, for his
faithfulness and truths sake, and nothing else; 1 Cor. 1.17. 1 Cor. 2.5. Genesis
15.6.
and so his faith should stand in the wisdom of man, but not in the power of
God, and so the cross of Christ should become of none effect. But Abraham
believed God, and it was counted to him for righteousness, though the things
promised seemed neither probable nor possible; and therefore Sarah, Genesis 18.13.
who is the type of carnal reason, laughed at the promise, conceiving it
impossible in reason that she should have a child; and therefore it is not that
assent nor consent that reason gives unto the things of God, as they appear
semblable and like, that is the faith of Abraham, but a simple and naked
believing and relying upon the bare and sole word of the Lord, though reason
and man's wisdom can see no way how possibly it can cow to pass, but with Mary
and Nicodemus question how can these things be; for reason is a monster, and
the very root and ground of all infidelity; for the carnal mind is emnity
against God, Romans 4.18.19, 20.
and is not subject to the law of God, neither indeed can be: but faith is that
pure and divine gift and work of God that leads the heart of man in the light
and power of the Spirit of Christ, with faithful Abraham even against hope to
believe in hope, and not to stagger at the promise of God through unbelief; but
to be strong in faith, Lib. de Aug. Scient 9. cap.
and to give glory to God. Concludamus igitur (says learned Verulam)
Theologiam sacram ex verbo, and oraculis Dei, non ex lumine naturae, aut
rationis dictamime hanriri debere; Therefore we conclude that sacred Theology
ought to be drawn from the word and Oracles of God, not from the light of
nature, or the dictate of reason.

CHAP. III. Of the Division of that which the Schools call Humane Learning, and
first of Tongues or Languages.
THose Sciences that the Schools usually comprehend under the title of Humane,
are by them divided diverse and sundry ways, according to several fancies or
Authors; but most usually into two sorts, Speculative and Practick: wherein
their greatest crime lies in making some merely Speculative, that are of no use
or benefit to mankind unless they be reduced into practice, and then of all
other most profitable, excellent and useful; and these are natural Philosophy
and Mathematics, both of which will clearly appear to be practical, and that
in a few reasons.

1. Can the Science of natural things, whose subject they hold to be corpus
natural mobile, be only speculative, and not practical? is there no further
end nor consideration in Physics but only to search, discuss, understand, and
dispute of a natural movable body, with all the affections, accidents and
cir^umstances thereto belonging? Is he only to be accounted -- Faelix, qui
potuit rerum cognoscere causas? Then surely we may justly conclude with Seneca,
Nostra quae erat Philosophia, facta Philologia est, ex qua disputare docemus,
non vivere! That which was our Philosophy is made Philologie, from whence we
teach to dispute, not to live. Surely natural Philosophy has a more noble,
sublime, and ultimate end, than to rest in speculation, abstractive notions,
mental operations, and verbal disputes: for as it should lead us to know and
understand the causes, properties, operations and affections of nature; so not
only to rest there and proceed no further; But first therein and thereby to
see and behold the eternal power and Godhead of him, Romans 1.20, 21.
who has set all these things as so many significant and lively characters, or
Hieroglyphics of his invisible power, providence, and divine wisdom, so
legible, that those which will not read them, and him by them, are without
excuse; and not to rest there, but to be drawn to trust in and to adore him,
who is the Causa causans, ens entium, and God of nature; and not to become like
the Heathen, when we know God, not to glorify him as God, neither to be
thankful; but to become vain in our imaginations, and to have our foolish
hearts darkened. And secondly, not only to know natures power in the causes and
effects, but further to make use of them for the general good and benefit of
mankind, especially for the conservation and restoration of the health of man,
and of those creatures that are useful for him; for ubi desinit Philosophus
incipit medicus, and is practicably applicable to many other things; as we
shall show when we speak of Magic.

2. Can the Mathematical Sciences, the most noble, useful, and of the greatest
certitude of all the rest, serve for no more profitable end, than speculatively
and abstractively to be considered of? How could the life of man be happily
led, nay how could men in a manner consist without it? Truly I may justly say
of it as Cicero of Philosophy, it has taught men to build houses, to live in
Cities and walled Towns; it has taught men to measure and divide the Earth;
more facilely to negotiate and trade one with another: From whence was found
out and ordered the art of Navigation, the art of War, E^gins, Fortifications,
all mechanic operations, were not all these and innumerable others the progeny
of this never sufficiently praised Science? O sublime, transcendent, beautiful
and most noble Mistress! who would not court such a Celestial Pallas? who would
not be inamoured upon thy Seraphick pulchritude? surely thy divine and
Harmoniacal music were powerful enough to draw all after thee, if men were
not more insensible than stones or trees. Is the admirable knowledge that
Arethmetick afords worthy of nothing but a supine and silent speculation? Let
the Merchant, Astronomer, Mariner, Mechanic and all speak whether its greatest
glory stand not principally in the practick part? what shall I say of Geometry,
Astronomy, Optics, Geography, and all those other contained under them, as
they are reconed up by that myrror of manifold learning Dr. John Dee in his
Preface before Euclide? it were but to hold a candle to give the Sun light, to
deny that they are practical. Nay are not all the rest also practical? what is
Grammar, Lodgick, Rhetoric, Poesy, Politics, Ethics, Oeconomicks, nay
Metaphysics? if they serve to no other use than bare and fruitless
speculation? I will only conclude in this case as they do in that maxim of
Philosophy, frustra est potentia, si non reducitur in actum, In vain is power
to speculate, if it be not reduced into action and practice.

Therefore omitting the division of humane sciences, as either the Academies or
others have ordered them; I shall proceed to divide them according to that way
which I conceive most convenient and commodious for mine intended purpose, and
so shall put them under a threefold consideration.

1. Those Arts or Sciences, that though they seem to confer some knowledge, yet
is it in order to a further end, and so are instrumental, subordinate, and
subservient to other Sciences. In the number of which I first reckon Grammar,
or the knowledge of tongues, which in some sort and measure is instrumental,
and subservient to all the rest. Secondly, Logic which I account instrumental,
and helpful to Mathematics, natural Philosophy, Politics, Ethics,
Oeconomicks, Oratory, Poesy, and all the rest as it especially teaches a
Synthetical, and Analytical method. Thirdly Mathematics, which are not only
subordinate amongst themselves, but especially instrumental, and very useful
to Physics. 2. Those Sciences that confer knowledge of themselves, and are not
instrumental or subservient to others, as natural Philosophy, Metaphysics,
Politics, Ethics, and Oeconomicks. 3. Those that though they confer some
knowledge, and have some peculiar uses, so they seem necessary as ornamental,
and such I account Oratory and Poesy. Which divisions I put not so much
because they agree in this order in their proper subjects, and ends, as to
accommodate them to my present disquisition. And I shall speak in the order as
I have put these, and first of the Grammar.
1. The knowledge of Tongues bears a great noise in the world, and much of
our precious time is spent in attaining some smartering and small skill in
them, and so we do all servire duram servitutem before we arrive at any
competent perfection in them, and yet that does scarcely compensate our great
pains; nor when obtained, do they answer our longing, and vast expectations For
there is not much profit or emolument by them, besides those two great and
necessary uses, to enable to read, understand, and interpret or translate the
works and writings of other men, who have written in several languages; so that
in this regard they are as a key to unlock the rich cabinet of diverse Authors,
that there by we may gather some of their hidden treasure; and also to enable
men to converse with people of other nations, and so fit men for foreign
negotiations, trade, and the like, which indeed are very useful and extremely
beneficial to all mankind. Yet besides what I have formerly spoken of Tongues
in relation to the interpretation of the Scripture, thus much also is evident,
that if a man had the perfect knowledge of many, nay all languages, that he
could give unto man, beast, bird, fish, plant, mineral, or any other numerical
creature or thing, their distinct and proper names in twenty several Idioms, or
Dialects, yet knows he no more thereby, than he that can only name them in his
mother tongue, for the intellect receives no other nor further notion thereby,
for the senses receive but one numerical species or Ideal-shape from every
individual thing, though by institution and imposition, twenty, or one hundred
names be given unto it, according to the Idiome of several nations. Now for a
Carpenter to spend seven years time about the sharpning and preparing of his
instruments, and then had no further skill how to employ them, were ridiculous
and wearisome; so for Scholars to spend diverse years for some small scantling
and smattering in the tongues, having for the most part got no further
knowledge, but like Parrats to babble and prattle, that whereby the intellect
is no way enriched, is but toylsome, and almost lost labor. Excellent and
worthy was that attempt of the renowned and learned Comenius in his Ianna
linguarum (if it had been as well understood, and seconded by others) to lay
down a platform and seminary of all learning and knowable things, that youth
might as well in their tender years receive the impression of the knowing of
matter, and things, as of words, and that with as much ease, brevity and
facility.

2. For Grammar which has been invented for the more certain and facile
teaching, and obtaining of languages, it is very controvertible whether it
perform the same in the surest, easiest and shortest way or not; since hundreds
speak their mother tongue and other languages very perfectly, use them readily,
and understand them excellent well, and yet never knew nor were taught any
Grammatical rules, nor followed the ways of Conjugations, and Declensions,
N^un, or Verb. And it is sufficiently known, that many men by their own
industry, without the method or rules of Grammar, have gotten a competent
understanding in diverse languages: and many unlettered persons will by use and
exercize without Grammatical rules learn to speak, and understand some
languages in far shorter time than any do learn them by method and rule, as is
clearly manifest by those that travel, and live in diverse Countries, who will
learn two or three by use and exercize, while we are hard tugging to gain one
by rule and method. And again, if we conceive that languages learned by use and
exercize, render men ready, and expert in the understanding and speaking of
them, without any aggravating or pusling the intellect and memory, when that
which gotten by rule and method, when we come to use and speak it, does
exceedingly rack and excruciate the intellect and memory; which are forced at
the same time, not only to find fit words agreeable to the present matter
discoursed of, and to put them into a good Rhetorical order, but must at the
same instant of speaking collect all the numerous rules, of number, case,
gender, declension, conjugation, and the like, as into one center, where so
many rays are united, and yet not confounded, which must needs be very
perplexive and gravaminous to Memorative faculty; and therefore none that
attains languages by Grammatical rules do ever come to speak and understand
them perfectly and readily, until they come to a perfect habit in the
exercitation of them, and so thereby come both to lose and leave the use of
those many and intricate rules, which have cost us so much pains to attain to
them, and so to justify the saying, that we do but discere dediscenda, learn
things, which afterward we must learn to forget, or learn otherwise: when
those that get them by use and exercitation, attain them in shorter time, have
a more perfect and ready way in speaking of them, and are freed from all these
tedious pains and fruitless labor. Much to be commended therefore was the
enterprise of Doctor Web, who found out a more short, certain and easy way to
teach the Latin tongue in, than the tedious, painful, intricate and hard way
of Grammar, and that by a brief and easy Clausulary method, in far shorter
time to attain perfection therein, and if it had been well followed and
improved, would have produced an on incredible advantage to the whole nation;
but we are in this like tradesmen, who all bandy and confederate together to
suppress any new invention though never so commodious to the Commonwealth,
lest thereby their own privare gain should be obstructed or taken away.

3. If the way to attain to languages by Grammatical method and rule were the
best and most certain, (which yet we have made appear not to be so) yet the
rules commonly used are guilty both of confusion and perplexity. How darkly and
confusedly do they go to work? leading youth on in an intricate laborinth,
wherein he is continually toyling like an horse in a mil, and yet makes no
great progress, and all because the method is perplex and obscure, void of
evidential perspicuity, rightly co-aptated to the tender capacities of young
years, which is the cause of the other, namely its prolixity, as we can all
witness by woeful experienc^; and little has been endeavored for a remedy
herein, that has not been worse than the disease, except the elaborate pains
of our Countreyman Mr. Brinsley, who therein deserves exceeding commendation.

4. I shall also touch some of its material defects: How probable, pleasant and
useful is the Hieroglyphical, Emblematical, Symbolical and Crytographical
learning, and all relative unto Grammar, and yet therein nothing at all touched
of any of them? Was not the expressions of things by Emblems, and
Hieroglyphics, not only ancient, but in and by them what great mysteries have
been preserved and holden out to the world? Harrigon. lib. Curs. Mathem.
And who can be ignorant of the admirable, easy and compendious use of all
sorts of Symbolisms, that have but any insight into Algebraick Arithmetic, or
have but slenderly consulted with the learned pieces of our never sufficiently
praised Countreyman Mr. Oughtrede, or the elaborate tracts of the laborious
Harrigon? Or are the wonderful and stupendous effects that Polygraphy, or
Steganography produce to be omitted or neglected? which are of such high
concernment in the most arduous occurrents of humane affairs, of what price and
value these are, let that monopoly of all learning, the Abbot of Spanheim
speak, let Porta, let Cornelius Agrippa, let Claramuel, let Gustavus Silenus,
Friar Bacon, and many others speak, who have written so learnedly and
accurately therein, even to wonder and amazement. Vid. Lib. Polygrap. Steganog.
Trithem. Hen. Cor. Agrip. de occult. Philos. lib. Io. Claram. in lib. Trithem.
expositio. Gustav. Silen. Crytoman^ices lib. Frat. Rog. Bacon. de mirabili
potestate artis et naturae lib. et alios.

5. What a vast advancement had it been to the Re-publick of Learning, and
hugely profi^able to all mankind, if the discovery of the universal Character
(hinted at by some judicious Authors) had been wisely and laboriously pursued
and b^ought to perfection? C^st. S^len. ^^tograph. lib. 7.
that thereby Nations of diverse Languages might have been able to have read it
and understood it, and so have more easily had commerce and trafick one with
another, and thereby the sciences and skill of one Nation, might with more
facility have been communicated to others, though not speaking or understanding
that language in which they were first written. This would have been a potent
means (in some measure) to have repaired the ruins of Babell, and have been
almost a Catholic Cure for the confusion of tongues: for do we not plainly see
that those which are deaf and dumb have most pregnant and notable ways by
signs and gestures to express their minds, which those that do much converse
with them can easily understand and unriddle, and answer them with the like?
that doubtlesly complete ways might be found out to convey out notions and
intentions one to another, without vocal and articular prolation, as some have
all ready invented and practiced by Dactylogy, and doubtlesly might be brought
to pass by the eyes and motions of the face only. Sir Kenelm Digbies Book of
bodies and spirits.
Sir Kenelm Digby has an apposite, though almost incredible story of one in
Spain, which being deaf and dumb, was notwithstanding taught to speak and
understand others, which cerrainly was performed chiefly by the eye; and though
it may seem a Romance to some, yet whosoever shall seriously consider the vast
knowledge, cautiousness, curiosity, sincerity, and punctual account of the
relator therein, will be convinced of the possibility hereof. And it is
recorded, and believed with Authors of repute and credit, Fr. Bacon de Au. Sci.
l. 6. c 1.
that in China, and some other Oriental Regions, they have certain characters,
which are real, not nominal, expressing neither letters nor words, but things,
and notions: so that many nations differing altogether in languages, yet
consenting in learning these Catholic characters, do communicate in their
writings, so far that every nation can read and translate a book written in
these common characters, in and into their own Country language. Which is more
manifest, if we do but consider that the numeral notes, which we call figures
and ciphers, the Planetary Characters, the marks for minerals, and many other
things in Chemistry, though they be always the same and vary not, yet are
understood by all nations in Europe, and when they are read, every one
pronounces them in their own Countries language and Dialect. And to make it
more evident, let a character denoting man be appointed, as suppose this *, and
though to persons of diverse languages, it would receive various denominations
according to their several vocal prolations, yet would they all but understand
one and the self same thing by it: For though an Hebrew or Jew would call it
(...), a Grecian (...) or (...), one that speaks the Latin Homo, a Frenchman
Un home, an High German Der Mann, a Spaniard Un Hombre, and the English, Man,
yet would the intellect receive but only the single and numerical species of
that which it represented, and so one note serve for one notion to all nations.

6. I cannot (howsoever fabulous, impossible, or ridiculous it may be accounted
of some) pass over with silence, or neglect that signal and wonderful secret
(so often mentiond by the mysterious and divinely-inspired Teutonick, Jac.
E^hem Book of the 3 ^old life of man, and in other places of his works.
and in some manner acknowledged and owned by the highly-illuminated fraternity
of the Rosy Cross) of the language of nature: but out of profound and deep
consideration, must adumbrate some of those reasons, which perswasively draw my
judgment to credit the possibility thereof.

1. For when I look upon the Protoplast Adam, created in the image, or
according to the image of the great Archetype his father and maker, Genesis 1.27.
Creavit deus hominem ad imaginem suam, God created man in his own image, and
also find the never-erring oracle of truth declaring evidently what that image
is, namly the only begotten son of the father, (...), Heb. 1.3.
who being the effulgence or brightness of glory, and the Character and image
of his subsistence: And this image of his subsistence, being that out-flown,
and serviceable word by which he made the worlds, Jo. 1.1.
and that in the beginning was the word, and the word was with God, and the
word was God; from this is manifest that Adam made in this image of God which
is his eternal word, was made in the out-spoken word, and so lived in,
understood, and spoke the language of the father. For the divine e^sence living
in its own infinite, glorious, and central being, having this eternal word, or
character of his subsistence, in and with himself, and was himself, did by the
motion of its own incomprehensible love, expand and breath forth this
characteristical word, in which man stood, and so spoke in from, and through
this outflown language of the father, which is the procedure of the all-working
and eternal fiat, in which all things live stand, operate, and speak out the
immense and unsearchable wisdom, power and glory of the fountain and Abyss
from whence they came, Psa. 19.1, 2, 3, 4
the heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament shows his handy
work, and every thing that has breath prayseth the Lord, Psa. 150.6.
and so every creature understands and speaks the language of nature, but
sinful man who has now lost, defaced and forgotten it. And therefore it is
not without a deep and abstruse mystery, that the Seraphical Apostle speaks
that he knew a man caught up into the third heaven, 2 Cor. 12.4.
into Paradise, and heard (...), ineffable words, which are not lawful or
possible to be spoken, for this was the Paradisical language of the outflown
word which Adam understood while he was unfaln in Eden, and lost after, and
therefore the same illuminated vessel in another place mentions the tongues of
men and Angels, 1 Cor. 13.1.
which would profit nothing, if they were not spoken in, and from the eternal
word, which is the love-essence, or essence of love. For this Angelical and
Paradisical language speaks and breaths forth those central mysteries that l^y
hid in the heavenly magic, which was in that ineffable word that was with God,
and lay wrapped up in the bosom of the eternal essence, wherein were hidden
and involved in the way of a wonderful and inscrutable mystery, all the
treasury of those ideal signatures, which were manifest and brought to light by
the Peripherial expansion and evolution of the serviceable word, or outflowing
fiat, and so became existent in the matrix or womb of that generative and
faetiferous word, from whence sprung up the wonderful, numerous and various
seminal natures, bearing forth the vive and true signatures of the divine and
characteristical impressions: like so many Harmoniacal and Symphoniacal voices,
or tones, all melodiously singing, and sounding forth in an heavenly consort,
the wisdom, power, glory, and might of the transcendent central Abyss of
unity, from whence they did arise, and all speaking one language in expressing
significantly in that mystical Idiome, the hidden virtues, natures and
properties of those various sounds, which though one in the center, become
infinitely numerous in the manifested, existence and circumference, as says
the oracle of mysteries, there are, it may be so many kinds of voices in the
world, 1 Cor. 14.10
and none of them (...) mute, or without signification. Many do superficially
and by way of Analogy (as they term it) acknowledge the Macrocosm to be the
great unsealed book of God, and every creature as a Capital letter or
character, and all put together make up that one word or sentence of his
immense wisdom, glory and power; but alas! who spells them a right, or
conjoyns them so together that they may perfectly read all that is therein
contained? Alas! we all study, and read too much upon the dead paper idols of
creaturely-invented letters, but do not, nor cannot read the legible characters
that are only written and impressed by the finger of the Almighty; and yet we
can verbally acknowledge, praesentemque refert quaelibet herba deum, but alas!
who truly reads it and experiences it to be so? And yet indeed they ever
remain legible and indelible letters speaking and sounding forth his glory,
wisdom and power, and all the mysteries of their own secret and internal
virtues and qualities, and are not as mute statues, but as living and speaking
pictures, not as dead letters, but as preaching Symbols. And the not
understanding and right reading of these starry characters, therein to behold
the light of Abyssal glory and immortality, is the condemnation of all the sons
of lost Adam; For the invisible things of him from the foundation of the world
are clearly seen, Romans 1.20.
being understood by the things that are made, even his eternal power and
divinity, so that they are without excuse. But if we look more narrowly in to
the great fabric or machine, we shall find that it is a^ a Pamphoniacal and
musical instrument, and every individual creature is as a several cord or
string endued with a distinct and various tone, all concurring to make up a
catholic melody, and every one of these understanding the sound and cure of
each other, otherwise the Harmony would be discordant, and man himself makes up
one string of this great instrument, though in his fallen condition he neither
understands the sound of his fellow-strings, neither knows how he concords with
his music, neither by his own will or knowledge would concur in this heavenly
consort, for to him the pipe is not understood, i Cor 14.7, 8.
neither distinguishes he the tunes, and so knows not what is piped or
harped.

2. Further, when I find the great and eternal being, speaking and conversing
with Adam, I cannot but believe that the language which he uttered, was the
living and the serviceable word, and that it was infinitely high, deep and
glorious like himself, and that which was radically and essentially one with
him, and proceeded from him, and was indeed the language of the divine nature,
and not extrinsecally adventitious unto him: and when I find Adam understanding
this heavenly Dialect (which had been uttered in vain if he had not understood
it) I cannot but believe that this was the language of nature infused into him
in his Creation, and so innate and implantate in him, and not inventive or
acquisitive, but merely dative from the father of light, from whom every good
and perfect gift does come and descend. Jam. i. 17.


3. Again, when I find the Almighty presenting all the Creatures before Adam to
see what he would call them, and whatsoever Adam called every living creature,
Gen 2 19, 20.
that is the name thereof, I cannot but conceive that Adam did understand both
their internal and external signatures, and that the imposition of their names
was adaequately agreeing with their natures: otherwise it could not univocally
and truly be said to be their names, whereby he distinguished them; for names
are but representations of notions, and if they do not exactly agree in all
things, then there is a difference and disparity between them, and in that
incongruity lies error and falsehood: and notions also are but the images or
ideas of things themselves reflected, in the mind, as the outward face in a
looking-glass, and therefore if they do not to an hair correspond with, and be
Identical one to the other, as punctually and truly as the impression in the
wax agrees with the seal that instamped it, and as face answers face in a
glass, then there is not absolute congruency betwixt the notion and the thing,
the intellect and the thing understood, and so it is no longer verity, but a
ly, and falsity. And therefore if Adam did not truly see into, and understand
their intrinsecall natures, then had his intellect false notions of them, and
so he imposed lying names upon them, and then the text would be false too,
which avers that what he called them was their names. Also Adam was in a deep
sleep when Eve was framed of his bone, and yet when she was brought before him
being awaked, he could tell that she was bone of his bone, and flesh of his
flesh, and therefore he called her woman, Genesis 2.23.
because she was taken out of man. Now if it be denied that he understood by
his intrinsic and innate light, what she was, and from whence she was taken
(which I hold altogether untrue) and that God by extrinsick information told
Adam from whence she was taken, yet did he immediately give unto her an
adaequate name, suiting her original, which most significantly did manifest
what was her nature, and from whence it came, and doubtless the name being
exactly conformable, and configurate to the Idaea in his mind, the very
prolation, and sound of the word, contained in it the vive expression of the
thing, and so in verity was nothing else but that pure language of nature,
which he then spoke, and understood, and afterward so miserably lost and
defaced. And if it be objected, that if Adam did understand the internal
natures, virtues, effects, operations, and qualities of the creatures, then he
would have known that the effect of eating of the tree of the knowledge of good
and evil, would have made him wretched, and discovered his nakedness, and then
he would not have been so mad as to have tasted thereof: To this I answer,
first, that God had plainly told him, that if he did eat thereof he should
surely die, and yet notwithstanding he did eat thereof, rather believing the
Serpent and Eve, than the words of the Almighty. But if it be supposed, that if
he had known the operation, and effect of that fruit, he would not have
credited the word of the Serpent, more than his own evidential knowledge: To
this, it is clear, that though the Serpent denied that the effect, or eating of
it, would procure death, so likewise he cunningly affirmed and insinuated, that
the eating of it would open their eyes, and that thereby they should be like
Gods, knowing good and evil: and therefore it was the promise of Deifying them,
Genesis 3.5.6.
that did inflame their desires, for it seemed to the woman good for food, and
pleasant to the eyes, and a tree to be desired to make one wise, and therefore
this made her put forth her hand, and eat of the fruit, and give also unto her
husband, and he did eat. But to answer this fully it is a deep mystery, and for
man to eat of the tree of knowledge of good and evil, was to judge of God or
his works, and creatures, by the creaturely, womanish, earthly, and Serpentine
wisdom, and so to feed it self, and find both good and evil, and not to abide
in the union, and to know all things in the light and image of God, and so to
have seen them exceeding good, 1 Timothy 2.14.
and to this the Apostle alludeth, saying, Adam was not deceived, but the woman
being deceived was in the transgression.

3. When I consider that the voices of birds, and beasts (though we account
them inarticulate) are significative one to another, and that by the altering,
and varying of those sounds, they express their passions, affections and
notions, as well as men, and are thereby understood of one another, I cannot
but believe that this is a part of the language of nature; for the Lamb knows
the individual bleating of the Ewe that is the Dam, from all the rest of the
Ewes; and the young Chickens will all run under the Hens wings, at a certain
sound of the Cocks voice, and all the Hens will run unto him at a certain call,
and therefore doubtless there is something more in that which Cornelius Agrippa
relates of Apollonius Tyaneus, than every one takes notice of, that he
understood the language of birds and beasts: And I cannot but admire how when
we hear one laugh, and another howl and weep, though the sounds be not
articulate, we can readily tell the one is the expression of sorrow, and grief,
and the other of mirth and joy: now from whence do we know this? this is not
acquired by us, or taught us by others, for even Children cry immediately after
they be born, and though it be said to be by reason of the sensation of cold
which they felt not in the womb, it is true, but then what is the cause that
crying or weeping is in all creatures the sign of sorrow, pain or grief, might
not some other kind of sound be the sign of it, or might it not in several
creatures be expressed by different and various tones? No truly, the mind
receives but one single and simple image of every thing, which is expressed in
all by the same motions of the spirits, and doubtlessly in every creature has
radically, and naturally the same sympathy in voice, and sound, but men not
understanding these immediate sounds of the soul, and the true Schematism of
the internal notions impressed, and delineated in the several sounds, have
instituted, and imposed others, that do not altogether concord, and agree to
the innate notions, and so no care is taken for the recovery and restoration
of the Catholic language in which lies hid all the rich treasury of natures
admirable and excellent secrets.

CHAP. IV. Of Logic.
IN the next place I am to consider of that which they call ars Dialectica, or
most commonly Logic, the principal ends of which they make to be discovery of
Sophisms and fallacies, producing probability and opinion, and bringing forth
of certitude and Apodictical Science, the last of which being indeed its true
and proper end: and so as to this end is subservient to some other Sciences,
but especially to natural Philosophy. I have formerly said something of the
prejudice that it has done to Theology, where I treated of that subject, and
therefore shall only now speak of it as it relates to humane and acquired
Sciences, and so lay out some of its chief defects, irregularities and abuses.

1. As it is now used in the Schools it is merely bellum intestinum Logicum, a
civil war of words, a verbal contest, a combat of cunning, craftiness, violence
and altercation, wherein all verb^l force, by impudence, insolence, opposition,
contradiction, derision, diversion, trifling, jeering, humming, hissing,
brawling, quarreling, scolding, scandalizing, and the like, are equally allowed
of, and accounted just, and no regard had to the truth, so that by any means,
per fas aut nefas, they may get the Conquest, and worst their adversary, and if
they can entangle or catch one another in the Spider Webs of Sophistical or
fallacious argumentations, then their rejoicing and clamor is as great as if
they had obtained some signal Victory. And indeed it is the counsel of the
Arch-Sophister their Master, to speak ambigously while they dispute, to
obfuscate the light with darkness, lest the truth should shine forth, nay
rather to spatter and blurt out any thing that comes into the budget, rather
than yield to our adversary, Aristot. lib. Topic. 2.
for he says, Quare oportet respondentem non graviter far, sed ponendo quae
non utilia sunt ad positionem, significare quaecunque non videntur, Therefore
it behooves the respondent not to take the business grievously, but by putting
those things which are not profitable to the position, to signify whatsoever
does not appear. O excellent and egregious advice of so profound and
much-magnified a Philosopher! Is this to be a lover of verity, or indeed to
play the immodest Sophister and Caviller? Now how adverse, and destructive to
the investigation of truth these altercations and abjurgations are, is clearly
manifest, for as Dionysius said against Plato, sunt verba otiosorum senum, ad
imperitos invenes, they are the words of idle old men unto unexperienced youth,
and nothing but vanity and trifles can arise from this way of cavillation.

2. Logic is all applied, for the discovery and finding forth of verity, and
therein proceeds very praeposterously: for seeing we know nothing in nature but
a posteriore, and from the affections and properties of things must seek forth
their causes, it required more powerful means, than verbal and formal
Syllogisms, to find out, and denudate natures hidden operations. And whereas
the best part of Logic for that purpose is Induction, which backed with long
experience and sound observation, might be prevalent to discover the working of
mother Nature; yet that has been altogether laid aside, while the glory of
Syllogisms has been highly predicated: Verulam. Nov. Org. Aph. 13.
But Syllogismus ad principia scientiarum non adhibetur, ad media axiomata
frustra adhibetur, cum sit subtilitati naturae long impar. Assensum itaque
constringit, non res. Syllogism is not applied to the principles of Sciences,
it is applied in vain to the middle axioms, seeing it is far unequal to the
subtility of nature. Therefore it binds the assent or consent, but not things.
For whereas we should from particulars proceed to generals, this preposterously
lays down universal axioms without due proof of them, thereby to make good
particulars.

3. The main defect of Logic is, that it teaches no certain rules, by which
either notions may be truly abstracted and gathered from things, nor that due
and fit words may be appropriated to notions, without which it fails in the
very fundamentals, and falls as an house built upon sand. For, Syllogismus ex
propositionibus constat, Verulam Nov. Org. Aph. 14.
prepositiones ex verbis, verba notionum testerae sunt: Itaque si notiones
ips^e (id quod basis rei est) consusae sint, and temere a rebus abstractae,
nihil in iis, quae superstruuntur, est firmitudinis. Syllogism consists of
propositions, propositions of words, words are the special signs of notions:
Therefore if notions themselves (which is the very bottom of the matter) be
confused, or rashly abstracted from things, there is nothing of firmitude in
those things that are superstructed. So that until a certain way and
infallible rules be found out for the adaequation of notions and things, and
fitting of genuine Denominations to notions, all the force and use of
Syllogisms, as it should demonstrate, and bring forth science, are but
fruitless and vain. Haud leve quiddam nominis impositionem esse, Plat. in
Cratyl.
nec imperitorum, and quorumvis hominum esse opus. Plato says, That the
imposition of names is no such light matter, nor that it is the work of the
unskilful and of any sort of men.

4. Though Logic be as it were Organ^n Organorum, an instrumental science,
they seem in some sort to make it a part of Physics, and so intricate it with
an innumerable commixture of the most difficult disputations, as any Philosophy
has: as though the unskilful and tender wits of young men were to be
overwhelmed with those thorny questions of universal, and Metaphysical things.
And as though Logic (if it were necessary and useful) were not to be contained
in a few plain and easy precepts, Petr. Gassend. exer. Per. con. Arist. exer.
1.
and that it which pretends to teach a short, clear, and easy method
applicable to all other sciences, should be so intricate and perplex in it
self, as not to be able to resolve of it self whether it be as art, or a
science? Practical or Speculative? whether e^s rationis, or something else be
the subjectum of it? So that they do not see that they act as foolishly, while
they dispute of the very art of disputing, Cor. Agrip. li. de van. Scie. c. 7.
and 8. de Dial. et Sophist.
as he that endeavors to see the proper vision of his own eye. Moreover, that
which might be concluded in a plain, and short proposition, must be drawn into
mood, and figure, and after the framing, repeating and answering some scores of
Syllogisms, the matter is further off from a certain and Apodictical conclusion
than in the beginning, and so most extremely becomes guilty of Battology, and
Tautologie, which it pretends to eschew and condemn. The grave Seneca said
well, speaking of these nugations. Sen. Ep. 45.
Idem de istis captionibus dico: quo enim nomine potius Sophismata appellem?
nec ignoranti nocent, nec scientem juvant. I say the same of these
Insnarements: for by what name may I rather call them than Sophisms? they
neither hurt those that know them not, nor help those that know them.

5. If we examine the Logic of the Stagyrite, who pretends himself the master
of method, and prince of perfection, we shall first find his Organon, which
should be his great instrument, and Masterpiece, to be a confused, and
headless piece, wanting those lights wherewith all legitimate tractation (even
Plato, Cicero, and other great men bearing testimony) is made out, and
illustrated; for it wants a definition of Logic, it wants the proposition of
the subject, it wants the distribution and partition of the matter: and what
should it want more necessary than these? And though some may say that these
things are added by his interpreters; that nevertheless argues his defect, and
besides the additions are not so very complete as might be desired. And
secondly, in his book de Categoriis, definitions are usually wanting, for he
defines not what a Category is, not what Substance is, nor what Quantity is:
but if any reply, and say he could not define these because they are the summa
genera, how could he define a Relative, or Quality, which are likewise summa
genera? Or to what end do the Aristotelians define all the Categories? Thirdly,
in his book de Interpretatione, what a noise does he keep about his modal
propositions, which he will needs limit neither to more nor fewer than four,
that which is necessary, impossible, possible, contingent? But I pray you, why
may there not be more? For if that be a Mood, which does modificate the
proposition, that is to say, indicates how the praedicate is in the subject,
may not all Adjectives by the like right be Moods? For if this be a modal
proposition, It is a necessary thing that man is a living Creature; These also
are modal, It is an honest thing that man should be studious of virtue, It is a
just thing that a Son should obey his Father, It is a gallant thing to die for
ones Country; but what shall I say more of many other defects, that may be
seen even of a blind man? These as instances are enough, seeing they are but
pleasant deceits, Lip. in Epist. Sen. 45.
and cunning trifles; Freesilaus the Philosopher used to say, Dialecticos
similes praestigiatoribus calculariis, qui jucunde decipiunt, That Logicians
are like to cunning jugglers, who do deceive pleasantly. So I leave many other
petty absurdities, superfluities, defects, and mistakes, and pass to things
more material.

6. Lastly I shall sum up all in few words to eschew tediousness. And first of
that principal part concerning Definitions as to matter and subject (for we
have said something of it formally as to method and tractation) which is the
basis of all, wherein if there be a defect, the whole edifice falls to the
ground; for whereas it determines all perfect Definitions to consist of the
next genus, and a Constitutive Difference, and since there is scarcely any
other difference known, except rational, and irrational, that is specifical,
and proxim to the individuals, the one of which is negative, and so can
positively prove nothing, and the other not only is, and may justly be
controverted, but also made apparent, that Brutes have reason gradually as well
as man, how lame and dilacerate this member is, needs no further demonstration.

2. To say nothing of Division, how defective, and imperfect it is, but to come
to Argumentation, of all the 19 several sorts of Syllogisms, seven only
conclude affirmatively, the other twelve negatively, Helm. li. Log. inutilis
dio.
and it is sufficiently known, that de negativis non datur scientia, and
therefore there is but narrow and straight room left for the certainty of
demonstration: And it is undeniably true, that the knowledge of the Premises
is more certain than the knowledge of the Conclusion, Sen^ Ep. 49.
and therefore undoubtedly certain that the knowledge of the conformity betwixt
the Premises and the Conclusion does preexist in us, and is only excited by
Syllogising, and therefore, quid te torques, and macer as in ea quaestione,
quam subtilius est contempsisse, quam solvere? why do thou torment and
macerate thy self in that question, which is more subtle to despise than to
dissolve.

3. Aristotle forbids dispute, unless with those that do admit his principles,
which he first thinks to be true, and yet notwithstanding from unlike
principles, does sometimes follow a strong Conclusion: as from false premises:
Nullum adorabile est Creator: Omne simulachrum est adorabile. Ergo, Nullum
simulachrum est Creator: Which is a true Conclusion. From whence it cannot be
judged that the Conclusion of Syllogisms does of necessity compel assent, nor
that the Conclusion does necessarily depend upon the Premises. Itaque prout in
mendacio non continetur, aut latet veritas, Joh. Bap. van Hell. li. antecit.
ejusque cognitio: ita consequens est, quod in praemissis non claudatur
necessario conclusionis cognitio. Therefore as the truth is not contained or
hid in a ly, nor the knowledge of it: So the consequent is, that the knowledge
of the Conclusion is not necessarily included in the Premises.

4. It is clear, that Syllogizing, and Logical invention are but a resumption
of that which was known before, and that which we know not, Logic cannot find
out: For Demonstration, and the knowledge of it, is in the Teacher, not in the
Learner, and therefore it serves not so much to find out Science, as to make
ostentation of it being found out; not to invent it, but being invented to
demonstrate and to show it others. A Chemist when he shows me the preparation
of the sulphur of Antimony, the salt of Tartar, the spirit of Vitriol, and the
uses of them, he teaches me that knowledge which I was ignorant of before, the
like of which no Logic ever performed: Nic. Hill. l. de Phil. E^icur.
For, Accurata Syllogismi forma, argumentoso, et luxurianti ingenio incongrua,
inventioni adversissima, and res per se satis manifest as simplici verborum
textura, praeceptorum impertinentium multitudine involuit. The accurate form of
Syllogism is incongruous to an argumentative, and luxuriant wit, most adverse
to invention, and does involve things manifest enough among themselves in the
simple contexture of words, with the multitude of impertinent precepts.

5. It is true that Syllogistical disputations do bring forth Conclusions, but
these conclusions beget but bare opinations, and putations, no infallible
Science, and so all things remain but as probable and conjectural, not as firm
and certain. And yet men are puffed up with this vaporous, and airy sound of
words, growing insolent and confident in the vain glory of Syllogizing
Sophistry, and so are taken off from seeking any other more solid knowledge,
Vernlam. Nov Org. Aph. 9.
Causa vero and radix fere omnium malorum in scientiis ea una est; quod dum
meant is hum nae vires falso miramur, and extollimus, v^r^ ^j^s ^uxilia non
quaeramus. The cause truly, and root almost of all evils in Sciences, is this
one, that while we falsely wonder at, and extol the force of humane
understanding, we do not seek its true helps. So that as Cardan said of his
Countrymen, I may say of our Logicians, One may find three gods amongst them
sooner than one man, so highly confident are they through these Dialectical
delusions. Cum quis illa quae nescit, Pla l. de Soph.
scire se putat, ab hac nimirum omnes quaecunque nos fallunt opiniones,
profiscuntur. When any one thinks he knows those things of which he is
nescient, from this verily does spring up all those opinions whatsoever that do
deceive us. Neither is there any thing in the Universe that is more deadly and
destructive to the progress and proficiency of Science, than the opinion and
conceit of self-sufficiency, and with Socrates the more that we are sensible of
the shallowness and nothingness of our knowledge, the more it will stir us up
to inquire and seek after it, and therefore precious was that advice of the
divine Plato his Scholar: Plat. Dialog. 5. de Leg.
Decet sane eum qui magnus vir futurus est, neque seipsum, neque sua diligere,
sed justa semper, sive a seipso, seu ab alio quovis gerantur. Ex hoc ipso
delicto accidit omnibus, ut ignorantiam suam esse sapientiam opinenter. Hinc
fit, ut quamvis nihil (ut ita dicam) sciamus, seire tamen omnia arbitremur.
Verily it becomes him who should be great, neither to love himself, nor humane
things, but to love always things that are just, whether they be done of
himself or any other; from this very fault, it happens unto all, that they
opinionate their ignorance to be sapience. From hence it comes to pass, that
although (as I may so say) we know nothing, yet notwithstanding we think we
know all things.

6. And whereas Raymund Lully invented an Alphabetical way for Syllogizing,
Cor. Agrip. li. in Art. brev. Lul. Paul. Sch. de Li. me^h.
improved and opened by Agrippa, Paulus Schalichius, and others, in which Picus
Mirandula and some did far excel, even to wonder and astonishment, which indeed
is a far more certain, copious, easy, and compendious way for argumentation,
especially to overcome all opponents, to be amply furnished to dispute de omni
scibili, to answer all objections, and to confirm the mind in those opinions
that it holds, and so deserves wondrous great praise and commendation: yet for
all that it leaves the intellect nude and unsatisfyed, because it produces no
certitude, nor evidential demonstration, and so fills the mind full of
opinions, but not of Apodictical Science, and makes men Parrat-like to babble,
argue, and say very much, but still to remain nescious, and ignorant, so vast
is the difference betwixt putation and true knowledge. Mars. Ficin in Dia^ 1.
de Rep.
Humanam scientiam in negatione quodam falsi, potius quam in very affirmatione
consistere. It is true, That humane science does consist in a certain negation
of falsity, rather than in the affirmation of verity. I will only conclude with
that remarkable saying of the Lord Bacon, Verulam. Nov. O^g. Aph. 12.
Logica, quae in abusu est, ad errores (qui in notionibus vulgaribus fundantur)
pabiliendos, et figendos valet, potius quam ad inquisitionem veritatis, ut
magis damnosa sit, quam utilis. Logic which is abused, does conduce to
establish and fix errors (which are founded in vulgar notions) rather than to
the inquisition of verity, that it is more hurtful than profitable.

CHAP. V. Of the Mathematical Sciences.
FOr the Mathematical Sciences, the superlative excellency of which transcends
the most of all other Sciences, in their perspicuity, veritude and certitude,
and also in their uses and manifold benefits; yet in the general they are but
either slightly and superficially handled in definitions, divisions, axioms,
and argumentations, without any solid practice, or true demonstrations, either
artificial or mechanical; or else the most abstruse, beneficial, and noble
parts are altogether passed by, and neglected, which we shall discover in
tracing over some of the several parts thereof.

1. For the prime and main stone in the building upon which all the rest of the
Fabric is erected, the noble Art of Arithmetic, so highly esteemed (and that
not without cause) in the Schools of Pythagoras, Plato, Euclide, nay and of
Aristotle himself, is quite rejected of our Academick Masters, who
notwithstanding would be esteemed the great and most expert Master Builders,
though they throw away the chief corner stone: And is not only slighted and
neglected as useless, and of no value, but transmitted over to the hands of
Merchants and Mechanics, as though it were not a liberal Science, or not
worthy the study and pains of an ingenuous and noble spirit: And but that some
private spirits have made some progreis therein, as Napier, Briggs, Mr.
Oughtredge, and some others, it had lain as a fair garden unweeded or
cultivated, so little have the Schools done to advance learning, or promote
Sciences.

2. And for the noble, and most necessary Art of Geometry, their handling of it
has been with the same superficial sleightness, Verul. lib. de Augm. Scient.
3. cap. 6.
and supine negligence, never bringing into perfect practice, nor clear
demonstration, that which many years ago Euclide compiled with so much pains
and exactness: and therefore are far from making any further discoveries
therein, contenting themselves with the sole verbal disputes of magnitude,
quantity, and the affections thereof, leaving the practice and application
thereof to Masons, Carpenters* Surveyors, and such like manual operators, as
though they were too good to serve so divine and noble a mistres.

3. There has been no more progress made in the Optical Art, which though it
affords many, and wonderful secrets, both for profit and pleasure, for by it
things far off are seen as at hand, minute and small things magnified, the
wonderful intersection of various species, without confounding one another,
demonstrated, the sight of men thereby succored, the Systeme of the world
thereby more perfectly viewed, and innumerable other rarities both of Art and
Nature thereby discovered; yet have the Schools proceeded no further therein,
than to verbal disputes, and some Axiomatical institutions and doctrines; and
but for the noble attempts of some few gallant men, such as Galalaeus,
Scheiner, Aguillonius, Hevelius, and the like, the grand mysteries of it had
lain buried in oblivion, and this age never seen those s^upendious effects that
through their industry in this Art has been brought forth.

4. As for Music it has had some little better fortune, for that vulgar and
practical part, which serves as a spur to sensuality and voluptuousness, and
seems to be the Companion of Melancholicks, Fantasticks, Courtiers, Ladies,
Taverns, and Tap-houses, that has had some pains taken about it, and some
honor done unto it, that the professors thereof might become Graduats: yet for
the mysterious part thereof, which consists in the discovering the nature,
quality, distinction, sympathy, dyspathy, significancy, and effects of all
sounds, voices, and tones that are in nature, these are altogether unknown and
neglected; as also how far it might be serviceable to Natural Philosophy, and
the laying open of the universal Harmony of the whole Mundane Fabric, that
remains untried and unattempted.

5. The Astronomy that the Schools teach being according to the Peripatetick,
and Ptolemaick Systeme, which they maintain with much rigor, severity, and
earnestness, is by them extolled to the heavens, as an Harmoniacal, regular,
and stately Fabric, which without any demonstration, or punctual observation
they obtrude upon the tender understandings of unwary youth: holding it forth
with that Magisterial confidence, as though it would clearly salve all the
Phenomenon, and render the true causes, grounds, and reasons of the motions,
and effects of all the Caelestial Bodies, and as though no fault, exorbitancy,
or defect could be found in this so complete, beautiful, and orderly structure.
Yet I must confess, that in all the Scholastic learning there is not found any
piece (to my apprehension) so rotten, ruinous, absurd and deformed as this
appears to be, and which may from most evident principles be everted, and cast
down, and therefore I shall take the more time in enervating the same, and that
from undeniable principles both of Physics and Mathematics.

1. They take that for granted, or at least unproved, which is not only
controvertible and indemonstrable, but untrue, namely that the Earth is the
Center of the Universe, and that the Heavenly Bodies do in their motions so
observe it, and from thence deduce the causes of gravity and levity; the
contrary or uncertainty of which appears thus. First, it is manifest that ^he
Earth is not the Center of the most of the Planetary O^bs, because by their own
confession, some of them, as and, are sometimes in their Apogaeum, and
sometimes in their Perigaeum, that is sometimes nearer and sometimes further
off from the earth; which they could not be if the Earth were their true and
proper Center, because according to the definition of Euclide, the
Circumference of a circle is every where equidistant from the Center, and all
lines drawn from the Center to the Circumference are equal, otherwise it would
cease to be a Circle, and one Circle can have no more than one Center; and
therefore the Earth is not the Center of the Planetary Orbs. Secondly, if the
Earth were the Center of the Orbs of the Planets, the dissection of the Orbs
would be needless into Excentricks and Concentricks* which being their own
tenent, manifests that the earth is not their true, and proper Center.

Thirdly, if the Earth were their Center, the Aequinoctial line dividing both
the Earth and Heavens into 2 equal parts, the Sun in his annual motion could
not be longer time in the one half circle than in the other, unless he did not
pass over equal intervals, or spaces of the line, in equal times, and so should
intend and remit his motion, which is denied of all: and therefore it being
found by certain, and yearly observation, that he stays some days longer on
the Northside the Equator, than on the South, it is manifest that the Earth is
not the Center of his Orb.

Fourthly, there are diverse Planetary Bodies that move circularly, that observe
not the Earth as their Center at all, as those Medicaeal, and Jovial Planets
about Jupiter, and those about Saturn, Mercury, and Venus about ^he Sun, and
the Sun about his own Center, and none of these respect the Earth, and
therefore cannot be their Center, and so not the Center of the Universe.

Fifthly, for the eighth Sphere, no certain rules of Art can demonstrate that
the Earth is its center, because it bears no sensible magnitude unto it, so
that no angle can be assigned to know the distance, and the eye cannot be a
certain, and proper judge, because it judges not of distance as its proper and
immediate object, but to do that is the office of the common sense, and where
the distance is great and vast, though the eye be far distant from the Center,
yet the things seen will seem to stand in a Circle about it, though they be not
truly and exactly so, and therefore this is rather a postulate than a proof,
and may justly be denied, because it cannot be proved: and that all the Stars
that we call or account fixed (though we cannot prove that any of them are so)
stand all in one Circle or Orb, cannot be true, for doubtless the difference of
their apparent magnitude is a certain argument that they are not all
equidistant from the Earth, and therefore is not the Earth the Center of the
Universe.

Sixthly, for their arguments taken from gravity and levity, they do but therein
usually petere principium, beg the question, and thereby commit a most palpable
Paralogism, for they define gravity to be that quod tendit deorsum, which tends
downwards, and if the cause is demanded why bodies severed from the Earth do
tend downwards thither again, they answer quia gravia sunt, which in effect is
this, They tend to the Earth, because they do tend to the Earth, which is idem
per idem: And if it were granted that the Earth were the Center of the
Universe, Gal. Galal. lib. de Syst. mund.
how could a Center any way understood be the cause of any motion at all, or
locality which is defined to be a space void of bodies, and capable of them,
have any power to give or cause motion in a body? These are the groundless
Chymaera's of the Schools, not knowing that bodies separate from the Earth do
move thither again from an intrinsic magnetic quality, Gil. l. de mag. ^t
lib. de ^^il. nov.
which in the Earth is by way of attraction, and in the part separate by motion
of Coition, besides some other clear reasons that may be given from Statical
principles, which for brevities sake I am forced ^o omit: For from this is
clearly evident, that the Earth not being the Center of the Universe, the whole
order and frame of the Scholastic Systeme is dissipaated, and out of course.

2. And as they have mistaken the mark in making the Earth the Center of the
Universe, they are as far wide in their determinations of the Circumference or
Orbs, which they make to be of a Quintessential nature (as they term it) and so
to be incorruptible, and free from change, and mutarlon: and it is believed
that this opinion is chiefly grounded upon this, That the heavenly bodies
remain still in the same state wherein they have been observed to be many ages
before, and no sensible alteration could ever be perceiv^d in them.

To which I answer, That this concludes nothing, because it argues from knowing
to being, when being has no dependence of, nor connection with our knowing, for
our knowledge is not the cause, nor measure of the Universe, nor of the things
therein contained. Verulam. Nov. O^g. Aph. 14.
Falso enim asseritur, sensum humanum esse mensuram rerum; Quin contra, omnes
perceptiones, tam sensus, quam mentis, sunt ex Analogia hominis, non ex
Analogia Vniversi. It is falsely asserted that man's sense is the measure of the
Universe; but on the contrary, all perceptions, as well of the sense as of the
intellect, are from the Analogy of man, and not from the Analogy of the
Universe.

Again, there may be many alterations in the Caelestial bodies, which by reason
of their vast distance, we do not, nor can perceive, especially if we consider,
that mutation is understood either as it relates ad totum, White Dial. de mundo.
or ad parts, therefore there may be (and without doubt are) many alterations
in the parts of the Heavenly bodies, though no change at all as to the whole of
any of them: for the Earth is as immutable, and incorruptible, in relation to
the whole, as any other of the Starry or Planetary bodies are, for the change
that appears in it, is but in the external and superficial parts, and though
sensible to us, yet is not perceiveab^e at a great distance, for we can discern
diverse mountains, and parts of the Earth, far remote from us, yet cannot
discern the alterations that are in the parts thereof: and so if ones eye were
placed in the Moon, Mars, Jupiter, or any of those Stars which we call fixed, we
should perceive as little change then here on the earth, as we being placed
here see in those Starry bodies.

Neither is it true that there appears no mutation in the Heavenly Bodies or
Orbs, because many men of great note, experience and skill, have observed that
Comets have been above the Sublunary Orb, and evidently demonstrated the same
by there Paralax, as Tycho Br^he, Copernicus, Kepler, Galalaeus, and others,
which clearly demonstrates (beyond the refutation of Logic) that there are
changes and mutations in the heavens, and so they are not incorruptible bodies
as is falsely asserted: And the evidence that appears to the eye in the use of
the Telescope does plainly evince that there is an Atmosphere about the body of
the Moon, which could not be if the Heavens were unchangeable.

3. Another thing that they grossly maintain is, that the heavens or Orbs are
as hard as Steel, and as transparent as glass, and yet have so many several
sorts of solid Orbs, Ecc^ntricks, and Concentricks, Epicycles, and the like,
which are all concamerated one within another, the absurdities and
impossibilities of which I shall demonstrate in some clear arguments.

For first, if they were solid bodies, and that every Star were but densior
pars sui Orbis, then either the unequal superficies of the contained Orb, must
ex^ctly touch the concave superficies of the circumambient Orb, or else not,
but some space to intercede between, which must either be implete with some
other body, or else be a mere inanity and vacuity; neither of which can
possibly be according to their own tenants, not indeed according to the truth
it self. For if the unequal superficies touch the concave exactly in all parts
and there be neither vacuity, nor body interjacent, then as the Mathematicians
truly say, they must touch in infinite points, and so there could be no motion
at all, because there could be no appulsion, nor retrocession, and where there
is neither of those, it is impossible there should be local motion, or lation;
^or two exact smooth, and equal superficiesses of hard and solid bodies joined
together, the uppe^most will if it be taken up, list up the lower also, if the
force of elevation be in the center of the solid bodies so fitted, as may be
seen in Brass, Marble, and the like, so that consequently there could be no
motion at all. And if there were any motion at all it must needs be with
confrication, and attrition, and so without plenty of some oily substance,
would not cause Pythagoras his spherical music but an unheard of rumbling
noise, such surely as possessed the brains of those that were the first Authors
of this mad and extravagant opinion. And if they say there is a vacuity
interjacent, then there could be no motion neither, because according to the
Schools Motus in vacuo non datur; and if they say there is some other body
between, then what is it? for if it be any Elemental body, that cannot be,
because they have incarcerated them all within the concave superficies of the
Moon; and if there were some other body included between, then seeing according
to Aristotle that Motus est causa caloris, how could it be but that body would
be heated even to ignition? seeing that all heat does continually rarifie, and
the Orbs continually moving with such an incredible swiftness, and no place for
evaporation, but it close pent in by the Superior Orb, how could all not be of
a flame, or forcibly torn, and rent assunder? unless we must have all solved
with that frivolous shift, that they are eternal, and ingenerable bodies, and
are but Analogously like ours, and so suffer none of these things that
Elemental bodies do: when they have clearly showed what that Analogy is, and
wherein they are neither absolutely like our Sublunary bodies, nor absolutely
different from them, then it will be time enough to return them a more plenary
responsion, until then let this suffice.

Secondly, if the Orbs were solid, how could it possibly be that there could be
Eccentricks, and Concentricks, the one having a more dense or thick part in one
side of the Circle or Orb, Kepler. Astro. Ep^^.
and the other having so likewise on the parts opposite? now how these should
have motions of their own, if they be solid, to me seems impossible; or how or
which way Epicycles should be affixed to these extending only from the concave
Superficies, Philolai de Syst. mund. liber.
to the unequal, how this should be in Spherical solids, or Orbs, without either
penetration of dimensions, admitting of vacuity, or some other fluid body to be
interjacent, to me seems more difficult to unloose, than the Gordian knot was
to Alexander, and will never be untyed unless Aristotle have learned of his
great Patron to cut that asunder which he cannot unty?

White Dial. de mund. fol. 84.
Thirdly, if the Orbs were solid, and impenetrable, then could not possibly any
Comets be above the superficies of the Moons Orb, or if it be certain that they
have been observed above (which is true) then of necessity the Orbs are not
solid, Kepler* de Stella martis lib.
but fluid bodies: neither could any new Star ever appear if they were solid,
but such have been known undoubtedly to be seen sometimes, and yet were no
Comets, therefore of necessity they are fluid, and not solid bodies. And it is
undeniably true, that if the Orbs were hard as Steel, and of such solidity as
is alleged, then they could not possibly intersect or enter into the Orbs of
one another; but it is certainly known by exact observation, and Mathematical
demonstration, that when Mars is in the lowest part of his Epicycle, or in
Perigaeo, he is then within the Orb of the Sun, which he could not penetrate if
it were solid, and therefore unquestionably they are not hard, but fluid
bodies; and so the Scholastic Systeme is ruinous, and groundless.

Fourthly, I shall urge one Optical argument, which is this, That if the
Heavens were all solid, and divided into so many Orbs, and they again
subdivided into others, then it must follow necessarily that according to the
multitude of Superfic^^sses, so must the multiplicity of refractions be, which
in this case would be very numerous, and so none of the Stars or Planets would
ever be seen in their true places, but either confounded, or numerously
multiplied, which how absurd, let the abbetters of this opinion themselves
judge.

4. From these they ground the motion of the tenth, ninth, and eighth Sphere,
making the tenth Sphere move most rapidly from East to West in that space which
we call 24. hours, and so snatcheth, and forceably whirleth about with it, all
the inferior Orbs, which innately, and properly have a reluctance, and
contranitency against it. The absurdity of which appears thus.

First, that the Diurnal motions of all the Orbs in 24. hours, except the
tenth Sphere, are merely violent, and compulsive, and only the motion of it
natural, and proper. Now how could they conceive, who hold that nullum
violentum est perpetuvem, that a motion that is violent could be perpetual in
nature, especially to these pure bodies which they hold to be eternal and
immutable? or how can it be that the first Sphere should communicate its
velocity to all the inferiors, and the second should communicate none at all?
Why is not Jupiter carried with the motion of Saturn? or the Sun with Mars? Hoc
mihi si solvas Oedipus alter eris.

Secondly, if the extreme and incredible velocity of the tenth Sphere, be
seriously considered, it will exceed all possibility of belief, nay even
swifter than thought or imagination: for of diverse Orbs moved about in the
same space of time, the least moves the most slowly, and the greatest most
swiftly, for if it be computed according to the least Diametre given unto it,
and how it moves more swiftly than the Orb of the Moon, by so many times as it
exceeds the greatness of its Circumference, it will be past all humane sense,
and understanding to imagine the extreme velocity of it, so that no Creature
can believe it to be so, but also be compelled to confess, that it is most
likely either to be set on fire, or else by the most vehement swiftness to be
whirled into Attomes.

Thirdly, if the eight Sphere be conceived to move, wherein as they fancy to
themselves that all the Stars are fixed, like so many nayls in a wheel, or bowl,
considering the immensity of its compass, the exceeding velocity of its motion,
and that the earth (which they suppose the Center of it) to bear proportion
unto it, but as an insensible point or prick, then it could not possibly be but
that it would appear all as an inflamed light, or a concave globe of fire,
because at one and the self same instant the multitude of rays would all be
united in this small Center, the Earth (or eye of the beholder) and infinite
rays strike the eye successively in a manner, ere the others passed from it,
and so must of necessity appear all entirely as fiery and luminous; so as we
behold a piece of wood whose end is fired being quickly whirled about in the
air in a circular manner, does appear to the eye as a true Circle of fire or
brightness: so that this would of necessity follow upon the structure of their
Systeme. By all which arguments may evidently appear, the impossibility of the
truth of that Astronomical composure which the Schools cry up for so certain,
neat, and beautiful, so that I may conclude with a learned Author, Non enim
quae de Arthuro et ipsius Equitibus finguntur, White Dial. de mundo fol. 45.
vel Homericas fabulas persuasu magis difficiles opinor, quam illam Caelorum
Compositionem, quam proxima nos saecula erudierunt. For I think the things that
are feigned of Arthur, and his Knig^ts of the round table, or the fables of
Homer, are not more difficult to be persuaded, than that composure of the
heavens, which the age preceding us has taught.

5. For the other parts of Mathematics, some of them are utterly unknown and
unpractised in the Schools, and some of them are taught there, but so
fleightly, and superficially, that small or no profit does redound from thence.
For they usually teach Cosmography, and the several species thereof, Nath.
Carpen. Geograph.
as Geography, Hydrography, Chorography, and Topography, yet whereas
Cosmography is the whole, and perfect description of the Heavenly and also
Elemental part of the world, and their Homologal application, and mutual
collation together, and so is no small or simple art, but high and of manifold
use, there has little or nothing been done to the perfection thereof, Jo. Dee
in his Preface before Euclide.
especially in the mutual correspondence and application of the heavens, and
earth: neither are the other brought into practice, especially the Theoremes of
Hydrography, whereby men might be made able and fit for Navigation, one of the
most necessary employments and advantages of our Nation.

6. What shall I say of the Science, or art of Astrology, shall the blind fury
of Misotechnists, and malicious spirits, deter me from giving it the
commendations tha^ it deserves? shall the Academies who have not only slighted
and neglected it, but also scoffed at it, terrify me from expressing my
thoughts of so noble and beneficial a Science? shall the arguments of Picus
Mirandula, and others, who have bitterly inveighed against it, fright me from
owning the truth? shall the thundering Pulpit men, who would have all men's
faith pinned upon their sleeves, and usually condemn all things they understand
not, make me be silent in so just a cause? No truly, I must needs defend that
which my judgment evidences to me to be laudable, and profitable; not but that
I utterly condemn the ignorance, knavery, and impostorage of many pretending
Sciolists, that abuse the same; but shall the art of medicine or Chemistry be
condemned, and rejected, because many ignorant Empericks, and false Alcumists
do profess them? Surely no, let the blame be upon the professors, not upon the
profession it self. For the art it self is high, noble, excellent, and useful
to all mankind, and is a study not unbeseeming the best wits, and greatest
Scholars, and no way offensive to God or true Religion. And therefore I cannot
without detracting from worth and virtue, pass without a due Elogy in the
commendation of my learned, and industrious Countrymen Mr. Ashmole, Mr. William
Lilly, Mr. Booker, Mr. Sanders, Mr. Culpepper, and others, who have taken
unwearied pains for the resuscitation, and promotion of this noble Science, and
with much patience against many unworthy scandals have labored to propagate it
to posterity, and if it were not beyond the present scope I have in hand I
should have given sufficient reasons in the vindication of Astroloy.

7. What shall I say of Staticks, Architecture, Pneumatithmie,
Stratarithmetrie, and the rest enumerated by that expert and learned man, Dr.
John Dee in his Preface before Euclide? What excellent, admirable and
profitable experiments do every one of these afford? truly innumerable, the
least of which is of more use, benefit and profit to the life of man, than
almost all that learning that the Universities boast of and glory in, and yet
by them utterly neglected, and never looked into: but what huge, stupendous
effects these can bring to pass, let our learned Countreyman Roger Bacon, let
Cardinal Cusan, let Galalaeus, let Vbaldus, let Marcus Marci, let Baptista
Benedictus, and many others speak, who remain as a Cloud of Witnesses against
the supine negligence of the Schools, who for so many Centuryes have done
nothing therein: Is this to be the fountains of Learning, and wellspring of
Sciences? let all rational men judge and determine.

CHAP. VI. Of Scholastic Philosophy.
FOr the Philosophy which the Schools use and teach, being merely
Aristotelical, let us examine the ground and reasons why it should be embraced
and cried up more than all other, or why he should be accounted the Prince of
Philosophers, the Masterpiece of Nature, the Secretary of the Universe, and
such an one beyond whose knowledge there is no progression. Which however
applauded to the heavens by his Scholars, who are jurati in verba Magistri,
will upon exact and due test prove, both weak, groundless, false,
unsatisfactory, and sterile, which we shall labor to elucidate in some clear
Arguments.

1. It will evidently appear that there is no reason why the Aristotelical
Philosophy as it stands now received, according to the comments, glosses,
expositions and interpretations of the Schools, should be preferred before any,
or all others. Because Aristotle was but a man, and so might err ar soon as
others, neither was he more than other men any way privileged from human
imperfections; nay considering him as an heathen, who did not know nor
acknowledge the fountain of life, which is God, and therefore by so much less
was able to teach the truth, by how much he was distant from the knowledge of
the true God, who is the primary verity: so that what he has written was
rather by a Diabolical than a Divine instinct, for Philoponus records that he
begun to Philosophize by the command of the Oracle of Apollo, which the most
acknowledge to have been uttered from the Devils advice and afflation.

2. Neither were his principles and tenants any whit differing from such
Diabolical directions, Arist. li. Phys. 8 prior. de Coel. et de mund.
for he makes God an animal in his Metaphysics, and chained him to the
exterior supe^ficies of the highest heaven, and made him bound to the laws and
necessity of Fate, which his most obsequious and sworn Interpreters cannot
deny. He denies in the twelfth of his Metaphysics that God takes care of
minute, and small things; in his books de Coelo he makes the world eternal and
increate; in his Physics he teaches that nothing can be made ex nihilo; in
his books de anima, and of Ethics, he denies the possibility of the
resurrection of the dead, and in many places does deny the immortality of the
soul, so that Lactantius said truly of him, Aristoteles Deum nec coluit, nec
curavit, and yet this is the man that is only thought worthy to be the father
of Christian Philosophy.

3. If the qualities and conditions of the man be looked into, there will be
found no such integrity in him* as may be any just cause of much confidence,
nor such manners as may ex^oll him above the rest, for does not Eusebius and
others relate that he betrayed his Country to the Macedonians, and to blot out
the infamy thereof that he prevailed with Alexander to restore it again? And
does not Pliny relate, speaking of the poison, Cum id dandum Alexandro magno
Antipater mitterit, magna est Aristotelis infamia excogitatum, that he was
guilty of administering the same? was he not accused for being guilty of
immolation to his meretricious mistress? was he not guilty of ingratitude (the
worst of vices) against his divine Master Plato, who therefore did justly and
fitly call him his Mule, because he kicked against the dugs from whence he sucked
his knowledge? what shall I recount his avarice, which makes Lucian so
nippingly feign Alexander in hell upbraiding him, that he had constituted
riches a part of the chief good, that by that specious pretext he might obtain
of him greater store of riches? Shall I recount his intemperance,
voluptuousness, and obscaene manner of living? or his impious, doubtful or
wicked end? no, let them be buried with his ashes. But these things do
sufficiently declare, that there is no just cause so much to esteem and applaud
him above others, seeing it is impossible to congest so many things against
Plato, Zeno, or Epicurus.

4. But I know they will say, They respect not his life so much, as his most
excellent wit, great judgment, and laudable diligence; well, I easily grant
that he was such an one, but to prefer him notwithstanding before all others,
cannot be done without too much temerity. And when arguments are comparative,
between the abilities of one person and another, it behooves him that will
judge, and determine rightly, thoroughly to understand and preponderate what
there is of value and price in either of them. So when there is a question made
of Phythagoras, Thales, Democritus, Zeno, Plato, Phyrrho, Epicurus, and others,
it is fitting he should understand whatsoever they all knew, or else he cannot
discern wherein Aristotle does exceed them all: unless he will give his
sentence before the one party be heard speak. For how can any boast to be more
wise than all the other Philosophers, without being guilty of intolerable
pride and arrogance? and truly I believe that Socrates who confessed that he
knew nothing, understood far more than the Stagyrite, who would hardly
acknowledge himself ignorant of any thing.

5. But perhaps it will be said that he has been received, and approved of by
Thomistius, Abenrois, Thomas Aquinas, Scotus and other men of great and vast
learning, and knowledge; well, it is truth he has been so; but who has ever
been the builder, or rayser of any Sect that has not had multitudes to cry him
up, to follow him, and earnestly to defend him? have not the Academicks as much
applauded Plato, as the Peripateticks have done Aristotle?

And have not the Sceptists as much extolled Phyrrho? and the Epicureans, their
Master Epicurus? of whom it is said, Qui genus humanum ingenio superavit, et
omnes
Praestrinx it, stellas exortus ut aethereus sol.
Nay is it not common to all, extremely and Hyperbollically to applaud the
authors, and builders of their Sect? neither has he been, or is so generally
received, and commended, but many men of as greatnote as any that have stood
for him, have disceded from him, or opposed him; for in his own times the whole
Schools of the Academicks and Stoics did oppugn him, Epicurus in many things
did contradict him, and Pyrrho in all, nay his famous disciple Theophrastus (as
Themistius relates) did tax his master in many things: neither in all
succeeding ages has there wanted able and learned men who have strenuously
opposed him, in many things if not in all, as Thomas himself, Albertus Magnus,
Scotus, Gregorius, Durandus, Harvaeus, Maronaeus, Alliacensis, Nicolaus
Cusanus, and many others; neither ought we therefore to follow or extol him
because multitudes have esteemed and adhered to him, for as Cicero well said,
Philosophia multitudinem consulto devitat, paucisque est contentae judicibus.
Philosophy consultively escheweth the multitude, and is content with a few
judges. And as Seneca witnesses, Haec pars major esse videtur; ideo enim pejor
est. Non tam been cum rebus humanis agitur, ut meliora pluribus placeant.
Argumenti pessimi turba est. This part seems the greater, therefore it is the
worse. It goes not so well with humane affairs, that the better things should
please the most. The multitude is an argument of the worst. Neither if his
Philosophy had been sound and perfect, need his Sectators appeal to authority,
and compliance of others, because truth is able to stand of it self, without
the authority of others: what is the cause that since the time that Euclide
writ his Elements of Geometry, there is not any one found that has rejected
them? or who has not followed them? Truly because the indubitable verity is in
them, and it is impossible the intellect should not assent unto them when they
are known. And would not the same thing have happened to the tenants of
Aristotle if they had been true, and indubious?

6. But they will urge further and say, that he is praised, and extolled of
other famous men that were not of his Sect, as Cicero, Plinius, and Quintilian,
and that he has the testimony of Phil^p and Alexander that were great, and
knowing men. It is true, and no way to be denied, for Cicero says of him, Quis
doctior? quis acutior? quis in rebus vel inveniendis vel ^udicandis acrior
Aristotele unquam fuit? who has been more learned? who has been more acute at
any time than Aristotle either in the invention, or judging of things? And
Pliny one while calls him Summum in omni doctrina virum! the chief man in all
learning! sometimes he calls him Virum immensae subtilitatis, a man of immense
subtil^y. And Quintilian says, Quid Aristotelem? quem dubito scien^ia rerum,
an scriptorum Copia, an eloquendi suavitate, an inventionum acumine, an
varietate operum clariorem putem. What shall I say of Aristotle? whom I doubt
whether I might think more famous by his knowledge of things, or by his
copiousness of writings, or by his suavity of eloquence, or by the acuteness of
his inventions, or by the variety of his works. Well, admit all this to be true
(as who would deprive him of his due honor) yet these are but the judgments
of men that might err as well as he; and what if others have thought otherwise?
must we altogether stand to these men's judgments? or has nature appointed
them to be final and infallible determiners, from whose judgment there is no
appeal? might not Aristotle and these men err in something? or were they
privileged from the common frailty of all men? no, I believe not but that the
proverb is true in them, and all men besides, humanum est errare. But shall we
not find that the selfsame men have given as great, or greater commendation to
others? yes truly, for being Orators they had all the liberty of a profuse
and Hyperbolical style, and often bringing in a commendatory catalogue of
learned and worthy men, there was no cause why they should omit the noble
Stagyrite.

But have they not often celebrated and preferred others before him? yes verily
there is hardly any thing more vulgarly known, than that iterated saying of
Cicero, when he was commending any of the Philosophers, always added semper
excipio Platonem, which manifested the high esteem that he had of him,
accounting no other worthy to be compared with him, whom he judged superlative
to all: and for Pliny we shall find him giving the precedence of wit and
knowledge to Homer above all others, and calling Plato Sapientiae An^istitem,
than which Elogy I know not what can be given more illustrious, and also openly
professing his repugnancy to Aristotle, and that he had added many things which
that great man was ignorant of. And for Quintilian you may hear him preferring
Plato, Philosophorum quis dubitet Platonem esse praecipuum, sive acumine
disserendi, sive loquendi facultate divina quadam, et Homerica? ut mihi non
hominis ingenio, sed quodam Delphico videatur oraculo instructus. Who doubts
that Plato is the chief of Philosophers, whether in the acuteness of disputing,
or in a certain divine and Homerical faculty of speaking? That he seems to me
instructed not with the wit of man, but with a certain Delphical Oracle: And in
a word, if thou will credit Quintilian thou shall find him extolling Cicero
beyond Aristotle, Plato, or any other of the foregoing ages; so that the same
mouths that commend him, do also prefer others before him.

But if the authority of men, the credit of the best esteemed, and the number
of voices could certainly decide the truth, then what store of witnesses might
be brought against him, and those also men of the greatest esteem and repute of
any in the Christian world? For is not the whole Peripatetick Philosophy
rejected of all the ancient Fathers? what need is there to memorate Tertullian,
Irenaeus, and the more Ancient? what need is there to mention Lactan^ius who so
often carpeth at Aristotle, tanquam secum dissid^ntem, et repugnantia dicentem,
et sentientem, as one disagreeing with himself, and speaking, and thinking
repugnant things? Why should I name Justin Martyr, who so often reprehendeth
him? or Hierome, who with so open, and tart a word taxes versutias ejus, his
subtilties? why should I recite Ambrose, Augustine, Theodoret, and the rest?
who impugning humane Philosophy in general, have not intended to spare
Aristotle alone. But in the name of them all hear Gregory Nazianzen who says
so elegantly, and truly, Abjice Aristotelis minutiloquam sagacitatem, abjicite
mortiferos illos super anima sermones, et universe humana illa dogmata. Throw
away the minutiloquious sagacity of Aristotle; throw away those mortiferous
Sermons of his upon the soul: and universally all those human opinions of his.
So that if the judgment of the Fathers be of any weight, the Philosophy of
Aristotle is not much to be regarded.

As for that which is alleged concerning Philip choosing Aristotle for a Tutor
to his Son Alexander, it merits but a slight confutation: for admit that Philip
was a very wise and prudent Prince (as no doubt but he was) yet did the
excellency of his skill principally consist in Political, and Military
prudence, and knowing Arms better than Arts, was not adaequately fit to judge
of the abilities of Aristotle, except by vulgar rumor, and common fame. And it
is not to be denied that in his time the fame of Aristotle was exceedingly
blown abroad; but who is ignorant of the inconstancy and levity of the popular
crowd in propagating, and spreading of rumors? But let it be granted that
Aristotle did excel not only all the learned men in Greece that lived in his
time, but all the men of the whole world that lived in the time of Philip; yet
what is this to the number and abilities of those that have lived both before
and since? or how comes the Judgment of Philip to oblige us who are not under
his Empire, and who could not compel the minds of men, under the tyranny of one
mind? for it is easier to inslave bodies than to captivate minds. And for
Alexander, though he had Aristotle in singular esteem, yet did he much value
other learned men, as Xenocrates, whose aemulator Aristotle was, and also
Pyrrho; so that both these received for gifts many Talents.

But this is not to be denied, that the splendour of Alexanders name did bring
much credit, and authority to Aristotle, both living and dead: but this
notwithstanding amongst the vulgar and those of vulgar wits, who as they are
only moved with external shows, so they think that a great Prince cannot but
have a great Master: when for the most part Princes choose not Tutors for
Princes, either for their abilities in judging of the solidity of literature,
or for the love they have to virtue, truth, or sincery, but rather for worldly
or Politic ends; that their sons may be instructed, and fitted both to keep
and acquire large Dominions, and Territories; and for the most part true
Science scorns the bondage, flattery, and vanity of Courtly splendour.

2. Again, there is no reason why the Peripatetick Philosophy should have the
palm and pre-eminence above all other, because there is a great uncertainty
both of the books and doctrine of Aristotle, as we shall evince in some few
reasons.

1. It is uncertain whether any book of Aristotle, or which owns him for
author, be extant or no; for if it were not dubious to what end do his
interpreters, as Simplicius, Themistius, and almost all the rest, which write
in this age, prepose this question at the beginning of every book that they
expound, Sitne hujusmodi liber Aristotelis an non? is this book Aristotle's or
not? Certainly if this thing were not dubious, there were no cause for
propounding this question; for we use not to scruple about things that are
certain, but about things that are doubful. For it is inquired concerning his
book de interpretatione, whether it be his or no, the later men do affirm it,
but long ago Andronicus Rhodius ha^h denied it, whether therefore shall we give
our suffrage to these modern men, or to him that is more ancient? who by the
verdict of Boethius, and Porphyrius, is said to have brought Aristotle's writings
out of Greece, and to have digested them into order; who shall loose this knot?
who shall resolve this doubt?

2. Another argument arises from hence; that Laertius has drawn the order and
Catalogue of Aristotle's books, and yet many are wanting which he enumerates,
and we have many as 12. or 14. of Metaphysics, 8. of Physics, 4. de Coelo, 2.
de generatione, 4. of Meteors, and 3. of the Soul, which are not mentioned in
his Catalogue, and therefore who need doubt but these are Supposititious? For
if they had been extant in the days of Laertius, would he have concealed them?
or could he have had no suspicion of them, who was so diligent to know, and
commit to posterity both the lives and books of the Philosophers? And it
appears that when Ptolomaus Philadelphus did erect that huge Library at
Alexandria, using the help and pains of Demetrius Phalereus, who was a
Peripatetick, This man, as he did promise great rewards in the Kings name to
those that brought books from any where, so he has not thought those to be
neglected which were said to be Aristotle's; And therefore Ammonius writes,
that many books were brought under the hope of gain bearing the title of
Aristotle, that notwithstanding were spurious and none of his: and therefore
who can be certain in such a caliginous Labirynth, to know whether these that
we have be truly his, or but false and adulterate? seeing many of them are
suspected rather to belong to Architas than to Aristotle.

3. Seeing according to Laertius, and some others, that there were many that
bore the name of Aristotle, might not easily all their works be ascribed to
this one Stagyrite? as in other things it often falls out: for there were many
Jupiters, yet all things were ascribed to one son of Saturn, and there were
many called by the name of Hercules, yet all their labors made only one son
of Al^mena famous. And did not Theophrastus and others (who are said to have
imitated the style of Aristotle) compose many books under the same title with
those of his (as many be gathered from Laertius Catalogues) and so might not
they in continuance of time have the inscription creep in, one instead of the
other? And is it not controverted whether the beginning of the Metaphysics,
and the books of plants, and others belong to Theophrastus, or to Aristotle?
And does not Cicero in his books de finibus witness that those books Moralium
Nichomachiorum, which are commonly ascribed to Aristotle, are to be attributed
to Nichomachus his son? And lest any should object (as they usually do) that
they are written in his style and method, does he not conclude, Non video, cur
non potuerit patri similis est filius, I do not see why the son might not be
like the Father? And are there not some books amongst those vulgarly accounted
the works of Aristotle, as the book of plants, that of the world to Alexander,
and others, that none dare positively assert to be Aristotle's? Neither is this
any new thing in him, for the same suppositition of books has happened to
Plato, Cicero, Seneca, Origin, Cyprian, Hierom, Augustine, and other great men.

4. Let it be concluded, that we have the books which may justly and
legitimately be ascribed to Aristotle, yet notwithstanding how dubious is it to
know in these books what is properly and truly his, and what is not? For
Strabo, Plutarch, and others, do memorate that when Theophrastus had left
Neleus Scepsius heir to his own, and Aristotle's Library, their books lay long
hidden in the ground and that many years after, when they were corroded with
worms, and moths, and almost consumed, and wasted, they were dug up and sold
to Apellicon Teius, who took care to export them to Athens, and took upon him
to amend and correct the defects according to his own mind: And (...) not long
after Lucius Sylla had carried them to Rome forth of Greece, he committed them
to Tyrannion the Grammarian, that he might correct and alter them; and so that
he added detracted or changed what he judged Appellicon had depraved, or might
better agree to the mind of Aristotle. And that afterward succeeded Andronicus
Rhodius who again turned all upside down and altered as he thought fit.
Therefore how shall we believe that the pure text of Aristotle, passing the
hands of so many Correctors (that I may not more truly say Corruptors come to
our hands without being viciated in innumerable places? first suffering by the
injury of time, and then by the conjectures of so many Censurers. Especially if
to this we shall add, the variety, oscitancy, and unskilfulness of
transcribers, we shall find that in this author, which is common to almost all,
that of one and the self-same place there will be various lections, that it
will be hardly possible to divine, which are the primary and proper footsteps
of the author.

5. But let this also be given, that there is nothing contained in his works
but what is his own, yet the style and manner of Aristotle's writing does render
his doctrine so uncertain, and obscure, that to fish out his meaning there is
need of a Delian Urinator. For though he might be copious and elegant in easy
matters, yet in things that are more difficult, and which require more
perspicuous explication, he is so ambiguous, brief, lame, and intricate, that
he seems from thence to have raised plenty of matter, and occasion to make his
Sectators wrangle and conjecture. Therefore Atticus did worthily, and
appositely compare him, and his writings, to that black humor poured forth by
the Cuttle fish, under which lying hid she escapes catching; for he seems to
have spoken so on purpose, as though he be taken in some sense, yet in another
he makes an escape, and so eludes the Catchers. And some of his followers do
acknowledge that he has used this kind of equivocal speaking of purpose; but
what need we any further witness, behold Aristotle himself openly declaring
that he used this affected obscurity in his Physics, for laboring to
consolate Alexander complaining that he had divulged them, he says, Scripsisti
ad me de libris Auscultatoriis, existimans in arcano custodiendos fuisse. Seito
igitur ipsos editos, et non editos esse. Cognosci enim, percipique ab iis
tantum poterunt, qui nos audierint. Thou have written to me touching my books
of Auscultation, thinking that they were to have been kept in secret. Therefore
know that they are published, and not published. For they can only be
understood, and perceived of those who have heard us. Which things being thus,
we may marvail to what end they have called and accounted him as a Demon? for
verily he has imitated the cunning of a Cacodaemon, who is said to speak by
his Prophets and Sibylls after such a manner, that his words may be used in
diverse and contrary senses: is this the honor of Aristotle, or the glory of
the Schools?

6. But further let it be conceded that Aristotle has spoken, and written
perspicuously, yet nevertheless his doctrine is left very uncertain: For he for
the most part still uses a Rhapsodie, and is a great Compiler of other men's
works, and that without taking time to digest or censure all things in them, so
that it is difficult to discern when he produces any thing of his own, when of
another man's. And therefore who is there, who when he perceives himself to be
urged and pressed with any place in Aristotle, may not oppose, and say, that it
is not he that speaks there, but some of the ancients under his person, and so
never be without a subterfuge, and way for evasion? Again, it is not seldom
that he does openly declare the fallaciousness, and uncertainty of his doctrine
by inserting of Adverbs of doubting, as in his book of the Categories speaking
of Relatives he says, Fortassis autem difficile sit de rebus hujusmodi
vehementer asserere: Perhaps it is difficult to affirm any thing vehemently of
such like matters. And further where he has reckoned up the four species of
quality, he adds, Fortassis quidem igitur alius quispiam apparuerit
qualitatis modus, sed fere qui maxi^e dicuntur, hi sunt. For perhaps truly some
other mood of quality may appear, but these are almost all that are especially
spoken of. There are many such like places which I omit, these being sufficient
to manifest the man to be no other but such an one as the author of the censure
commonly prefixed before his works, who after many commendations given him,
says, Accedebat ad haec, ingenium viri tectum et callidum, et metuens
reprehensionis, quod inhibebat eum, ne proferret interdum aperte quae sentiret.
Inde tam multa per ejus opera obscura, et ambigua. There happened to these
things, the closs wit of the man, and crafty, and fearing reprehension, which
did inhibit him, that sometimes he durst not utter openly those things which he
thought. From whence it is that so many things, throughout his works, are
obscure and ambiguous.

7. But let us omit these, and give it for granted that Aristotle has uttered
his opinion plainly, and does speak altogether Dogmatically, and without
haesitation; will it not still remain of necessity that his doctrine is
uncertain and obscure, seeing it is beset with continual altercations amongst
the Peripateticks themselves, differing about the interpretation of his text?
neither is there any possible hope of their reconciliation, but that we may
sooner see a conjunction of the poles of heaven, one holding this, and another
that, and yet all affirming that their meaning was Aristotle's mind: for when
they make the question, whether, and what kind of matter he did ascribe to the
heavens, some affirm that he did attribute matter to the heavens, and some deny
that he did attribute any: some hold that he appropriated the same matter to
the heavens, that he did to the elements, and other some affirm that he gave
them a diverse matter. Wherefore suppose any one not preoccupated desired to be
instructed in the Peripatetick doctrine, what should he do, or whither should
he turn himself, when he should see about some one difficulty propounded,
diverse and sundry opinions differing one from another, and Aristotle wrested
against himself? would he think it possible that Aristotle at one and the
self-same time, did hold things absolutely contrary one to another?

8. And if all this were granted that the Aristotelians did not disagree
amongst themselves, and had a genuine interpretation of Aristotle's mind, yet
would there remain much doubt and uncertainty in his doctrine: because in it
there are many things omitted, and insufficient, many things Tautological* and
superfluous, many things false, impious, and calumnious, and many things
repugnant, and contradictory, which we shall make out hereafter, and so pass
them in this place.

3. Neither ought the throne be yielded to Aristotle alone, nor his Philosophy
only adored, and admitted, because in his writings innumerable things are
wanting, and defective, that are essentially necessary to the completing of
Physical knowledge, which we shall something at large demonstrate.

1. I shall pass by the defects in his Organical learning, as having been
touched before when we handled Logic, and only come to open his defects in
Physics: And here first is required a definition of Physic, the declaration
of the subject matter is wanting, a general partition, and distribution is
required: neither is it shown to what end, how or in what order he will proceed
to speak of the heavens, the meteors, the animants, and the like, which all
belong to Physical speculation, this is all the order of this great
Methode-monger. And when he had laid it was to be proceeded ex notioribus nobis
ad notiora natura, and that even by common sense singulars are better known to
us, and universalls more known in nature, yet presently after he preposterously
concludes, ab universalibus ad singularia procedendum.

2. What a brave definition does he give of Nature, Arist. l. 2. Phy.
to wit, Natura est principium, and causa motus, and quietis ejus, in quo inest
primo et per se, et non secundum accidens, in which there are more defects and
errors than words? For hereby nature is not distinguished from the efficient
cause, Hell. lib. Phys. Arist et Gal. ign.
art may be a principle as well as nature, and many more which I shall not
stand to recite, seeing the most acute, and learned Helmont has demonstrated
no fewer than thirteen errors, or defects, in this so short a definition, and
so concludes, Atque tandem valde anxius, nescit quid vocet, aut vocare debeat
naturam, naturalis auscultationis scriptor. Pet. Gas. exer. 5 contr. Arist.
And at the length being very anxious, the writer of natural auscultation is
ignorant what he should or ought to call nature. And also confutes some other
descriptions of Aristotle with many pregnant and undeniable arguments: Arist.
l. 3 Phy. cap. 3.
and in the most of all his divisions and definitions, as may be seen in his
definition of motion, and of alterarion, and diverse others, which were tedious
and fruitless to reckon up.

3. His proofs and demonstrations for the most part have the same lameness with
the rest, ex uno disce omnes. He goes about to prove the world to be perfect,
because it does contain bodies, and that a body is perfect because it
contains trinal dimension, and that trinal dimension is perfect, because
three are all things: but three are all things, because if they be either one,
Arist. lib. de Coel. et Mun. ca. 1, 2, 3, 8, 9, 10. prim. lib.
or two, yet we have not named all things; but as soon as there are three, we
may call them all things. O how egregious! O how super-sufficient is this
proof! O how wonderfully beseeming so great a Philosopher! O how fit is he to
be the Prince of Learning, and the Dictator in the Academies! And the same
absurdities may be seen every where in his writings.

4. The like appears in his argumentations against the ancient Philosophers,
whom he seems every where to confute, calumniate and contradict, but with the
same imperfections and defects, as to instance in two or three. He taxes
Democritus, Leucippus, and others very insufficiently, who did hold that
generation was by congregation, Arist lib 1. de Genesis et Cor. cap. 2, 9.
and that no continuum was compounded of indivisible things, which they
speaking of Physical impartibilitie, he impugns as of Mathematical. Does he not
unworthily tax Plato, that besides matter and Idaea, he had put no efficient
cause of generation? when he himself besides matter and form, rather has put
privation, which is a non ens, than any efficient cause: Quapropter cum
Aristoteles nesciat naturam, Helm. lib. ante citato.
proprietates, itemque generationum causas, ac quidditatem; quis non
judicaverit, ex aridis cisternis Scholorum aquas Philosophiae haustas hactenus?
Octo enim libri ausultationum Physicarum, somnia et privationes, pro naturae
cognitione exponunt. Wherefore seeing Aristotle is ignorant of nature,
proprieties, and also the causes, and quiddity of generations; who shall not
judicate the waters of Philosophy hitherto drawn from the dry Cisterns of the
Schools? For the eight books of Physical auscultations, do expound dreams, and
privations, instead of the knowledge of nature.

5. This Philosophy is merely verbal, speculative, abstractive, formal and
notional, fit to fill the brains with monstrous and airy Chymaeras,
speculative, and fruitless conceits, but not to replenish the intellect with
sound knowledge, and demonstrative verity, nor to lead man practically to dive
into the internal center of natures abstruse, and occult operations: But is
only conversant about the shell, and husk, handling the accidental, external
and recollacious qualities of things, confusedly, and continually tumbling over
obscure, ambiguous, general and equivocal terms, which are only fit to
captivate young Sciolists, and raw wits, but not to satisfy a discreet and wary
understanding, that expects Apodictical, and experimental manuduction into the
more interior clossets of nature. Here in the Schools is found no such thing,
but objurgations, and clamours, fighting and contending Andabatarum more, like
blind, or madmen, not knowing where they wound others, nor where they are hurt
or offended themselves.

6. And whereas names should truly express notions, and they be co^gruous to
things themselves, the Aristotelian Philosophy leads us into an endless
Labyrinth, having nothing in manner but Syllogisms, or rather Paralogisms to
statuminate and uphold the Fabric thereof: for they have altogether laid aside
Induction as too mechanical and painful, which only can be serviceable to
Physical Science, and have invented and introduced words, terms, definitions,
distinctions, and limitations consonant enough amongst themselves, but no way
consorting or sympathizing with nature it self. Verulam. Nov. Org. Aphor. 8.
Scientiae enim, quas nunc habemus, nihil aliud sunt quam quaedam
concinnationes rerum ante a inventarum; non modi inveniendi aut designationes
novorum operum. For those Sciences that we have now, are nothing else but
certain concinnations of things formerly found out; not the ways, or
designations of inventing new works. And one thing more, instead of
establishing the mind in Physical truths, most usually they confound the
judgment with Mathematical terms, which in Aristotle's writings is no small
error: for though the Mathematics be exceedingly helpful to Natural
Philosophy, yet is confusion of terms very hurtful; for if a Mathematical point
or superficies be urged in a Physical argument it will conclude nothing, but
only obfuscate, and disorder the intellect.

7. This School Philosophy is altogether void of true, and infallible
demonstration, observation, and experiment, the only certain means, and
instruments to discover, and anatomize natures occult and central operations;
which are found out by laborious trials, manual operations, assiduous
observations, and the like, and not by poring continually upon a few paper
Idols, and unexperienced Authors: As though we could fathom the Universe by
our shallow imaginations, or comprize the mysteries of mother nature in the
narrow compass of our weak brains; or as though she would follow us into our
Chambers, and there in idleness communicate her secrets unto us; no verily,
Dii bona sua laboribus vendunt, ease and idleness are not the way to get
knowledge. Therefore here I shall show what noble parts of Physical knowledge
have been, and are neglected by the Schools, only because they abhor taking of
pains, and think they can argue Dame Nature out of her secrets, and that they
need no other key but Syllogisms to unlock her Cabinet.

1. Therefore that noble, and almost divine Science of natural Magic, is by
them not only repudiated, abominated, and prosecuted with fire and sword, but
also the very name s^ems nauseous and execrable unto them; so little have they
done either to advance learning, or to vindicate truth. A great wonder that men
that profess themselves almost ignorant of nothing, and think themselves the
most skilful wordmen or Logodaedalists in the world, should either not
understand or be unwilling to acknowledge that the word Magic was in its
primary and proper acceptance, taken in a good and honorable sense, and
appropriated to those that the world accounted most wise and learned: and never
was abusively taken, until many Impostors, and knaves did abuse and pervert
that so noble a science, as though the name of Doctor were dishonorable, or
unworthy to be an epithet for the able and learned, who have justly merited
and taken that degree, Jo. Bapt. Port. mag. natu. l. 1. cap. 1.
because every Montebank Emperick and Quacksalver, have usually that title
attributed unto them. Was not Magic amongst the Persians accepted for a
sublime Sapience, Matthew. 2.1, 7.
and the science of the universal consent of things? And were not those men
(supposed Kings) that came from the East styled by that honorable name (...)
M^gi, or Wisemen, which the Holy Ghost gives unto them, thereby to denote out
that glorious mystery of which they were made partakers by the revelation of
that spirit of life and light. Neither do I here Apologize for that impious and
execrable Magic, that either is used for the hurt and destruction of mankind,
or pretends to gain knowledge from him who is the grand enemy of all the sons
of Adam, Jo. Pic. Miran. Con. m^g. nu. 26.
no, that I truly abominate, Quia (as learned Mirandula says) pendet ex manu
hostium primae veritatis, potestatum harum tenebrarum, quae tenebras falsitatis
male dispositis intellectibus obfundunt. Because it depends upon the hand of
the enemies of the primitive verity, of the powers of these darknesses, which
do infuse the tenebrosities of falsity into evilly disposed intellects.

But that which I defend is that noble and laudable Science, Quae cognitionem
formarum abditarum ad opera miranda deducat, Verul. l 3. de Aug. Sci. c^. 5.
at que activa passivis conjungendo, magnalia naturae manifestet; which leads
cognition of occult forms unto wonderful works, and by conjoining actives to
passives, does manifest the grand secrets of nature. And indeed is that worthy,
and wonderful science, not unbeseeming the noblest person, or greatest Scholar,
and is that sublime knowledge whereby the wondetful works of the Creator are
discovered, and innumerable benefits produced to the poor Creatures. Mirabilia
artis Magicae non sunt nisi per unionem and actuationem eorum, Jo. Pic. Miran.
loco. citato.
quae seminaliter, and separatae sunt in natura. The wonderful things of Art
Magic are not brought to pass, except by the union, and actuation of those
things that are seminally, and separately in nature: So that indeed, Magicam
operari, non est aliud nisi maritare mundum. To operate by Magic is nothing
else but to marry the world, that is, fitly and duly to join and connex agents
to their patients, masculines to faeminines, superious to inferiors,
Caelestials to Terrestrials, that thereby nature may act out her hidden and
latent power. And this is that which the greatest Doctor need not be ashamed
of, whether Physician or Philosopher, but that which is commendable both before
God and man, and that wherein if the Schools had been exercised, their works and
fruits would have been more manifest, and they then owned not as the
disseminators of vain controversies, and frivolous disputes, but as the true
interpreters of nature, Patriots of true learning, and benefactors to mankind.
But I pray God they may repent and amend, and embrace the truth, and also
practice it.

2. The next thing I shall mind them of, as one of their greatest defects, is
that sublime, and never-sufficiently praised Science of Pyrotechny or
Chemistry; which though it has suffered much through the corruption of time,
and the wickedness of cov^tous Impostors, and ravenous Harpies, who gaping
after mountains of Gold, do either suck the purses of others as greedy as
themselves, or else do willingly suffer themselves to be deluded, and
circumvented by these broilers and smoke ^ellers, and so bring an injust infamy
upon this so profitable and laudable an art. And though in former times it was
had in honor by Trismegist, Geber, Raymund Lully, Arnoldus de villa nova,
Roger Bacon, and many others, yet was it for many ages in a manner buried in
oblivion, or banished to the Monastic cells, until Basilius Valentinus, Isaac
Hollandus, and Paracelsus that singular ornament of Germany, did revive and
restore the same, and since more clearly manifested by him, who is justly
styled Philosophus per ignem, and many other famous men. The benefits of which
are now so openly known, esspecially the common and vulgar part of it (though
the grand mysteries are hid in the breasts of those who are truly called Adepti)
and so much written by the elaborate pens of many learned and industrious men
therein, that it would be needless to relate its transcendent uses, and
excellencies: it being in a word that Art that does help more truly and
radically to denudate, and discover the secret principles and operations of
nature, than any other in the world, and I dare truly and boldly say, that one
years exercise therein to ingenious spirits, under able Masters, will produce
more real and true fruit, than the studying Aristotelian Philosophy has
brought forth in many centuries. O that the Schools therefore would leave their
idle, and fruitless speculations, and not be too proud to put their hands to
the coals and furnace, where they might find ocular experiments to confute
their fopperies, and produce effects that would be beneficial to all
posterities. Paracel. li. de. Tinct. Phys.
I will only mind them of this one rule. Discendae primum ergo digestiones,
distillationes, sublimationes, reverberationes, extractiones, solutiones,
coagulationes, fermentationes, fixationes, and omne quod ad opus hoc
instrumentum requiritur, cognoscendum est usu, prout vitra, cucurbitae,
circulatoria, gallinarum ova, terrea vasa, balnea, furni ventales,
reverberatorii similesque, nec non carbones atque tenacula: sic in Alchimia
medicinaque proficere poteris. Neither despise this counsel because the author
is no friend to Aristotle, nor be ashamed to cast off thy fine clothes to work
in a laboratory, for without this thou may wax old in ignorance, and die with
guilt, because thou have served thy generations with no better stuff than
Aristotle's dreams, Helm li. Phys. Arist. et Gal. ign.
and Scholastic fables. Nam utut natural ingenium, and acumen judicii,
Philosophus habeat, nunquam tamen ad rerum naturalium radicem, aut r^dical^m
scientiam admittitur, sine igne. For howsoever a Philosopher may h^v^ a natural
wit, and acuteness of Judgment, notwithstanding he is never admitted to the
root, or radical Science of natural things, without the fire.

3. Another thing of no less weight than the former I shall denote unto them,
which is that part of natural Philosophy, that concerns medicine, which of all
other is most necessary, and behooful for conserving and restoring the health
of man; and yet is no less imperfect, and defective than any of the rest.

For first it is turned into a way of mere formality, flattery, cunning, craft
and covetousness, nothing being so much sought after by its professors as
popular applause, repute, and esteem with rich and mighty men, that thereby the
larger fees may be drawn from them, while in the mean time, the poor are
neglected and despised. Is this the office of a Physician? is only riches got
by hook or crook, whether the Patient reeeive benefit or none, live or die, the
sole end of their profession? and must these things have the countenance of
Law, and confirmation by Charters? must these things be applauded and cried up,
while the sincere and faithful endeavors of simple and honest-meaning men, are
disdained and trampled upon? But the world has always loved deceivers, and
therefore must be deceived.

Secondly, the rule being most sure, that ubi desinit Philosophus, incipit
medicus, it must of necessity follow, that if Philosophy be false, uncertain,
and ill bottomed of it self, then the medicinal knowledge that is built
thereon* and drawn from thence, must needs be faulty and ruinous. Now how false
the Aristotelian Philosophy is in it self is in part made clear, and more is to
be said of it hereafter, and therefore truth and experience will declare the
imperfection of that medicinal knowledge that stands upon no better a basis.
For Galen their great Coryphaeus and Antesignanus has laid down no other
principles to build medicinal skill upon, than the doctrine of Aristotle, as
that all bodies mixed are compounded of the four Elements, and that the total
parity or disparity, temperament, complexion, and constitution of all bodies do
arise from the equal or unequal conflux and commixture of these four: and that
from these do result four prime qualities, and four humors, and that the
abounding, defect, repugnancy, or alteration of he^e are the causes of all
diseases. Jo. Bapt. Van Hel^li. Elem.
Mirum sane, quantum in his rixatum, et scriptum sit: ac miserandum, quantum
baec laxa nugarum somnia, mundum hactenus circumvenerint. Truly it is a wonder
how much has been disputed and written in these things: and it is to be
commiserated, how much these loose dreams of trifles, have hitherto
circumvented the world.

For this same author makes it good by undeniable arguments and experiments,
that there are not four Elements, nor humors, in rerum natura, and has said
enough, sufficiently to confute and overthrow the whole Fabric of the
Galenical learning, which here I forbear to insert. And therefore it is very
strange that the Schools, nay in a manner the whole world, should be enchanted
and infatuated to admire, and own this ignorant Pagan, who being ambitious of
erecting his own fame, did traduce, and darken the writings of those that
preceded him, and pretending to interpret and open the doctrine of learned
Hippocrates, he altogether obscured and perverted the same: And yet can the
Schools be so wilfully mad to adore this Idol* and follow this blind guide.

Thirdly, if the ground of Galenical Physic had been sound and firm, and that
it were the true and certain way both to find out the causes, and to cure
diseases, yet notwithstanding has it been but loosly prosecuted, and smally
promoted, seeing for the space of so many hundred years, there is not by the
Schools found out any more certain, safe, or easy way to cure diseases than
was in the days of Hippocrates, and Galen: It is very strange that it should
grow up and flourish with them, and never since come to any more perfection,
when it is usually observed that nothing is simnl and semel invented and
perfected. For it is plain that in Botanical knowledge nothing of value is
found out or discovered since the days of Dioscorides; for though some plants
be now found out that were not then known, and many species of others also, and
their cuts and figures more perfected, as beside much confusedly heaped up
concerning their qualities of heat and cold, dryness and moisture; yet is
nothing more added by real experience, and diligent observation of their
specific virtues, and intrinsic properties, so that in regard of the
vegetable Kingdom the art of medicine has got little advance.

Fourthly, though medicinal knowledge have received some melioration especially
in the Anatomical part, wherein men have labored with much acuteness,
diligence, and observation, so that this part seems to be growing, and arising
toward the Zenith of perfection, especially since our never-sufficiently
honored Countryman Doctor Harvey discovered that wonderful secret of the
bloods circulary motion: yet for all this there comes small advantage by it in
practice, and application, for the more certain, safe, and easy curing of
diseases: for though it bring great satisfaction to a speculative
understanding, and help to clear many intricate doubts, yet does it little to
remove dolor, danger, or death.

And moreover though it be grown to a mighty height of exactness, in vulgar
Anatomy and dissection of the dead bodies of men, or the living ones of beasts,
birds, and fishes; yet is it defective as to that vive and Mystical Anatomy
that discovers the true Schematism or signature of that invisible Archeus or
spiritus mechanicus, that is the true opifex, and dispositor of all the
salutary, and morbifick lineaments, both in the seminal guttula, the tender
Embrio, and the formed Creature, Rob. de Fluct. lib de Anato. mia mystica.
of which Paracelsus, Helmont, and our learned Countryman Dr. Pludd, have
written most excellently.

Fifthly, the most excellent art of Surgery, though much advanced by the help
of Anatomy in all that belongs to manual operation, or the use of instruments;
yet in the curing of great and dangerous sores, as the Lupus, Cancer, Fistula,
Carcinoma, Elephantiasis, Strumaes, virulent and malign Ulcers, and the like,
it is much defective, and can perform little, without mineral and Chemical
medicaments. Not because nature and providence have ordained no remedies for
them, but because of the sloathfulness and negligence of professors and
artists, who sit down contented with Galenical medicaments, thinking there is
nothing of greater virtue, and operation than they; and so become slaves and
captives to some few Authors, whom they think it not lawful to relinguish, or
that natures whole mysteries were comprised in their paper Monuments, and no
search further to be made: Not knowing that their scrutiny should be through
the whole Theater of nature, and that their only study and labor ought to be
to acquire and find out salves for every sore, and medicines for every malady,
and not to be inchained with the formal prescriptions of Schools, Halls,
Colleges, or Masters, but to seek continually that these things might be made
known unto them, and not to imagine it is sufficient to have served an
appenticeship to it as to a trade, Paracel. lib 4. de cause. Luis Gal. Cap. 9.
except they arrive at higher seize. Quia medicus ad imaginem dei agere
ac laborare jussus est, constat ipsum non nugacibus rebus, sed secretioribus
Magiae ac Cabalae studiis operam suam locare debere: non enim ut
Iurisconsultorum vel Physicorum scientia, sic et Medicina humanis
speculationibus comprehendi potest, cum ipsa supra omnes arts admirabilis ac
occulta existat. Because the Physician is commanded to act, and labor
according to the image of God, it is manifest that he ought not to place his
pains in trifling things, but in the more secret studies of Magic, and
Cabalistick Science: for not as the knowledge of Lawyers and Naturalists, so
also can Medicinal skill be comprehended by human speculations, seeing it is
admirable and occult above all arts. Therefore what great error, and how
heinous a crime is it to leave the great book of the Macracosm, nay and the
writings of others, only to adhere to the doctrine of ignorant, wicked,
malicious, and blind Pagans? Hell de prom. Author.
I shall only add this, Adeoque cum omne donum bonum, nedum virtutum, sed and
cognitionum, descendat a patre luminum; quis poterit a Scholis Gentilitiis
scientiae medicae tesseram ediscere? Dominus enim creavit medicum, non Scholae.
Therefore seeing every good gift, not only of virtues, but also of Sciences,
does descend from the Father of lights; who can perfectly learn the sum of
Medicinal knowledge from the heathenish Schools? For the Lord has created the
Physician, not the Schools.

4. There remains diverse excellent discoveries of many mysterious things in
nature that do properly belong to Physics, which yet the Schools take small or
no notice of, and as little pains in, either to know, teach, or improve them;
and so are a witness against them of their sluggishness, and deficiency of
their too-much-magnified Peripatetick Philosophy.

As first, they pass over with a dry foot that laudable, excellent, and
profitable science of Physiognomy, which has been admired, Verul. lib. 4. de
Aug. Sci. ca. 1.
and studied of the gravest and wisest Sages that have been in many
generations: which is that Science which from and by certain external signs,
signatures, and lineaments, does explicate the internal nature and quality of
natural bodies either generally or specifically. And this so necessary a
knowledge both in the genus and species of it is altogether omitted by the
School; they understand and teach nothing of Caelestial signatures, which are
in some measure made known by the quantity, light, color, motion, and other
affections of those bodies: They teach nothing of Sub-caelestial Physiognomy,
whether Elementary, Meteorological, or Mineralogical, but are utterly ignorant
in all these, as also in Botanical, and Anthropological Physiognomy, contenting
themselves with a few frivilous, false and formal definitions, and notions, and
so never seek to penetrate into the more interior nature of things, by which
it comes to pass that they know little in the vegetable, and animal kingdoms,
and least of all in the subterranean, or mineral; and but that Paracelsus,
Crollius, Quercetan, Baptista Porta, and some others had taken pains in it,
there had no footsteps of it almost been visible. Arist. lib. de Some. et vig.
cap. 3.
And my Lord Bacon does reckon also as defective the interpretation of natural
dreams; for though Aristotle himself has said something of this, yet those
that pretend most to admire and honor him, have taken as little pains in this
as the rest, to improve it to the glory of their great Master.

Secondly, they are as ignorant in the most admirable, and soul-ravishing
knowledge of the three great Hypostatical principles of nature, Salt, Sulphur,
and Mercury, first mentioned by Basilius Valentinus, and afterward clearly and
evidently manifested by that miracle of industry and pains Theophrastus
Paracelsus. Beguin. Tyr. Chy. c. 2.
Which however the Schools (as hating any liquor that is not drawn out of their
own Cask, and despising all things that come by toil and labor) may slight and
contemn it, and please themselves with their ayery Chimaera of an abstracted
and scarce intelligible materia prima, Par. de Trib. princ.
or Hyle, which is neither plane ens, nec non ens, and think to make fools
believe their Masters description of it, that it is neque quantum, neque quale,
neque quid, neque quicquid eorum quae cernuntur, and so the Delphick devil
cannot expound it, nor Sphinx nor O^dipus be able to unriddle it; Is
notwithstanding so clear, certain, and Apodictical a truth, that all the
Academies in the Universe will never be able to eradicate, and whose verity is
made so evident by Pyrotechny, that he must needs distrust his own senses that
will not credit it; but what avails it to sing to a deaf man? And though
Helmont with the experiments of his Gehennal fire, and some other solid
arguments labor the labefactation of this truth, yet does he not prove that
they are not Hypostatical principles, but only that they are not the ultimate
reduction that the possibility of art can produce, which he truly proves to be
water; yet are the most compound bodies in the universe to be reduced into
them, and by that introversion is the secrets of nature more laid open than by
all the Peripatetitk Philosophy in the world, and if this be not so, let
experience speak.

Thirdly, what shall I say of that wonderful and most beneficial discovery of
the Magnetical Philosophy, Gilb. de mag^
by our worthy, learned, and industrious Countreyman Doctor Gilbert? what rare
and unheard of mysteries does it disclose? what huge light, and advantage does
it bring to Natural Philosophy, and the Mathematics? What helps to Navigation,
and almost all other arts, and trades? How vastly is it improved, enlarged, and
adorned by those great wits, and unwearied persons, such as Ridley, Carpenter,
Barlow, Cabaeus, and the grand gatherer of all kind of learning Athanasius
Kercherus? Kercher. de Art magn.
Can the Schools say, or make it good, that in the space of fifteen hundred
years they ever invented any such like thing? nay it were well if they had not
been, and still were the opposers, contemners, and condemners of all new
discoveries, how transcendent, useful, or profitable soever they were.

Fourthly, what shall I say of the Atomical learning revived by that noble, and
indefatigable person Renatus des Carts, and since illustrated and improved by
Magnenus R^gius, Reg. de Fundam. Phys.
White, Digby, Phocyllides, Holwarda, and diverse others? Has the Schools any
thing of like firmness, do they demonstrate after Euclides most certain and
undeniable way, as Democritus reviviscens does? no surely, all theirs is but
like dross and chaff in comparison of this. What shall I say of that notable
conceit of the most happy genius these latter ages have had, John Kepler, of
the Continued Emission of rays from the body of the Sun, that causes all the
rest of the Planets to move? Kepler Epit. Astron.
Deserves this no further investigation? What shall I say of the Epicuraean
Philosophy, brought to light, illustrated and completed by the labor of that
general Scholar Petrus Gassendus? Surely if it be rightly examined, it will
prove a more perfect, and sound piece, than any the Schools ever had, or
followed.

4. The Philosophy of Aristotle maintained by the Schools ought not to be
prised so much above others, because in it there are many things superflu^us,
Tautological, frivolous, and needless* as we shall in a few instances make
clearly evident.

For first, omitting many superabundant reiterations, and repetitions in his
Organicks and Animasticks, I shall only touch some few contained in his
Physics: as in that much celebrated definition wherein nature is said to be
Principium, and causa motus, Arist. lib. 2. Phys. cap. 1.
and quietis ejus, in quo inest primo, and per se, and non secundum accidens.
1. This particle causa seems to be put superfluously; seeing every cause is a
principle. 2. That of quietis; seeing the faculty of Contraries are the same,
for that which is the faculty of speaking, and holding ones peace, is the same.
3. That ejus, in quo est, seeing also art is the principle of the motion of the
artificer, in whom it is. 4. That primo. 5. And that per se; for also art is
the cause of artificial motion, primarily, and by it self, quatenus as far as
it is of this sort. 6. That particle, and non secundum accidens, is needless;
for wherefore was that necessary seeing before he had put per se? I shall omit
the rest of his nauseous Tautologies in the 3, 5, and 7. chapters of the
forcited book, and in the most of the books of Physics following, as obvious
to every one that will take pains to examine and consider them.

Secondly, in his book de Coelo he reiterates this, Simplicis corporis simplex
est motus, and simplex est motus simplicis corporis, Arist. l. 1. de Coel. et
Mun. cap. 2.
as though these two were much different: and there twice or thrice is repeated
the probation, that Circular motion does agree to some body according to
nature. The like to which may be seen in the 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, and 12. chapters of
the same book, and in all the books following of the same subject. I shall
only name one other, and so pass this point, in lib. 1. De or^u, et interitu,
cap. 6. He propounds the question of the Elements, whether they be, or they be
not? and whether they be sempiternal, or not? As though they had not been
agitated in his third book de Coelo, and at last brings in that vain
repetition, est igitur tangens ut plurimum id, quod tangit tangens: apparet
tangens tangere quod tangit, necesse videtur esse quod tangitur tangere, etc. O
how egregiously is this disputed of him who must needs be accounted the Prince
of Philosophers! O how excellent needs must those disciples be that are taught
by so worthy a Master!

5. This Philosophy ought not so much to be magnified above other, because in
it are very many things that are apparently, and absolutely false, to make
which appear, I shall only name two or three manifest particulars.

First he affirms that nothing is contrary to substance, which he again asserts
in his Logic, Arist. lib. 1. Phys. cap. 6.
and repeats elsewhere, which to me seems absolutely false: for certainly the
substance of the fire is contrary to the substance of the water. But thou will
say the contrariety is solely in the qualities. But seeing these qualities are
every one proper to their substances, and do arise out of them, and accept
their esse from them: and therefore does not this also argue contrariety in
them? For let the substance be of the same nature on both sides; from whence is
it that these qualities do arise rather than others which are contrary unto
them? And again in the same chapter it is false that he teaches that
contraries cannot suffer of themselves: For do not cold things strive with hot,
and moist things with dry? And do not these qualities mutually beat back, and
expel one another.

Secondly, it is false which he affirms lib. 2. Phys. cap. 7. That the formal,
final, and efficient causes are coincident, to wit in respect of the same
effect: for how can the father be the same with the essential form of the Son?
And it is also false which he defends in the eighth chapter, That art does not
deliberate; otherwise artists do all things rashly. But although the Mason do
not deliberate, whether he ought to prepare a foundation rather than an house,
Therefore does ^e not consult, whether he shall build it now rather than at
another time? or whether of this matter, rather than of other? or whether in
this manner, rather than in another?

Thirdly, how false is that which he lays down in the 6, and 7. chapters of
the third book of Physics, that no number can be given, than which a greater
may not be excogitated: but that a magnitude may be given, to wit the world,
than which no greater can be excogitated? I pray you why may it not be lawful
and possible to conceive a magnitude greater than this world? nay ten thousand
times greater, wherein lies the impossibility? He also defines there infinitum
to be that beyond which something always may be taken; but how is that
possible to be infinite that has something extrase? or that it can be made
infinite by something without it self? These are brave sancies, and fine dreams.

Fourthly, in the 8. book, besides innumerable falsityes that may be observed
in the 5, 6, 7, 8, and 9. chapters, that is a most signal one, which in the
first chapter he labors to build up, of the eternity of motion: that thereby
he may make out the ingeniture, and eternity of the world. Let us therefore see
with what reasons he can evince, and persuade it. 1. Is this, Motion is the act
of a movable thing: Therefore that which is movable has preceded Motion. I
pray you does he not wound himself with his own weapon, and strangle himself by
his own consequence? For if any thing has preceded Motion: Therefore motion is
not eternal. 2. He argues, The thing moving, and the thing moved are either
made, or are eternal; But neither can be said to be so. But wherefore cannot
the one or both be eternal, and nevertheless without motion? He adds, because
this is absurd. An egregious instance truly, and indeed Philosophical! for
where appears this absurdity? He further urges: If the thing movable had
preceded motion, then it had rested: and so another motion had been necessary
before, of which that rest had been a privation. Verily as though he who is
born blind, ought to have seen in the womb, that blindless might be accounted
the privation thereof. 3. He proceeds, Power ought to be near to the Act. As
though stones that have lain hid from the framing of the world under the earth,
had not as well power to be framed into an house which is made to day, as they
have a few days before they be dug up. 4. He says, Time is eternal,
therefore Motion also: He confirms the Antecedent, 1. Because all Philosophers,
except Plato, do affirm it. As though the matter were pleaded in the Court,
where voices are numbered? yet some have accounted Plato's judgment more than a
thousand; but this were to try things by authority, not by truth. 2. Because
time is not sine nunc: but every nunc is the beginning of the sequent, and the
end of the praecedent time. As though there could not be a nunc first, and
last; if either the motion of heaven has begun, or also if we believe that
motion is not measured by time, which were not hard to demonstrate.

5. I shall only instance in one place more, and that is lib. 1. de Coelo cap.
3, cap. 4. There he assumes, and endeavors to prove, that Circulary motion
has nothing contrary un^o it: what if of two wheels or orbs, the one were
moved toward the Orient, and the other toward the Occident, were they not to
be said to be moved toward contrary parts? and is not this to have something
contrary unto it? nay may not the motion of something in a straight line, be
contrary to motion that is circular, seeing all motion is considered in
relation unto the term, or point from whence, and unto which it moves? and how
this cannot be possible, to me seems neither probable nor possible. And though
I have but taken these few things to instance in, yet were it no hard matter
(but that it belongs not to my present purpose) to evert the whole ground and
fabric of his Philosophy, and that with arguments unanswerable, and
infallible, but these are sufficient for this place and purpose.

6. Aristotle's ipse dixit, or the School's sic habet Aristoteles, ought no
longer to pass for oracles, nor his tenants for truths before others: because
innumerable things in his Philosophy do contradict, and are diametrically
contrary; and that I may make out what I say, I shall call in for witness his
own words, and instance in some few particular places, that it may be manifest
how in constant and wavering he was in his own opinions.

First, in his book of Categories there is plain contradiction, seeing he makes
ten: and notwithstanding elsewhere sometimes three, sometimes six, sometimes
eight. He says the first substance is rather substance than the second, and
not long after he affirms that the property of substance is to receive more
and less. He makes Time a species of Continued quantity: and notwithstanding in
the 4 book of Physics, he will have it to be Number, which is Discrete
quantity. He also endeavors in the 1 book Priorum Analyticorum, to demonstrate
the definition of the figures, and in the 2 after teaches that definition
cannot be demonstrated. In the 1 book Posteriorum he will have us in
Demonstration to proceed from things more known to us: and for all that he
defines demonstration to be that which proceeds from Causes, but causes are
more unknown to us than effects; and in the same books he has many such like,
which for brevity I omit.

Secondly, in his first book of Physics he impugneth that immovable principle
of Parmenides, and Melissus: and after in the 8 book he proves that there is
one immovable principle of motion. He teaches in the fifth chapter, that
Contraries are not made, by course, of themselves, and not long after he
holds, that whatsoever is generated, is generated of its contrary, and that
whatsoever is corrupted goes into its contrary. In the second book, and seventh
chapter, he disputes against Empedocles affirming that the works of nature are
made by chance; And yet confesses that Monsters are the misses and lapses of
nature: And in the seventh book of Metaphysics the seventh chapter, he holds
that those things that do grow without seed are made casually, from whence also
in the 3 de Anima the 12. chapter, he says, Quae natura sunt, propter aliquid
sunt, aut casus eorum, quae sunt propter aliquid. And many other of the like
sort, from which I purposely supersede, these being sufficient to make good the
assertion.

Thirdly, one more may be joined to these out of his book de Coelo the 2
chapter, where he says, that every natural body is movable: And yet for all
that in the third chapter, and more expressly in the fourteenth of the second
book, he contendeth that the earth does rest immovable in the center of the
world. In the seventh chapter in the words cited not long before he altogether
supposes the heaven not to be animated: and notwithstanding he expressly
says it is animated in the second book, and second chapter; and also the first
de anima the third chapter, and elsewhere. In the second book, and second
chapter, he holds that a sempiternal motion is in God: and in the eighth of
the Physics he maintains the primum movens to be immovable which is God: In
the eight he says the heaven is not an Organical body, and notwithstanding (as
it is already seen) he has made it to be endued with a Soul: For the soul, as
he defines it, is the act of an organical body: as also in the twelf he says,
Actionem astrorum talem esse, qualis est plantarum, and animalium.

But of these things enough; by all which (I conceive) it is clearly manifest
that the Peripatetick Philosophy ought not to be preferred before all other,
nay rather to be utterly exterminated, and some better introduced in the place
thereof, and that is the thing was attempted to be proved.

CHAP. VII. Of Metaphysics, Ethics, Politics, Oeconomicks, Poesy, and
Oratory.
THough there be something in the most of these, that might tollerably pass,
yet are many things in them so useless, false, uncertain, superfluous, wicked
and defective, that they stand in need of reformation, melioration, or
eradication, as we shall show of every one of them in their order.

1. For the Metaphysics, which they call their Philosophia prima, and do
usually define it to be Scientia entis, quatenus ens est, the abuse and vanity
of it appears in this. That it being nothing else but an abstract consideration
of things by way of prescision, or cutting off from all other cocomitant
cogitations, and so to weigh and examine the things nudely and barely under the
respect of their being, all other notions there about being separate from it,
does bring no better instruments, nor effective means for the discovery of
truth, than the weak and bare operation of the Intellect, or indeed of
Fantasy, or the Imaginative faculty, and therefore no marvail that it has
spider-like weaved forth so many sly and cunning Cobweb-contextures of slender
conceits, and curious niceties, fit for nothing but to ensnare and entangle:
and has been so luxuriously petulant in the faetiferous production of so many
monstrous, fruitless, and vain Chimaeras. For they holding the soul to be
tabula rasa, in which nothing is insculpt, and that Science comes not by
reminiscence, or resuscitation, but merely acquisitively de novo, and that
there is nothing in the Intellect that has not first some way or other been in
the Senses, then must it needs follow that the operations of the Intellect are
but weak means to produce Scientifical certitude, and so Metaphysical learning
but barren and fruitless.

2. It has neither laid down, nor assumed any certain principles, that are
necessary or helpful to promote Science; for whereas it obtends this for a
maxim, That not any thing can be, and not be at the same instant of time; what
fruitful products was there ever yet drawn from this unprofitable fundamental?
neither ever has it proceeded so far as to find a sure, and ultimate resting
place, which notwithstanding the learned Renatus des Chartes has happily
performed, Renat. des Cha^^. de me^hod.
having gone back to the very basis of all, which is, that there is men's
cogitans, which can no way feign, or excogitate it self not to be, which is a
more certain and undeniable principle than ever the Schools invented, or built
upon.

3. It is of no use nor advantage to other Sciences, nor ever has brought any
good or profit unto the sons of men, but only seduced them into strange
labyrinths of notional Chymaeras, and speculations, like idle and vain dreams,
filling and feeding the fancy, but yielding nothing of solidity to enrich the
Intellect, nor any thing of use or profit to accomodate mankind: except that
may be accounted an advantage, to obscure the truth, and lead the fantasies of
men into the crooked Meanders of conceit, and nutation, and so with the
assistance of its Twin Logic (both sisters of the same mother Nox) bring men
to imagine and argue much, but in truth and verity to know little.

4. If it had been able (as it proudly pretends) to have taught any thing truly
and certainly of those things that are Metaphysical, or supernatural, that
either are not corporeal or materiate, or else much transcend the nature of
Physical bodies both Caelestial and Elementary, then might it justly be
received, and have its due commendation. But alas! what weak, frivolous and
groundless opinions has it produced concerning God, Angels, separate
substances, and the like? Verul. de Au. Scient. lib. 3 cap. 2.
not seeing so much in these things as the Ethnicks, who, in the fable of the
Golden Chain, did affirm, that neither men, nor the Gods could draw Jupiter
from heaven to the earth, but that Jupiter could easily draw men from the earth
to heaven. Quare frustra sudaverit, qui Caelestia religionis arcana, nostrae
rationi adaptare conabitur. Therefore he in vain sweats, who indevours to fit
the heavenly mysteries of religion to our reason.

Vid. Metaphys. Campanel. et Pet. Gasl^nd. contra Arist.
5. What shall I say of those strange, vain, and poisonous Cockatrice eggs that
it has hatched, full of nothing but useless questions and altercations, to as
little purpose as the disputes de Lana caprina, or Moonshine in the Water? What
shall I say of it, is it not altogether defective of all solid, and
fruit-bearing knowledge? does it not superfluously abound with vanities and
follies? was ever any made either wise or happy by it? and yet this is the
Schools prime Philosophy or Metaphysical learning, which is nothing but vain
opination, Aug. Alst^mde nobil. institut. lib.
void of Scientifical demonstration, and clear verity. Fa^eamur, rerum
divinarum paucissimarum demonstrationes habemus, omnia fere opinionibus
definentes. We must confess, we have the demonstrations of very few divine
things, defining all things by opinions.

In the next place comes the Ethics to be considered of, which how fruitless
and vain they are may appear in a few reasons.

For 1. how can he be supposed to be the fittest teacher of that art, who was
himself an heathen, and neither knew nor acknowledged God, who indeed is the
summum bonum, and so placed felicity in fading, and momentary things, as
riches, and honor: or at the best made but Virtue the chief good, which cannot
however be happiness it self, but at the most but the way and means to attain
it? And it must necessarily follow that he that understands not the real, and
true end, cannot teach the indubitate means that leads to that end, and
therefore must needs be a blind guide, especially to Christians, as Lambertus
Danaeus has sufficiently manifested; Lamb. D^nae. de E^hick. Christ. lib.
and yet the Schools must needs follow, and prefer the dark Lamp of a blind
Pagan, before the bright-shining Sun of the Prophets* and Apostles.

2. Though the Schools have disputed much of the Chief good, of virtues, and of
vices, yet have they either taught nothing at all that is practicable, whereby
virtue might be obtained, and vice eschewed, or felicity enjoyed, or but
touched it very slenderly, perfunctorily, and unprofitably: as though it were
sufficient to teach a Pilot the many dangers of his voyage in respect of
tempests, Verulam. d^ Aug. Scien^. lib. 7.1.
storms, winds, sands, shelves, rocks, and the like, and to make a large
commendation of the peace, plenty, fruitfulness, and happiness of the place to
which his journey were intended; yet leave him altogether ignorant and untaught
how to escape those dangers, and unfurnished with means to attain to the
harbor unto which his navigation is purposed.

3. They have chosen to themselves such a way, whereby the mass of Ethical
knowledge might be set forth as a splendid and beautiful thing, bearing forth
the brightness of wit, and vigor of eloquence, rather than any truth in the
matter, or benefit to the readers and hearers, and so have made it facilely
disputable, but difficultly practicable, seeking themselves, more than truth,
or the benefit of others; as Se^eca truly says, Nocet illis eloquentia, quibus
non rerum facit cupiditatem, sed sui: Eloquence hurts those, to whom it
causes not the desire of things, but of themselves: for water is better in an
Earthen vessel, than poison in a golden cup, and he that speaks truly and to
profi^ others is to be preferred before him that speaks Rhetorically, and
elegantly to small profit or purpose.

4. It cannot but be matter of much wonder to all ingenuous men that shall more
seriously perp^nd, and weigh the business, why not only the Moral Philosophy
of Aristotle should take place above that which is deduced from principles of
Christianity; but also why he should have therein the pre-eminence above
Socrates, Plato, Zeno, and many others, who truly taught many divine and
precious things for the eradicating of vice, the planting of virtue, and the
establishing of mental tranquillity, and moral felicity, which Aristotle and
all his Sectators never either understood, or had fruition of. Arist. Nich. l.
1. cap. 5.
What shall I say of that man of men the severe Seneca? are not his writings
about virtue, tranquillity, and curing the minds diseases, infinitely beyond
all those needless, fruitless, vain and impertinent discourses of the proud
Stagyrite? Let all that ever loved virtue and tranquillity, Pet. Gassend. con.
Arist ex. 7.
and have perused the one, and the other, speak, and declare their judgments:
nay does not that one little Enchiridion of Epictetus contain more precious
treasure, than all the great volumes of Aristotle? let virtue speak, and truth
determine.

Now for the Political and Oeconomical learning taught by the Schools out of
Aristotle, as it has many things of singular use, and commodity in it, so is
it not without its chaff, and tares, deserving rather purging, and refining,
than the estimation of being complete and perfect: For as there are many things
in it frivolous, obscure, immethodical, superfluous, and false, so also is it
very defective, and imperfect; for if we look upon what Plato has written de
legibus, and de Republica, though there may be found many things unpracticable,
and incomplete, yet compared with the other, it is no way inferior, but
deserves as great, if not an higher commendation; and so the writings of Bodin,
nay Macchiavel and diverse other modern authors may duly challenge as much
praise in this point, as that of Aristotle, which the Schools do so much adhere
to and magnify, yea even our own Countreyman master Hobbs has pieces of more
exquisiteness, and profundity in that subject, than ever the Grecian with was
able to reach unto, or attain; so that there is no reason why he should be so
applauded, and universally received, while more able pieces are rejected, and
past by.

Lastly, for Rhetoric, or Oratory, Poesy, and the like, which serve for
adornation, and are as it were the outward dress, and attire of more solid
sciences; first they might tollerably pass, if there were not too much
affectation toward them, and too much precious time spent about them, while
more excellent and necessary learning lies neglected and passed by: For we do
in these ornamental arts, as people usually do in the world, who take more care
often time about the goods of fortune, than about the good of the body, and
more nice and precise sollicitousness about fashions and garbs, than either
about the body it self or the goods of the mind, Verul. de Au. Sci. l. 6 c. 3.
regarding ^he shell more than the kernel, and the shadow more than the
Substance. And therefore it was not without just cause that Plato (though by
some censured for it) did reckon Rhetoric amongst the voluptuary arts, for we
most commonly use it either for the priding and pleasing of our selves that we
may appear eloquent, and learned to others, or else use it cunningly and
sophistically to captivate, and draw over the judgments of others to serve our
ends and interests: and thereby make false things appear true, old things new,
crooked things straight, and commodious things unprofitable, as Augustine
says, Imperitior multitude, quod ornate dicitur, etiam vere dici arbitratur,
The more unskilful multitude thinks that what is spoken elegantly, Sen.
Epist. 115.
is also spoken truly. And therefore Seneca says, See thou a man neat and
count in his language, then is his mind occupied in minute things.

2. Both Eloquence and Poesy seem rather to be numbered amongst the gifts of
nature, than amongst the disciplines, for those which excel much in reason,
and do dispose those things which they excogitate in a most easy method, Aug.
Alst. de nobil. institut.
that they may be clearly, and distinctly understood, are most apt to persuade,
although they did use the language of the Goths, and had never learned
Rhetoric: and those that are born to invent most ingenious figments, Ren. de
Char. de method.
and to express them with the greatest elegance and suavity, are to be
accounted the best Poets, although they are ignorant of all the precepts of the
Poetical art; for nascitur, non fit poeta, and therefore Plato most truly
concludes, Omnes itaque carminum poetae insignes, non art, sed divino
afflatu, mente capti omnia ista praeclar a poemata canunt. Therefore all the
famous makers of verses, do not sing all these excellent Poems by art, but by a
divine afflation, being carried above themselves.

3. Though Aristotle were a great Master in Oratory, and a very eloquent man,
yet in that point might justly give the palm to his Master Plato, unto whom all
the attributes of honor in that particular are worthily accumulated, of whom
it is said, That if Jupiter would speak in man's language, he would speak in
that of Plato.

Thus have I briefly run over some of the faults, and defects of Academick
learning, but am far from having touched all, for to have done that would have
reached beyond both my time, and purpose, and also mine abilities; for Benardus
non videt omnia: yet if the Lion may be known by his paw, and Hercules by his
foot, then I hope there is enough said to make it clear, that the Aristotelian,
and Scholastic learning, deserves not the pre-eminence above all other, nor
those great commendations that the corruption of times, and sloathful ignorance
of the most have ascribed unto it, but that a great part of it does deserve
eradication, some of it reformation, and all of it melioration, and so I
proceed.

CHAP. VIII. Of their Customs, and Method.
HAving hitherto spoken of the subjective learning that the Schools handle, it
follows in order to examine their customs and method, not that I mean to
meddle either with their manners, or maintenance, but leave that to the
judgment of others, lest it happen to me, as Erasmus said of Luther, that it
was dangerous to meddle with the Popes Crown, and Monks bellies: but only to
note some things in the way, and method of their teaching, which are obvious
to my weak observation, and so shall lay them down as they present themselves
to my low apprehension.

1. Though in one Academy there be usually diverse Colleges, or houses, yet must
all the Scholars in those several places be tied to one method, and carried on
in one way, nay even bound to the same authors and hardly allowed so much
liberty, and difference, as is between Aristotle, and Ramus Logic: As though
they in the way of their teaching had arrived at the highest point of
perfection, which could no way be improved, or no other as profitable could be
discovered and found out, and so are all forced like carriers horses, to follow
one another in the accustomed path, though it be never so uneven or impassable.

2. Their Scholastic exercises are but slenderly, negligently, and sloathfully
performed, their public acts (as they call them though but verbal
digladiations) being but kept four times in the year, that is in the terms,
which if one should tell them in plain terms, are but usually idle terms: as
though time of all other things here below, were not to be accounted most
precious, and that there can be no such detriment done unto youth, as to lose
or mispend it.

3. Their Custom is injurious, and prejudicial to all those that desire to
make a speedy progress in learning, nay unequal, and disproportionable in it
self, namely to ty men to a set time of years, or acts, before they can receive
their Laureation, or take their degrees: as though all were of one capacity or
industry, or all equally able at their matriculation, and so the sloathful, and
painful, the most capable, and most blockish, should both in the same equal
time have an equal honor, which is both disproportionable and unjust. For some
will attain to more in one year than some in three, and therefore why should
they not be respected according to their merits and proficiency, and not bound
to draw in an unequal yoke? and what matter were it whether a man had been
there one month or seven years, so he had the qualification required, and did
subire examen, and perform the duties of the place, surely it is known that
gradus non confert scientiam, nec cucullus facit monachum.

4. Their custom is no less ridiculous, and vicious, in their histrionical
personations in the performance of their exercises, being full of childishness,
and scurrility, far from the gravity, and severity of the Pythagorean School
where a five years silence was enjoined: using so much lightness as more befits
stage players than diligent searchers of Science, by scoffing and jeering,
humming and hiffing, which shows them like those animals they imitate, nay
rather hur^ful Geese, than labourious Bees, that seek to gather into their
Hives, the sweet Honey of Learning, and Knowledge.

5. What is there in all their exercises, but mere notions, and quarrelsome
disputations, accustoming themselves to no better helps for searching into
natures abstruse secrets than the Chymaeras of their own brains, and converse
with a few paper Idols? as though these alone were sufficient keys to open the
Cabinet of Natures rich ^^easurie, without labor and pains, experiments and
operations, trials and observations: Surely if he that intends to prove a
proficient in the knowledge of Agriculture, should only give himself over to
contemplation, and reading the books of such as have written in that Subject,
and never put his hand to the plough, nor practice the way of tilling and
sowing, would he ever be a good husbandman, or understand thoroughly what
pertains thereunto? Surely not, and no more can they be good Naturalists that
do but only make a mold and Idaea in their heads, and never go out by
industrious searches, and observant experiments, to find out the mysteries
contained in nature.

6. Their custom is no less worthy of reprehension that in all their exercises
they make use of the Latin tongue, which though it may have custom, and long
continuance to plead its justification, and that it is used to bring youth to
the ready exercise of it, being of general reception almost through the whole
world: yet it is as clearly answered, that custom, without reason and benefit,
becomes injurious, and though it make them ready in speaking the Latin while
they treat of such subjects as are usually handled in the Schools, yet are they
less apt to speak it with facility in negotiations of far greater importance.
And in the mean time, the way to attain knowledge is made more difficult, and
the time more tedious, and so we almost become strangers to our own mother
tongue, loving and liking foreign languages, as we do their fashions, better
than our own, so that while we improve theirs, our own lies altogether
uncultivated, which doubtless would yield as plentiful an harvest as others, if
we did as much labor to advance it: Neque hodie fere ulla est natio, quae de
idiomatis sui praestantia non glorietur, aut contendat. Aug. Alst. de nobil*
institut.
And therefore were the Romans so careful to propagate their language in other
nations, and to prohibit the Greek language or any other to be spoken in their
public contentions: And so likewise Pythagoras, Plato, and Aristotle did teach
in their own mother tongues, and Hippocrates, Galen, Euclide, and others writ
in the vulgar language of their own nation, and yet we neglecting our own, do
foolishly admire and entertain that of strangers, which is no less a
ridiculous than prejudicial custom.

7. Another is no less faulty and hurtful than the precedent, and that is their
too much admiring of, and adhering to antiquity, or the judgment of men that
lived in ages far removed from us, as though they had known all things, and
left nothing for the discovery of those that came after in subsequent ages; It
was appositely said of Seneca, In re maxima, and involutissima, in qua cum
etiam multum actum erit, omnis tamen aetas quod agat inveniet. In the greatest,
and most intricate thing, in which when also much is done, notwitstanding every
age shall find what it may further do; and so profoundly censures those great
men that went before us, to be as our leaders, but not our masters, and so most
excellently concludes, Multum restat operis, multumque restabit: nec ulli nato
post mill saecula praecludetur occasio aliquid ad^uc adjiciendi. Much work
does remain, and much will remain: neither will the occasion be cut off to any
born after a thousand ages, Verul. de Au. Scient. l. 1. ^t Nov. O g. lib.
Aphor. 84.
still of adding something. And indeed we usually attribute knowledge and
experience to men of the most years, and therefore these being the latter ages
of the world should kn^w more, for the grandaevity of the world ought to be
accounted for antiquity, and so to be ascribed to our times, and not to the
Junior age of the world, wherein those that we call the ancients, did live, so
that antiquitas saeculi, juventus mundi.

8. They usually follow another hurtful Custom not unlike to this preceding,
which is too much to bind in themselves with the universality of opinions, and
multiplicity of voices, as though it were not better to stand single and alone
with truth, than with error to have the company of the multitude, or as though
the multitude could not err, or that the greater number must necessarily be in
the truth, when as the wiseman says the number of fools are infinite, and
Aristotle himself tells us, that though we speak as the most, yet we should
think as the fewest, and Cicero informs us that Philosophy is content with a
few judges, and Seneca most egregiously says, Nihil magis praestandum est,
quam ne pecorum ritu sequamur antec^dentium gregem, pergentes non quo eundum
est, sed quo ^tur: Nothing is more to be performed, than that we may not,
according to the manner of cattle, follow the s^ock of those that went before,
not following whither it ought to be gone, but whither it is gone. And again,
Nulla res nos Majoribus malis implicat, quam quod ad rumorem componimur, optima
ra^i ea, quae magno assen^u recepta sunt: Nothing does insuare us with greater
evils, than that we compose our selves to rumors, supposing those things the
best, which are received with great assent.

9. Consonant to this is that other of their adhering to authority, especially
of one man, namely Aristotle, and so do jurare in verbi Magistri, when
according to their own tenants, arguments drawn from authority, are numbered
amongst the weakest, and what could Aristotle know more than all other, that
his opinions should be received as oracles? he both might and did err, as well
as other mortals: And may not we as justly recede from him as he from his
Master Plato, and the rest of the ancient Philosophers? Is it any thing but a
just liberty that we ought to maintain, and pursue, thereby to be admitted into
the Court of Lady Verity? for which all chains ought to be broken, and all
fetters fyled off.

10* Neither is their method, and order in teaching any whit less vicious than
the rest, for whereas Aristotle himself presupposes his Auscultator or Scholar
in Physics to have been already trained up in the Mathematical Sciences (which
are indeed instrumently subordinate to natural Philosophy as introductive
thereunto) the Schools immethodically, and preposterously teach youth Logic,
and natural Philosophy, not having at all tasted the very rudiments of
Mathematical knowledge, which how much out of due order and method, nay
contrary unto it, I leave to all judicious persons to judge and consider.

CHAP. IX. Of some expedients, or remedies in Theology, Grammar, Logic, and
Mathematics.
I Know it will be objected, that facile est reprehendere, it is an easy thing
to find fault, but difficult and arduous to repair and amend, and that one fool
may mar, and spoil that in an hour, which many wise men cannot make right again
in many ages: and the most ignorant may easily disorder, and deface the
masterpiece of the most curious artist, when he is not able to repair the
least part of it. And therefore that it is not sufficient to demolish an
ancient, and goodly Fabric, upon pretense that it is either unprofitable in
the site, and figure, or that the materials are ruinous, and decayed; unless we
bring better in their room, have laid a better platform, and know certainly how
to erect a better Fabric.

To which I answer, by a clear confession, that before we throw down we should
know wherewithal, and how to build, and that it is far more easy to demolish,
than to erect a sufficient and complete Structure, and especially for a single
person (and he also of the lowest, and least abilities) which is and ought to
be the work of many, nay all persons and ages: for as I verily believe that
what I have produced for demonstrating the groundlesness, ruinousness, and ill
composure of the Scholastic Fabric of learning is not far from the truth, so
also am I confident of mine insufficiency to erect a better in the place
thereof, yet in magnis voluisse sat est, I shall do mine endeavor, hoping that
those that are more able will put to their hands to help to supply my defects,
and so shall offer the best materials and art that I have to erect a new, and
better building, and in the same order that I have handled the several parts.

1. Therefore for Theology which is a speaking of God, or a speaking forth the
things of God, it is expedient that men should lay aside the suffering of
themselves to be styled by that blasphemous t^^le of Divines, which is such an
impropriety of language as all their learning will never be able to justify, it
being an attribute that does only predicate essentially of the being of God,
and is indeed incommunicable to the Creature, who has nothing that is divine
or spiritual but by participation; for though the text says that Saints are
partakers of the divine nature, yet will it not follow that because they are
said to be partakers of divine things that therefore they are divine, because
participations do not truly predicate of those essences to which they are
communicated, but of that being from whence they flow: for men participate of
the light and heat of the Sun, but it cannot be truly predicated of men that
either they are the Sun, nor truly and univocally that they are of a Solary
nature, but only that participating of its influences and operations, they may
be truly said to be heatned, and enlightened: for though it be in the English
translated John the Divine, whereby those that understand not the Greek are
misled, and thereby drawn to give that title to their Priests, who
blasphemously assume it to themselves, yet I hope there is much difference
betwixt (...), and (...), one that speaks of God or divine things, and one that
is divine, the Scots therefore have a more apposite and warrantable Epithet,
who seldom or never call their Ministers Divines but Theologues, and we have
many could cry out against the Bishops for having the title of Lord, or Grace
given them, and yet they themselves can swallow this title of being Divines,
which is more unseemly, unfit, and unwarrantable.

2. Another expedient that I shall offer in this case is, That the Scriptures
which are as the seamless Coat of Christ may not be rent and torn with the
carnal instruments of man's wit and reason, nor modeled, or methodiz'd as an
humane art or science, but laid aside in Scholastic exercises, as a sacred and
sealed book, Lev. 10.1, 2.
lest they offering strange fire upon Gods altar, perish as others have done:
for in the day of man's light the Tabernacle of the Lord will be covered with a
cloud, and in the night of his darkness there will be fire; Exodus 40.36, 37, 38.
therefore let not men journey until the cloud be taken up, or the fire appear,
otherwise they must know the Lord does not lead them nor go before them. And
indeed, whatsoever the proud and deceitful heart of man may imagine, the
Scriptures are a sealed book, Isa. 29.11, 12.
for so the prophet says, The vision of all is become as the words of a book
that is sealed, which men deliver to one that is learned, saying, Read this I
pray thee: and he says, I cannot, for it is sealed. And the book is delivered
to him that is not learned, saying, Read this I pray thee, and he says, I am
not learned. What can be more plain than this, that it is as a sealed book both
to the learned, and unlearned? and this is it that is sealed with seven seals,
Rev. 5.1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
and no man in heaven, nor earth, nor in the Sea, that is found worthy to open
this book, and to unclose the seven seals thereof, but only the strong Lion of
the Tribe of Judah, and therefore let Schools not touch it, lest it be their
destruction. For unless they leave the Lords own work to himself, and cease to
sit in the seat of the scornful, The Lord will laugh them to scorn, Psalm 1.7.
and vex them in his sore displeasure, neither will he bless them in their
labors, nor prosper them in their exercises: Nay, until all the Magistrates,
and Elderships of the earth that profess his name, take off their Crowns, and
lay them at the feet of the Lamb, and learn to practice, and put in execution
our Saviors counsel, To give unto God the things that are Gods, and to Caesar
the things that are Caesar's, and not at all to intermeddle with the things of
God, misery and destruction will follow them to the grave, and of them shall be
required the blood of all the Saints. O therefore that they would Kiss the
Son lest he be angry, Psalm. 2.12.
and so they perish from the way of everlasting truth: for when his wrath is
kindled but a little, blessed are all they that put their trust in him.

3. The last expedient I shall present in this subject is, That what can be
discovered of God, and supernatural things, by the power of Reason, and the
light of Nature, may be handled as a part of natural Philosophy (unto which it
does belong) because it is found out by the same means and instruments that
other natural Sciences are: and what may from thence clearly be demonstrated,
and deducted, may be holden forth as a means to overthrow Atheism, Gentilism,
and the like, but not to statuminate, or build up any thing in religion, nor
like a wild bore to enter into the Lords vineyard to root up and destroy it.

In the next place are languages, and Grammar, which is the means or instrument
by which they are taught, unto which I shall offer these few helps.

1. That care may be had of improving, and advancing our own language, and that
arts and sciences may be taught in it, that thereby a more easy and short way
may be had to the attaining of all sorts of knowledge: and that thereby after
the example of the Romans we may labor to propagate it amongst other nations,
that they may rather be induced to learn ours, than we theirs, which would be
of vast advantage to the Commonwealth, in foreign Negotiations, Trading,
Conquest and Acquisitions, and also of much domestic advantage within our own
territories. For if we should arrive at any extraordinary height of learning,
and knowledge, though we should but speak and write in our own mother tongue,
then would other nations be as earnest in learning it, and translating our
books, as former ages have been in laboring to attain the language, and
translate the books of the Graecians, and Romans, and we at this day of the
French, and Germans.

2. That some compendious way for both teaching and learning foreign languages,
may be established by use and exercise, without the tedious way of rule, or
Grammar, which doubtless upon diligent, skilful, and exact trial, would prove
more short, easy, certain, and beneficial, as is manifest by ordinary people
that never knew any thing of Grammatical order, being kept in families that
speak another language, and having none to converse with that speaks their own,
will in a wonderful short time learn to speak, and understand it; for when
necessity is joined with industry, it produces great and stupendous effects.

3. That in the way of teaching languages the order prescribed by Comenius in
his Ianua linguarum may be practiced, and means used to improve it, that both
words and matter, names and things, may be learned together, which may be done
both with the same facility, and in the same shortness of time; that so the
tender intellects of young children may not only inbibe the names, but also
the natures and qualities of things.

4. That in the method of teaching Grammar, master Brinsleys way laid down in
his Grammar School may be put into practice, that children may be taught in
their mother tongue to know perfectly the several parts of Speech, declinable,
and indeclinable, and punctually to vary the declinable parts, especially Noun,
and Verb, and to construe and parse in their own tougue, that so they may be
ready to make use, and to apply it when they learn the Latin, or any other
language, without which they shall never have any sure foundation, nor proceed
in any way of ease and certainty, nor arrive at any height of perfection, for
none learns more than what the intellect clearly compre^ends, and what it knows
how to practice, and make use of.

5. In the Grammatical way of teaching it is a most certain axiom, that what is
one part of speech in one language, is so in all, and four parts being
indeclineable, it is manifest that they are learned by no rules, but only by
use and exercise, as the memory can congest and record them: so that there
remains but other four to be obtained by rule, and two of them, which is
Pronoun and Participle, either are but very few, as the Pronoun, and so are
easily known wherein they agree or differ from the Noun and Verb; or the
Participle, which has nothing but what agrees either with the Noun, or Verb,
or with both: So that the whole difficulty is in the Noun and the Verb, of both
which some are regulars, and some are irregulars, Anomala, defectives, or
Heteroclytes. Now for the irregulars, the best, easiest, and shortest way were
to learn them by use and exercise, without rule, which for the most part is
done, and the rules usually are but superfluous, and render the way more
perplex and tedious; and this being observed, the way of regulars would be
facile and brief, as being but one rule for all. And this I suppose being
observed would render the way of Grammar teaching of more bevity, facility, and
certainty, but greater experiences may know better ways.

It may be imagined that I should proffer some auxiliary means for the
promoting of Symbolical, and Cryptographical learning, as being a part of
Grammar, but therein I must rather acknowledge mine inability, and only wish
that so much of it as is discovered, and made clear by others, might be put in
practice, then would the benefit of it be better understood by use, than I can
demonstrate in words. And for the universal Character that would require a
peculiar Tract, not a cursory touch: and for the language of nature, I fear it
is not acquisitive but dative, and therefore shall not be so weak in that
particular, to prescribe a rule, which none has power to follow, or strength
to perform.

Next in order follows Logic, which being that art or Science that should
administer expedients and helps for the promoting and finding out of all other
Sciences, does notwithstanding stand in need it self: from whence then should
it have it? truly it is hard to determine, for it is such a groundless,
intricate, and perplex piece, that it is very doubtful from whence it had its
original, and therefore most difficult to know how to find its remedies; yet
shall offer my best assistance to its regulation and amendment.

1. It is necessary that its radical ground be found forth in nature, and
likewise its extent, without which it is not possible to lay open its nature
and efficacy; for though it undertake to reason and argue of all things, yet
bears it forth but little light and evidence of its own power and strength. And
therefore in the first place it is requisite to inquire, what reason and
ratiocination are in their intrinsic nature, and what they can operate, and
effect, both solely by themselves, and conjunctively with the senses, because
it is clear that the work of Reason is posterior to that of Sense, and does but
compound, divide, and compare the several species that are received by the
senses, and make Deduction, and draw Conclusions from them, and this is
necessary that its distinct power and efficacy may be known. Also it is
expedient to examine wherein man in reason exceeds other animants; for though
man to maintain his unjust tyranny over the other fellow creatures (excuse the
phrase it is no ranting term, Job 17.14.
for Job confesses, I have said to corruption thou art my father, to the worm
thou art my mother and my sister) has assumed to himself the title of being
Rational, and excluding all other living Creatures from that prerogative, when
it is certain that many other Creatures excel man in the acuteness of some
Senses, and it is questionable that some exceed him in Reason too, though
therein he be to be preferred before the most, so that if it be diligently
searched into, it will be found that there is no specifical but a gradual
difference.

2. Before any great good can be effected with Logic, especially with the
Syllogistical part, it will be very expedient that its principles be
demonstratively cleared and proved, either in some other Science from whence
they are taken, or be briefly and compendiously laid down, and defined, that
they may more certainly be assented to, and the grounds known, as in the
Mathematics, where a few Definitions, Petitions, and Axioms, serve to
demonstrate the whole operations by, with such certitude, that none since the
days of Euclide have denied, or rejected them, that so by this means the
Conclusions in Logic may be certain and profitable.

3. That some prevalent way might be found out, for discovering and rectifying
the delusions and fallacies of the senses, and for drawing adaequate* and
congruous notions from things, and giving ^pposite and significant
denominations to notions, that so the fountain may be made clear at the head,
and rise of it, that all the several rivulets, and streams that run from thence
may be lympid and pure, without which it will be but as a muddy puddle, whose
streams cast forth dirt and mire.

4. That the chiefest and most beneficial part, which is Induction, may be
improved, that it may be serviceable and helpful for the discovering of
Science, which cannot be unless some careful, diligent, and exact means be
brought into practice, for the making, trying, and observing of all sorts of
experiments, both frugiferous, and luciferous, that time may not be vainly
spent in needless altercations, disputations, speculations, and notions, but
in real, and profitable experiments, and observations; That so the end of
Logical labor may not be to bring forth opinion, and error, but certainty of
Science, and solidity of truth.

The Mathematics should now come in order, but of them I need say little, as
to their advance, because they contain sufficient expedients in themselves for
the progress of their promotion, and indeed do want nothing but diligent and
faithful prosecution, and practice, that they may arrive at a complete period.
And therefore the only help I shall offer in this case, is, to desire that
this so noble, and excellent a Science, with all the parts of it, both general,
and special, vulgar, and mystical, might be brought into use and practice in
the Schools, that men might not idly lose their time in groundless notions,
and vain Chymaeras, but in those real exercises of learning that would both
profit themselves, succeeding generations, and other Sciences.

And I could also wish that the sound, and Apodictical learning of Copernicus,
Kepler, Ticho Brahe, Galilaeus, Ballialdus, and such like, might be introduced,
and the rotten and ruinous Fabric of Aristotle and Ptolomy rejected and laid
aside.

CHAP. X. Of some helps in Natural Philosophy.
NOw when I come to lay down some expedients for the reformation and promotion
of Physical knowledge, two things (I know) will be questioned, and inquired of.

And first, Whether all the whole body of the Aristotelian Philosophy should be
eliminated, and thrown away.

To which I answer, No; for there are many things in his History of Animals,
and some things in his Politics, Ethics, Logic, Metaphysics, and Rhetoric,
that are commodious and useful, yet do they all stand in need of reformation
and amendment: But for his Natural Philosophy, and his Astronomy depending
thereon, it admits of no reformation, but eradication, that some better may be
introduced in the place thereof. And for his Expositors, and Commentators, they
instead of reforming what was amiss in his writings, carried with a blind zeal
to make him the only oracle of truth, have increased the corruption, and not
supplied the defects, nor removed the errouts.

Secondly, it will be urged, That if the Peripatetick Philosophy which the
Schools maintain, should be taken away, where would any such perfect, complete,
and methodical piece be found to supply the place thereof.

To which it is answered, That I have already demonstrated, and laid open the
faults and defects thereof, that there is no such perfection in it at all as is
supposed, and therefore no inconvenience to remove it. And admit there were no
such complete piece, as were requisite to substitute instead of the
Aristotelian learning being taken away, the greater were the shame of
Academies, that within the compass of so many Centuries have done no more for
the advancement of learning, for the greater the defect is, the more it ought
to stir up all men's endeavors to repair, and make good the same. And also
there are some pieces of Philosophy more complete than Aristotle's, as I shall
show in the following expedients.

1. It cannot be expected that Physical Science will arrive at any wished
perfection, unless the way and means, so judiciously laid down by our learned
Countreym^n the Lo^d Bacon, be observed, and introduced into exact practice;
And therefore I shall humbly desire, and earnestly press, that his way and
method may be embraced, and set up for a rule and pattern: that no Axioms may
be received but what are evidently proved and made good by diligent
observation, and luciferou^ experiments; that such may be recorded in a general
history of natural things, that so every age and generation, proceeding in the
same way, and upon the same principles, may daily go on with the work, to the
building up of a well-grounded and lasting Fabric, which indeed is the only
true way for the instauration and advance of learning and knowledge.

2. How unfit, and unsuitable is it, for people professing the Christian
Religion to adhere unto that Philosophy which is altogether built upon Ethnical
principles, and indeed contrary and destructive to their tene^ts? so that I
shall offer as a most fit expedient, that some Physical learning might be
introduced into the Schools, that is grounded upon sensible, rational,
experimental, and Scripture principles: and such a complete piece in the most
particulars of all human learning (though many vainly and falsely imagine there
is no such perfect work to be found) is the elaborate writings of that
profoundly learned man Dr. Fludd, than which for all the particulars before
mentioned (notwithstanding the ignorance and envy of all opposers^ the world
never had a more rare, experimental and perfect piece.

3. That the Philosophy of Plato, revived and methodized by Franciscus
Patritius, Marsillius Ficinus, and others; That of Democritus, cleared, and in
some measure demonstrated, by Renatus des Carts, Regius, Phocylides Holwarda,
and some others; That of Epicurus, illustrated by Petrus Gassendus; That of
Philolaus, Empedocles, and Parmenides, resuscitated by Telesius, Campanella,
and some besides; and that excellent Magnetical Philosophy found out by Doctor
Gilbert; That of Hermes, revived by the Paracelsian School, may be brought into
examination and practice, that whatsoever in any of them, or others of what
sort soever, may be found agreeable to truth and demonstration, may be
embraced, and received; for there are none of them but have excellent, and
profitable things, and few of them but may justly be equallized with Aristotle,
and the Scholastic learning, nay, I am confident upon due and serious perusal
and trial, would be found far to excel them.

4. That youth may not be idly trained up in notions, speculations, and
verbal disputes, but may learn to inure their hands to labor, and put their
fingers to the furnaces, that the mysteries discovered by Pyrotechny, and the
wonders brought to light by Chemistry, may be rendered familiar unto them: that
so they may not grow proud with the brood of their own brains, but truly to be
taught by manual operation, and ocular experiment, that so they may not be
sayers, but doers, not idle speculators, but painful operators; that so they
may not be Sophisters, and Philosophers, but Sophists indeed, true Natural
Magicians, that walk not in the external circumference, but in the center of
natures hidden secre^s, which can never come to pass, unless they have
Laboratories as well as Libraries, and work in the fire, better than build
Castles in the air.

5. That the Galenical way of the medicinal part of Physic (a path that has
been long enough trodden to yield so little fruit) may not be the prison that
all men must be inchained in, and ignorance, cheating and impostorage
maintained by Laws and Charters; but that the more sure, clear and exquisit
way of finding the true causes, and certain cures of diseases, brought to light
by those two most eminent and laborious persons, Paracelsus, and Helmont, may
be entertained, prosecuted and promoted; that it may no longer be disputable
whether medicine (as it stands in the common road of use and form) be more
helpful than hurtful, or kill more than it cures; and whether the Republique of
Rome were more happy in the health of her Subjects which wanted Physicians for
five hundred years, than we that have them in more abundance than Caterpillars,
or Horseleaches. And unless these few expedients be put in practice, we may wax
old in ignorance, and never see Physical knowledge arrive at any height of
perfection; and so I pass to the others following.

The next is Metaphysics, to help which I shall only offer this expedient,
that it might be reduced to some certain grounds and principles, from whence
demonstrations might be drawn, that men might proceed with some certainty, and
not wander in the dark they know not whither, and so that the most sure way of
Rena^us des Carts may be brought into use, and exercise, who has traced it
unto the head of the Spring, and shaken off the loose and superfluous
questions, notions, and frivolous Chimaeras thereof: That so it might become
useful and beneficial, which as it now stands, and is used (or rather abused)
serves for little else but only to amuse, and amaze the understanding, to blow
up the Fantasy with ayrie and empty notions, and to make men vainly and
fruitlessly wast their most precious time, which should be bestowed in things
of more necessary use, and of greater concernment.

As for Ethical knowledge, I suppose it better taught by president and
practice, than by words and precepts, for seeing virtue does consist in action,
it must of necessity be far more laudable, that men be brought up to live
virtuously, than to talk and dispute of virtue, and therefore could wish it
more practical and less speculative. And yet could desire that the nature of
passions and affections, virtues and vices, might be more radically
demonstrated, and sought into, than they are in the Scholastic way, and
therefore shall only propose that what Melancthon and Cartesius have
discovered of them, might be made documental, and practicable, and that the
doctrine of them might be made more consonant to that Christian Religion which
men so much profess, and glory of, and that Seneca and Epictetus might not be
slighted, and neglected, while Aristotle is only applauded and embraced,
betwixt whom there is no small difference.

Lastly for Rhetoric and Poesy, I shall prescribe nothing, but leave every
man to the freedom of his genius, only to add this, that Emperors and Kings
can make and create Dukes, Marquesses, and Earls, but cannot make one Orator or
Poet, and so shall conclude with the Lyrick Poet, Tu nihil invita facies,
dicesve, Minerva.

CHAP. XI. Some Expedients concerning their Custom, and Method.
IN order to the prescription of remedies concerning their Customs and Method,
though (as in the rest) I cannot do what should or ought to be done in so
weighty a matter, yet shall I contribute what lies in my weak power, and at
least express my good will, if not my skill.

1. And so shall first desire that men may no^ be tied up all to one method or
way, lest as it may keep them in a good path, so it may hinder them from
embracing, or following a better: and it is clear that there may be many ways
to one place, and diverse methods for the attaining the same end of knowledge,
so as we would not exclude men from trials that they may find out the best, so
we would not ty them to any one, lest it prove the worst.

2. That above all other things care may be had that time be not misspent, or
trifled away, which is an irreparable loss, and utterly irrevocable, and
therefore I could wish that Apelles motto might be had in everlasting
remembrance, Nulla dies sine linea; and therefore long vacations, relaxations
and intermissions are to be looked upon as Scylla and Charibdis, the rocks and
shelves whereon youngmen may easily suffer Shipwreck.

3. I shall tender this, that all should not be tied to one term or time, but
every one have his honor according to his industry and proficiency, that
thereby those that are painful may be encouraged, and those that are idle and
sluggish may be ashamed: And that none may be debarred of his degree or grace,
how short a time soever he has been there, if he be but able to perform the
requisites and exercises injoined, by which means merit, not years,
sufficiency, not formality, shall take place and be rewarded.

4. That their exercises may not only be verbal and disputative, but practical
and operative, that they may not only be tried what they can say, but what
they can do, not only what they opinionate, but what they can perform, that as
nature has given them two hands, and but one tongue, so they may learn to work
more and speak less.

5. That their exercises may be in the English as well as other tongues, that
while they labor to make other languages familiar unto them, they become not
altogether strangers unto their own: and that scurrility, and childishness may
be laid aside, and all things performed with more sobriety and gravity.

6. That neither antiquity nor novelty may take place above verity, lest it
debar us from a more diligent search after truth and Science: Neither that
universality of opinion be any president or rule to sway our judgments from
the investigation of knowledge; for what matter is it whether we follow many or
few, so the truth be our guide? for we should not follow a multitude to do
evil, and it is better to accompany verity single, than falsity and error with
never so great a number. Neither is it fit that Authority (whether of Aristotle
or any other) should inchain us, but that there may be a general freedom to
try all things, and to hold fast that which is good, that so there might be a
Philosophical liberty to be bound to the authority of none, but truth it self,
then will men take pains, and arts will flou^ish.

7. As to the order to be observed in teaching the Arts, and Sciences,
doubtless there can be no better method, than leading them into the fair fields
of Mathematical learning, which by reason of its perspicuity and certitude
would so settle and season the understanding, that it would ever after be
sufficiently armed to discern betwixt truth and opinion, demonstration and
probability: and render it more fit and able to proceed in Natural Philosophy,
and other Sciences, and so to proceed to the Tongues, then to Physics, and so
to Logic, Metaphysics, and the like, which order without question, would
prove more advantageous, than that which the Schools have pursued for so many
years with so little fruit. And these are the Expedients that for the present I
have to present, hoping they may be acceptable until better be found out; and
if any thing herein may appear to be erroneous, let it be but heartily made
manifest, and he will be willing either to give further satisfaction, or to
reclaim his mistakes, who in these things judges himself but as the meanest of
men, and so no way privileged from frailty and infirmity.

FINIS.

