A SERMON Preached July 2, at the FUNERAL OF Mr John Wells Late Pastor of
Olave-Jury, London.

By Thomas Watson, late Minister of the Gospel in Stephens Walbrook, London.

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Parkhurst at the Bible and Three Crowns in Cheapside
near Marcers-Chappel, 1676.

TO THE READER.
Good Reader,
AT the Request of some friends I have been induced to publish this Sermon: it
is swelled something bigger in the Press; But the matter I had prepared before,
only there wanted Time to serve it in. If thou reapest any benefit by this
ensuing Discourse, I shall not repent that it was made public.

July 7. 1676. Thine to serve thee THO. WATSON.

TIMES SHORTNESS.
I COR. VII. 29. But this I say, Brethren, the time is short.
THe blessed Apostle in these words shows us what our station in the world, and
all our Secular enjoyments are; they are minute and transient, But this I say,
Brethren, the time is short.

The Text consists of two parts:

1. A Kind Compellation (...), Brethren.

2. A Seasonable Admonition, (...), The time is short.

1. A Kind Compellation, Brethren. The Saints of God are Brethren. They are
eodem sanguine conglutinati August.
, cemented together with the blood of Christ.

Then let there be no strife among them, seeing they are brethren, Genesis 13. 8.
Believers are regenerated by the same Spirit, they suck the same Breasts, the
Promises; they wear the same Garment, Christ's Righteousness; they sit at the
same Board, the Table of the Lord; they partake of the same Glory, the
inheritance in light, Col. 1. 12, and shall they not love! There ought to be no
contending among Gods people, but who should love most 1 Pet. 3. 8.
.

Satan leaps at discord, he warms himself at the fire of men's Passions. If he
cannot divide the Spiritual members from their Head, he will endeavor to make
them smite one against another. If he cannot keep the Saints from Heaven, he
will endeavor to make them fall out by the way. It was ill for Abraham's
Herd-men and Lots to fall out when the Canaanite was in the Land, Genesis 13. 7.
It Is an ill time for Mariners to be fighting when the enemy is boring an hole
in the bottom of the Ship. Take heed the Popish Enemy does not enter at your
breaches. Let Christians remember they are Brethren. Unity among Brethren,
resembles the harmony among Angels. Psalm. 133. 1, 2, Behold how good and
pleasant it is for brethren to dwell together in unity; it is like the precious
ointment upon the head, as the dew of Hermon. It Is compared to ointment,
because it is sweet; and to the dew of Hermon, because it makes every thing
fruitful. The Primitive Christians were of one heart, Act. 4. 32. Let us pray,
That that Golden Motto may be written upon England, Cor unum, via una, one
Heart, and one way; Jer. 32. 39. What a blessed place will Heaven be, where our
light shall be clear, our love shall be perfect, our joy shall be full!

2. A Seasonable Admonition, The time is short. This word [ Time] I shall take
more strictly for the term and period of man's life, The time is short. The
diverse instances of Mortality may serve as so many Commentaries upon the Text.
The Greek word for short (...).
alludes to Mariners, who roll up their Sails and bring them into a narrow
compass when the Ship draws near the Harbor. So though the sails of man's life
were spread larger in the times of the Patriarchs, yet now God is folding up
these sails in a narrower compass, Tempus contractum est, the Time is short:
the Scripture frequently asserts the brevity and transitoriness of man's life,
Psalm. 89. 97, Remember how short my time is Quantillum sit tempus meum. Gejer.
. Psalm. 39. 5, Behold, thou have made my days as an hand-breadth; which is the
least of the Geometrical measures. Job uses three elegant Metaphors to set
forth the shortness of man's life, Job 9. 25, My days are swifter than a Post,
they are passed away as the swift ships, as the eagle that hastes to her prey.
If we look to the land, there man's life is like a swift Post; if we look to the
Sea, there it is like a swift Ship; if we look to the air, there it is like a
flying eagle.

Life is compared to a cloud, Job 7. 9, a cloud is a vapor drawn up by the Sun
into the middle-region of the air; when this cloud comes to its full
proportion, it is soon dispersed and blown away with the wind. Life gathers as
a cloud, bigger and bigger, but on a sudden it is dissipated by death. Our life
is but as a point to the Globe Punctum est quod vivimus and puncto minus. Sen.
, nay it is less, Psalm. 39. 5, My age is as nothing (...)*
before thee. There is but a span between the Cradle and the Grave. Solomon
says, There is a time to be born, and a time to die, Eccles. 3. 3, but
mentions no time of living, as if that were so short, it were not worth
speaking of Vita adeo parum a morte distat ut ipsa mors sit. Musc.
.

Quest. In what sense is the time of life short?

Answ. 1. It is short in respect of the uncertainty, it may instantly expire. A
man that holds a Farm at the will of his Landlord, if he be asked how long time
he has in the Farm, he will say, no time at all, because he is sure of none,
he may be turned out the next hour. So our time is short because uncertain.
Hezekiah, it is true, had a lease of fifteen years sealed, Isa. 38. 5, but we
have no such lease sealed us, death may be within a days march of us.

Quis scit an adjiciant hodiernae crastina vitae tempora, dii superi Horat*
.

There are so many casualities, that it is a wonder if the slender thread of
our Life be not cut off by untimely Death. Have you not seen a Virgin on the
same day dressed in her Bride-apparel, and her Winding Sheet.

2. Time is short in respect of the improvement. If we reckon that for Time
which is well spent, then Time is brought into a narrow compass indeed: a great
part of our Time lies Fallow: take from our life all the time of Eating,
Drinking, Sleeping, besides idle impertinencies, and then how short is out
Time! How little is the time wherein we can truly say, Hoc Vixi, This time I
have lived! O how little is the time which is spent with God! Time misimployed,
is not Time lived, but Time lost Diu suit in mundo non vixit. Sen.
.

3. Time is short compared with Eternity. There is no Prospective-glass to see
to the end of Eternity. Eternity is a Day that has no Sunsetting Una dies
continua occajum non habens. Gerh.
. It is a Circle without beginning or end. Eternity is a sum that can never be
numbered, a Line that can never be measured: reckon as many millions of years as
there have been minutes since the Creation, and they stand for Ciphers in
Eternity. The most elevated strains of Rhetorique cannot reach Eternity Cogita
centum millia annorum, cogita decies Centena millia annorum, Cogita mill
milliones annorum, immo saeculorum nondum in choasti aeternum. Corn. a Lap.
: It is a Sea without Bottom and Banks. Time may be compared to a spot of Earth
lying at the mouth of the great Ocean; Time is a Spot on this side Eternity;
and what a little of that Spot is Man's life! Thus you see in what sense Time is
short.

It will not be long before the Silver cord be loosed, and the Golden bowl
broken, Eccles. 12. 6. By the Silver Cord I understand the Pith or Marrow of
the Back, which for its whiteness is called Silver: this Silver Cord will soon
be loosed. By the Golden Bowl is meant the Meninx, or Skin, wherein the Brains
are enclosed as in a Bowl; this Golden Bowl will soon be broken. Time goes on
apace Animantis cujusque vita in fuga est.
. The Poets painted Time with Wings, because it flies so fast. In Joshua's
days, when the Sun and Moon stood still, Time went on. In Hezekiah's Reign
when the Sun went Ten degrees backward, Time went forward. Our whole life is
nothing else but a passage to Death, where there is no staying by the way, or
slacking our pace.

Use 1. See what a poor inconsiderable thing Life is. The time is short, and
upon this small Wire of time hangs the Weight of Eternity. Life is but a short
Scene Acted here. It is but (...) a Vapor or puff of Wind, Jam. 1. 4 ut Vir
Crescit Vita decrescit, Senec.
. Life is made up of a few flying Minutes. Oh then how imprudent are they, who
to save their Lives will damn their Souls! He were unwise, who to preserve a
short Lease would lose his Freehold: How many such are there who to preserve
this short Life will take indirect courses, defraud and oppress, and to build
up an Estate will pull down their Souls; many to save their Skins will deflour
their Conscience: Spira to preserve his Life abjured the Faith.

The Irish make great reckoning of their Skimeter (a Warlike Weapon) and will
endure a blow on the Arm to keep their Skimeter from being hurt. To this
Skimeter I may compare the Soul: better it is to endure a blow on our Body, or
Estate, than suffer our precious Soul to be endamaged. The Soul is the Man of
the Man: The Soul of Plato, is Plato: The Soul is the Princely part, Crowned
with Reason; it is Dei insignita imagine Bern.
; it carries in it some faint Idaea or Resemblance of the Trinity. The Soul is
a rich Diamond set in Clay: what folly is it for saving the Clay, to lose the
Diamond! Like Tiberius the Emperor, who for a draught of Water lost a Kingdom.

Use 2. Use 2. Exhort. Br. 1.
Is Time so curtailed and shortened? Let us often contemplate the shortness of
Life Vive memor Lethi. Pers.
. Feathers swim upon the Water, but Gold sinks into it. Light Feathery-spirits
float in vanity; but serious Christians sink deep into the thoughts of their
sudden change; Deuteronomy. 32. 29, O that they were wise, that they would consider
their latter end. Forgetfulness of the latter end, makes Life sinful, and Death
formidable. People naturally shrink back from the thoughts of Death: Amos 6. 3,
They put far away from them the evil day. When they are young, they hope they
shall spin out Life to the Blossoming of the Almond Tree; and when old age
comes, they hope to renew their strength as the Eagle Nemo putat se cito
moriturum. Aug.
: though their Bodies are subject to corruption, and they feel the symptoms of
mortality in them, Deafness of Hearing, here is Death creeping in at the Ear;
Dimness of Sight, here is Death creeping in at the Eye: yet so frantique are
they, as to persuade themselves of long life. Bodily diseases are but Deaths
Harbingers, which go before to bespeak a Lodging for Death. Why then do men
dream of an Earthly Eternity? Psalm. 49. 11, Their inward thought is, that their
houses shall continue for ever. Where is the Man that contemplates Times
Shortness, or makes another's Death a Looking-glass in which he may see his own
dying Face.

Some may say, this Discourse of the Shortness of Time is fit for such as are
Consumptive, whom the Physicians have given over; but for their parts they are
well in health, and may live these many years (...). Chrysostom.
.

But though your Blood be fresh in your Veins, and your Bones are full of
Marrow, you know not how short your time may be: He was not sick, nor in fear
of sickness, who said, Soul take thy ease, but that night Death sealed him a
Lease of Ejectment, Luke 12. 20. Freshness of Complexion is sometimes a
lightning before Death. The metal of which Glass is made, when it begins to
shine, is nearest melting. Persons likely enough to live, have been suddenly
taken away, by Squinisies, Convulsions, Appoplexies. How soon may Death sound
its Allarm! It Is reported of Zeleuchus, that the first piece of Householdstuff
he brought into Babylon, was a Tombstone. O Meditate of the transiency and
brittleness of Life: think often of your Tombe-stone.

Quest. What advantage will accrue to us by often thinking of our short stay
here?

Answ. 1. The shortness of Time meditated on, would cool the heat of our
affections to the World. These visible objects please the fancy, but they do
not so much delight us, as delude us: they are brevi dilapsura, suddenly gone
from us. Worldly things are like a fair Picture drawn on the Ice, which the Sun
quickly melts Theodoret.
. The time is short, why should we love that overmuch, which we cannot keep
overlong? 1 Cor. 7. 31, The fashion (...).
, or Pageant, of the World passes away. Time passes away as a Ship in full
sail: this thought-on seriously, would mortify Covetousness. Paul looked upon
himself as ready to loosen Anchor and be gone, 2 Pet. 1. 14, Knowing that
shortly I must put off this my Tabernacle: And how did his love to the World
dye? Gal. 6. 14, The World is Crucified to me, and I unto the World. Who would
covet that much, which has neither Contentment nor Continuance? Among the
Graecians, the City of Sparta had a King of it but for a year, and then he was
to lay down his Crown, which made every one strive not to be King. Why should
we so toil about the World, as if we were to live here ever? What needs a long
provision for a short way Parum viae quid multum viati^i?
? If we have but enough to bear our charges to Heaven, it suffices. Suppose a
man's Lease were ready to expire, and he should fall a building and planting,
would not he be judged indiscreet? When our time is so very short, now to
follow the World immoderately, as if we would fetch happiness out of the Earth,
which God has cursed, is a degree of frenzy: we shall have no need of the
Earth shortly, but to be buried in it.

2. The meditation of the shortness of Time, would be a means to humble us. St.
Augustine calls Humility the Mother of the Graces. Balm sinks to the bottom of
the Water: a good Christian sinks low in Humility: and what can sooner pull
down the Flags and Banners of Pride, than to consider we are shortly dropping
into the Dust Agnoscat homo se esse mortalem and franget elationem. Aug.
. The Priest was to cast the Feathers of the Fowls, by the place of the ashes,
Levit. 1. 16. All your Feathers of Honor must shortly lie in the ashes. Shall
not he which is clothed with Mortality, be clothed with Humility? The
thoughts of the Grave would bury our pride. When the Lord had said to the
Judges, Psalm. 82. 6, I said ye are gods; lest they should grow proud, he adds a
corrective, but ye shall die like men. Ye are dying-gods.

3. The meditation of the shortness of time, would hasten our Repentance.
Repentance is as necessary as Heaven; as radical moisture and natural heat
preserve the life, so repenting-tears, and an heart burning with love, preserve
the soul. It is natural to delay Repentance (...). Plutarch.
. We say as Hag. 1. 2, The time is not yet come. But the Text says, the time
is short; our life is a taper, soon blown out. The thoughts of Times volubility
and swiftness, would keep us from proroguing our repentance. It Is no time for
us to make a long work, when God is making a short work (...). Chrysostom. Hom. 22.
de Simult.
. It is observed of the Birds of Norway, that they fly faster than the birds of
other Countries. By the instinct of nature knowing the days in that Climate to
be very short, they therefore make the more have to their nests. The
consideration of our short abode here, will make us avoid delays, and fly
faster to Heaven upon the wing of repentance.

4. The meditation of the shortness of time, would antidote us against the
temptations of Satan (...).
. Temptation is Satan's eldest daughter, that woes for him. Satan does more
mischief by his wiles, than his darts. He knows how to suit his temptations, as
the Husbandman knows what seed is proper for such a soil. Satan tempted Achan
with a wedg of Gold; David with Beauty. It is hard to keep up the banks of
Grace against the sea of Temptation. I know no better remedy against Satan's
immodest solicitations, than this Text, The time is short: What Satan, do
thou tempt me to vanity, when I am going to give up my accounts? shall I now be
sinning, when to morrow I may be dying? How shall I look my Judge in the face?
Christian, when Satan sets sinful pleasure before thee, show him a deaths-head,
this will make temptations vanish.

5. The consideration of the shortness of our stay in the world, would be an
help to Temperance; it would make us sober and moderate in the use of worldly
comforts. By excess we turn things lawful into sin In licitis perimus omnes.
; the Be may suck a little honey from the leaf, but put it into a barrel of
honey, and it is drowned. We may with Jonathan, dip the end of the rod in
honey, but not thrust it in too far 1 Samuel 14. 27.
. Noah took too much of the Grape, Genesis 9. 21. The flesh, when pampered,
rebels: The best preservative against intemperance is this, Tempus est
contractum, The time is short. When we are feasting, death may quickly take
away the Cloth. * Plut.
Plutarch reports, that the Egyptians used at their great Banquets to bring in
the Image of a dead man, and say to their Guests, Look upon this, and proceed
in your Banquet. An excellent Antidote against a Surfeit. Joseph of Arimathea
erected a Sepulcher in his Garden, to spice his flowery delights with the
thoughts of death.

6. The meditation of the shortness of time, would much mitigate our grief for
the loss of dear Relations. It is observable, when the Apostle had said, The
time is short, he presently adds, Let them that weep be as if they wept not. No
doubt the loss of Relations is grievous to the fleshy part. It is like pulling
a limb from the body. When God strikes us in our right eye, we weep. It Is
lawful to give vent to our grief: Joseph wept over his dead Father. But though
Religion does not banish grief, it bounds it. We must weep quasi non, as if we
wept not. Rachels sin was, that she refused to be comforted, Mat. 2. 18. Origin
it is thought died of grief; and if any thing can stop the issue of sorrow, at
least assuage it, it is this, The time is short. We shall shortly have our
losses made up, and enjoy our godly Relations again in Heaven.

7. The Meditation of the shortness of time, would make us highly value Grace.
Time is short, but Grace is for ever. 1 John 2. 27, The anointing which ye have
received of him, abides in you. Grace is a blossom of Eternity Joh. 4. 19.
; it is semen manens, an immortal seed, 1 John 3. 9. Grace is Embryo Gloriae;
Grace is not blasted by death, but transplanted into a better soil. Grace is
not a lease which soon expires, but an inheritance intailed for ever. He who
has true Grace, can no more lose it, than the Angels can who are fixed in
their Heavenly Orb. Rev. 10. 6, The Angel swear by him that lives for ever,
that there should be time no longer. But Grace shall survive time, and run
parallel with Eternity.

2. Branch. If Time be so short, and winged, take heed of mispending this short
time; to mispend time is the worst prodigality.

1. Take heed of spending time unprofitably; Domitian wasted much of his time
in catching Flies Turpe est difficiles habere nugas. Mart.
. Many live to cumber the ground. Telluris inutile pondus. Judge. 10. 4, ^ Jair
had thirty Sons that rode on thirty ass-colts, and they had thirty cities, and
they died. So it may be said, such an one was born in the reign of such a King,
and he possessed such an Estate, and he died; his life was scarce worth a
prayer, or his death worth a tear. An idle person stands in the world but for a
cipher, and God writes down no ciphers in the book of life; many are like the
wood of the Vine, useless. Ezekiel. 15. 3, Will men take a pin of it to hang any
vessel thereon? Too many resemble the Lillies, which toil not, neither do they
spin. They spend their time as the Emperor Caligula, he was at a great expense
to provide a Navy, and when it was provided he sent his Mariners to Sea to
gather cockle-shells, and so they sailed home again. God has furnished men
with precious time wherein they may work out Salvation, and they employ it
vainly, aut aliud agendo aut nihil Sen.
; they ravel it out in impertinencies. What reward can be expected when there
is no work done? who is crowned that never fights? Mat. 25. 30, Cast ye the
unprofitable servant into utter darkness.

2. Take heed of spending time viciously; Diverse spend their short time in
drinking, gaming, whoring: Esau while he was hunting lost the blessing; many
while they hunt after sinful pleasures, lose Heaven: Sin is boiled to a great
height in this Age; men study new Oaths, and count it a shame not to be
impudent; they are steeped and parboiled in wickedness (...). Claud.
; they live in the world to infect others, as the Basilisk with its breath
poisons the herbs. What a dreadful account will they have to give, who have
nothing to show God but their Treasons?

Branch 3. If the time of life be so short, let us improve it. Ephesians. 5. 16,
Redeeming the time. If a man had but a short time in a Farm, he would make the
best improvement of it; and get as good a Crop as he could out of it, before he
left it. The thoughts of our short stay here, should make us improve this
little Inch of time.

And that we may the better do this, Remember, we must be accountable to God
for Time. God will say, What have you done with your Time? If a Lord entrust
his Steward with such money and goods, he expects that he should give him an
account what he has done with them, and how he has employed them. Every one
of us are Stewards, and God will call us to a reckoning, and say, What have you
done with the Talent of Time I entrusted you with?

Quest. How should we improve this short time?

Answ. 1. In General, mind Salvationwork, Philip. 2 12. He who lays up Gold
and Silver, is wise for his Children; but he who gets Salvation, is wise for
himself. Prove. 9. 12.
.

2. In special, improve this short time,

1. By a serious examination: Christians, examine how the case stands between
God and your Souls, 2 Cor. 13. 5, Prove your selves. The Greek word is (...),
try your selves, as the Goldsmith does his Gold by a Touchstone. Time is short,
and what if God should say this night, Give an account of your Stewardship.

1. Account with your selves about your Debts? are your debts paid, your sins
pardoned?

2. Account with your selves about making your Will: Time is short, you may dye
before night; have you made your Will? I mean in a Spiritual sense, have you
given up your Will to God, and by solemn vow set Seal to the Will? They are
fittest to resign their Souls to God, who have resigned their Wills to him.

3. Call your selves to account about your Evidences. Are your Evidences for
Heaven ready? Your Desires are your Evidences. Do you desire Christ for
himself; As Beauty is loved for it self? And can nothing quench your thirst but
Christ's Blood? and, Is your desire quickened into endeavor Isa. 26. 9.
? This is a blessed sign.

For want of this self-examination, many who are well known to others, are
unknown to themselves: they know not whither they shall go when they dye, or to
what Coast they shall Sail, to Hell, or to Heaven Animula, vagula, blandula,
quae nunc abibis in loca? Hadr.
.

2. Improve this short time by laying hold of all the seasons and opportunities
for your Souls. The Mariner takes the fit season, he sets to Sea while the wind
blows. Time is short, and Opportunity (which is the Cream of Time) is shorter.
Let not the seasons of mercy slip.

1. While Gods Spirit strives with you, cherish its sweet whispers and motions:
as when the Dove came flying to the windows of the Ark, Noah reached out his
hand, and pulled it into the Ark: So when Gods Spirit (this blessed Dove) comes
to you, entertain and welcome it into the Ark of your Souls Genesis 6. 8.
. If you repulse the Spirit, he may refuse to strive any more. Gospel-seasons
though they are sweet, they are swift.

2. While God's Ministers are with you, make use of them, Zechar. 1. 5, The
Prophets, do they live for ever? Their Time (by reason of their labors) is
scarce so long as others. We read of Lamps within the Pitchers, Judge. 7. 16.
Ministers are Lamps; but these Lamps are in Earthen Pitchers, which soon break.
Ministers, though they carry the Word of Life in their Mouths, yet they carry
Death in their Faces. Improve their labors while you have them: they thirst
for your happiness, and as so many Bells would Chime-in your Souls to Christ.

3. Improve this short time by keeping up a close Communion with God, 1 John 1.
3. Our (...), or Communion is with the Father, etc. This sweet Communion with
God is kept up, 1. By holy meditation, Genesis 24. 63, Isaac went out to meditate
in the Field at even-tide. Meditation concocts Divine-truths in the mind. It
brings God and the Soul together Nil in hac vita dulcius sentitur, nil ita
mortem ab amore mundi s^parat, nil sic animam contra tentationes roborat, nil
hominem ita ad omne bonum opus excitat quam gratia contemplationis. Bern.
. It is the bellows of the affections: It gives a sight and a taste of invisible
Glory, Psalm. 140. 39, My meditation of him shall be sweet.

2. Communion with God is kept up by Prayer: Praying-dayes are Ascensiondayes.
Caligula placed his Effigies in the Capitol, whispering in Jupiter's Ears.
Prayer whispers in Gods Ears: It is a secret parley and converse with God (...)
Clem. Alex.
. On this Mount of Prayer the Soul has many sweet transfigurations.

4. Improve this short time by doing all the service you can for God Dio
servire est regnare.
: Wisdom may be learned of an Enemy; Satan is the more fierce, because he
knows his time is but short, Rev. 12. 12: we should act more vigorously for
God, seeing our time is but short. Our lives should be as jewels, though little
in quantity, yet great in value. St. Paul knew his stay in the world was short,
2 Pet 1, 14, therefore how zealous and active was he for God while he lived, 1
Cor, 5. 10. I labored (...), more abundantly than they all. Paul's Obedience
did not move slow, as the Sun on the Dial, but swift, as the Sun in the
Firmament. Is Time short? Let us be God-exalters, let us bring Glory to God in
doing good to others: as Aromatick-trees sweat out their precious Oils; so
should we lay out our strength for the good of others.

1. Let us do good to their Souls: convince the ignorant, strengthen the weak,
reduce the wandering: A good Christian is both a Diamond and a Lodestone. A
Diamond sparkling in sanctity, and a Loadstone for his attractive virtue in
drawing others to Christ.

2. Let us do good to their Bodies: Many at this day say to their sorrows, Ye
are our Companions. Let our Fingers drop with the Myrthe of liberality, Heb.
13. 16, To do good, and communicate, forget not. Let us feed the hungry, cloth
the naked; be Temporal Saviors to others Incipe erogaere si non vis errare.
Aug. de Verb. Dom.
.

Could we thus improve our time, our lives, though short, would be sweet: this
would be the way to cast abroad a fragrant redolent smell in Gods Church; like
the Orange Trees which perfume the air where they grow.

Could we thus improve our time, we might have our Consciences drawing up a
Certificate for us, 2 Cor. 1. 12; and then no matter though the World censure,
if Conscience acquit: no matter how cross the wheels go, if the Clock strikes
right.

Could we thus improve our time, we might have an (...), an easy and joyful
passage out of the world. This was Hezekiah's comfort when he thought he was
lying on his deathbed, 2 King. 20. 3, I beseech thee, O Lord, remember how I
have done that which is good in thy sight. To improve Time aright, answers Gods
cost, credits Religion, saves the Soul.

Use 3. Terror to every wicked person, who exhausts his strength in sin: his
time here is short, and then begins his Hell. He spends his life in a frolic;
he takes the Timbrel and Harp, and rejoices at the sound of the Organ, Job 21.
12. But the time is shortly coming, when all his mirth shall cease, Rev. 18 22,
The voice of the Harpers, and Musicians, and Trumpeters shall be heard no more
at all in thee. The Grave buries all a sinners joy. When a wicked man dies, the
Devil gets a windfal. Satan (in Samuel's shape) said to Saul, 2 Samuel 28. 19,
Thou shall be with meto morrow. The Sinner is to day with his Lusts, and may be
tomorrow with the Devil. Who would envy the wicked, their honor, or pleasure?
they must pay dear for it. They have a short Feast, but a long Reckoning: for a
drop of mirth, they must drink a Sea of wrath: and Who knows the power of that
wrath? It was a saying of Cardinal Bellarmine, If a man had but a sight of
Hell, it were enough to make an intemperate person sober. Hell is the emphasis
of Torment. The Sacrifice of Jealousy was to have no Oil, nor Frankincense put
to it, Numb. 5. 15. In Hell is no Oil of Mercy put to the Torments of the
wicked to lenify them; nor is there any Incense of Prayer to appease Gods
wrath. Oh that sinners would in time break off their iniquities. What is become
of their Intellectuals, have they sinned away Reason as well as Conscience? The
time of life is short, but the torments of Hell are lengthened out; Rev. 14.
11, The smoke of their torment ascends up for ever and ever.

4. Use. Here is a light side of the Text, to the Godly; they may be glad that
their time here is short; they cannot live but by dying. Behold, honey at the
end of the rod.

1. The time being short, their sinningtime cannot be long. Sin is a
troublesome inmate. Romans 7. 24, Paul that Bird of Paradise, sighed and groaned
under corruption; a child of God mingles sin with his duties, he cannot write a
copy of holiness without blotting; there is a party in a regenerate heart sides
with Satan; but be of good comfort, the time is short, it is but a while
(Christians) that the dead man shall be tied to the living; that you shall be
combating with a proud, unbelieving heart. The year of release is coming: Death
does to the Godly, as the Angel did to Peter Act. 12. 7.
, it smites them, and makes their chains of sin fall off quite.

2. The time being short, their working-time cannot be long: in this life much
work is cut out. There is, 1. The work of the hand, as the Artificer works in
his Trade, Prove. 10. 4. 2. The work of the head; notions are the children of
the brain, and there is labor in bringing them forth.

3. The work of the heart, which is the hardest work, to search, cleanse, watch
the heart; as a clock sometimes goes faster, sometimes flower; so the heart
sometimes goes faster in sin, sometimes flower in duty. But here is the Saints
comfort, their working-time is but short, Rev. 19. 13, They rest from their
labors. When their bodies return to dust, their souls return to rest.

3. Time being short, their sufferingtime cannot be long. Life is inter-larded
with trouble, Job 14. 1. You may as well separate weight from lead, as trouble
from man's life. Quid est diu vivere, nisi diu Torqutri? Aug.
We come into the world with a Cry, and go out with a Groan. Every one has his
yoke, and it is well if there be not a nail in it; but Time is short. Though the
Cross be heavy, we have but a little way to carry it; death will give the godly
a writ of ease, Job 3. 17, There (i.e. in the Grave) the wicked cease from
troubling.

4. The Time being short, their waitingtime cannot be long; the Godly shall not
be long out of Heaven. While the blessed Angels see the orient beauties that
shine in Gods face, Believers live far from Court, being imprisoned in the
body. Here they do rather desire God than enjoy him. But the Time is short, it
is but a few days, perhaps hours, and the Saints shall be ever solacing
themselves in the light of Gods Countenance. They shall leave their pillow of
thorns, and lay their head on Christ's bosom. Faith gives a propriety in God,
death gives a possession. The Wagons and Chariots came rattling to old Jacob,
but they were to carry him to his Son Joseph. Deaths Chariot-wheels may come
rattling to a Believer, but it is to carry him home to his Fathers house.

In that Paradise of God a Christian shall have more than he can think; Ephesians. 3.
20. He can think, What if every mountain were a Pearl, every flower a Ruby,
every sand in the Sea a Diamond, the whole Globe a shining Chrysolite? but all
his thoughts are too low and dwarfish to reach the glory of the Celestial
Pyramides. Praemium quod side non attingetur.
The reward Heavenly (as St. Austin says) exceeds Faith; and the Time being
short, a Christian shall be in Heaven before he is aware; then shall he bathe
his Soul in those perfumed pleasures of Paradise, which run at Gods right hand
for evermore.

I have done with the Text: let me speak next to the Occasion.

We are met to commemorate the Death of an Eminent Minister in this City, Mr.
JOHN WELLS. Sorry I am to be an Actor in this Mournful Scene. But being
requested by Him in his life (in case I survived), I was willing to do this
last Office of love. There has been of late a great mortality of Ministers.
The men of the World need not be so fierce against Gods Ministers, they will
not trouble them long; Gods taking away his Ministers so fast (two in a day)
boads much evil. It presageth the fall of an House when the Pillars are removed.

Concerning this Reverend Brother deceased, it is not my purpose to use any
hyperbolical Encomiums, or Panegyricks; only give me leave to strew a few
Flowers upon his Hearse.

This our worthy Friend was endued with Learning and volubleness of speech. He
could (...), divide the word rightly, as a workman that need not be ashamed.
Seals he had to his Ministry. Some of his hearers might call him (as Cyprian
did Caecilius) novae vitae parentem their Spiritual Father.

For his Piety, he was not only a Follower of that which was good, but a
leader; he said not long before his death, That he had brought this to an
issue, That he loved God. He was fixed to his Principles: Though he be now by
Death a Fallen-Star, yet he was not a Wandring-Star

His disposition was not Morose, but Affable: a man of that Candor and Curtesy,
as did oblige and win the affections of many to him. When Grace and sweetness
of Nature meet, it is like a Pearl in a Gold-Ring.

For his Preaching, 1. He did frame himself, ad captum populi; he Preached
intelligibly to the capacity of his Auditory. Sure that Minister will never hit
the hearts of his hearers, who shoots over their heads. Ministers should be
Stars to give light, not Clouds to darken the Truth* Clearness is the grace of
Speech. Gregory Nazianzen Preached plain to the ignorant, yet was admired by
the learned.

2. He was elaborate and painful in his work. Sloth in a Minister is as bad as
Sleep in a Sentinel. He would not offer that to God which cost him nothing.
Christ bled for Souls, well may we sweat. This good man, like a Taper, wasted
himself, while he gave light to others.

He was a man of a forgiving-Spirit; he was not troubled with the overflowing
of the Gall: Kindnesses he wrote in Marble; Injuries he forgot.

He was very Charitable: The Backs and Bellies of the Poor, were the furrows
where he sowed the Seeds of his liberality. But though his Charity did shine,
he did not care it should blaze. He is now taken from the evil to come.

For you that did sit under his Ministry, let me tell You, you have lost a
Friend and a Guide; you have cause to be Close-mourners. Let me request only
this of you, That you would remember the many good Instructions given you:
though he is dead, let not his Sermons dye too, but labor to Copy them out
fair in your Lives.

FINIS.

