The Saints Guide, OR, Christ the Rule, and Ruler OF SAINTS.

Manifested by way of Positions, Consectaries, and Queries.

Wherein is contained
The Efficacy of acquired Knowledge. The Rule of Christians. The Mission and
Maintenance of Ministers. And the power of Magistrates in Spiritual things.
By JOHN WEBSTER late Chaplain in the Army.

LONDON, Printed for Giles Calvert at the Black-spread Eagle at the West End of
Paul's, 1654.

To all that love the Lord JESUS CHRIST in Truth and Sincerity.
Dear Souls,
BLessed be the God of mercies, who has satisfied my spirit, that it is not
the power of Argument, the force of Dispute or Eloquence, nor the efficacy of
humane Reason that can more clearly make out the things that are freely given
to us of God, than they are by that Spirit that searches all things, yea even
the deep things that are of God, in the experience of his Saints, as they all
witness, having the same spirit opening unto them that Record which God gave of
his Son. Neither are these and poor weak things (though we should not despise
the day of small things) made public upon any such account, Zach. 4. 10.
but only as it pleased the Lord to draw forth my spirit, to give testimony
with those Truths he had sealed in my breast, against all the prejudice,
cenfures, and unrighteous judgments of men.

For that immortal Spirit which raised Ies^s up from the dead, (...)
and quickens the bodies of his Saints, by its own light, life, power,
wisdom, and strength, works all in all in his people, stands not in any need
of the weak instrument of ^infull man's carnal and devilish wisdom: John 6. 63.
For it is this Spirit that qu^ckeneth, the flesh profits nothing. Neither
are the weapons of a believers warfare carnal, 2 Cor. 1^. 1.
but mighty in Christ, not in us, to the pulling down of strong holds, and
laying low of every imagination that stands up against Christ.

And also I have usually in experience observed, that in laboring to make out
the Truth by the force of our wit, and arguments, one carnal weapon is but set
against another, and so does little else but engender strife, and stir up
passion: so that Truth rather receives damage than profit by it. And therefore
the Scripture witnesses, (...)
that Saints should avoid foolish questions, (...)
endless Genealogies, and contentions, with perverse disputings, whereof comes
envy, strife, railyngs, and evil surmisings.

And as the Lord in mercy has cleared my spirit from these mysts, so he has
led me forth to give my testimony with the rest of his Saints in behalf of his
Cause and Truth, against all perverseness, and unrighteousness of men. For after
the Lord about eighteen years ago, had in his wonderful mercy brought me to
the sad experience of mine own dead, sinful, lost, and damnable condition in
nature, and fully showed me the nothingness, and helplesness of creaturely
power, either without or within me, and graciously led me forth to witness with
the Prophet David, Psalm 40. 2.
That he had drawn me forth of the horrible Pit, and set my feet upon a Rock,
and established my goings: And then, and ever since carried me forth sometimes
in much power, sometimes in weakness (according to the working of his own will)
to declare unto the sons of men what he had done for my Soul.

This no sooner appeared in me and others whom it pleased the Lord to reveal
his Son in, (...)
but the power of Babel in the Ministers of Satan transforming themselves into
Ministers of Righteousness, then in the Episcopal and Prelatical Form, poured
forth all their malice and spite against the Truth, and against all those in
whom it appeared: then throwing dirt upon us, and hotly raging in persecution
against us, in and under the terms of Puritans, Seperatists, Grindletonians,
and Antinomians: And also continued the same bitterness in malice in the tail
of the Dragon (though then disguised under the name of Presbyterians, and a new
Form of pretended godliness) by the former odious ^itles, and addition of new,
as Libertines, Blasphemers, Sectaries, and Heretics: and since has not ceased
under the new devices of Independency, and Church-gathering, keeping still the
same appellations, and super-adding of others, as Dippers, Quakers, and indeed
what not? calling and accounting all others as Heretics that were not of their
Tribe, and Trade, Form and judgment: and so the hierling merchants of Demetrius
his Craft do still vociferate and continu it: yet notwithstanding all their
bloody malice, 2 Cor. 1. 10.
and insaciable envy, the Lord has delivered me, 1 Pet. 1. 5.
and those that were his, through his great mercy, from the paws of all these
devouring Lions, and will still faithfully keep and preserve all his by his
mighty power, through faith unto salvation.

And now the Lord has strengthened my spirit and hand to bear out my witness
against all these, and to manifest the same to you my dear brethren, pertakers
of the same heavenly calling, and anointed with that spirit that teaches all
things, and leads into all truth; Gal 3. 28.
where there is neither Jew nor Greek, bond nor free, male nor female, but are
all one in Christ Jesus: to the unity of whose Spirit he commends you, who
remains

April 28. 1653. Yours in the Lord, though the lowest and least of all Saints,
JO: WEBSTER.

To all those that set up Forms, and external Worship instead of the spiritual,
and those that call themselves the Ministers of the Nation.
Contrymen,
IT is far from my purpose to asperse your persons, or to condemn any of the
least appearances of the Lord Jesus in you: much less to oppose any thing that
may tend to the building up of the spiritual and new Jerusalem. Nevertheless
the Lord has put a few things in my mouth to speak unto you, and some things
in my spirit to inquire of you, which I beseech you to receive in meekness, as
becomes th^se who have styled themselves by the dear and precious name of
Christians.

Has the Spirit of Christ ever revealed in you, or the record of his truth
taught you, that any Form of godliness (how exact soever) or any external
worship, or discipline (though never so near the model, that you may imagine is
laid down in the Lette^ of the Scriptures) does make a Saint, where the life
and power is altogether absent? Or does there appear in any of your gathered
Congregations, or select Forms, the evident and pure power of spiritual
self-denial, and divine love? Nay, is it not as the Apostle foretells, 2 Timothy 3.
5.
Having a Form of godliness, but having denied the power thereof? Does Pride,
Covetousness, Censuring, Envying, Condemning, nay murdering of others that
follow not your Forms, declare or evidence the power of godliness? Is not he a
murderer that hates his brother, and therefore has not eternal life abiding
in him? ^ John 3. 14, 15.
Or is there none a Brother, but only he that is of your gathered Congregation?
Is this to worship the Father in spirit and truth? John 4. 21, 22, ^3, 24.
or rather to worship ye know not what, either at Jerusalem, or pon some other
Mountain. The Lord open your eyes, and give you spiri^s to discern in what
Principle ye stand: Was ever the Spirit of Christ in his Saints in any Age, a
spirit of persecution? Or were the Saints accusers of their Brethren, by
casting upon them any odious Titles? Or did they complain of others to any
secular Power, or labored to punish or imprison any that followed not them and
their way? Nay, does not Christ teach them not to forbid such? Mark 9. 38, 39,
40.
And is it not the Rule, that Saints should not speak evil one of another? ^mes
4. 11, 12.
for in so doing they judge the Law, and fulfill it not? And did not God so lead
out their spirits, that being reviled, they did bless, being persecuted, ^ Cor.
4. 12.
they did suffer, and being defamed, they did entreat? Nay, is it fitting to
bring a railing accusation against the Devil? Jude 9.
No, but to refer it to the Lord, that he may rebuke him. Now whether it be so
with you or not, let your Consciences and carriage speak.

Did ever the Spirit of Christ teach you, that any actions, duties,
performances, or any holy exercises of yours, were well-pleasing unto God, that
were not the fruits and effects of his Spirit inhabiting and working in you?
No, although you should give your bodies to be bu^ned, 1 Cor. 13. 3.
and your goods to feed the poor, without the Principle of Divine Love (which
is Christ) working the same in you, it would profit you nothing. Where is your
Charity? Where is your Love? Does all that you act in the way of his worship
flow from this Spirit? Try your selves, Examine your selves, 2 Cor. 13. ^.
know you not that Christ Jesus is in you, except you be reprobates? Matthew. 15.
13.
Must not every Plant which the heavenly Father has not planted be rooted out?
And if your Religion and way of worship were of God, it would stand without any
assistance of man, or worldly power, that the Gates of Hell could not prevail
against it; Matthew. 16. 18.
for his Kingdom being not of this world, John 18. 36.
is not upholden by the power or principles of this world, but by the Almighty
Word of his spiritual power.

But does the house of your holiness stand founded upon this Rock of Ages, or
upon the sandy foundation of man's power, and self-righteousness, and therefore
when the rain descends, Matthew. 7 24* 25, 26, 27.
the winds blow, and the floods beat, it falls, and the fall of it is great?

And you that call your selves the Ministers of the Nation, did ever the Spirit
of Christ teach you to derive your Calling and Mission from man, or the power
of men? Is it not the Lord of the Harvest only, Ma^t^. 9 36, 3^* 38.
and none but he, by his own will and spirit, that sends forth Laborers into
his Vineyard? Had you your Mission from him, or from Rome? from his spirit, or
from the vain and fruitless imposition of the hands of Bishops or Presbyters
who apishly imitated the Apostles action, without their spirit, gifts or power?
Is not the calling of a Minister (as was Paul's) from God immediately, and
neither of man, hor by man? Gal.^. 1. 11, 12*
Consider into what Places you have thrust your selves, even whither the Lord
has not put nor placed you: Nay, have you not run when he never sent you?
Those that are his Disciples, John 15. 16.
choose not him, but he chooses them, and ordains them to bring forth fruit.
But do you not pretend to choose him, to make a Trade of his service, when you
go and are sent to Academyes to be fitted for that end, and to Bishops,
Presbyters, gathered Churches, or the power of the Magistrate, to borrow
authority, and thereby to procure a fat Porsonage or Augmentation? and then you
set up shop to sell and vend your wares, as though now you had served a
sufficient apprentiship, and were Masters of the Craft or Trade; when yet God
hat^^ neither chosen, fitted, nor sent you forth in the power and demonstration
of his Spirit. And this appears, by the fruits of your pretended Ministry,
being empty, dull, dead, liveless, and only like teaching of the Scribes and
Pharisees: for indeed men do not gather Grapes of Thorns, Matthew. 7. 6. 10. 29.
nor Figs of Thistles: and so by the fruits of their Doctrine, the true
Ministers are known from the false, and so are you.

Dare you presume to ^ver that you are Christ's Ambassadors, and know not the
Message that you should deliver, but have it to frame, and hammer out by your
study, cogitations, devices, and the working of your carnal wit, and corrupted
Reason? or to scrape and gather up out of this and that Author, Father,
Schoolmen, 2 Cor. ^. 6.
Modern Writers, this and that Expositor, Commentator, and the like? I John 2.
27.
Is this to be made able Ministers of the New Testament, Heb. 8. 11.
not of the Letter, John 1^. 13.
but of the Spirit? Those that Christ sends forth, Matt^. 10. 19, 20.
have that Unction that teaches them all things, that they need not to ask or
inquire of vain Idols that have eyes and see not, John 7. 8, 3^.
ears and hear not, mouths and speak not, Psalm 115. 5^, 7.
neither have any spirit of understanding in them at all, but they are all
taught of God, and have received in some measure of that spirit which leads
into all truth, and need not take thought what they shall answer; for it shall
be given them in that hour; for it is not they that speak, but the Spirit of
the Father in them; and out of their bellies do flow fountains of living
waters: While in the mean time your broken Cisterns of wit, learning, and
carnal wisdom can contain no water. Jer. 2. 13.
Can you be his soldiers, when y^u have no weapons but what are carnal, and
not those spiritual ones of Christ, that are mighty in him to the pulling down
of strong holds, 2 Cor. 10. 4.
and the laying low of every imagination that stands up against him, and his
power? The Lord in mercy open your eyes, to see your own emptiness, and want of
furniture, to fight, conquer, and stand in this spiritual and great warfare: 2
Cor. 3. 5.
otherwise none are sufficient of themselves, to think any thing of themselves,
but every Ministers sufficiency is of God.

Did ever Christ teach you to preach for hire, or to make Contracts how much
you must have for exercising that Ministry, the necessity of which is laid upon
you (if you be called of God) even to preach in season and out of season, 1
Cor. 9. 16.
and woe be unto them that do it not? Mic. 3. 11.
And yet it is your cry, No public maintenance, no Ministry; Oh hypocrites,
how can ye escape the damnation of hell! Or has he taught you to remove from
place to place, where you may have more money or a greater benefit? This is only
to preach for hire, not for the love of the truth, nor out of your sensibleness
of the necessity incumbent upon you. With what faces can or dare you exact
Tithes or pay from poor Laborers, by the compulsory power of a worldly Law,
who (perhaps) never received any benefit from your Ministry? or cry out for a
public maintenance to be established by the Magistrate? Is there any other
maintenance for a Gospel Ministry, but what those freely give, that feel, and
confess the benefit of the same, thinking it a small matter to give carnal
things for spiritual: Did ever the Apostles compel (or declare it lawful so to
do) any to lay down the price of their sold possessions at their feet, but only
received that which according to the motion of every ones spirit, was
voluntarily brought in unto them? Or did they ever force any (or declare it
lawful so to do) to give them any carnal things, but such as declared that
they had rec^ived spiritual things, and only so much as their spirits were drawn
out freely to give? But you, like Demetrius and the rest of the Silver-smiths
of that Trade, have long shouted, and continue so still, that great is your
Diana of Ephesus: and that if this truth I now hold ^orth should pr^vail, your
Shrine-making would be sp^iled, your trade overthrown, and your selves utterly
undone, who have nothing else to live by, and therefore by your nois must needs
provoke the multitude, and (if possible) draw them on your side, though you be
never able to give an account of this your unlawful noise and tumultuous
^lam^r. And I know you having so long time traded in this Merchandise, and
found therein what your souls lusted after, cannot but weep and mourn to see it
all destroyed and taken away: and yet the day is hastening, and the time is at
hand.

The Lord therefore in the tenderness of his m^r^y give you to see that you are
in Babylon, and call you out from thence, that you be not partakers of her
sins, and receive not of her plagues; and that you may be brought into the
Church of Christ, which is his body, to the eternal comfort of your souls, and
the praise of his glorious name,

April. 28* 1653. So prays the meanest of men, J. W.

Diverse Positions and Quaeries propounded unto all those who being of different
Judgments concerning the same, are willing in love and meekness to give or take
satisfaction.
I. Of Humane Learning.
BY Humane Learning I understand, Position. 1.
all that Science or knowledge that is or may be acquired by Natural power,
capacity and industry: To the attaining of which, the immediate concourse of
Gods Spirit is necessary, and the common grace of the holy Ghost requisite, for
the making men capable in diverse measures to attain the said acquirements; and
this concourse or common grace, I take with man's natural power and capacity,
inclusively, and not dis-junctively. And thus is Science by the Schoolmen
divided into that which is acquired, and that which is infused; and this humane
acquired Science I understand in the manner of acquisition, stands divided and
distinguished from that evidential and experimental knowledge, which men partake
of, by the sending in, inflowing, and indwelling of the Spirit of Christ. And
in this sense the most knowing men understand, and accept it.

That all this Humane Learning or acquired knowledge in its excellency and
perfection cannot, Position. 2.
per se, and ex propria natura understand, nor apprehend the mystery of the
Gospel; nor any way of its own nature can be advantageous unto it; but is
different from it, even hurtful and destructive unto the said end, as may
appear by these Arguments following.

The posse of it is clearly denied; (...)
The Natural man receives not the things of the Spirit of God, (...)
for they are foolishness unto him: neither can he know them because they are
spiritually disc^rned. A natural man cannot know them by any natural power or
acquisition. But the man of the most and greatest acquired knowledge in the
World is no more then a natural man: (...)
For that which is born of the flesh is but flesh, not spirit Therefore can he
not understand the things of the Spirit of God; they are otherwise discovered,
that is, spiritually, not carnally.

The esse of it, or matter of Fact is as clearly denied; Argum. 2.
Which none of the Princes of this world knew; (...)
for had they known it, they would not have crucified the Lord of Life. (...)
And again; for after that in the wisdom of God, the world by wisdom knew not
God, it pleased God by the foolishness of preaching, to save those that
believe. So that neither the Princes of Learning, either of the Jews or
Gentiles, did ever in their wisdom or learning know the mind of God in the
Gospel; nor we, or those that come after us, do, or shall in all our wisdom
ever know or understand it.

That Humane or worldly wisdom cannot know the mystery of the Gospel, Argum. 3.
is clear, because it is dissonant from, and contrary to the pleasure and
decree of the Almighty, that it should effect any such end: At that time Jesus
answered and said, Matthew. 11 25, 20.
I thank thee O Father, Lord of heaven and earth, because thou have hidden
these things from the wise and prudent, and have revealed them unto babes; even
so Father, for so it seemed good in thy sight. ^ Cor. 1. 19, 20
For it is written, I will destroy the wisdom of the wise, and will bring to
nothing the understanding of the prudent. Now that which is dissonant from, and
contrary to the purpose of God, cannot effect that which he has determined it
shall not.

This would necessarily set up (as it does too much already) a confidence in
the flesh, Argum. 4*
and a glorying in man's frail wisdom, and dark cognition; which is contrary to
that end which God has decreed in the saving of man. For he has chosen
foolish things to confound wise, and weak things to confound strong, 1 Cor. 1.
27, 28, 29.
and thing* that are not, to confound things that are; that no flesh should
glory in his presence. Therefore the knowledge of the Divine mysteries of the
Gospel, comes not by man's acquisition, lest it should be said, the Idol of his
Learning had told him this.

And as it does not, nor can understand the mysteries of the Gospel, Argum 5:
but they seem foolishness unto it; so all the wisdom of the flesh is at enmity
with, and destructive unto the way of knowing the truth, nay, even to the truth
it self; Because the carnal mind, Romans 7. 8.
or the wisdom of the fiesh, is enmity against God, and is not subject to the
Law of God, neither indeed can be. So that every mind naturally, though never
so learned (for no humane learning sanctifies the mind) is but a carnal mind,
and so is enmity against God, and is not, nor can be subject to his Law; but is
in truth and verity, earthly, sensual, and devilish Jam. 3. 15.


And if it be objected, Object. 1.
that though Humane Learning be an enemy to the Law of God while it is in a
natural and unsanctified heart: yet when the heart is once sanctified, and
truly turned to God, then it becomes a sanctified instrument, and a good
handmaid to Theology.

To this I answer, Solution.
that though the heart be truly sanctified, in which human learning does inhere
as in its subject; yet does it not follow that learning it self is, no more
then sin can be said to be sanctified, though the heart of a sinful man may be
truly said to be sanctified: for acquired learning by it self, and of its own
nature is nothing else but sin, and therefore remains so still, and cannot
truly and properly be said to be sanctified no more then sin. But if by being
sanctified, they mean that the providential wisdom of God does order it, or
make use of it for the good of his People, I opose it not, so that it be
understood, that that good flows not from the nature of acquired knowledge it
self; but from the Wisdom and goodness of the Spirit of God, (...) 8. 2^
who makes all things work together for the benefit of those that love him,
who are the called according to his purpose; And so no more can properly in
this respect be predicated of it, then of sin it self, which in that case
(though not as an entity; for Non entia, ad modum entium concipiuntur) is said
also to work for the good of Gods Saints.

Again, Ob^ect* 2.
if it be objected, That though Learning be not effectual to the understanding
of the mystery of the Gospel, yet it is prevalent to the completing of the
literal and historical knowledge thereof.

To this I answer, Soluti^^*
Though it may conduce to the gaining of literal and historical knowledge, yet
this is not ad idem, because it profits nothing, ^ohn ^ 63.
for Truth it self bears record, It is the Spirit that quickneth, (...)
the flesh profits nothing; and men are made able Ministers of the New
Testament, not of the letter, but of the spirit; for the letter kills, but
the spirit gives life. So that all literal and historical knowledge gained
by man's power, is but like the principle from whence it Flowed, fleshly,
earthly, deadly and destructive.

Consectaries.
Then all those that the world cries up for learned, Consect. 1:
from this principle of Humane Learning, are but with God called and accounted
un-discipled, un-taught, as Peter witnesses clearly, where speaking of the
Epistles of Paul, he says, in them some things were hard to be understood, 2
Pet. ^* 16.
which they that are untaught and unstable, wrest as they do also the other
Scriptures, unto their own destruction. Whereby it is manifest that by the word
(...) (which though usually rendered in the English Translation heedlesly, the
unlearned, yet properly signifies, the undiscipled or untaught, and therefore
commonly in the Latin is turned indocti, which points forth the same
significantly; for the word that signifies unlearned, or unlettered is (...),
which is, Homines illiterati, and idiotae.) He intends those that were
undiscipled, Acts 4. 13.
and had not the Teaching of the Spirit, and yet in the strength of natural
reason and carnal wisdom, wrest the word to their own destruction. So that all
that knowledge which flows from the natural man's acquisition, which the world
calls wisdom, is foolishness with God; and though the wisdom of God, which
stands only in the teaching of ^ is Spirit, be accounted foolishness with men,
yet this foolishness of God is wis^r then the wisdom of men. (...)


Then all those expositions and interpretations of Scripture that have been,
Consect. 2
are, or shall be made by the force and power of human learning, and man's
innate notions of wit and reason^ are no more then earthly, sensual and
divelish destroying all those that rely upon them, or trust in them. And all
preaching or expounding from this principle, is damnable both to speaker and
hearer: If the blind lead the blind, Ma^^h. 15. 14.
they fall both into the ditch. Then are not the most that pretend to preach,
seeing they do it but from this principle, those that take away the key of
knowledge, and enter not themselves, neither suffer those that would come in to
enter? Mat. 23. 13.
and therefore a most heavy woe belongs unto them, and will fall upon them.

Therefore when men teach and affirm, that without human learning, none can be
able Ministers of the New Testament, and condemn those that speak only out of
the teaching of the Spirit, and have little or no human learning at all, and
make use of little or none, but lay it aside, do they not plainly shut up the
Kingdom of Heaven from men, and neither enter themselves, nor suffer others
that would?

Then if the quintessence of all humane learning were as a Magisterial extract,
monopolized in one man, Consect. 3
yet were it no fit qualification for a Minister of the Gospel; for flesh and
blood reveals not these divine things unto men, M^t. 16. 17
but the Father which is in Heaven.

Queries*
Whether of two men, Query 1
the one having a great measure of acquired learning, but not the infused and
experimental* the other the infused and experimental. but no human learning,
are fitter to be chosen to the Ministry?

Whether any be fit or able to judge of the Spirit in another, Query 2.
that have it not themselves; or to give approbation, or witness to others of
that which they have not experienced in themselves; and consequently whether a
Nation or Commonwealth can justly set up persons to judge of the Spirit of God
in others, and to give them licenses to exercise those gifts of the Spirit,
that have not experienced the work of this Spirit in themselves, or not?

Whether or not, all that much magnified natural Reason (which we think
dignifieth us above, Query 3.
and distinguishes us from brutes) and all that human learning (which we
conceive exalts and rectifieth Reason) be the fruit and effect of the forbidden
tree, and is a spurious and adventitious faculty which man wanted in his
innocence, and was instilled into him by Satan in the fall?

Whether all that knowledge that a natural man has by nature, and from the
first Adam, Query 4.
and all that which by the same power he can attain, be not the same hellish
and serpentine wisdom by which the Devil rules his kingdom, or not? And
whether all the horrible and strange tenets sprung up in all Ages, with the
jars and disputes about the things of God, arise not from this smoke of the
bottomless pit of Satan's malice, stirred up in the Region of man's carnal
wisdom and human learning?

2. Concerning the Law.
By this word Law I understand a Light discovering what should be done,
Position 1.
and what ought not to be done, commanding the one, and prohibiting the other;
and this (according to the tenor of divine Truth) I find to be threefold.

1. Internal, and impressed upon the souls of all men naturally, and therefore
commonly called the Law of Nature, which the Apostle makes clear in these
words: (...)
which show the work of the Law written in their hearts, their consciences also
bearing witness, and their thoughts the mean while accusing, or else excusing
one another. And under this law were, and are all men, even as they are men.

2. External, (...)
as that of the Decalogue, commonly called Moral, engraven in the Tables of
stone, given unto Moses, and obliga ory unto all the seed of Abraham according
to the ^lesh, (...)
and all the Jews were under this Law, and it was their light and rule.

3. There is another Law which is internal, spiritual and eternal, The Law of
the Spirit of Life, (...)
as says the Text: For the Law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus, (...)
has ^reed me from the Law of sin and death: (...)
and this is also cal^ed the Law of Faith, and the perfect Law of Liberty; and
under this are all Sa^nts and (...) Believers: of the second and third we shall
(...) something.

That the Mos^ical Law of the Decalogue, (...)
commonly called the Moral Law, was only binding to the Jews, not to the
Gentiles unless as they became Proselytes, and embraced the Jewish Religion,
these Arguments confirm it.

A Law is always binding unto those to whom it is promulgated and made known,
not to others: (...)
Now the Law of Moses was promulgated to the Jews or seed of Abraham according
to the flesh, not to the Amorites, Canaanites, Persians, or other Nations, who
neither knew Moses, nor believed in, or worshipped the God of the Hebrews. For
he says, You only have I known of all the Nations of the earth; (...)
therefor I will punish you for all your iniquityes; (...)
and therefore the Pro^het prays, (...)
that God wou^d pour out his fury upon the (...) then that knew him not; (...)
and he suffered all Nations to walk in their own ways! for, he did not deal so
with other Nations, neither had the Heathen knowledge of his Law. Therefore was
the Law obligatory to the Jews to whom it was given, not to the other Heathen
Nations, that neither knew the Law nor the Lawgiver.

That Law by which (...) to be judged is obligatory and binding, unto him; (...)
but the Gentiles were to be judged by the internal Law in their own
consciences, not by the external and written Law of Moses: Therefore it was
that Law, not the other, that was obligatory and binding unto them. This
appears clearly in that of the Apostle; (...)
For as many as have sinned without Law, shall also perish without Law; and as
many as have sinned in the Law shall be judged by the Law, For when the
Gentiles which have not the Law, do by (...) (...).

(...) unto them (which (...) needs (...) was the ^aw Moral of Moses; and
therefore they were a Law unto themselves, and were (...) by the work of the
^aw written in their hearts.

(...) practice of the Apostles in not declaring the whole (...) to the
Gentiles that were conver^^d to the Faith, (...)
but only enjoining a branch thereof. (...) as the Text with^sseth; For it
seemed good t^ the Holy Ghost and to us, (...)
to lay upon you no greater burden than these nec^ssary things: and there as a
necessary thing he enjoy^^, avoiding of Fornication, which is a branch of the
Mor^l Law; now if the whole had been obligatory by Divine Right (as is the
Moral Law to all that are under it) they could not, not would have but enjoined
a part, and have suspended or omitted the rest.

It is undenyably true, that men are to be convinced by, and from those
Principles that they allow, and not from those they allow not: Therefore if the
Gentiles had been under the Law of Moses, or ought by divine Right to have been
under ^t, Paul and the other Apostles that preached (...) t^em would have
labored to convince them from those (...), and have urged against them the
testimony of the La^, and the Prophets, as they did against the Jews; or have
pressed upon them the receiving and obeying of the Law o^ Mos^s; but in their
practi^e there is found no such thing, but ot^erwise; for when Pa^l came to
Athens among^^ the Ethnic Philosophers, he told them not of the Law of Mos^s,
but took an occa^ion from that inscription, (...) unknown God, (...)
to preach Jesus Christ unto them, (...)
and to reveal unto them, him whom they knew not.

This Law Mosa^cal or Moral, (...)
was never given intentionally of God, that any should be justified or made
righteous by it: but that sin and w^ath might ^e rev^aled all mouths stopped, and
all men made thereby guilty before God. Which is clear (...).

(...)

God, long before the Law was given, (...)
had dec^eed and de^la^ed to justify man by faith, and therefore the Law could
(...) disannul the decree and promise of God made before, and (...) not
justify any: (...) years, (...)
could not (...)

The Law in its true and proper end justifies not, (...)
but (...), reveal wrath, and discovers sin. For we know that what (...) the
Law says, (...)
it says to them who are under the Law, that every mouth may be stopped, and
all the world may (...) guilty before God. Therefore by the deeds of the Law
(...) shall no flesh be justified in his sight: for by the Law is the knowledge
of sin; and it is the Law that works wrath. (...)
For the Law being spiritual does condemn whatsoever is carnal and not of its
own nature, that thereby sin might become (...). And it is this M^ses that ou^
Savior told the Jews did accuse them to the Father, though they trusted ^n him
(...)


Though the Law Moral was, and is a Ministry of condem^nation to those that
were or are under it, (...)
and so is glorious: yet is there a Minist^y of condemnation of greater glory,
which is the Gospel; by which men under a Gospel (...) are convinced of higher
things than the Law could convict them of. Which appears thu^;

The Law only condemned men (...) not doing whatsoever was written in it, (...)
and did not condemn them for no^ (...) in Jesus Christ, for the L^w is not
(...), And therefore was there need of a greater and clearer light to make
manifest that infidelity was sinful and damnable, and so we ^ee (...)
convinced not only by the Ministry of the Law as he (...), I was alive without
the (...) (...)
(...) the Commandment came, (...)
sin revived, and I died: but also by the Spirit of Christ in the Ministry of
the Gospel; Saul, Saul why persecute^t thou me? And he said, who ar^ thou Lord
And he answered, I am Jesus whom thou persecutest; wherein it is mani^e^t he
was convinced of his infidelity and enmity against Christ.

The Go^pel therefore being that true and pure light that convinces men that
not beleiving in the Lord Jesus is sinful and (...), Argum. 2.
which no light preceding did or could effect, (...) more glorious than all
other lights that went (...): (...)
(...) that light is come into (...) rather than light, because their (...)
(...)
and therefore, the Father judges no man, but has give^ all judgment unto the
Son: and he com^ in flaming fire to render (...) to all those that know not
God, (...)
and obey not the Gos^el of Salvacion, So that men are condemned under the
Gospel for not beleiving, as well as under the Law ^or not doing; and ^erein
appears the Ministry of the Gospel more gl^^ious then that of Moses.

That to a (...) Beleiver the Spirit of Christ is his Ruler and Conductor,
Posicion 5
and the Go^pel is interpreted by that Spirit his Rule and Guide; and no Law
besides whatsoever; which is evident from these grounds.

Because, Argu^. 1
if he be Christ's, he is led by the Spirit of Christ, and if a m^n have not the
Spirit of Christ he is none of his; Romans 8, 9, 1^
and it is this (...) that teaches a Believer all things, 1 John 2* 27.
and leads him into ^ll truth, (...)
(...) (...)
for he is taught of God: And this is that Spirit that (...) all things, (...)
yea even the deep things of God, which every Beleiver receives in some
measure ( and (...) the Spirit of the world) that he may know the things that
are freely gi^^n to him of God. So that this Spirit both searches out, and
teaches those deep things that no Law could ever discover or find out.

And it is as clear that the Gospel is his Rule, wherein his way is perfectly
painted out: Argum. 2.
The (...) shall liv^ by Faith* and without faith it i^ impossible to please
God; (...)
and whatso^ver is not of Faith is ^in; and the life that a Believer now lives
is ^y the faith of the Son of God, who loved him, and gave himself for him.
(...)
Therefore faith being the way ^e should walk in, (...)
and the Rule he should go by, it is mani^est the Law is not his Rule, because
not of Faith.

That which teaches a Believer to de^y all ung^dly (...) and not to be
conformable to this present evil world, A^gum. 3.
but to be perfect as his heavenly Father is perfect, Luke 1. 75.
and holy as he is holy, (...)
and to serve him in holiness and righteousness without fear all the days of
his life: that same is his Rule and his Guide* but it (...) clear, that the
Gospel and Grace of God ^eacheth (...) things, and therefor they are his Rule
and Guide, for the Scripture says, Let every (...) that names the Name of
Christ, (...)
depart from iniquity; (...)
for the grace of God that brings salvation unto all men, has appeared,
teaching us to deny ungodly lus^s, and to live soberly, righteously, and godly
in this present world: and therefore is the grace of G^d in he Gospel that
teach^th these things, the Rule and Guide of a Christian.

That which discovers to a Believer the fruits of the flesh, Argum. 4*
and likewise of the Spirit, is his Rule and Guide; but the Gospel (...) this
clearly, and not the Law; as say^h the Apostle, now the works of the flesh are
manifest, which are these; (...)
adultery ^ornication, uncleanness, lasciviousness, (...), witchcraft, hatred,
variance, emulations, wrath, strife, seditions, he^^sies, ^^vyings, murders,
drunkenness, and such like. But the fruits of the Spirit are love, joy, peace,
long^suffering gentlenes^, goodn^ss, fa^^h, meekness, temperance; against such
there is no Law.

That which discovers that to be sin and sinful which the Law did nor,
Argum. 5.
is the Rule and Guide of a Believer but the Gospel teaches that infidelity is
sin and that he which beluveth (...) is condemned already* and this the Law
neither did not could do; and therefore the Gospel, not the Law, is the
Believers Rule and Guide. And ^urther, that which (...) those things which the
Law did and others, higher and deeper, is the Rule of a Believer, and this is
the Gospel, not the ^aw; for it says, Ye have board that it was said by them
of old time, (...)
thou shall not commit adultery: (...)
but I say unto you that whosoever looks on a woman to lust after her, h^^h
committed adul (...) (...)

Whether ^ught the Gospel to be preached as (...) ghest and chiefest Light for
discovering the (...) of (...) or not, (...)
seeing we now live under a (...)?

Whether are all holy and godly actions of Saint duty or privi^edges, (...)
and do flow from an inward (...) of Divine love, rather than from an external
prec^pt of ^ear, o^ rewa^d, or not?

Whether Faith, Repentance* and all other Grace^ mentioned in the Gospel
(though in form of speaking laid down as requisite du^yes) be not free gifts
and gracious mercyes? And if they be free gifts and graces, why do men press
them legally, and not hold them out freely and Evangelically?

Whether do men that press Faith and Repentance as conditions or
qualifications, build upon the principles of Calv^^ or Armini^^?

Of the calling, and enabling of (...)
That Christ by his Spirit mani^esteth the mystery of the Gospel unto such as
in his own purpose and decree he has separated for the Ministry, (...)
and sends them ^orth in the power and evidence of the same Spirit; and all
that men have done in appoin^ing and se^^ing up of a Mi^istry, is of man and
not of God: one^y those that have had experi^nce of the same truth, have
sometime used to give their evi^ence, or wi^nels to the truth in others, which
was not their calling, but a testimony from others that such were already
called. And no humane power has any legal right to forbid or hind^r that such
may not speak what God has revealed in them* and unto them.

It ^s plain that God chooses Instruments* and they not him: (...)
(...) vea^ his Son in me, (...)
that I might preach him among the heathen, immediat^y I conferred not with
flesh and blou^; Neither went I up to Jerusalem to them that were Apostles
before me. (...)
No, he was an Apostle, not of man, nor by man, but by Jesus Christ, neither
was he taught it but by the revelation of his Spirit; and so are all those that
are truly called of God; for there is nothing but Christ by his Spirit only
that makes men able Ministers of the New (...), (...)
not of the Letter, but of the Spirit; for men as men, are not sufficient to
think any thing of themselves, but their sufficiency is of God. For though
there be diversityes of gif^s yet it is the same spirit that gives them; (...)
and though there be differences of administrations, yet it is but the same
Lord that does administer in them all; and though there be (...) of operations,
yet it is the same (...) that works all in all, and one Spirit that gives
out all these as it pleases.

And as he calls them, enableth them, and sets them apart, Argum. 2.
so he only sends them forth and the authority they have is only from him,
not from man For in the same manner that he was sent (which was in the power of
the Father, and not in nor from the power of man) so sent he them; and
therefore says, pray ye therefore the Lord of the Harvest, that he would send
forth Laborers into his Vineyard. (...)
It was not to pray Princes nor Magistrates, Bishops, nor Presbyters, (...) nor
Congregated Churches, to send forth Laborers, but the Lord of the Harvest
only. Unless we should a fly imagine, that the Lord of the Harvest (that has
ordained the Wheat to be gathered into his own Barn, (...)
and is that dear loving and provident Father that takes care for all his, nay
though a mother may forget her child, yet will he not forget his) should take
no care of besowing, planting, watering, nor increase o^ his Spiritual and
Immor^al seed, nor of the ^eaping of that Harvest which was not pu^chased with
corruptible things as Silver and Gold, 2 Pet. 1. 18, (...).
but with the precious blood of his d^ar Son: bu^ leave it to ignorant,
careless, or malicious Husbandmen It is he that is the Begetter an^ (...) of
this Spiritual Seed, the Planter, Waterer and Increaser of it. For neither is
he that planteth anything neither he that waters any thing, but God that
(...) (...)


And as they are sent ^orth by Him and his Spirit only, so th^^ authority and
weapons are spir^^ual, not ca^nal or (...) they speak in the power, Argum. ^.
(...)
evidence and demonstration of the (...), and with authority, not like Scribes
and Pharisees; for the weapon^ of their warfare are not carnal, (...)
but mighty in God: their power arises not from Commissions and Licen^^ given
or gran^ed from Magistrates, Parliaments, or numbers of person proudly and
Lucifer like, styled Divines, from Committees or Colleges Presbyteryes or
Academye^, nor from any such, but from the Lord of Hosts, the God of Heaven and
Earth, from Jesus Christ the Judge of quick and dead, and from that Spirit of
his that searches all things, yea even the deep things of God. The strength
and might of their weapons is not Academick and Scholastical Learning (the
^otten rubbish of Ethnical and Babylonish ruins) nor Fathers, Modern Writers,
Expositors, Commentators, (the ayery bubbles that ignorance, corrupt (...) and
humane Tradition has blown up, and gilded over with the unsuitable and
Heterogeneous title of Orthodoxal Authors) nor their wit, reason, nor
collected notes (the rotten Crutches to support lameness) no nor any of these,
or whatsoever can arise from the flesh, but only that Spirit of Truth, that
lends into all truth.

And as their Calling and power is only from God, Argum. 4.
so man has no power to obstruct or hinder it: for Peter and John said unto
the Council of the lews, (...)
Whethe^ (...) be right in the light of God, to hearken unto you more than unto
God, judge ye; for we cannot but speak the things that we have seen and heard.

If it be objected, Object. 1
that though it be (...) that God called many of the Apostles by his own power
and Spirit on^^y; yet that Calling was immediate and extraordinary; and
a^terwards those that were so called, did constitute and ordain others in an
ordinary way, by Imposition or Extension of hands, as diverse places of
Scripture do affirm. For this cause left I thee in Cr^^^, that thou should
set in order the things that are wanting* and ordain Elders in every City as I
had appointed thee. (...)
And neglect not the gift that is in thee, which was given thee by Prophecy,
with the laying on of the hands of the Presbytery: 1 Timothy 4. 14. Acts 13. 3.
And when they had laid their hands on them, and fasted, and prayed, they sent
them away. And when they had ordained them Elders in every Church, (...)
and had prayed with Fasting they commended them to the Lord, on whom they
beluved.

For those dist^nctions of Mediate and Immediate, Ordidinary and Extraordinary,
(...)
I find no mention of them nor ground for them in the Gospel, and they are but
the cunning and (...) devices of the Schools, and therefore need no further
answer, than rejection and denial, until they be made good from a better
ground than that fruitless and vain wisdom of man. And though in the calling of
many of his Ministers in diverse ages there were diverse circumstances used at
the calling of some, that were varyed, or omitted at the calling of others
(which they have therefore made an Essential difference; not knowing that
Circumstantials do not absolutely change the nature of Essentials) yet was it
the same God that called and sent them, and the same Spirit that enabled them,
and spoke in them, as says the Record of Truth; (...)
God who at sundry times, and in diverse manners, spoke in times past unto the
Fathers by the Prophets, has in these last days spoken unto us by his Son. So
many of the Apostles were called by the External and audible voice of Christ in
the flesh; yet that verbal Call had signified little, if the Spirit had not
called them inwardly in their hearts* for herein consisted their calling that
to them it was given to understand the Mystery of the Kingdom, (...)
but to others it was not given: And yet were many others as truly called as
they, that never saw nor heard Christ speak in the flesh: And Paul being
called, had a great light shined, and a voice spoke unto him, which those that
journeyed with him, could hear, though they saw no man; and yet were Timothy,
Titus, Barnabas, and others as truly called as he, in and by the power of the
same Spirit, though not in the same manner, rela^ing to circumstances: and yet
did, and do all the Ministers of Christ in all Ages speak from the same
Principle, and are sent forth in the same Power, and Spirit; so that
Circumstance makes nor substantial Difference, and so that part of the
Objection is of no force: for the Truth ^aith, (...)
Knowing this first, that (...) Prophecy of the Scripture is of any private
interpretacion. For the Prophecy came not in old time by the will of man: but
Holy men of God spoke as they were moved by the Holy Ghost: and so do all his
Ministers still until the end of the World,

For the Imposicion of hands it is manifest, Argum. 2.
that it was used in diverse cases, Luke. 5. 13.
as first by our Savior in ^^ring of Disceases, Mark. 1. 41.
and after by the Apostles in the like cases: Act. 3. 7.
and likewise upon little children brought unto him. Act. 5. 12.


And lastly by the Apostles and Presbyteries, Mat. 19. 13, 14, 15.
in laying on of their hands, with Fasting and Prayer: Bu^ it is as manifest
that by their layiug on of Hands, Fasting and Praying, Act. 1^, 3.
gifts of Grace (...) were given, Act, (...)
and those upon whom they laid their hands, and prayed with, did thereupon
speak with Toungs, and Prophecy, and so thereby received the Holy ghost, and
this was that gift that Timothy was exhorted not to neglect, and this was it
that Simon Magus would have bought with money. Tim, 4, 14 Act, 8, 1^.
Now to imitate an Ordinance, or practice an Administracion without the same
Power, Spirit, and ^ifts is but hypocritical, and vain: therefore unless that
they that pretend to ordain by Imposicions of hands, had the same Power, or
thereby could confer the same gifts, they ought not to practice the same
Administracion, because without the pr^sence of the same Power, and operacion
of the same Gifts wherein the Essence of it stood, it cannot be said to be an
Ordinance of God, but a Tradicion of men

Again the falling of the Holy Ghost, and the manifesting of its visible Power,
Argum. 3.
or Power visibly, by Prophesying, and speaking with Tounges; was not (as has
been commonly mistaken) a peculiar Ordinance for setting men apart for the
Ministry; but was commonly used to Converts, as Converts, and belonged to
Beleivers as they were such. Which is undeniably manifest: For when Philip came
to Samaria, and had preached the Gospel, Act. 8, 2, 14, 15, 1^ 17,
many there believed, add were baptized, both men and women: And Peter and John
were sent down unto them, who prayed for them, that they might (...) the Holy
Ghost (for as yet he was fallen upon (...) of them (...) (...) they were
baptized in the Name of the Lord Jesus.) Thou laid they their hands on them,
and they received the Holy Ghost: and these were both men and women, and not
all Ministers, unless every Believer be one.

And again, when Paul came to Ephesus, he found there certain Disciples that
had been baptized with the Baptism of John, but had not heard whether there
were any Holy Ghost or not, (...)
and these he baptized again in the Name of the Lord lesus. And when he had
laid his hands upon them, the Holy Ghost came on them, and they spoke with
tongues, and prophesied. And all these were about twelve. But it is not
apparent that this was done for Ordaining them for the Ministry, but as they
were believers, unless where the Scripture is silent, we must give it a tongue,
to speak out what we fancy, and suppose And therefore Timotheus stirring up
the gift that he received by Paul's hands, and the hands of the Eldership, ^
Tim. 1. 6, 7.
was but that gift of the Holy Ghost which he received as a Conve^t, not as a
Minister, unless (as I said) all Believer^ be (...), as in some degree they are
in truth and verity. For God has not given his the spirit of fear, but of
power, of love, and of a sound mind. And indeed there are two things
concer^ing this very observable. 1. That the Holy Ghost often ^ell upon those
that were converted, while the Word was in speaking; sometimes before they were
baptized with water, and sometimes before praying with them, or laying on of
hands; and yet these they usually baptized with water afterward; Acts 2. 4.
as is manifest: that at Pentecost they were all filled with the Holy Ghost,
and spoke with other tongues, as the Spirit gave them utterance. (...)
And while Peter yet spoke these word^ the Holy Ghost fell on all them which
heard the (...). Acts 8. 12, 1^, ^5,
^ Those upon whom the Holy Ghost was thus fallen, we ^in^e that they did baptize
them, but not lay t^eir hand, on them; but those that had been bap^^zed, and no
received this gift, (...)
upon such they put their hand^, that they might receive it. By which it is
clearly manifest, that imposition of hands was used to many that were baptized,
who had not received the gift, and so was common to Believers, as Believers, as
Peter (...) saying, As I began to speak, the Holy Ghost fell on them, as on us
at the beginning. Then remembered I the word of the Lord, Acts 11. 15, ^6, 17.
how that he said. John indeed baptized with water; But ye shall be baptized
with the Holy Ghost. For as much then as God gave them the like gift as he did
unto us, who believed on the Lord Jesus Christ; What was I that I could
withstand God? So that here it is clear, that this gift (and so the Type or
Ordinance of Imposition of hands) ^id belong to as many as believed on the Lord
Jesus Christ, and so was not peculiar to the Ministry only.

And as to that Scripture, Acts 13. where it is aid, Argum. 4.
and when they had ^a^ted, and prayed, and laid their hands on them, they sent
them away viz. and so urge that this Imposition of hands was then used for the
setting of Barnabas and Saul apart for the Ministry, and so was their Calling
or Ordination there unto (...) is manifest that these men were called before,
and did exercise the Ministry before; and therefore in the same place they are
called Prophets, and Teachers, (...); which they could not truly have been said
to be, unless they had been before called, and ordained of God. 2. When the
Holy Ghost desired to have them separated* they were there to (...) unto the
Lord, Acts 9. 2^, 29.
and fasting: so that they were (...) to and exercised in the work before this
their (...) for Pan^ preached presently after his Conversion, at Damascus, and
also at Terusalem; and it was three years after his Conversion before he came
thither; Gal 1. 18, 2^, 23.
so that this laying on of hands was not (a is commonly alleged) his Calling
or setting apart to the Ministry. 3. This separating or sending forth of Saul
and Barnabas, was for the accomplishing of that work whereunto he had already
called them; and so to employ them in several places or Countries: And when
they were to take this journey, the (...) of the (...) did (...) and pray with
them, and laid their hands on them, that the Lord might strengthen them, and
prosper them in the work. Which thing ought to be done, and is usually
practiced by Saints, when God sends forth any Minister to other places or
Regions to preach his Word.

And also as to that Scripture alleged in Acts 14. v. 23. Where the words are
(...) Argum. 5.
Quu^que ipsis per suffragia creassent Presbyteros: and when they had ordained
them Elders. Where say some is understood Ordinacion, and se^ting apart to the
Ministry: Others, the choosing of Ministers for particular places, by consent
of the people i^ extending the hand, 1. The Apostles no where mention any power
or skill that they had to call, 2 Cor. 3. 5. 6.
or make men able Ministers of the New Testament, but do witness, that it is
God that makes them, and others so, and he only sends them into his Vineyard,
and not men: and therefore the Apostles practice cannot be understood to
contradict their evidence in teaching; Mar 9. 38.
and therefore this cannot be understood of Ordaining and Calling men to the
Ministry; but of appoynting men to particular places, for order and convenience
sake that were already called and ordained of God. 2. Paul oftentimes gives out
his witness, and commendacion of particular men, testifying that God had
gifted, called, and made them faithful for that work of the Ministry, and so
sends them to diverse places to abide as Ministers: Romans 56. 21.
So he does of Timothy, Titus, 1 Cor. 16. 10
and many others: Now if Timotheus come, see that he may be with you without
fear: for he works the work of the Lord, 2 Cor. 8. 23.
as I also do. Whether any do enquire of Titus, he is my partner and fellow
helper concerning you; or our Brethren they are the Messengers of the Churches
and the glory of Christ. (...)
And so he gives his witness of Tychicus that he is a beloved Brother, (...)
and a faithful Minister in the Lord: and he testifies that he sent Timotheus
to the Thessalonians as a Minister of God, These. 3. 2.
and a fellow labourer in the Gospel, to establish them, and comfort them
concerning their faith. So that what was done of the Apostles, Presbyteries, or
Churches was but only a giving forth of their witness in behalf of such as God
had called, that by their testimony others might more willingly receive them
and their Doctrine. 3. When Timethy was left at Ephesus, and Titus in Greet to
set things in order, and ordain Elders in particular places, this was but to to
appoint such as God had alread^ called and gifted to remain at such part^cular
places, and to give their Testimony and witness, that they were so called; which
either they did by extending of the hand, when diverse so called and gifted were
present or nominated; or else that diverse being proposed, the believers of that
Church did by extending the hand, manifest which of them they desired to be
over them in the Lord: and then these they confirmed in those places, and
prayed that God might prosper them in that work, Acts 20. 28.
To feed the flock of Christ, which he has purchased with his own blood: and
these are the Pastors that should feed the flock, 1 Pet. 5. 2, 3.
not for filthy lucre, but of a ready mind: and not as being Lords over the
heritages. Not but that they are called before this, and this but a witness
from others that they are so called.

If it were in the power of Magistrates, Argum. 6.
Academyes, Presbyteryes, or Churches to send forth Ministers, then this would
be a continual, and standing power to propagate this Tribe, by a way of carnal
generation, as that of the L^vites, who were born Priests, or to the right of
the Priesthood; and so no age or generation need be without, as has been and
is practiced in the Kingdom of Babylon to this day, who all claim it by
Succession, and a carnal way of propagation; Bishops from the Pope, Presbyters
from them, and the Independent, and baptized Churches from the Presbyters: so
that here would be a perpetual Ministry set up by man, whether ever God sent
any or not. Col. 1. 26.
When the mystery of his Truth has been hidden from ages and generations, Acts
1. 7.
and is only manifest to the Saints according to the times and seasons that
the Father has put in his own power. And so all along the time of the
Apostasy these Locusts have swarmed out of the bottomless pit, Rev. 9. 3, ^
and covered the face of the Earth to devour the Fruits thereof, (and would
continue so still) though the Father of light never sent them, but the Prince
of darkness.

Consectaryes.
Then for a State or Commonwealth to set up, Consect. ^.
and appoint a National Ministry, from any judgment of men, Ministers, or
Churches: is to take unto themselves the power, wisdom, and right of the
Almighty, and to set themselves in his Throne, and so to be like the Scribes
and Pharis^es, John (...) 6, 10.
thieves and robbers, stealing, and attributing that honor unto themseves,
which is due to the Lord of the Harvest, who only (...) Laborers into his
Vineyard. This is but to set up a c^rnal Image of a Ministry, a Picture without
(...) their trust in him. (...)


Then those that have entered into the Sheepfold not by the (...), Consect. 2.
but climbed up some other way, the same are thieves and robbers; and the Sheep
neither know, nor hear their voice nor follow them: (...)
And he that cannot evidence his Calling to be immediately from and by the
Spirit of Christ, both by the witness of the same Spirit in his own Breast, the
power, and authority of the speakings of God in him, and by the Seal of his
Ministry, the Conversion, and Confirmation of Souls; is nothing else but a
thief and a robber, a deceiver, and an (...) and nev^r was sent of God, but
came of himself, and had (...) but from the Devil, and Man.

Then are (...) and Commissions from men to authorize others (...) and r^^ch,
vain, corrupt, and abominable and men that pretend to derive their power from
these, are (...) And if any thing be not of him, it will fall of it self; for
that which is crooked cannot be made straight.

Queryes.
I desire to know from whence the National Ministers have Q^ary 1.
their Calling, or Ordination? If from Man, who gave him that Power, and
wherein consists it? If from God, when, and how did they receive it, and
wherein stands the Power of it?

Are not they Thieves and Robbers, Query 2.
that steal and robb Christ of his honor? And do not these so, when they hold
that being bred in an Academy, and furnishd with such Arts and Learning as are
taught there, and to be Ordained by Bishops, Presbyters, or Churches, is the
true Calling, and Ordination of Ministers? If this be not to rob God of his
Honor, what is it then?

Do these that call themselves the Ministers of the Nation, Query 3.
seek Authority, Counsel, Countenance, and Protection from God only, (that
sends forth true Ministers, and bids them not be afraid of those that can kill
the body, and can do no more; but of him that can throw both body and soul into
hell fire) or from Men and Magistrates?

Why do these men if they be ordained of God, and sent out in the Power of his
Spirit, persecute, condemn, and scandalize others for witnessing that there is
no other Calling but what in the power of that Spirit? when it is certain, That
no man speaking by the Spirit of God, calls Jesus accursed. 1 Cor. 12. 3.


Of the wages and maintenance of Ministers.
That the Ministers of the Gospel have allotted and allowed them a maintenance
by the Gospel Order, Position 1.
is evident.

Because, Argum 1.
The Labourer is worthy of his hire, and the Lord has ordained that they which
Preach the Gospel should Live of the Gospel: 1 Cor. 9. 6, ^, 8 9, 14.
And he that is taught in his Word, should communicate to him that teaches in
all good things, Gal. 6. 6.

But it is as evident that this maintenance arises not from Tithes and
Oblations, Position 2.
as to the Levites under the Jewish Ministry* Nor by the power of a compulsory
Law made by a Commonwealth, or National Power, in giving or settling a National
Maintenance: But from the free Gift and Contribution of those individual
persons wrought upon by that man's Ministry, to whom they are to communicate
their temporal things, and the proportion such, as God shall move their spirits
to bestow.

Because the Jewish Ministry is now fulfilled, Argum. 1*
and ended, which was but the pattern of the Spiritual, H^b. 4. 14.
and now we have no other High Priest but Christ; and all his people being
members of his mystical Body, and stones in his spiritual Building, do not
pay Tithes in him who received them of Abraham, H^b. ^* 6, 9, 12.
in whose loins (according to the flesh) Aaron and his sons were: And therefore
the Priesthood being changed, there is made of necessity a change also of the
Law.

Secondly, Argum. 2.
our Saviors command to his Disciples when he sent them into the World, was
not that they should have Lands and Livings, Lordships and Dominion, Tithes and
Augmentations, (...)
but only food and raiment, and therewithal they were to be content. And they
were to provide neither gold nor silver, nor brass in their purses, nor scrip
for their journey, neither two coats, neither shoes, nor yet staves (for the
workman is worthy of his meat* so that they were to bargain or contract for
none, but only to receiv that thankfully of those whose hearts God stirred up
to give it freely.

Thirdly, Argum. 3.
when our Savior was ascended, and the Spirit was descended upon the Apostles
and other Believers, they did not force nor compel those that were converted to
give them so much or so much out of their estates, but those that freely would
sold them, Acts 4, 34, 35, 36, 39.
and laid the money down at their feet, and then distribution was made
according as every man had need; and while their goods were un^old, or not
brought into the common pur^ they might every one have don with their own as
they listed, Acts 5. 4.
as the Apostle told Ananias and Saphira; so that they witnessed that they had
no other warant to receive wages by, but only what was freely given unto them.

Fourthly, Argum. 4.
this Rule was not so strict neither that a Minister of necessity must receive
it, or else offend against the Rule; but it was so indifferent that Paul did
refuse it in the coasts of Achaia, and said, that none should rob him of that
boasting in those quarters, and adds the Reasons why he did so, (...)
which was not that it was not lawful for him to have taken what they freely
offered (as it seems he did in some other places) but that he might cut off
occasion from those which desired occasion, that wherein they gloried, they
might be found even as he; 1 Cor. 9 15, 16 17, 18.
and that he might make the Gospel of Christ without charge: for the necessity
of preaching it was laid upon him, (as it is upon all those that are truly
sent) and therefore whether he received any thing or nothing, a woe belonged
unto him if he did not preach the Gospel.

If it be objected, Object. 1.
That in those days the Magistrates were Heathen, and so took no care for those
that were Christians* yet now in our Nation the Magistrates are Christians, and
therefore ought, and may make a law and appoint wages and maintenance for their
Ministers.

I answer, Solution.
if suppositions were Apodictical proofs, then many would make ready
conclusions, Argum. 1.
and the way to knowledge would be very facile: for it is easy to suppose that
all the Magistrates in a Commonwealth, inferior and superior, are all
Christians, nay the whole body of the Nation it self, because they have a
national worship, and are all promiscuously called by that glorious name: but
there is a vast difference betwixt names and things being so, and being called
so; It is one thing to suppose, and another to prove, and but weak from the
denotation to argue to the thing, as though Judas might truly be concluded one
of the true Disciples of Christ, because he is called one of the twelve. No,
external forms do not demonstratively prove the verity of internal principles:
For he is not a Jew that is one outwardly, neither is that circumcision that is
outward in the flesh; Romans 2, 28, 29,
but he is a Jew that is one inwardly, and circumcision is that of the heart,
in the spirit, and not in the letter, whose praise is not of men, but of God.
Therefore when the supposition is proved, then it may be answered, in the mean
time ex suppositis suppositio, sequitur.

Again, if some of the Magistrates were truly Christians, Argum. 2.
yet Christ's kingdom being not of this world, Joh. 18. 36.
but a Spiritual one, they ought not to intermeddle with carnal constitutions
in his spiritual things, which he makes good by his own Spirit, Wisdom and
Providence, and not by the counsel or wisdom of the Princes of this world,
which comes to naught; and his servants are to wait upon him by a simple
believing, Matthew. 6. 33. 2 Cor. 5. 7.
and to walk by faith, and not by sight. Moreover, if they were Believers, they
might every one of them in his single condition give to him that taught him
what proportion of his own good things he had an heart to bestow, but not to
set down a law to judge over the conscience of his brother, because these
things ought to be done out of a principle of love, and not from the law of au
external command.

If they were all Christians, Argum. 3.
it was never yet that I could see proved, that they had power to settle a
maintenance for the Ministry of the Gospel; and the contrary to me appears an
undeniable truth, and that from these grounds,

1. Because the Rule of Christ, and the practice of his Apostles were only for
a free and voluntary contribution from the free will offering of those whose
spirits were wrought upon by that particular Ministry to which they should
contribute: now for Christians to pretend to have power to make a law for the
maintenance of his Ministry, and the good of his cause, and walk contrary to
the Rule of Christ himself, to me seems strange that it should be accounted
lawful.

2. There is no Magistrate has any power to make a law of those things he
perfectly understands not; for how can a right judgment be given where the
intellect is not clearly formed? Now it no where appears that the Magistrates
have the spirit of discerning to know the Ministers of Christ infallibly from
the ministers of Satan; and therefore might as soon maintain and advantage the
one as the other.

3. As was said before, it crosses the way of providentiall confidence, and
simple believing and waiting upon God, and so cannot be lawful for them to do.

Consectaries.
Therefore for a Magistracy by a compulsory law to settle a maintenance for a
National Ministry by Tiches, Conset. 1.
Augmentations, or in any other way, is to act against the ordinance of Christ,
and to make the Commandments of God of none effect by the traditions of men.
(...)
And therefore they should learn to give unto Caesar the things that are
Caesar's, (...)
and to God the things that are Gods.

Then for Ministers to be bred at the Academies, Consect. 2.
and get Orders, Licenses, or Seals from human authority, thereby to get fat
Benefices and rich Livings, is to make the Ministry a mere Trade, and to go
contrary to the command of Christ, and the practice of the Apostles, To make
bargains with the people to have so much, and so much, for exercising their
Ministry, is to preach for pay, and not for Christ* To press the Magistracy to
provide for them, is to distrust the promise and providence of God, and to fly
to the arm of flesh, (...)
and therefore they are doubly accursed both for making the arm of flesh their
refuge, and withdrawing their hearts away from the living God; Hear ye this, I
pray you, ye Heads of the house of Jacob, (...)
and Princes of the house of Israel, that abhor judgment, and pervert all
equity* They build up Zion with blood, and Jerusalem with iniquity. The Heads
thereof judge for reward, and the Priests thereof teach for hire, and the
Prophets thereof divine for money; yet will they lean upon the Lord, and say, Is
not the Lord among us? No evil can come upon us. And when the Ministers preach
and cry out, If Tithes be taken away, and Augmentations cease, and there be no
wages nor maintenance allowed by law, ^how should we live? what shall maintain
our families? who will then preach the Gospel? The people are hard-hearted, and
will give us little or nothing; if no public maintenance, no Gospel. Are not
all these the complaints of an evil, adulterous, and unbelieving generation,
that preach faith to others, even of things high and spiritual, and yet
themselves dare not trust God for food and raiment? Matthew. 6. 32.
Do not the heathen seek after all these things, and have you no more faith
then they?

Then those that are the true Ministers of Christ, Consect. 3.
know that the necessity of preaching the Gospel is laid upon them, and will
preach in season and out of season, whether they have any thing or nothing;
nay, will not cannot in conscience take any thing carnal from any man, to whom
they have not sown spiritual: and not that neither, but according to the
free-will-offering of their minds, to whom they have ministered spiritual
things* and in this point, by their fruits ye shall know them.

Queries:
Did thou, Query 1.
who call thy self one of Christ's Ministers, when Christ called thee and
sent thee forth (if ever he did so) make a bargain with him what thou should
have for thy labor, without which thou would not do thy work, or but
negligently and with murmuring?

Did ever Christ teach thee to clamor and cry to the Magistrate to settle thee
some maintenance by a law? or to exact it from the poor labourer, Query 2.
who never yet received a spiritual benefit from thy teaching, nor has no
heart to give thee any thing but against his will?

Can thou ever make it appear to be a duty incumbent upon the Magistrate to
settle thee wages by a law, Query 3.
or it lawful for thee to take it? If thou can, it is high time to produce
thy strong reasons, lest thy god Dagon fall to the ground and rise no more, and
with the rest of thy brother Craftsmen to shout high, lest your shrine-making
be marred for ever.

Will not thy Trade be as long-lived as the world, Query 4.
if Academies can give thee qualifications, men an Ordination, and the
Magistrates maintenance? But Babel must fall*

Concerning the power of Magistrates in spiritual things.
That the Magistrate has power both coercive and punitive, Position.
against al evil either in words or works, whether it be against a private or a
public interest, is manifest.

Because all men, Argum. 1.
even as men, have this impressed in them by the light of Nature, principles
sucked in by education, or a light from God upon their spirits, That the end of
being is its own preservation; and as this is ingrafted in one, so it is in all
individuals; and as they would not be willing that any other should hurt or
destroy their being, nor hinder the mere necessaries of its conservation; so it
is contrary to natural justice, and right reason, to hurt or destroy the being
of another, or to hinder them of mere necessaries for their conservation. And
all Laws were at first intended, and should be exercised, to preserve unto
every Numerical person (as far as possible) these grand privileges of Natures
universal Charter; and therefore what acts or words soever may tend to the
obstructing or frustrating of this end, is in the Magistrates power to restrain
and punish. And for this purpose the Apostle bears witness, Romans 2, 14, 15.
that the Gentiles who had no external Law given of God, were a Law unto
themselves; which did show the work of the Law written in their hearts, their
conscience bearing witness, and their thoughts the mean while accusing or else
excusing one another.

The Scriptures make this clear, Argum. 2.
commanding every soul to be subject unto the Higher powers, because there is
no power but of God. Romans 13. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.
The powers that be are ordained of God. And whosoever resists the powers,
resists the Ordinance of God, and they that resist, shall receive to
themselves damnation. And these are the Ministers of God for the defense and
praise of those that do well, and for the punishment of those that do evil,
for they bear not the sword in vain. And therefore the Apostle concludes that
the Christians should be subject unto these Ministers (though Heathens) not
only for wrath, but also for conscience sake; and for this reason was Tribute
to be paid unto them, 1. Pet. 2. 13.
because they were the Ministers of God attending upon that very thing
continually. And thus were all the Saints commanded to obey every Ordinance of
man for the Lords sake, 1 Timothy 2. 1, 2.
whether of Kings or others; and that prayers and supplications should be made
for Kings, and all that were in authority, that they might lead a quiet and
peaceable life in all godliness and honesty.

But now the grand scruple is, Position 2.
what power the Magistrate has in those things that are called spiritual: And
by things spiritual I understand those things that the Apostles and other
Saints taught and practiced as Christians; for as men, they were in their words
and actions (as is proved before) under the power of the Magistrate. And in all
those things that they held, taught, or practiced, I find evidently these two.
1. They never required any thing of the Magistrates (as they were Christians)
but only liberty to speak out the things that Christ had manifested unto them;
and quietly to meet together to break bread, pray, baptize, edify, or
communicate to the wants of one another* 2. Nothing that they spoke o^ did (as
Christians) was any (...) contrary, hurtful, or obstructive to the Civil Laws,
(...) Jews or Gentiles.

I never read that they desired of the Magistrate honor or riches, Argum. 1.
Lordships or dominions, nor to be called Doctors, Masters, Rabbis, or to have
the pre-eminence and chief seats one above another, as ours now-a-dayes that
call themselves Christians, must have a Law to make them Masters, Doctors and
Batchelors of Divinity (as they are pleased vainly to style them) and that not
had but with a vast expense to the Commonwealth (in allowing such large
Revenues of Lands and Tithes to maintain an hive of Drones, Wasps and Hornets
in their Monkish Cells) which might be better employed for enabling men in Arts
and Sciences to fit them for Civil employments, and not to paint up a
blader-blown Clergy (another falls title they have assumed to themselves) with
such idle Terms and vain Epithites. It is true that the Disciples being but
earthly and carnal, had much ado among themselves Who should be greatest, but
our Savior tells them, That the Kings or Rulers of the Nations did bear rule
over their people, Mat. 20^ 20. 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28.
and were called gracious Lords, but it should not be so among them, but he
that would be greatest should become least, and he that would be master, should
become as a servant. And Zebedees children (being of the same carnal principle
with the rest) could desire to sit the one at his right hand, and the other at
his left in his Kingdom but he told them, they knew not what they asked. And
the Scribes and Pharisees loved the uppermost seats in the Synagogues and at
Feasts, Mat. 12 38. 3^.
and greetings in the Marketplace, and to be called of men Rabbi, Rabbi, but
the Disciples were forbidden these things.

I never read that the poor Disciples, Argum. ^.
or any other Saints desired of the Magistrates tithes, or augmentations, money
or maintenance for their pains taken about the things of Christ. They desired
not of the Magistrates any Authority, Licenses Commissions or Orders for their
preaching the Message that God had put into their mouths. But now our Sons of
Belial will strike their fleshbook with three teeth into the pan and caldron,
and if the people will not give them of the Sacrifices they they will take it
by force, and so wage law against the poor people; but the judgment of Elies
sons is hastening upon them, and if they make not a great uproar and noise,
their great Diana falls for ever.

I never read that the Disciples, or Christians in their days, Argum. 3.
did desire the Magistrate to punish kill, accuse, condemn or imprison any that
received not their doctrine: no, they were but to shake off the dust of their
feet as witness against them. (...)
Nor did they desire to have the Magistrate to punish any that fell away from
their doctrine into other opinions, though never so gross; but all that they
did was by spiritual power to deliver them to Satan, and that also for this
end, even for the destruction of the flesh, (...)
that the spirit might be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus.

All that I find that they declared the Magistrate had no power to hinder them
of, Argum. 4.
was the speaking the things of God, wherein they were bound to obey God rather
then men, and in this case the counsel of Gamaliel was both good and precious,
That they should abstain from these men, and let them alone: (...)
for if that counsel or work were of men, it would come to naught: But if it
were of God, it cannot be overthrown, and so in opposing of it, men may be
found fighters against the holy Ghost.

2. Neither did they act or speak (as Christians) any thing that was
destructive, Argum. 1.
or any way hurtful to the power of the Civil Magistrate. For though they were
accused of diverse evils and misdemeanors, as of being enemies to Caesar, the
Temple, and Laws, perverting of the people, Acts 1^ 26. (...)
for speaking blasphemous words against the place of the Jewish worship, (...)
against the Law, to trouble the Cities, to teach customs not lawful for them
to observe that were Romans, and that they turned the world upside down: That
they were seducers, heretics, (...)
and that their Sect (as they were pleased to call it) was spoken against every
where, and that Paul was a pestilent fellow, (...)
a mover of sedition among all the Jews throughout all the world, and a
ringleader of the Sect of the Nazarens. Yet were all these accusations false
and forged, and could not be proved against them: (...)
For neither against the Law of the Jews, neither there against the Temple, nor
yet against Caesar, had they offended any thing at all.

Nay, Argum 2.
they were so ^ar from being disturbers of the peace, or injur^ous to any man,
that their very Doctrine was to have, as much as in them laid, (...)
peace with all men, (...)
and not to suffer ^or (...) doing, (...)
but well: And it was their practice, (...)
that being reviled, they did bless and being persecuted, they did suffer, and
being de^amed they did entreat. Nay, they were so far from doing evil, or
opposing the civil Power, that Paul being wrongfully accused by the Jews, had
such confidence even in the justice of the Heathenish Magistrate, and his own
innocence, with God^ assistance, that he appealed unto Caesar. But it is not so
with those that pretend to be Saints now; (...)
for they will not be content without maintenance from the Magistrate, or else
they will resist and oppose.

The civil Magistrate has not any positive power to punish any man, Position
3.
or restrain any, for their l^ght, judgment, conscience, opinion, or way of
worship, if so be they act or speak nothing that is distractive or destructive
to the civil Power, or tending to the breach of the peace, or to injure one
another; which is manifest from these grounds,

Nothing ought to be restrained, Argum. 1.
condemned, or punished by the civil Magistrate, in relation to Judgment and
Opinion, but as it is certainly and in^allibly known to be erroneous, false,
blasphemous, or heretical nor any thing ^estrained or punished in respect o^
worship, but what is infallibly known to be idolatrous, supe^st^^ous, and
contrary to the mind of God. But it is manifest, that man, ^s he is natural,
knows not these things, but they are fooli^^ness unto him, (...)
neither can he discern them; for men ar^ altogether gone out of the way, (...)
and there is none of them that understands these things, no not one. And then
shall man be a judge of what he knows not, and give sentence where he
understands not at all? And if it be thought that Magistrates are to judge and
punish these things as they are Christians, because it is said, that the Saints
shall judge the world. (...)
1. It cannot be proved that they are ^hristians because they are called so,
nor that they are Saints because they think and call themselves so; for, not he
whom man approves, but he whom God approv^th is justified. 1 Cor. 10. 18.
2. And though it be true that the Saints do and shall judge the world, yet it
is not by using any of the Civil Power or Authority of the world: for Christ's
kingdom, of which they are members, is not of this world: (...)
and thus Paul did not judge those that were without; and the Saints judging of
the world was in spi^itual power, by a declarative witnessing against all
unright^ousness of men, but no using of the civil sword; for their weapons
were not carnal but spiritual. And ther^^ore the Magistrate is not the
competent judge of these things, and therefore has no power but what is
negative, and so ought not to forbid them.

But though the Magistrate had the spirit of discerning, Argum. 2
without error or mistake, of what was true or false, light or darkness, both
in relation to opinion and outward worship, yet is not the right and judgment
of these things given or granted unto him, though he be as a god upon earth,
but it is the great and high privilege and prerogative of Jesus Christ, by
whom God will judge the world, (...)
according to Paul's Gospel, and the very ^entiles for walking contrary to their
own light, were judged of God, and not by men, (...)
and of him given up unto vile affections, as a just punishment for sinning
against light; (...)
and therefore the Father has committed all judgment unto the Son, (...)
and he it is that is appointed judge of quick and dead: for all power is given
him both in heaven and earth (...)
for it is God himself (...)
in these cases, and not man, that is and will be Judge.

Again, Argum. 3.
what Tares soever the envious man has sown in the field of the world, of
lies, falsities, errors, blasphemies, heresies idolatrous and superstitious^
worships are not to be weeded forth by every ^ervant, (...)
nor by the Magistrate, le^^ they pluck up the wheat also, but both must be let
alone until the harvest and then the Lord will send messengers that shall make
a sepration: Therefore the Magistrate ought not to meddle with the plucking out
of the Tares of errors, heresies and false worships; for thereby usually the
wheat is plucked up, and the tares left; for the Saints of God have always been
persecuted and slain under the pretense of rooting forth errors, and destroying
false ways of worship, and under color of doing God good service: For it is
evident, that since the Magistrates have assumed to themselves the title of
Christians, and pretended power, nay also will, and skill of promoting the cause
of Christ, of setting up forms, professions, and making Creeds, Confession, and
Articles of Religion by the power of civil authority; as also to eradicate
errors, heresies and false worship, Antichrist has by that means had his
growth and increase; Apostasy has entered and prevailed, Truth almost in all
Ages has been stissed and suppressed, and the Saints persecuted and butchered,
as is too evident in Martyrologie and Church History. And this is all the
advantage that the truth of Christ ever gained, or can have from the authority
of men, and the power of the world.

Also the record of truth does witness that God in his unsearchable wisdom and
providence has decreed, Argum. 4. 1 Cor 11. 19. Mat. 18 ^^
that heresies must come, that those that are approved amongst his Saints may
be made manifest, and that it is of necessity that offenses must come, though
there be a woe to those by whom they do come. And therefore the power of man or
Magistrates cannot frustrate the purpose of God, but while they labor to do
what belongs not unto them, they become fighters against God, and so are given
up to blindness, and because they believed not the truth, are given over to
believe lies.

Moreover, (...)
this power has been assumed by men and Magistrates from no better a ground
then the rotten foundation of infidelity and pride; out of infidelity, in
fearing and distrusting that God was not powerful and wise enough of himsef in
his own spiritual strength to carry on and accomplish his own work without the
wisdom and power of sinful, weak, and vain man, (...)
whose breath is in his nostrils, and his help vain: When the Kingdom and Cause
of God is built only upon himself, that everlasting Rock of Ages, and Christ
is that Stone, (...)
though refused of men, is chosen of God, and precious, and is become the chief
in the corner. Even that stone coming out of the Rock without hands, and
crushing in pieces all the Images of brass, Dan 2. 34.
Iron or clay, that ever the power of man erected or set up. And it Proceeds
out of pride, man vainly thinking in his wisdom and power to make the work of
God more effectual then the Lord has determined, and by the rod of fear and
terror to drive more into heaven then ever God has decreed shall come there,
or to force them in sooner then his appointed time, or by a door that he never
opened; not considering that the weakness of God is stronger then the strength
of men; 1 Cor. 1. 25* John 6. 44*
and the foolishness of God wiser then the wisdom of men, and that no man can
come, nor be driven unto Christ, Argum. 6.
except the Father draw him.

Lastly, the Magistrate pretending to be judge of the consciences of men, does
usurp the place of God; for God himself will immediately reign there, and none
can persuade nor change a heart but God only, Ezekiel. 18. 31. and 11. 19.
for it is he that takes away stony hearts, and gives hearts of flesh, takes
away the old and gives new ones, and no creaturely power is able to do it. And
also thereby many are forced to become hyporites, and to sin against the light
of their own conscience, or else to undergo loss of goods, or liberty, bodily
hurt, or death, which is cruel and tyrannical, nay even against the law of
Nature: for who would desire to be compelled against the light of his own
conscience? and therefore how unjust is it to compel another? This may make a
man a Prosselyte, to say and profess with his mouth, that which is contrary to
the intent and belief of his heart, and so to be twofold more the child of
perdition then formerly. Object. 1,


Some object, That the Jewish Magistrates had power to punish idolatry and
blasphemy; and why have not Magistrates amongst the Christians the like power?
Solution.


1. Because we are not under the same administration, Heb. 7. 12.
nor are their Laws obligatory to us: For the Priesthood being changed, there
is made of necessity a change also of the Law.

2. Because we have not the same means to instruct and direct us in giving
judgment in such abstruse and deep matters; for they had extraordinary
direction by the Vrim and Thummim, and by their Prophets, both of which we
want: we have none that can make fire come down from heaven, as Elija did, to
confound Baals Prophets withal: and therefore where there are not like
premises, there cannot be like conclusions. Others object, Object. 2.
that there is a power that the Disciples had and exercised, to cen^ure and
deliver to Satan, as in case of Incest; and of Hymeneus and Philetus denying
the resurrection: and the Angel of the Church in Thyatira is threatened, Rev. 2.
20.
beacuse he had suffered Iezebel to ^each and seduce the servants of God; and
theref^re that there remains a coercive and punitive power, if not in the
Magistrates at least in the Ministers and Churches, and therefore it is lawful
to exercise that.

1. It is true, Solution.
that the Apostles and primitive Churches had by their directions a power to
retain sins, and to deliver to Satan; but this was not an external power of
man, or the sword, but was spiritual, and stood in the power of Christ; for
the Apostle says, In the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, when ye are gathered
together, 1 Cor. ^. 4. 5.
and my spirit, with the power of our Lord Jesus Christ, to deliver such an one
to Satan for the d^struction of the flesh, that the spirit may be saved in the
day of the Lord Jesus. Now this was done in the power of Christ, and so as no
Church now can show the like, though they seem to imitate it.

2. This was not done by inflicting any external punishment upon him, but that
the rest of the saints were to forbear such an ones company, 1 Cor. 5. 11.
even to eat with him, and consisted not in some violent thrusting out such an
one from their houses or company, but in withdrawing themselves away from him:
for the Apostle warns and commands the believing Thessalonians in the name of
our Lord Jesus Christ, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 6. 14.
that they should withdraw themselves from every brother that walked disorderly;
and if any did not obey his word in that Epistle, they should note such an one,
and have no company with him, that he might be a shamed.

3. For that of the Angel of the Church in Thyatira, it contains a very high
and great mystery, more then man's wit can conceive by the letter; yet it is
clear that they should not have suffered her: but what was it they should have
restrained or resisted her withal? not with carnal* weapons (for the Saints
wear not such) but with spiritual, which were mighty and powerful in Christ.

2. Those rebuked there were such as had her doctrine, Rev. 2. 22, 24, 25.
and those threatened were such as had committed fornication with her, and
therefore by suffering her, was to have embraced her doctrine; but those that
had it not, nor had known the depths of Satan, they were not reproved not
threatened at all, but exhorted only to hold fast until Christ should come.

Consectaries.
There is nothing in the Gospel either in doctrine or practice, Consect. 1.
that is distractive or destructive to the civil power, nor any way hurtful or
injurious unto men. And therefore whatsoever doctrine or practice is destructive
to Magistracy, or tends to break the peace, or injure any man, the same has no
ground in the Gospel, and is an evil that the Magistrate has power to
restrain and punish.

All the liberty that Christians have, Consect. 2.
or can claim of or from the Magistrate, is only negative and permissive, that
they should not forbid and hinder them to declare the things that God has
revealed in them, and commanded them to utter, nor prohibit them the way of
their worship and serving of God.

The Magistrate has an unquestionable power to restrain and punish every word
and action of man that tends to the disturbance of the civil State, Consect. 3.
or to the prejudice of others, and is bound to uphold nothing of Christian
Religion, either with the sword, or with money or maintenance: and therefore
those that require pay from the State to uphold their Religion, ought in that
point so far to be restrained, as to be denied it, and none allowed them.

Then whatsoever a man's opinion or way of worship be (if he live peaceably
amongst men both in word and work, Consect. 4.
and faithfully and obediently toward the Civil power) the Magistrate (ought
without respect to his judgment, or way of worship) to protect and defend him,
and not at all to intermeddle with him in regard of either.

Queries.
If the Magistrate (not having infallibility of judgment) do by law establish
one or more forms or Religion, Query 1:
and compel men to conform thereunto, may not one or all those be idolatrous
and erroneous? and some way not allowed by law, be the only way of truth in
Christ?

Can a Magistrate drive more into heaven then the Father has determined to
draw thither? Query 2.
or can he be wiser then the Spirit of Christ to teach and direct men the way
to eternal life?

Does any form of religion necessarily entail the grace of God upon those that
walk in it? Query 3.
Or can any form keep out the Spirit and Grace of God when it will enter?

Does any power of the Magistrate really and truly change the heart, Query 4.
though it make the tongue confess, and the person in external worship conform
to the Form and Religion established?

Is it not against the law of Nature, Query 5.
and the light imprinted in us, to do that to another we would not have done to
our selves, to compel another when we would not be compelled?

If any out of tenderness of conscience, Request. 1*
lowliness of mind, or love of the truth, desire further satisfaction in the
particulars handled herein, I shall be willing (as far as the Lord in mercy
shall enable me) either by conference or otherwise, to give them what content
and assistance lies in my power.

If any one be unsatisfied with the truths herein contained, Request. 2.
and judge them unsound or erroneous, and so have a desire to confute them, or
argue against them, I only entreat them plainly and fully to make it manifest
out of what principle they speak, whether from the Spirit of truth, or from the
ground of Human learning and Reason, and according to the presence of the Lord
with me, they shall receive a responsion.

FINIS.

