A DIALOGUE BETWEEN Mr. MERRIMAN, AND Dr. CHEMIST: CONCERNING JOHN SERGENTS
Paradoxes, in his New Method to Science, and his Solid Philosophy.

By T.W.

LONDON: Printed in the Year, School.

A DIALOGUE BETWEEN Mr. MERRIMAN and Dr. CHEMIST: Concerning John Sergent 's
Paradoxes, in his New Method to Science, and his Solid Philosophy.
Merriman, WHAT you are hard at work Doctor, well! Does the Philosophers Stone
appear yet? You Will never leave off till you have lost your Brains, and your
Money; for generally this is the effect of your Study, Poverty, and Madness;
for I never knew any of you but died Beggars; though once perhaps Masters of
plentiful Fortunes, and this is enough to drive any Man out of his Wits. Come,
come, be advised by a Friend, leave of this foolish Study, lay aside this
imaginary Philosophers-Stone, and apply thy Wits in some thing that is
substantial and advantageous.


Dr. Chemist, Why faith Merriman, I am almost weary on it, for after so many
Years of hard Study, and the throwing away my Money, my Time, and my Brains,
(as thou say,) when I thought I was upon the point of having the
Philosophers-Stone in my hand, some unlucky Accident or other turned all into
Smoke, and I was to begin again.


Merr. What Is here, the Method to Science and Solid Philosophy by J. S. ha, --
ha, -- ha. --


Dr. Ay! Have you seen them? They are ingenious Pieces I can assure you, and
the Author is a Man of parts; he has found out that which no Man since the
Creation could find out but himself; Nay, nor never had been found out, had not
the Divine Providence made choice of him above all Men of the World to Midwife
into the World this wondrous Child, his Method to Science.


Merr. A wondrous Child indeed, a wondrous Monster, framed in his own Brain,
that has neither Head, nor Tail; ugly, and deformed in every part of it: The
Beats can lick their Cubs into some shape, but he can never lick this Whelp of
his into any.


Dr. Have you read the Book Merriman, or do you only speak the malicious words
of J.S's Enemies?


Merr. Yes, I have read it, and read it, and studied to find out something of
sense in it, and still could meet with nothing but Nonsense. I Will tell you, it
looks as if it had been writ by Oliver's Porter in Bedlam, it is just like a
Quakers Sermon, take it in pieces and you will find a great many good sayings in
it; but take it all together it is a piece of Nonsense. And this you call a
wondrous Child, and product of Mr. J. S's Brain, and brought to light by the
Divine Providence, as he proudly and vainly tells us, I must tell you Doctor,
the expression out of his his Mouth nauseates, and smells rank of Blasphemy.


Dr. It Is strange Merriman, that because you cannot comprehend his
Demonstrations, that therefore you will run down the Book for Nonsense.


Merr. It Is much more strange Doctor, that you who would be thought a Man of
sense, should justify and approve such Paradoxes as his Book contains: Why,
what is more nonsensical then to see a fellow in an Age of dotage, with one foot
in the Grave, peep out, and with a speaking Trumpet tell the World they are all
Fools and Coxcombs; that there is not one Man of Sense to be found in it, and
that there never was a Philosopher till J. S. appeared, and that he was sent by
the Divine Providence to teach the World (which was lost in ignorance) the
Method to Science. Does not all this look like a Man come out of Bedlam, who
thinks every Man mad but himself? And would not one take him for the Ass in the
Fable, who had hid himself some time in a Pit, and at last comes out very
gravely in a Philosophers Cloak: His Master asked him where he had been so
long? And he answered, that all that time he had applied himself to the study
of Philosophy, and that he was become a very great proficient, and Doctor, but
for all his boasting of his Science, his Cloak was no sooner pulled off, but
every one knew him to be an Ass; and so he was severely chastised for his lying
and vaunting.


Dr. Come, come, Merriman, this is all Malice, and putting upon J. S. Why can
you believe that a Man of his Sense, Learning, and Piety, can be so senseless
and pron'd as to run down all Mankind as senseless Animals that had never learnt
his Method to Science? Or, that there never was any true Philosophy till he
appeared in the World?


Merr. Nay Doctor, it is far from Malice, or putting upon him, for I have
Demonstration for what I say; his own words Doctor, and that is Demonstration
enough. Seeing Philosophy reduced to this lamentable condition, Alas poor
Philosophy! and that solid rationality, and all truth in natural Objects were
thus in eminent danger to be overrun, and born down by imaginary Conceits; and
apprehending that God's Providence had fitted and enabled me J. S. to redress
such great Mischiefs; O brave J. S. I thought it became me to reinstate Reason
in her Sovereignty over fancy. Sol. Phil. Ep. Ded. p. 8. and in the Preface he
says, Indeed I must own I have a high opinion of my Principles, and my Method,
which Nature and God's good Providence have laid and established, pa. 11. What
think you of this? Is not all this Luciferian Pride! For my part I am so far
from believing him to be appointed by the Divine Providence to be the Worlds
Master, and to teach them this New Philosophy, that I begin to suspect him to
have a Cloven Foot, and that no body but the Devil set him on work.


Dr. The truth of it is, he does infinitely abound on his own Sense, and it was
always his fault, which has drawn him into a great many Follies, which has
occasioned him many disturbances; I wish he had been advised and either have
writ more modestly, or not at all.


Merr. How is it possible Doctor for this Man to be advised, who judges all
other Men Fools, and himself the only wise Man in the World! He tells you, that
the World has been sufficiently pestered already with Books of Philosophy, nay,
Volums blown up to a vast bulk with windy and frothy Probabilities, and petty
inconclusive Topics. Preface to Solid Philosophy, ibid. and who writ these
vast Volums, that contained nothing but windy, frothy, Probabilities; only the
greatest Wits and Masters in the World, but ('it is no matter, they are all Fools
co Mr. S.) but behold now in this latter Age appears a wonder, a Man that
speaks no windy, frothy, Probabilities, nor petty inconclusive Topics; but as
often as He opens his mouth speaks Demonstrations, and no Man can see them but
himself.


Dr. Whose fault is that Mr. Merriman? If Men will not see when the
Demonstration lies before them, that is no fault of Mr. J. S. but if Men would
not be prejudiced, and would but open their Eyes and look through Mr J. S's
prospective, they would see Demonstrations fly from his Mouth and Pen as thick
as Attomes; but let another Man speak, and then you shall behold nothing but
windy frothy Probabilities. O he is certainly a rare Man in this Art of
Demonstration; Good man, with what tenderness and compassion he speaks of the
World's ignorance, and blindness. Alas! says he, how few Men are there who
will profess to demonstrate in Philosophy, or to reduce their Discourses to
Evidence? Ibid. p. 13. Without doing which, and abiding by the Trial, perhaps
there is not one word of truth in all Philosophy, nor any thing but learned
Romance in all the Universities of Europe. And will not you say then that the
World was reduced to a deplorable condition, and that he had good reason for
writing and publishing his Method to Science, and his Silod Philosophy?


Merr. I must confess Doctor, that if his saying be a Demonstrotion of the
Worlds ignorance, it was in a miserable condition. Alas poor World! Not a word
of truth in all Philosophy, nor nothing but learned Romance in all the
Universities of Europe? A sad business Doctor upon my word; and alas this must
all be true according to J. S. For how possibly could the Philosophers and the
Universities of Europe profess to demonmonstrate in Philosophy, or reduce their
Discourses to Evidence, who were totally ignorant of J. S's Method to Science;
and consequently had no Solid Philosophy. Poor ignorant World! What a blessing
is it, that the Divine Providence should send a Man at last to inform our
ignorance, and teach us the way of Truth, what not one word of Truth, and
nothing but learned Romance among so many learned Men, and so many famous
Universities? Why, this is the Devil, who can believe it? I Will tell you what
Doctor, this requires a swinging Demonstration, the World will never believe it
else; and I suppose he writ to be believed. I Will tell you what, it sounds very
harsh to tell any one Man that he is a Fool, but to go about to demonstrate him
so, is certainly the part of a Madman, for no Man desires to be thought a Fool,
though he be one; but for a Man to go about to demonstrate all the learned Men
that are, and ever have been in the World, to be a company of empty, windy,
frothy Fools and not to have one word of Truth or Solid Philosophy amongst
them, is the part of a Man distracted. Faith Doctor, the best way for your
friend J. S. to come off, of this business, is to say he was intoxicated when
he writ these Books, for they smell rank of the fumes of an intoxicated Brain.


Dr. Well, but if he makes all this out by a clear Demonstration, what will you
say to him then? For there is not one thing that he asserts, but he
demonstrates.


Merr. Ay, so he tell us. It Is granted, there cannot be a clearer proof of a
thing then when it is cleared by Demonstration; but do you or any Man in the
World see this Demonstration of his, does it appear evident to you, that you
are a windy, frothy Fool, and that there is not one word of Truth in all you
say, or write, and ask the same question of all the learned Philosophers, and
famous Universities in Europe; and they will all tell you they see nothing of it,
and that nothing but a Man distracted would assert such a nonsensical
Proposition. Now to demonstrate, and no Man to see the Demonstration, is a
Paradox that no one could be the Author of but J. S. ask my Lord D. to whom he
dedicates his Book, if he believed himself a Blockhead before he read J. S's
Method to Science, or his Solod Philosophy, and see what he will say to you?
Well, so much for Ep. and Pref. Now let us have a touch at his Method to
Science, and his Solid Philosophy, and observe a little what Paradoxes we shall
meet with there, for I can assure you he is a Man that does infinitely abound
with them.


Dr. And I Will warrant you will call his Definition of Notion a Paradox, for which
I can assure you he values himself highly; a Notion (says he) is the very thing
it self existing in my understanding, (and this he says) is so manifestly true,
that were it otherwise, it is impossible any Man living should know any thing
at all. What think you of this? Solid Philo. p. 27.. 3.


Merr. What think I of it? Why I cannot but laugh to see the Ass mumble
Thistles, though they prick his chops he will be doing with them; he tells you he
foresaw the World would laugh at him for a Man of Paradoxes, at the first view
of this Proposition; but for all that he was in mighty pain till he was
delivered of it, though he were sure to be laughed at, and he is much in the right
of it; for I can assure him, he has had as many laughers as have read his Book:
Well, I Will say that for him he is a bold Britain, he sets the World at defiance,
let all the wise Men say and think what they will, if this Proposition is not
true, every Man's a Fool, for it is impossible he should know any thing. Give me
leave Doctor, this is a dangerous Man to live in a Commonwealth, a Man can call
nothing his own that this Man gets a Notion of. Why, if a Man has a pretty
Daughter, or a handfome Wife, he no sooner gets a Notion of them, but whip
they are gone; he has them himself, in the twinkling of a Bedstaff. He comes into
a Pasture where there are Droves of fat Bullocks, Flocks of Sheep, Herds of
Swine; why, he no sooner sees them, but slap, he sweeps them all away: Show him
a Gold Watch, a Diamond Ring, a Rope of Pearl, a Purse of Gold, he no sooner
gets a Notion of them, but whipshius, doxious, they are all gone, he has them
all in his possession. And this he thinks may be a subject matter of laughter;
whatever others have had, I Am sure I have had my belly full, I have not laughed
so this seven Years: Bless me! That it is possible for an Old Man to be so
rediculous; I Will tell you Doctor, I would have you advise him to set up for a
Conjurer, I fancy he would make a rare one, does he not look something like
one? I fancy he does?


Dr. Come you are merry, you are merry, Mr. Merriman; I see you have not your
Name for nothing, why do you think that because he has these Real Substantial
Things really in his Head, that he carries them away with him, and they remain
no longer where they were when he had his Notion of them? No, no, though he has
them all really in his Head, or Understanding, they still remain where first he
conceived a Notion of them, he does not carry them away with him, that is a
gross conception indeed.


Merr. Hold a little Doctor, what signifies a Notion, if a Man does not carry
it away with him? Now if these Substantial Bodies really remain where they were
before his Notion of them, how possibly could these Real Substantial Bodies be
in his Head! Unless you will say that a Substantial Body can naturally be in a
Thousand places at the same time, which is as great a Paradox as the other;
give me leave Doctor to ask you a question, J. S. comes into a Field of Asses,
and he no sooner sees them but he conceives a Notion of them, he goes home
having conceived, does he carry the Asses along with him, or no? Or, do they
still remain in the Field where he first conceived them?


Dr. Why, they still remain in the Field, though he have a true Notion of them.


Merr. Very pretty, but how does this stand then with J. S's. Definition of
Notion, for Notion (says he) is the very Ass it self, no likeness or Idea, but
the pure Animal with all its Modes. Now if he has carried the Beasts home with
him, they are not in the Field; if they are still in the Field, it will prove a
false conception, and the Notion will become Abortive: And then what will
become of poor J. S. for if he loses his Notion, he loses all? If the very
Asses are not in his Head, it is Demonstration he has nothing in his Head; and
for my part I shall never believe they are there, till I hear Him Bray. I have
heard of some Men who have had Maggots and Worms in their Heads, and these
little Animals deprived them of the use of Reason, they were little better then
Fools; what must we say then of a Man whose Head is filled with Bulls, Bears,
and Asses? Is not this a likely Man to make Demonstrations, and teach the World
the Method to Science and Solid Philosophy?


Dr. Why prithee Merriman, this is all sham, and banter; I hate to see a Man of
parts run down at this rate without Rhyme, or Reason; he produces no less then
fifteen Demonstrations to prove his Deposition and you fall a laughing, and cry
it is nonsense; is this a rational way of Arguing.


Merr. Doctor, when a Man tells me that the Moon is made of Green Cheese, and
that the Stars are in the Center of the Earth, that every Man walks with his
heels upwards, that a Man has not free Will, would you have me to discourse
this man rationally? No, I laugh at him, and think he is only fit to be tied up
to a Rack and fed with Hay, as you do a Horse; but because you desire it, I
answer to his first Demonstration. When I simply apprehend the Thing, or any
Mode or Accident of it, this Operation of my Understanding is within my mind,
(says J. S.) and completed there. Sol. Phil. p. 29. I grant it: Therefore the
Thing apprehended, which is the Object of that Operation must be there
likewise, ibid. I distinguish: The Thing apprehended must be there likewise,
Apprehensively, Intellectually, or Representively I grant him; and this we call
an Idea of the Thing; but that the House, the City, the Ass, apprehended, is
Really and Substantially in the Understanding, I deny: And now where is his
Demonstration, and all his other Demonstrations? For they are all built upon
this Bottom, and the consequence is so extravigantly absurd, that it deserves
no other Argument then laughter: But come no more of this, let us to another
Paradox.


Dr. Come let us hear what other Paradox have you found out?


Merr. Why, what think you of this: That it is infinitely more impossible, an
Angel should be changed by God after the first Instant, then by any other
Spirit. Method to Science, p. 309. 310, 311, 313. And what he says of an Angel,
the same consequently he says of a separated Soul. What think you of this, is
not this a notorious Paradox? What does this Man mean? Was Lucifer and his
fellow Angels the first Instant created in a State of Grace, or no? Are they
still in that State? If not, how comes this Change? It could not be from God
(says J. S,) all his Power could not make it, nor from the Angels themselves,
nor from any other Spirit, or Creature whatever. And yet a notorious Change is
made, even from the State of Grace, to the State of Sin. From a State of Bliss,
and Glory, to the State of Damnation. From the State of a glorious Angel of
Light, to a damned Devil, condemned to eternal Darkness. From a good Angel in
Heaven, to a black Devil envellop'd in eternal Torments. These are eternal
Truths Doctor, delivered to us by an eternal Wisdom, infinitely beyond J. S's
Paradoxes, which he has the impudence to call Demonstrations. These are such
demonstrative Truths I tell you, that they cannot be denied without renouncing
the Christian Faith. And yet J. S. is that bold Man who has done it, can I say
then any thing more modest of him then that the Man dotes in his Old Age?


Dr. But to come off of this Point, supposing he should deny that Lucifer and
the fallen Angels were created in the State of Grace, and Glory, where are you
then? Then your Argument falls to the ground.


Merr. Why, if this be his way of coming off, the last error will be worse then
the first; here he will make God a Tyrant, to create such an infinite of noble
Spirits for no other end then Damnation. No, no, I can never believe (though he
is a bold Man) that he will be so bold to strike at the Attributes of God in
this Nature. However, he has drawn a bold stroke for the Deists, and Atheists;
He has cleared Hell of all the Devils, not a Devil to be found there, co' J. S.
For if God with all his Power could make no Change in the Angels, after the
first Instant of their Creation, nor they could make none in themselves by
their Pride vainly thinking to raise themselves to the equality of a God, then
they must still be in Heaven, where they were in the first Instant of their
Creation, if in Heaven, it is clear they are not in Hell; and if they are not in
Hell, then there is no Hell; for no Devil, no Hell. Thank you good Mr. S. co'
Mr Athiest, if your Doctrine be true, we fear no Devils, that we have been
Bug-bear'd with so long: Your humble servant good Mr J. S.


Dr. But what do you say he holds the same opinion of the separated Souls? I
don't remember it.


Merr. The very same Doctor, but this is an old Mumpsimus of his old Father
Blacklo, which he is reviveing for fear the old Gentleman should be forgotten.
It was his opinion that the separated Souls in their intermediate State were
not to be delivered thence till the Day of Judgment, till the reunion of the
Soul and Body, and his reason was, because a pure Spirit could admit of no
Change; but his Scholar has outdone the Master, goes a step farther; and tells
you that by the Omnipotent Power of God they cannot be freed thence. God (says
J. S.) withal his Power cannot do it, nor all the Sacrisices and Prayers of
the Church effect it.


Dr. Why, Merriman, at this rate you will persuade me that he denies praying for
the Dead, which to my certain knowledge is false; for I my self have seen him
take Money, and good found Sums to pray for the Souls departed.


Merr. If he does, he is a damned cheat, to take the Peoples Money to pray for
that, which he belives is impossible to be obtained: No, not by the Omnipotent
Power of God. For according to his Principle his Prayers can neither relieve
them out of Prison, nor in the least mitigate their pains, and sufferings. God
(says he) though all powerful, cannot possibly Change their State. These poor
people are bravely helped up with such Men's Prayers: Well, he is a rare fellow,
this is your learned S. Deliver me from such Doctors.


Dr. Fellow! But why fellow? Prithee Merriman treat the Gentleman with civiler
Language, and be not so unmannerly, for I can assure you he stands very fair in
the Eyes of a great many Men, whatever your Judgment may be of him.


Merr. I am sorry for it Doctor, Yes faith heartily sorry for it; for that
renders him the more dangerous Man, and as for my unmannerlyness, I think I
treat him but too civilly, who is so unmannerly to all Mankind, Nay, even to
God himself. What shall I call a Man that goes about to rob God of his chief
Attributes! But let us proceed.

What think you of this, it is a piece of drudgery (says J. S.) misbecoming the
Essence of God to be the Immediate Cause of Motion or Change. Meth. to Science,
Appen. p. 404.. 26.


Dr. I do remember the expression, and was displeased with it when I read it.


Merr. Pray tell me Doctor, who was it that created the Angels, was it not God?
Nay, was it not God who was the immediate Cause of this Change. If he were not,
pray assign me who or what was, for we hear of nothing but God that had a Being
before the Angels; or was there here any Change made? Glorious Spirits brought
to light out of a confused Chaos of nothing. If this was a Change, it could not
possibly be made but by the immediate hand of God; because, there was then no
other Cause or Being but God to cause this Change; when a Sinner is converted,
and becomes of a Child of the Devil, the Child of God. Is this a Change or no?
If it be, who was the Cause of it? Not God (says J. S.) it is drudgery
misbecoming the Essence of God to be the immediate Cause of such a Conversion
or Change. Was this Change made without the immediate Operation of the Holy
Ghost? If the Divine Grace was necessary for such a Change, by what hand was it
immediately conveyed to the Soul, but by God's? for I never heard in all my
Divinity, that either Men or Angels could give or be the dispenser of God's
saving or sanctifying Grace. Pray Doctor when you see your friend J.S. tell him
he would do much better to apply himself to the Study of true and solid
Divinity, then thus to puzzle his Brain with his New Imaginary Philosophy: For
a learned Doctor of Oxford being ask what he thought of S's Method to Science,
said, that it is a piece of unintellible Nonsense; and yet this Man with all his
Nonsense sets up to teach all the World. Pray good Mr. Doctor, did God make Man
or no? Or was it an Angel, or some thing else that made him! If he did, was
there any Change or Motion made when this Thing called Man was made? Who was it
that formed this piece of Earth with a rational Soul, was it not God? And was
there no Change made here by the immediate hand of God. A piece of Earth made
an intelligible rational moving Creature, was this the immediate work of God or
an Angel; No, it was a drudgery (says J. S.) misbecoming God to be the
immediate Cause of such a Change as this. Poor S. I am sorry for thee with all
my heart, that thou pretendest to so much Philosophy, and art so prodigiously
ignorant in Divinity. Why, hark you Doctor, did this Man ever read the Holy
Scriptures? If he had, he would have found there, how that God in the beginning
created Heaven and Earth: Let us make Man (says God) to our own Image and
likeness, Genesis c. 1. and the whole Chapter tells us how God is the immediate
Cause of the whole Creation; and was all this done without Motion or Change?
What stuff what nonsense is this? I protest Doctor I am ashamed of such
Paradoxes as these from a Man that pretends to Sense or Religion; I can assure
you his way of demonstrating shows him to be a Man of neither.


Dr. So, so, Merriman, this is very fine to run down a Man of his parts at this
rate; why do you imigine that if these Paradoxes of his (as you call them) had
been so absurd as you are pleased to make them, that the Learned Zealous
Reverend Bishops had not taken notice of them, and damned them before this time
of day; why are you Mr. Merriman the only discerning Man in England to Judge
and Damn M. S's. Principles in the Method to Science and Solid Philosophy.


Merr. Nay prithee Doctor don't trouble me with the Bishops not taking notice
of his Nonsense, and Paradoxes; perhaps they have not read his Books, and if
they have, if they will be negligent in their Duty, what is that to me? I am
not to answer for them, but I am to answer before God, if I see a Man running
down Piety, Religion, and God himself, if I do not Detect the Villainy, and stem
the Tide; at least put a helping hand to it, if it be in my Province. I Will tell
you Doctor, Novelties in Religion are Monsters, that every good Man ought to be
up in Arms against to destroy them, for fear they should destroy us.


Dr. Why can you imagine that he has sent these Books into the World without the
Bishops knowledge? No, he is a better Man then so, to send any thing abroad
that may lie under a Censure without their Approbation.


Merr. I wish he were a better Man then he is, Ay faith, heartily wish it, and
if he has had the Bishops opprobation, he has the less to answer for, and they
the more: But come let us to another Point.


Dr. Another Paradox you mean.


Merr. I do so, you are much in the right of it. Nay, it is what he himself
Judges the World will take it for, not only a Paradox, but a very wild one, and
little less than Blasphemy; that is, if he should deny that God can annihilate.
But behold the good Man immediately at this thought bounceth into Rapture and
tells us, that out of the profound and dutiful Reverence I bear to his Wisdom,
Goodness, and Power, I must declare it is my Tenet that he cannot; any more
than he can witness a Falsehood, or be liable to any other imperfection. Solid
Philo. p. 184.. 11. I remember Spondanus tells us that this was one of John
Wickleff's errors, that God could not annihilate any thing; which was condemned
with his other Heretical Articles in the General Council of Constable. Quos omnes
Synodus rursum diligenter examinatos perpetuo decreto damnavit. Annal. Spondan.
Anno. Christi. 1415. N. 43. It Is no matter, though eternally damned by the Synod.
J. S. must declare that he is of John Wickleff's opinion, it is positively his
Tenet. Now the question is Doctor, whether J. S. or John Wickleff is the better
Christian, was the opinion damnable in John Wickleff, and Catholic in J. S?
What think you of this Doctor, this is a Paradox with the Devil at the tail
on it?


Dr. Hold, hold, Mr. Merriman, not so fast, pray hear his Reason. You judge
(says he) that this limits, and consequently, takes away the Omnipotency of
God. But I, (says he) on the contrary think I have far more reason to judge,
that the other Opinion argues Impotency, and ours settles his Omnipotency.
Omnipotency, (says Mr. S.) Is a Power of doing all things: And not of doing
nothing. To Act, is to do something; and therefore to do nothing or make a
nothing (which is the Sense of Annihilation) is not to do.


Merr. Omnipotency is a Power of doing all things, (says J. S.) I say
Omnipotency is a Power of doing all things or not doing, what God pleases;
though it is in his Power to do, what he is pleased not to do. It Is in the Power
of God to create another World, besides this. But God does not create it, is he
therefore less powerful? No, before God created the World, was he less powerful
then he is now? No, and yet it was in his choice, whether he would create it or
no. God, we say, was creating from all eternity; and yet nothing was created
but in time. Now, because God does not create as many Worlds as J. S. would
have him, therefore, co' he, he is an idle God and does nothing. To act (says
he) is to do something, and therefore to do nothing, or make a nothing, (which
says he is the sense of Annihilation) is not to do. I positively deny that this
is the sense of Annihilation, whoever understood that to annihilate was to make
a nothing, but J. S.? No; no, to annihilate requires no more in God, then to
withold his all-protcteing hand, and what Gods Providence is pleased no
longer to support, and protect, that momet cease to be, and is disolved into
its first nothing. As for example, I hold a Glass in my hand, then (says J. S.)
you do something. I do not hold the Glass; then (says he,) I hold nothing, I do
nothing. But by my not holding the Glass, the Glass falls, and is broken and
destroyed. How! By my doing something or nothing? call it what you please, the
Glass is broken, and destroyed, by my not holding it in my hand. So the great
Omnipotent Creator, holds this great Globe the World. It Is in his power to let
it go, or hold it fast, is it not? if he is necessitated to hold it fast, then
we are not obliged to him for his protection; if his Divine Providence will
hold it no longer but let it fall; will it not be disolv'd to its first
nothing, and so become annihilated. If not, why then the World can subsist
without Gods Providence; which according to my Divinity is Blasphemy; but
according to J. S. it is a profound and dutyful reverence he bears to the
Wisdom, Goodness, and Power of God. So that supposing God should withold his
hand from the protection of some little Animal, and by this Cessation of Gods
Providence over this Creature, it becomes annihilated: Mr. J. S. immediately
falls out with God Almighty, and roars against his Wisdom, Goodness, and Power;
and so he fairly takes his leave of his God, that he had such a profound
reverence for.


Dr. But does not the tell you that God is a pure actuallity of Being, actually
and ever exercised, and undetermined to Act; that Actual Existence being
essential to him, his peculiar effect is, to give Existence, or to create
things; and to conserve them in being, which is a perpetual Creation, or
Creation continued; and therefore, that it is more diametrically opposite to his
Nature, to cause a Not Being, then it is for Light to cause Darkness.


Merr. And is God Doctor Chemist a less actuality of Being, because he did not
create the World, or demonstrate the Effects and ad extra^ of his eternal
Creating just that critical Minute that J.S. would have had him? or does God
cease to be a Good, Wise, Powerful creating God, because at his pleasure he
with draws his protecting hand from some inconsiderable Fly, or Worm. But after
all, the question is not as to matter of Fact, whether God will withold his
hand from conserving some inconsiderable Insect; and suffer it to perish, and
be annihilated. But the question is peremtorily, whether God of his Omnipotent
Power can possibly do it, if he so pleases; and J. S. answers positively that
though it may seem to the World a wild Paradox, and little less then Blasphemy
that it is his Tenet that he cannot. Now Doctor, what is the meaning of all
this, what can be the design of belching forth such Blasphemies, such wild
Paradoxes, such unheard of Novelties, such monsters in Religion? I Will tell you
what Doctor, it looks with a very ill Face, as if the Man in his Old Age had a
Mind to start a New Religion, and leave it behind him for the giddy-headed
World to puzzle their Brains, and run Mad after. I remember we read that the
Athenians made a Law that whoever proposed any thing New to be inserted as a
Law in the Commonwealth, was to do it with a Rope about his neck, to let him
know that if the Senate did not approve of the Novelty, he was immediately to
be hanged. And what shall we say of such Men who are introducing such
monsterous Novelties into Christian Religion, so notoriously to the dishonor
of God, and Christianity? All Heretics (says Tert.) promise Reason and
Knowledge; all of them assail Faith with Humane Understanding. But God teaches
us another way, which is to adore his Mysteries with submission of Spirit, and
make of our own proper Judgments a Sacrifice on the Altar of our Faith. If J.
S. would do thus, he would not thus foolishly perplex his old Head, and the
World with his New Method of Paradoxes, and Nonsensical Philosophy.


Dr. This is very sharp, Merriman, upon Mr. J. S. prithee why so angry?


Merr. I Will tell you Doctor, I think I am not sharp enough in a Cause of this
Nature, where Gods Honor, and the purity of Christian Religion is so
desperately struck at. Besides this is not the first time that he has been
playing these tricks; he is conjuring up the old Devil in Philosophy, that he
formerly raised in some of his Treatises of Divinity. But I will not expose him
more then needs must; I Will let his old Errors sleep in Oblivion, since they
have been sufficiently handled by the Ar. Bp. of Dub. and damned by some of the
Faculty of Sorbon.


Dr. Damned by some of the Faculty of Sorbon, do you say? This is what I never
heard before.


Merr. Yes; yes, damned by some of the Faculty of Sorbon, and in these Terms,
that three Propositions of his could not possibly be explicated in a Catholic
Sense. If you desire to see the Propositions come to my House and I will show
you them.


Dr. Well, Merriman, I Am resolved I Will acquaint Mr. S. of all you have said of
him, and I Will warrant you he will give you a Rowland for your Oliver.


Merr. Ay, do, and spare not Doctor, I have said all this I can assure you, on
purpose that you might tell him; perhaps it may do the Man some good. And if he
desire to know my Habitation, you may tell him also, I live next door to Dr. H.
if he asks on which side on him; Answ. on the Thumb side. If he asks in what
Street; Answ. King Street. If where is that King Street; Answ. In
High-Holbourn. If where is High-Holbourn; Answ. At the West End of London. If
where is London; Answ. About the middle of England. And if where is England; in
such a part of Europe; if where is Europe? Answ. In the North-West part of the
Earth. Method to Science, p. 92. And thus Directed, he will not fail of finding
out Your Humble Servant, Robbin Merriman.


Dr. But why all these Particulars?


Merr. Why this is to show you, that I am well read in J. S's Method to
Science. This is his very Direction to find out that Skilful Dr. H. And so my
Noble Doctor, good Night.


FINIS.

