The way how a Religious Correspondencie may be procured and maintained amongst
the Churches. For their mutual safety, and the advancement of the Gospel at
home and abroad.
IF it be granted, as it is an undeniable truth, that the Godly party of this
Nation is more deeply engaged to endeavor a Religious Correspondency with
Foreign Protestants then any other people in all the World; then it will
follow, that they are bound to lay to heart more then others, the way how this
Correspondency may be procured and maintained. Now the way which the Lord has
ordained for the building up of the Body of Christ, amongst the Saints; is that
only, which in a Gospel work, to advance the Truth, and hold forth the light of
life, is to be chosen amongst the Churches; and I suppose, that none can hope
for a blessing upon any other way. As for this way, I find it expressed by the
Apostle to be this. That the Saints who depend upon Christ as upon their head,
and so make up his Body, should endeavor to edify themselves in Love, by that
which every joint supplieth, Ephesians. ^.15, 1^.
according to the effectual working thereof in the measure of every part: where
two things belonging to the communion of Saints, are implied and presupposed;
as also els-where expressly commanded.

First, that the Saints should not look to their own things alone, Phil. 2.4.
but every one to the things of others also.

Secondly, that the end for which we should look to the things of others as well
as our own, Heb. 10, 24.
should be to provoke them to love and to good works. And if these duties be
not at all minded, upon a true spiritual and Gospel account it is evident, that
the main and fundamental rules of Gospel-communion is wholly neglected:
therefore such as in the midst of these distracted courses of men in the World;
desire to appear Saints: and shine as lights, ought conscionably to lay to
heart; what in this present Juncture of time, The Question.
should be done by us in conformity to this Rule; namely, what the Gospel way
and manner of proceeding, should be in our present case, to provoke the Saints
at Home and abroad to love and good works.

To answer this Question, without presuming to prescribe any thing to others I
shall humbly suggest that which may be without Prejudice taken into
consideration by all, The Answer.
and be made use of by those who are in places, as God shall direct their
spirits, and give them opportunity.

Let it then be thought upon whether the Leaders of our Public Affairs, both
in spiritual and humane ways, such as offer themselves up unto Christ, should
not think it a part of their duty to encourage those, who holding the
foundations of Faith and Obedience, make Profession of the Ordinances of
Christ; to own one another in that whereunto they have attained: and to
associate one with another so far as they are come, to walk by the same Rule,
for mutual Edification; notwithstanding some differences which may be still
found amongst them, in extra fundamental matters, according to the Apostles
advice, Philip. 3.15, 16.

And because this Association ought not to be the effect of a a Magistratical
Power, but should proceed from the Principles of holy communion, according to
the effectual working in the measure of every part: that it may be the fruit of
a free willing Gospel obedience, by that which every joint supplieth: therefore
each party should be entreated by those that have an interest in them (nor
should any think it below him, how great soever, to entreat others for Christ's
sake in Gospel concernments) to declare as from themselves these following
matters.

1 What agreement there is between them and other Parties professing the Gospel
in this Nation? and how far they think themselves united with them, in matters
of Faith, of Worship, and of Discipline? 2 What the Gospel Rules of mutual
forbearance are, which they think themselves bound to observe toward others in
cases of difference; till God give in further light, that in the mean time, the
occasions of strife, of scandals, and of breaches may be avoided. 3 What their
advice is Concerning the way of Reconciling differences, and how they may build
up one another in that whereunto they have attained, notwithstanding lesser
differences; which overthrow not the foundation. 4 What course they would
advise to be taken, to repress the scandalous and disorderly ways, wherein
some set themselves to overthrow all the foundations, both of Church and humane
Societies; by taking aw^^ (...) the Ordinances of Public worship, and of all
civil subject^ (...) ^^e higher Powers.
If each Party can be (...) and obliged to declare their sense freely
Concerning the^^ (...) their declarations may be taken together, and compared;
and that wherein they shall be found all to agree and speak the same thing, may
be collected by it self as their mutual Harmony which the Supreme Power should
approve and Ratify; as that which in the Public way of the profession they
will own and countenance with Authority; it being the Agreement of the
Churches and Saints of the Nation.

Whiles this matter is in Agitation another motion may be made, by fit Agents
which will be subordinate unto the former; and may by Gods blessing help it
forward to be effectual to some good purpose; which is. That the Chief leading
men of the Orthodox Parties should be induced to declare two things.

1 First, what the Relation is wherein they desire to stand toward foreign
Protestant Churches: and how far they do own them as Brethren in Christ? 2
What Concurrence and Correspondency, they are willing to maintain with them for
a common Gospel interest, which is the Truth of the holy Profession, that it may
be with one lip and shoulder, held forth unto the world against the common
enemies thereof.
If a Declaration containing these two things can be obtained, from the leading
Ministers of the Churches, as a consequence of the Public Declarations which
the State has put forth formerly to this effect: then an Agent might be
employed toward the Foreign Churches, who should be instructed and enabled to
acquaint them with these following matters.

1 What the true state and justice of our Cause and proceeding has been
hitherto, against the Enemies of our Civil and Religious Liberties. 2 What our
desires and inclinations are to concur with the Godly Parties abroad in the
common interest of Religion, and upon what grounds we are now moved to make
this motion unto them. 3 What the means are by which our concurrence and
correspondency with them may be entertained for the propagating of the Truth
and common safety.
And whether our Agreement with (...) United Provinces take effect or not, I
conceive, the End (...) ^^ll be of great use: not only for our own strength,
by the (...) of our spirits at home; but for the gaining of the Prayer (...)
^ffections of the Godly Party abroad: and for the vindication of our former
Proceedings against the Reproaches of malicious Adversaries, which have
discredited us abroad; and for the ingratiating of our future undertakings:
wherein we may be led forth by the good hand of God, to advance the Kingdom of
Jesus Christ amongst the Neighbor Nations. But if no such Endeavors be set
afoot; it is very evident to me, that we shall not only be wekened, and more
and more divided at home, but be opposed and looked upon as Enemies, by all the
Professors of the Gospel in Foreign Parts, which I would not fear much; if it
should not come upon us by our own default, and through the neglect of a duty
which God requires of us and which we are engaged to perform, both by the
Rules of the Gospel, and by our own solemn Professions; in the face of all the
Churches and of the whole world: which to make good according to my ability,
and for the discharge of my conscience that I may not be found guilty of
neglecting my Uowes, I do offer in all humility these suggestions; and as a
Solicitor of Public Gospel duties toward the Churches, shall Remain a
Servant thereof in Christ.

FINIS.

