An HISTORICAL ESSAY Endeavoring a Probability That the LANGUAGE Of the Empire
of CHINA is the Primitive LANGUAGE.

By John Webb of Butleigh in the County of Somerset Esquire.

LONDON, Printed for Nath. Brook, at the Angel in Gresham College. 1669.

Licensed By Authority.

TO THE MOST SACRED MAJESTY OF CHARLES The Second.
SIR,
NEW DISCOVERIES make the Lives of PRINCES famous; Their POSTERITY powerful;
Their Subjects rich. Most prudently therefore does YOUR MAJESTY vouchsafe to
encourage them. Which rais^th a Spirit in the Hearts of Your People to
prosecute the same. It being fully verified in Your Majesty, what was said unto
that famous Emperor of CHINA, HIAVOUUS, The virtue of a KING is like the Wind,
his Subjects like Corn, which incline all to that part, whereunto they are
moved by the Wind.

This ESSAY in all humble submission invokes YOUR ROYAL Protection, it pretends
to advance the DISCOVERY of that GOLDEN-MINE of Learning, which from all
ANTIQUITY has lain concealed in the PRIMITIVE TONGUE; whether Religion, Famous
Examples of the Wisdom of Old, Politic Rules for Government, or what ever
else advantageous to Mankind be respected. And wherein no doubt, so great
Mysteries are involved, as nothing hitherto in all the Learning of the World
can either excel or equal.

Hence it is, thatso many Writers, in almost all Ages since the Birth of CHRIST
have one way or other treated thereof: some asserting the Teutonique to be it;
some the Samaritan; others the Phaenician; diverse Churchmen pleading as well
for the Chaldaean, as Hebrew. With what success I question not; my intention
being, not to dispute what in Possibility cannot, but what in Probability may
be the First Speech. Neither is it my purpose with others to insist on vulgar
Traditions, or licentious Etymologies of Words; weak and frail Foundations to
support such a Weight, but fix my Basis upon Sacred Truth, and credible
History. Scripture teaches, that the whole Earth was of one Language until the
Conspiracy at BABEL; History informs that CHINA was peopled, whilst the Earth
was so of one Language, and before that Conspiracy. Scripture teaches that the
Judgment of Confusion of Tongues, fell upon those only that were at BABEL:
History informs, that the CHINOIS being fully settled before, were not there;
And moreover that the same LANGUAGE and CHARACTERS which long preceding that
Confusion they used, are in use with them at this very DAY; whether the Hebrew,
or Greek Chronology be consulted.

The Scripture is infallible, my principal Authors, fide Sacerdotum data,
profess Integrity, as having of very late Days, by long study compiled the
History of CHINA, from the Ancient Records thereof, eversince the time of NOAH.
The Foundation then not failing, my Superstructure most probably stands, So
much the firmer; as that how valid soever transient Words are, written Records
be of far more certain Credit. As YOUR Serene MAJESTY right well knows.

YOUR MAJESTY may happily say, I have daringly engaged in a bold Undertaking.
But difficult things GREAT SIR are as soon effected, as easy, if the true way
be observed. However to err in a matter wherein so many of greatest Learning
have erred: YOUR MAJESTY pleasing to pardon me, I need not blush.

The LORD GOD of Heaven and Earth, bless, guide, and preserve YOU, in all Your
Counsels; and make YOU Religious like Jaus; Wise like Yuus; Victorious like
Hiavouus, whose conquering sword crowned Him with victory over more Nations,
than Alexander of Macedon ever saw or heard of; Like Xunus beloved of all YOUR
People: And make all YOUR People as publicly minded, as Their People the
CHINOIS, Whereby YOUR MAJESTY and ROYAL POSTERITY shall reign happily to
Eternity; and YOUR Kingdoms enjoy Wealth and Prosperity throughout all Ages.

SIR, Your Sacred Majesty's Ever most Loyal Ever most Lowly Subject and
Servant, John Webb.
Butleigh 29 May 1668.
An Exact MAPP of CHINA* being faithfully Copied from one brought from Peking
by (...) Father Lately resident in that City.


AN ESSAY Toward the PRIMITIVE Language.
BY what manner of Policy, the several Nations and People of the world were
governed before the Flood, no certain memory is remaining, nor any record to
which we may give just credit, extant; either of the wars or peace, or other
actions that were then performed. But that they had Kings, Rulers, and set
Forms of Government, undertook noble Enterprises, made Invasions, subdued
Countries, managed with great advice the affairs of war, and achieved many
things worthy of admiration, there is no cause to doubt. For, their exceeding
long lives, having, to their strength of body, added the experience of eight
hundred or nine hundred years, must necessarily increase their Wisdom and
conduct, and render their undertakings (had they been communicated to
posterity) far more excellent, than whatever can be related of aftertimes.

And though Moses passes over this first Age in so short a narrative as seven
brief chapters; and, writing an history of and for the Church, mentions no
farther, the affairs and nations of the world, than was meet for the Church,
that of the Israelites especially, to know, according as it was likely they
should have then, or after, more or less to do with them; much nevertheless
may be collected from him in relation to the condition of that time. For, we
find that the men of those days were mighty and famous; his words Genesis 6. v. 4.
being, They were mighty men, which were of old men of renown. We may style them
Hero's, such as either through their valor brought almost impossible and
admirable attempts to an unexpected and desired issue; or such as by their
virtue were the Authors of profitable Arts and Sciences, and reduced Mankind to
civil and sociable conversation.

But it is not to be denied, that then there were mighty men in regard of
bodily stature also, whom the Scripture calls from their greatness and
terribleness Rephaim and Emim; from their pride Anakim; from their strength
Gibborim; from their Tyranny Nephilim; from Gibbons in Genesis
their naughtiness Zamzummim; such were Og and Goliath after the Flood. But
howsoever the bodies of these men were composed, certain it is, that before the
Deluge, they divided (as we by the Civil Law are now wont to do) their goods
amongst their children; assigning their Real estates to the eldest of their
sons, and their Personal to the younger. For, Adam gave unto Cain Lands to
Till, unto Abel Sheep to Feed.

Posterity being multiplied, they fell immediately to the building of Cities,
fortifying of Castles, driving of Cattle, committing of Slaughters, and
whatever else the interest of their wilfulness persuaded them unto; These
things being done by them as well for necessary habitation, as for strength and
safety to secure themselves, and oppress others. That they did build Cities, no
doubt is to be made; for if Iabal was the first that dwelt in Tents, Where
should the rest dwell, says Heylin, but in Cities, Towns, or Villages? And
that the first of Cities was built by Cain, as also that he called it after the
name of his Son Enoch, the Scripture teaches Gen 4. v. 17. which was either
erected by him, to cross that curse of his wandering to and fro; or to arm him
against others, whom his guilty conscience caused him to fear; or to be a
receptacle and storehouse of those spoils, which by force and violence,
Josephus tells us, Ios. (...). Iud. lib. (...). c. 3.
he took from others, when the earth was barren to him, and would afford him
nothing. Probable it is, that the City was called Enoch, because, the curse not
suffering the Father to stay in any place, he was enforced to commit an hasty
inheritance to his son, and leave him to finish and govern the same.

To this manner of life, in regard of general use, several Arts were invented;
One finds out the making of Tents, in which leading a wandering life, his
robberies might be the more concealed, and his flocks and herds the better
fed. Another the forging of iron useful for the making of arms, and weapons of
war* and what else they could of that kind. Another, Music: whereby the
affections being enflamed, they were stirred up unto those things, in which
they placed their greatest happiness. So that as this race of men, acted all
things not by reason, but lust; frequent contentions, private quarrels, and
open war, could not but of necessity arise amongst them: and, though they might
be well enough able from themselves to defend themselves; the other party, the
children of Seth nevertheless lived no more safely amongst them, than silly
sheep amongst raging wolves.

They were as great Idolaters, if not greater Idem c. 4.
then those of the after-age to which they gave example; for, degenerating,
says Josephus, from the ancient institutions of their forefathers, they
neither observed the service of God, nor humane Laws. But were fierce and
cruel, full of Injustice, Oppression, Murder, Rapine, Pride and Ambition, all
concomitants of war, and presages of ruin to ensue. Which Ambition and Pride
had, as it seems, a very early influence upon the Leaders of the succeeding
Age, otherwise they could not possibly have imagined that they should make
themselves a name, by the building of such a work at Babel, as they enterprised
to erect; nor so soon have known what war meant, as that, ere they were well
warm in their new seats, to invade one another. For, the issues of Assure, and
the issues of Cham, says Sir W. Raleigh, fell instantly at contention Sir
Walt. Ra. Have. par. 1. pa. 144.
for the Empire of the East.

As for fruits of Peace, they had Theology, Prophecy, Astronomy, Astrology;
had Weights and Measures; and Cain, as Josephus relates, first assigned
proprieties in possession of Land, before as common as the Air and Light:
therefore Meum and Tuum was even in those times.

Concerning their manner of diet: many are of opinion, that they eat no flesh,
but fed on vegetable aliments, those at the least of the race of Seth, who
obeyed the command of God. And this may be collected from the very Text,
Behold, I have given you every herb bearing seed, which is upon the face of
all the earth; and every tree in thee which is the fruit of a tree yielding
seed to you, it shall be for meat; Genesis 1. v. 29. which plainly shows, they
were utterly prohibited the eating of flesh. Neither do we read, that this
prohibition was taken off, till immediately after the descent of Noah from the
Ark, when either, because the Deluge had impaired or infirmed the nature of
vegetables, God giving him an augmentation of his words, said, Every moving
thing that lives soall be meat for you; even as the green herb have I given
you all things, Genesis 9. v. 3. And though it may be supposed, the first men
would not keep sheep, except they made food of them; very learned expositors
will tell us* that it was partly for their skins, with which (...) lothed
themselves; partly for their milk with which they sustained them, and partly
for offerings which they sacrificed unto God. As Dr. Brown in his Pseudodoxia
Epidemica has delivered. Dr. T. Br. in Pseud. Epid. l. 3: p. 141.


They enjoyed the use of Letters: for Josephus attesteth, that Adam having
prophesied two universal Destructions, one by fire, another by water, his
posterity erected two pillars, one of brick, another of stone, in both which
they writ their inventions of Astronomy. But, notwithstanding he thus
witnesses, yet whether those of Adams posterity that erected the same pillars
invented the Letters they engraved on them, he says not: whereby we may
conjecture, that, admitting the engravements were made be Seth or Enoch; the
Characters nevertheless were more ancient, and by some other found out; of
which happily we shall have somewhat more to say. However, of these Epigraphs the
Scripture seems not to be altogether silent; for we read, Judge, 3. v. 26. And
Ehud escaped while they tarried, and passed beyond the Quarries, and escaped
unto Seinath. Now Isa: Vossius tells us, that this Translation receding from
the true signification Is. Voss. de At^t. mun. p. 3^.
of the Hebrew word, puts Quarries for Sculptures. But the Seventy have rightly
rendered it (...); for there, says he, was that stony Pillar which the Hebrews
believe Seth set up, as Josephus alleges, who writes that even in his time
the same Pillar remained in a place called Syriada.

Some ascribe the invention of Astronomy to Seth, as also the first naming of
the seven Planets: Others to Enoch, who, they say, (...) furthered this
Science, and who (says Eupolemon) was by the Greeks called Atlas, to whom they
attribute the invention thereof.

Trades also they had and Occupations: Cain was a Plough-man, Abel a Shepherd.
Arts and Sciences, as was said before, as well military as civil; for Iubal
invented musical instruments, and Tubal-Cain the working in metals, and making
of Armor, which some think to be Vulcan by the neerness of name and
occupation. They lived in all manner of wealth, pleasures, delights,
licentiousness, and sensuality; and Naamah is reputed the first inventress of
linen and woollen, and of vocal Music, and seems to have been the Venus,
or Helena rather, of those times; all the world wandering in love after her, if
we may credit the Hebrew Doctors.

Heylin tells us, the like may be supposed in Heyl. Cosm p. 4. Land. 1657.
all other mysteries and Arts of living, though there be no express mention
made of them in those early days. In regard therefore that Sciences were then
in such manner multiplied, though Moses records them not; diverse are of
opinion, notwithstanding we read not in Genesis of any kind of shipping before
the building of the Ark, that the knowledge of Navigation was not wanting to
them, it being so singular an Art; so necessary for the life of man, and by the
natural and daily use of swimming, so easily to be found out. Which Conjecture
has some ground of likelihood, considering that Adam according to the very
probable, though commonly received Opinion, was, by his Creation learned in all
manner of Arts. As also, that although in their removes for peopling of the
world, they might either by swimming, or by bridges, or on rafts, pass
conveniently over rivers; yet nevertheless over Seas out of one part of the
world into another, or from Continents into Islands they could not possibly
transport themselves without shipping, and some skill in Navigation. And if any
should object, that, had they had shipping, others might have been saved in
them, besides Noah and his family: it may be answered, that the Ark of Noah was
covered; for the Text says, And Noah removed the covering of the Ark, etc.
Genesis 8. v. 13. that is (as we are to conceive) part thereof, and so much as
served to look forth, from whence he might see round about, which by the window
he could not do, it opening one way only. Whereas the other shipping being
open vessels, could not live during such continually violent rains, and
downfalls of water, which like Hyracanes, or Spouts, Cataractae Caell came
tumbling from the clouds; but must inevitably perish. Besides, They were eating
and drinking, marrying and giving in marriage, until the day that Noah entered
into the Ark. Mat. 24. v. 38. And therefore took no care, and could have no
time to make any stores ready, or be victualled for so long a season as the
flood lasted, or till provisions were sprung up and to be had again. Add
especially hereunto, that God had passed his decree, that all Mankind, and all
living Creatures, upon the face of the earth, Noah and his family, and those
with him in the Ark excepted, should be destroyed.

That the world was thoroughly peopled before the flood, that great and
universal Deluge, which God, for the sins of men, was pleased to bring upon the
whole world, does clearly manifest. For why, says Heylin, Heyl. Cosm p. 6.
should all the earth be buried in that sea of waters, if all the Earth had not
been peopled, and all the people of it guilty of oppression in the sight of
God? And certainly, says Sir. W. Sir W. Ra. hist. par. 1. p. 136.
Raleigh, seeing all the world was over-flowne, there were people in all the
whole world which offended. But, that the whole world was peopled by Adam and
his offspring before the flood, that Scripture which commands Adam to be
fruitful and multiply, and to replenish the Earth, Genesis 1. v. 28. does, I
conceive, asplainly and evidently manifest, as that by virtue of the like
blessing conferred in the self same words on Noah, Gen 9. v. 1. it was to be
peopled by Noah and his issue after the flood. For if so many Millions of men,
as we shall shortly hear, Ninus, Zoroaster, Semiramis, and Staurobates, led
after them to the field (and they left not all their Kingdoms empty) were born
within three hundred years after the Deluge: What numbers might they consist
of, that one thousand six hundred fifty six years brought forth, preceding the
same? If, in like manner, all Asia the greater, and the less, with Greece, and
the Islands thereof, all Egypt, with Mauritania and Lybia, were within the
aforesaid time after the flood fully peopled: And if we believe Berosus, then
not only those parts of the world, but (within one hundred and forty years
after the flood) Spain, Italy and France were also planted; much more then may
we think, that in one thousand six hundred fifty six years before the flood,
the world was thoroughly replenished with people.

From the first promise made to Abraham, unto the departure of Israel out of
Egypt, being four hundred and thirty years, after the Apostles account, Galat.
3. v. 17. were born of Abraham's own body, comprehending men, women, and
children, says Willet, fifteen hundred thousand. And reason will grant, that,
having the same blessing promised, as great increase A. Will. in Exodus 12.
should be given to the sons of Adam, as the sons of Noah. Considering withal
that the sacred story does not particularly recite all the progeny of all the
men in those days, but that only which seemed chiefly necessary for
understanding the succession of things and times. And it is absurd to think,
that men during such long lives, and in such perfect health should not beget
very many children, and have frequently two and three at a birth. When in this
our Age we have known a woman, the wife of one Edward Jones by name, a Waterman
yet living in Westminster, to have brought him forth eight children within the
compass of two years, at the first birth two, at the second as many, and at
the last four. And when within this last Century from Robert Honywood of
Charing in the County of Kent Esquire, and Mary his wife, she, that is so
famous for ballancing her salvation with the breaking of a glass, lawfully
proceeded three hundred sixty seven persons within less than the space of
eighty years. Taking notice also, that, long before the flood, Polygamy being
universally contracted to strength of body and length of days, no degrees of
kindred or consanguinity were observed. And when death forbearing the father,
made no place for the son, till he had beheld living nations of his own body.
Therefore we have cause to doubt, that the people wanted world, rather than the
world people; or, as Sir W. Raleigh, the world could not contain them, rather
than that they were not spread throughout the world. Insomuch that if God had
not abridged the life of man after the Flood, and decreed his age to be
ordinarily no more than seventy years, whereby women are become incapable to
bear children above thirty years at most, and made them all subject likewise
to infinity of diseases, there must either have ensued some other universal
destruction to have exstirpated them all again, or else they could not have had
so much as room to have breathed in; their numbers would have been so infinite,
many ages since.

For, supposing the women before the flood to have been generally fruitful, as
no doubt they were, and that they continued childbearing long, of which in
regard of the length of their lives, as little question is to be made, setting
aside how many children soever they might have at a birth, though in Egypt
even since the flood, it has been usual with them to bring forth two, three,
five, and, as Trogus Pompeius says, sometimes Seven at a birth. It seems not
impossible, considering the increase of the Honywoods, but that, by ordinary
means, in the revolution of one thousand six hundred fifty six years, such
numbers might be multiplied, as would not only plant the whole world, but also
many more worlds besides, if any such were. For, finding that from two persons
in almost eighty years were produced three hundred sixty seven; if we admit
from Adam and Eve in the interval of the two first Centuries after the Creation
to have proceeded but four hundred, and allow one fourth part only of this
number to be apt for generation; that is, one hundred, or fifty married
couples: then if each of these couples have but every two years one, they will
bring forth in 50 years more than twelve hundred and fifty sou^s. And by thus
proportioning one fourth part of the number begotten, to every fifty years of
time, which* in regard of their long lives, and presumed strong constitutions,
could not be any impediment to procreation; it is most clear, most certain,
that in the space of sixteen hundred years the last generation will amount unto
two thousand, nine hundred, thirty three millions of millions; three hundred
eighty four thousand, seven hundred sixty six millions; ninety six thousaud and
four hundred persons; the odd fifty six years, how advantageous soever in the
last place, being wholly laid aside. For, if the product of those be added, it
will increase their numbers unto above ten millions of millions. So that either
that first age was as much or more subject to Plagues, Pestilences, Famines,
Wars, Losses, and Calamities, as aftertimes; or else, either the world could
not contain such prodigious multitudes; or they must devour one another for
want of food and habitations. For, granting the Terrestrial Globe to be all
habitable Earth, no Seas intervening and dividing it into twelve equal parts;
it will be found, allotting to each division two hundred and fifty millions of
people, that three thousand millions will fully plant the same, and make it
more wonderfully populous than this extreme part of Asia, whereof we are to
treat. But being, scarcely the one half of it only is habitable, and Sea
possesses the rest; fifteen hundred millions will more than enough suffice.
Whereby it is demonstrable, that, if for settling of Plantations multitudes of
people be requirable, the whole Earth was thoroughly planted before the Flood.
But how innumerable soever their numbers appear to be, by the just judgment of
God upon them for their manifold offenses, they were, by the first of the
universal destructions, Water, all destroyed.

The Scripture is very manifest and plain herein, And behold, I, even I (says
the Lord) do bring a flood of waters upon the earth, to destroy all flesh,
wherein is the breath of life, from under Heaven, and every thing that is in
the Earth shall die, Genesis 6. v. 17. Again, Genesis 7. v. 19. And the waters
provailed exceedingly upon the Earth, and all the high hills that were under
the whole Heaven were covered. Now this drowning of the world, has not been
quite drowned in the world; for, even by profane Authors it is remembered. To
omit others, Lucian in his Dea Syria relates the opinion of the Hierapolitans,
but a little corrupted from the narration of Moses; so plainly does he
attribute to his Deucalion the Ark, the resort and safeguard of the lions,
bores, serpents, and beasts; the repairing of the world after this drowning
thereof, which he ascribes to the perjury, cr^elty, and other abominations of
the former people. Berosus not as in Amnius that brat of a Monk, but as in
Abydenus that ancient Historiar, cited by Eusebius, as I find in Sir W.
Raleigh, affirms, Sir W. Ra. hist. par. 1. p. 88.
that Saturn gave warning to Sissithrus of this Deluge, and willed him to
prepare a great Vessel or ship, wherein to put convenient food, and to save
himself with his kindred and acquaintance; which he builded, of length five
furlongs, and of breadth two. After the retiring of the waters, he sent out a
Bird which returned; after a few days he sent her forth again, which returned
with her feet bemired; and being sent out the third time came no more. Plutarch
Plut: de a^im. comparat.
also has written of this Dove, sent by D^ucalion out of the Ark, which
returning was a sign of tempest; and flying forth, of fair weather.

At Berne in Switzerland in the year 1460. in a Mine from whence they drew out
Metal-Ore, Simler. Ortel. Fracastor. apud Meu: Cent.
at fifty fathom deep, a ship was dug up, in which were forty eight carcases
of men, with Merchants goods: At Shotesham in Norfolk within the lands of Sir
William Daily* Knight, in digging of a Well, at a considerable distance from
the Sea, at sixteen fathom, innumerable quantities of Oysters, Cockles,
Perywinckles, and such other sorts of shellfish, whole and unbroken, were
found: and in Cheshire within the forest of Da^imore, in searching for Marle,
at sixty fathom, at seventy say some, huge and mighty trees, as black and hard
as Ebony, were taken forth. Now, What should these discoveries, and others of
this kind whereof Histories are full, signify? but to declare unto posterity,
that not only the Continents of all the Earth, but Islands of the Sea also, and
all the other parts of the world, as well as Asia, were drowned and overflowne:
and that the inhabitants of them in like manner perished.

When then the world was wholly inhabited before the flood, it must
consequently follow, that several dispersions and plantations were then made,
as either the numbers of the people increased, or the necessity of providing
victuals for themselves and families enforced; as strong a motive, says
Heylin, to such dispersions H^yl* Co^. page (...).
as the Confusion of Tongues was afterward. The difference is, That, that
which necessity would have done in long tract of time, the Confusion of Tongues
did at an instant. And if any should imagine the unity of their Language did
hinder their dispersion, we confess it some hinderance at first, but not much
afterward: for though it might restrain their dispersion, it could not their
Populosity, which necessarily requires transmigration, and emission of
Colonies. In regard therefore of such several dispersions, the different
affections of the people and general corruption of the Age; for, The whole
earth was corrupted, Genesis 6. v. 11. Heylin makes no question, but that they
might have different Languages and forms of speech, at least as to the Dialect
and Pronunciation, although the Radicals of the Language might remain the same.
But though, besides what has been already said, that expression of the
Builders of Babel, Let us make us a name, lest we^ be scattered abroad upon the
face of the whole Earth, Genesis 11. v. 4. seems to imply, that there were
dispersions preceding the flood; for how else should they in such newness of
time apprehend, they might be scattered abroad, unless they had learned from
their fathers by hearing them relate, that the people had been dispersed into
several Plantations before; and therefore would provide, that whatever became
of others, they might promise themselves a name, and be remembered by the work
they made, into what part of the world soever they should chance afterward to
be dispersed. Nevertheless I cannot find, the least authority to presume, that
the language spoken by our first Parents, admitted any whatever alteration
either in the Form or Dialect and pronunciation thereof, before the Confusion
of Tongues at Babel; but that it was in this first Age before the flood, and
afterward until the time of that Confusion, the common and general speech,
and therefore primitively called (says Coelestine) Lingua humana, the Humane
Tongue. Monsieur D'Espagne in his Essay of the I. D' E* pagne. p. 38
wonders of God, tells us, That the Language of Adam continued alone in the
world, there being none other for the space of fourteen generations; this Unity
continued till the nativity of Phaleg the Son of Heber. And Crinesius Chr.
Crin* de conf. Ling. p. 3.
says, All men living in the time before, and at the Confusion it self, did
not only agree in unity of Words, but also in unity of Lip, that is, in the
manner of Pronunciation. Wherefore we may certainly conclude, that Noah carried
the Primitive Language into the Ark with him, and that it continued pure and
uncorrupted amongst his succeeding generations until the Confusion of Tongues
at Babel, till when, The whole Earth was of one Language and one Lip, as Genesis
11. v. 1. clearly manifests.

Now whether this Language may be yet remaining in any part of the Universal
World, is the main subject of our enquiry. In order to which, we are to
consider, in what part of the World the Ark first rested; what Colonies were
planted either before Nimrod and his Troops came into the Valley of Shinaar, or
the Confusion of Tongues happened; And whether yea or no, those Colonies so
planted were liable to the curse of Confounded Languages, being through their
absence, not guilty of the Crime committed at Babel.

Concerning then the place where the Ark might rest after the Flood: All that
the Scripture says of it, is, that the Ark rested upon the Mountains of
Ararat, Genesis 8. v. 4. But in what Country these Mountains are, that it says
not. Josephus will have these Mountains of Ararat Ios. Ant. Iud. l. 1. c. 4
to be the hills of Armenia, borrowing his discovery from Berosus, cited by him
in these words, Fertur and navigij hujus pars in Armenia apud montem
Cordiaeorum superesse; and quosdam Bitumen inde abrasum secum reportare, quo
maxim vice amuleti leci hujus homines uti solent; and it is reported says he,
that a part of this vessel is yet remaining in Armenia upon the Cordiaean
Mountains, and that diverse do scrape from it the Bitumen, and carrying it away
with them, use it especially instead of an Amulet. Nicholas Damascenus calls
this Mountain of Ararat, Baris. But Sir W. Raleigh after having by several
arguments fully proved, that the Ark of Noah did not rest in any part of
Armenia, and that the Mountain of Ararat was not any one of the Gordiaean
Mountains, or Baris, there being no such hill in Armenia, or in rerum natura,
as Baris concludes. That Ararat is not any one hill so called, no more than
any one hill among those Mountains which divide Italy from France, is called
the Alps; or any one of those which part France from Spain, the Pyrenian. But
as these being continuations of many hills, keep one name in diverse Countries,
so a^l that long ledge of Mountains which beginning at the Coast of Lycia runs
through Armenia, Mesopotamia, Assyria, Media, Susiana, Parthia, Caramama, Aria,
Margiana, Bactria, Sogdiana, and Paropamisus, having all these Kingdoms on the
North or South Side of them, are of one general name. And that as Pliny gives
to this ledg of high hills, even from Cilicia to Paropamisus, and Caucasus, the
general name of Taurus, so was Ararat the general name which Moses gave them,
the diversity of appellations no otherwise growing, than by their dividing and
bordering diverse Regions, and diverse Countries. As in like manner we do call
that, that does generally go by the name of the Mediterranean Sea, sometimes
the Tyrrhene, Ionian, Adriatique, and Aegean; sometimes the Hellespont, Pontus,
Propontis, and B^sphorus, according to the several Countries it passes by, and
the several Coasts it washes. And therefore seeing that Moses teaches us,
that all those people, which under the conduct of Nimrod entered the Valley of
Shinaar, came from the East, And as they went from the East, they found a plain
in the land of Shinaar, and there they abode, Genesis 11. v. 2. We may I suppose,
says he, without controversy resolve, that the Ark of Noah rested and took
ground upon those Mountains of Taurus, or Ararat, as Moses calls them, which
lie Eastward from Shinaar, between East- India and Scythia; and not on those
Mountains of the North-west, betwixt Mesopotamia, and Armenia major, as Berosus
first feigned, and most Writers following him have since mistaken.

Goropius Becanus in his Indo-Scythia maintains, that the Ark rested on the top
of Mount Gor. Bec. Indos. p. 473.
Caucasus, in the confines of Tartaria, Persia, and India, using many arguments
for his opinion; as amongst others the exceeding populousness of the Eastern
Countries, but relying principally upon the aforesaid Text of Scripture. With
him Heylin joins issue; saying, If then they came Heyl. Cosm. Page 7.
from the East to the land of Shinaar, as the Text says plainly that they did,
it might well be, that they came from those parts of Asia, on the South of
Caucasus, which lie East from Shinaar, though somewhat bending into the North,
impossible they should come from the Gordiaean Mountains in the greater
Armenia, which lie not only full North from Shinaar, but many degrees unto the
West.

The first thing mentioned in Scripture, that Noah did after his coming forth
of the Ark, having sacrificed and returned thanks to God for his deliverance,
was, to Till the Ground and Plant. And Noah began to be an Husbandman, and be
planted a Vineyard, Genesis 9. v. 20. And manifest it is, that he travailed not
far to seek out the Vine, for the Plantation thereof is remembered, before he
entered into any counsel, how to dispose of the World amongst his children. In
regard whereof many are of opinion, that Noah seated himself in the East, in or
near to the place, where he first went forth of the Ark, and that he never came
to Shinaar at all. For he was too principal a person to be either forgotten or
neglected, had he removed with Nimrod thither. Sir Wall. Ral. hist, par. 1. page
158.
And it is no where found, says Sir W. Raleigh, that Noah himself came with
this Troop to Babylon, no mention at all being made of him (the years of his
life excepted) in the succeeding story of the Hebrews, nor that Sem, or any of
the Sons of Noah's own body, was in this disobedient company, or among the
builders of Babel. Therefore it is very probable that Noah Id. p. 144.
taking up his rest, not far from the place where the Ark grounded, first
inhabited India, and had well peopled all those parts, which lay nearest to
him, before he sent Nimrod, and his followers forth upon new discoveries. Hence
the same Author tells us also, that from the East came Id. p. 109.
the first knowledge of all things, and that the East parts of the world were
the first civilized, having Noah himself for an Instructor, whereby the farther
East to this day, the more Civil, the farther West the more Savage.

In confirmation hereof Heylin likewise declares, Heyl. Cosm. p. 16. 17.
that Sir W. Raleigh pleads the point exceeding strongly, that it must needs
be, that Noah was settled in the East, and had well peopled all those parts
which lay nearest to him, before he sent Nimrod and his Troop abroad to search
for other habitations. And after having very studiously discoursed of the
several generations, and dispersions of the Sons of Noah, so far forth as their
names are registered in holy Scripture to be the Heads and Leade^s of those
several Tribes, which joined together in the design for the building of Babel,
and afterward dispersed themselves, he proceeds, saying, But that no more
than these (I mean, says he, heads of Families) descended in so long a time
from the loins of Noah, that they should have toward the new peopling of the
world in an hundred years (for so long time it must be at least from the Flood,
to the building of Babel,) no more than sixteen Sons in all, and ten of those
sixteen go childless to the grave, is not a thing to be imagined. Nor is it to
be thought, that all the people which were born since the flood till then,
could meet together at one place as by inspiration; or being met could join
together in a work of so little profit; or that if Noah or Sem had been there
amongst them, they would not have diswaded them from that foolish enterprise.
And therefore I should rather be of their opinion which think, that Noah fixed
himself in those parts, which lay nearest to the place where the Ark took land,
and having planted as far Eastward as he thought convenient, sent out the
surplusage of his people; under the conduct of one or more of these
Undertakers, directing them perhaps to the land of Shinaar, where himself had
dwelt before the flood. For, in regard there is none of those, though most
diligent men, who have written of the Plantations of the world upon this
dispersion, that either speak of any Nations planted by Noah himself, or Sem
and Iaphet, or of their settling in the Colonies of any one of their
Descendents; it is to me says Heylin again, a very strong argument, that they
came not with the rest to the Plains of Shinaar, but tarried still in those
habitations, wherein God had planted them.

Purchus thinks, that before the flood Noah lived in Syria (which probably his
Author might Purch. Pilgrimage, lib. 1. p. 67.
mistake for Serica) but whether there, or in the land of Shinaar, or
wheresoever else; Josephus affirms, that he forsook his native Country, and
with his Wife and Family travailed into another Region, where he built the Ark.
Now, though what became of him, or whither he removed is uncertain.
Nevertheless it is most sure, says Willet, that he neither joined with A.
Willet in Genesis 8. and (...)
Nimrod, nor his company, nor ever engaged with them; and although the
Scripture makes no mention of the rest of his Acts, yet no doubt is to be
made, but that he exercised himself in Planting of Religion, and doing most
excellent works for the benefit of Mankind, of which Moses omitteth to speak,
as also of the proceedings of the Godly succeeding Fathers, because he hastes
to the story of Abraham.

That Noah staid behind and came not with the rest to the Valley of Shinaar,
Goropius also G. Bec. Indos. page 466.
is clearly of opinion; who in like manner asserteth, that it is for certain,
about Ararat first; afterward in the Plains of Shinaar, men after the Deluge
seated themselves, and from either of those places were dispersed into several
parts of the world. And if any shall think the contrary, says he, that none
remained behind, but all went together to Shinaar, he will of great folly
accuse the second Parent of Mankind, that he should have so little of the
common sense of men in him, as to make them all leave assured habitations, for
uncertain dwellings; secure houses, for open fields; free ways, for encumbred
passages; and known Meadows, for unknown pastures. By the verses of Sibylla
also, which not only Josephus, but likewise Eusebius, St. Hierome, Id: p. 532
and others word for word remember, it appears that all came not together to
Shinaar. (...). i. e. as Goropius renders the words, Cum omnes homines ejusdem
linguae usum haberent, quidam eorum turrim aedificarunt altissimam, quasi per
eam telum essent assensuri, when all men had the use of one same Tongue, some
of them built a most high Tower, as if they had intended to have scaled Heaven
thereby. When then Sibylla, as Sir W. Raleigh observes, making a limitation,
says, some of them [only some] built the Tower; and Moses witnesses, that
those that built it, came from the East into the West, it is plainly manifest,
that all came not together with Nimrod unto Shinaar, but others remained behind
in the Eastern parts. All therefore were not present at the building of the
Tower, seeing that they went not All together; neither is it said in Scripture
that they did, which as it does positively say, They were All of one speech; so
it does not definitively say, They All went.

Moreover, the exceeding multitude of People, wherein the East parts of the
world first abounded; and wherein none of those by whom the Earth was planted
after the Confusion of Tongues, are yet reported to have settled any Colonies,
does likewise very much convince, that the East Countries were peopled before
the remove to Babel. For, that they were not left desolate upon this remove,
but sufficiently provided both of Men and Cities, appears by those vast
Armies of Zoroaster and Staurobates; Heyl. Cosm. p. 7. and 731
of whom Zoroaster out of his own Kingdom of Bactria, brought into the field
against Ninus the Monarch of Assyria, an Army of four hundred thousand fighting
men; which manifests, says Heylin, that Bactria was as soon peopled, as any
Country since the general Deluge. For, it could not have possibly been, that
Zoroaster should have raised so mighty an Army in the time of Ninus, who was in
suceession but the third Monarch from Nimrod, had Bactria been planted, but by
a Colony sent out from Shinaar. The other Staurobates being King of India
beyond Indus, was invaded by Semiramis with an army consisting of three
Millions of footmen, one million of horsemen, beside other mighty Forces both
for Land and Sea service; whereof, says Sir W. Raleigh, if we believe but a
third part, it shall suffice to prove, that India was the first Sir W. Ra.
hist. par. 1. p. 99.
Planted and Peopled Country after the Flood. For Staurobates encountered her
with an army exceeding her numbers, Staurobates avitis majoribus, quam quae
erant Semir amidis copiis, Staurobates drawing together of his own people
greater forces then those of Semiramis (says Diodorus Siculus) defeated her.

Now though considering the great Troops that Nimrod might bring with him to
Babel, as by the building of the City and Tower may appear, the numbers which
Semiramis levied might easily grow up, she being the Wife of Ninus, the Son of
Belus, who was the Son of Nimrod; it was impossible nevertheless, that the army
of Staurobates should exceed hers, had his numbers of Indians been increased,
but by Colonies sent into those parts, so late as the dispersion at Babel and
Confusion of Tongues, unless God had raised his Army out of Stones, or by some
such miracle. For, not any multiplication natural (to use Sir W. Raleigh's own
words) could in such time produce so many bodies of Men, as were in the Indian
Army victorious over Semiramis. When then India beyond Indus was in the time of
Staurobates so fully peopled by those that remaining with Noah never came down
to Shinaar; we need not doubt, but that they had then passed farther also; and
as their numbers increased, or desire of new seats invited them, made removes,
and sent out Colonies to the more remote parts of Asia, till at length they
settled in the remotest CHINA. Which Country that it was originally peopled by
some of the posterity of Noah before the enterprise at Babel, Heylin conceives
may probably be concluded. Heyl. Cosm. page 870.
But of this hereafter. In the mean time, I might add for a farther evidence,
that those that have written the actions of Alexander of Macedon, assure us,
that he found more Cities and Sumptuosities in that little Kingdom of Porus,
which lay side by side with the River Indus, than in all his other Travailes
and Undertakings.

But hereof we have as yet from Heylin somewhat Id. pa. 881.
more to say. He then in enumerating the old Inhabitants of India, relates;
that they were originally descended from the Sons of Noah, before they left
these Eastern parts, to go toward the unfortunate Valley of Shinaar. We could
not else have found this Country so full of people in the days of Semiramis, as
that Staurobates to oppose her, could raise of natural Indians only, an army
consisting of greater forces than that she led, and had compounded of several
Nations to the number of four millions and upwards. A matter exceeding all
credit, though neither could make up a fourth part of that number, if the
Indians had been no other, than some one of those Colonies, which were sent
from Babel, or rather a second or third swarm of those former Colonies, which
went thence under the command of the first Adventurers. For, that any of the
first Adventurers, who were present at the building of the Tower of Babel,
travailed so far East, is not affirmed by any, who have labored in the search
of their Plantations. So that I take it for a matter undeniable, that the
Plantation of India preceded that of Babel, though by whom made, there is
nothing to be said for certain. Yet, says he, if I might have liberty to
express my own conceptions, I am inclinable to believe, that all the Eastern
parts of Persia, with CHINA, and both the Indias, were peopled by such of the
Sons of Sem, as went not with the rest to the Valley of Shinaar. For, otherwise
I can see no reason, that the posterity of Iaphet, should plant the greatest
part of the lesser Asia, and the whole Continent of Europe with the Isles
thereof, and that the Sons of Cham should spread themselves over Babylonia,
Palaestine, the three Arabia's, and the whole Continent of Africa; the
posterity of Sem being shut up in a corner of the greater Asia, hardly so big
as some of the Provinces taken up by the other Adventurers. And therefore that
an equal latitude may be allowed to the Sons of Sem, I think it not improbable
to fix them in these Eastern Countries, spreading themselves this way, as they
grew in numbers, before the rest of the Adventurers went to seek out new
fortunes at the Tower of Babel. Thus far Heylin. Who has set no less than four
considerable remarks, as to our present enquiry after the Plantations made
before the dispersion at Babel, in this one and the same Paragraph.

But here I meet with an objection, that Athanasius Kircherus in his China
illustrata asserts, China was peopled by the posterity of Cham, after he came
out of Egypt, and therefore could not be planted by any of the Sons of Sem, or
before the Confusion at Babel. In answer whereunto, I must take leave to give
you Kircherus his own words; by which you will find so slender authority for
his Assertion, that you will admire rather, how it was possible so learned a
man could ever fancy such a conceit. For, his principal, yea verily in manner
his only argument is, that because the Egyptians, who were descended from
Cham, used Hieroglyphics; therefore the Chinoes did descend from Cham, because
they used Hieroglyphics also. Whereby you may observe, that if the Mexicans
want their Ancestors, they may repair to Kircherus, and he will presently
inform them, that they came from some of the posterity of Cham because they in
like manner as had the Egyptians, have Hieroglyphics in use. But why to
confirm his opinion, did he not tell us, that the Hebrews were of the seed of
Cham, because they likewise as well as the Egyptians were circumcised? However
hear him, Certe ut ad credendum inducar, magni momenti argumentum, sunt
veteres is^i sinensium A. Kirch. Chapter Ill. par. 6. page 226
characteres Hieroglyphicorum in omnibus aemuli; Certainly, says he, that I am
induced to believe this, those ancient Characters of the Chinoes in all things
imitating Hieroglyphics, are an argument of great validity.

But Sir W. Raleigh will positively assure you, Sir W. Ral. hist. par. 1. page
98. A. Sem. Rel. del Cin. par. 1. c. 6.
that the Chinoes had Letters in use long before either the Egyptians or
Phaenicians: Semedo will maintain, that they had the same Characters which they
use at this day, and which were abstracted from those Hieroglyphics, diverse
years before Kircherus brings Cham's Plantation into China: Vossius can assert,
that they have had the Is. Voss. de Aetat. mun. p. 44. M. Mart. Act. Sin. p. i
Id. Sin. His l. 1. p. 22.
use of Letters longer by far than any people that ever were: And Martinius
makes appear ere long, that for Antiquity in the use of Letters, China excells
all other parts of Asia; as also that veteres isti Sinensium characteres
Hieroglyphicorum in omnibus aemuli, were invented by the Chinois many ages
before the flood. What is more to be said? Kircherus himself (allowing him his
own computation) shall acknowledge A Kirch. Chapter Ill. par. 6. p. 225.
that China was both planted, and these their characters invented some
Centuries of years before the dispersion at Babel.

Now, though this is far more than sufficient to answer the objection, let us
see nevertheless, how he conducts his Colony. He tells us then, loco citato,
That Cham first out of Egypt through Persia, and thence into Bactria conducted
his Colonies, whom we conclude, says he, to be the same with Zoroaster King of
the Bactrians; but Bactria the farthest Region of Persia, is bounded by the
Kingdom of the Mogor, or Indostan, and thereby so opportunely scited, that they
might easily from thence transfer their Colonies into China, the utmost
Nation of the habitable world, together also with the first elements of
Letters, which from their Father Cham, and Mercurius Tresmegistus Counselor of
his Son Misraim, and first inventor of Hieroglyphics they had though rudely
learned. Now Cham cannot be said to go out of Egypt into Bactria, for after
his arrival in Egypt, he never departed thence, but lived and died there in
the three hundred fifty second year after the Deluge, as Sir W. Raleigh
relates. Heylin has told us lately, that Bactria was as soon peopled Sir W.
Ral. hist. par. 1. p. 197, 198.
as any Country since the Universal Flood, otherwise it could not possibly have
opposed Ninus with such numbers as it did, if the same had been planted but by
a Colony, sent out from Shinaar; much less may we say, if it were but first
peopled from Egypt, so long time after. For, Sir W. Raleigh finds Cham to have
but begun his Kingdom there one hundred ninety one years succeeding the
inundation of the world. And as for Mercurius Tres-Megistus, whom the Greeks
called Hermes, there were many of this name, and how to distinguish them is
difficult. Two of them were famous in Egypt, and there worshipped as Gods. The
One (probably here meant) was the son of Hylus, whose name says Boccase, the
Egyptians feared to utter, as the Bocc. lib. 7. page, 126, 127.
Jews did their Tetragrammaton; the other was the son of this Tres-Megistus,
and for his wisdom by his father called Cath; but which of these two it was
that taught the Egyptians the use of Letters, Writers much differ; and no less
also about the Age in which they lived. For Isaackson and others, place them
about the time that Abraham was called out of Haran or Charran into the land of
Canaan; others suppose the first and most ancient to have been Joseph the son
of Jacob; others again, that he was Moses himself; and Sir W. Rawleigh with
some Historians find them not to have flourished until the days of Moses; when
as the Chinois had enjoyed their now letters at least five hundred years before.

It was Sem that inhabited the Country of Asia Iosep. Ant. Iud. lib. 1. cap.
7. ^rch. Pilgrimage, lib. 1. p. 37. G. I. Vos. Chron Sac. pa. 52. Aynswor. in
Genesis 10.
beginning at Euphrates, and extending to the Indian Ocean sea, says Josephus:
To the posterity of Sem befell the parts of Asia from Indaea Eastward, says
Purchase; the Eastern parts of Asia, together with some of the Southern, were
peopled by the generations of Sem; says G. I. Vossius. And with these Raleigh,
Heylin, and Aynsworth agree, as you have heard. Whereas Cham and his offspring
possessed the South of Asia and Africa, as the same Authors assert.

Neither could Cham be Zoroaster, it is a fancy, Sir W. Ral. hist. par. 1. p.
169.
says Sir W. Raleigh, of little probability. For Cham was the paternal
Ancestor of Ninus, the father of Chus, the grandfather of Nimrod, whose son was
Belus, the father of Ninus, which Ninus slew Zoroaster in Bactria, as
Historiographers unanimously accord. Wherefore, and for that Cham never removed
out of Egypt after his settlement there, into Bactria; Cham could not be
Zoroaster King of the Bactrians, nor from thence ever transferr Colonies into
China, as Kircherus would persuade. But in all probability, China was after the
Flood first planted either by Noah himself, or some of the sons of Sem, before
the remove to Shinaar. For, such Principles of Theology, as amongst the
Chinois, we shall shortly hear of, could not proceed from the wicked and
idolatrous race of accursed Cham, but from those only that were, de civitate
Dei, of the City of God.

The most remote parts then of the Eastern World, being planted before the
dispersion at Babel; and until the Confusion of Tongues, the whole Earth being
of one language and one lipp, it must indisputably succeed, that Noah and
whosoever remained with him, which came not with the rest to the valley of
Shinaar, and consequently by their absence thence, had no hand in that vain
attempt, could not be concerned in the Confusion there, nor come within the
curse of confounded Languages; but retained the PRIMITIVE Tongue, as having
received it from Noah, and likewise carry the same with them to their several
Plantations, in what part of the East soever they settled themselves, as well as
Nimrod and his Troops brought it with them to Shinaar. And hence it is, that
Goropius says, Because the Cimmerians were not at the Confusion of Babel,
therefore G. Beca. Indos. page 534.
there is no question to be made, but that their Language was the PRIMITIVE.

Hence the same Author, Because those that were left behind to plant Margiana,
were not at Id. page 533
the building of the Tower, it must be necessarily acknowledged, in regard the
Language was not confined to any, but general to all, as well unto those at
Shinaar, as all people elsewhere, that the ANCIENT Language, which before the
Confusion was common to the universal World, remained with those of Margiana.
Hence Sir W. Sir W. Ral. Histor. par. 1. page 158.
Raleigh, it is conjectured, that those of the race of Sem which came into
Chaldaea, were of Nimrod's Troop, and removed with him thither: yet, in regard
they were no partners in the unbelieving work of the Tower, therefore they did
retain the first and most ancient Language, which the first Age had left to
Noah, and Noah to Sem and his Issues Hence Heylin also, That some Plantations
Heyl. Cosm. p. 7.
had no reference to the Confusion of Tongues, being made before it, on the
sending out of such Colonies, as were nearest to the place, where the Ark did
rest. But how general soever the consent is, what needs profane testimony;
when sacred History plainly teaches us, That the Language of These only that
were at Babel was confounded, and not of Those that were absent thence, and not
guilty of that mis-believing work. The words of the holy Penman, Genesis 11. v. 5,
6, 7, 8. are. And the Lord came down to see the City, and the Tower, which the
Children of men builded. And the Lord said, Behold, the people is one, and they
have all one Language, and this they begin to do; and now nothing will be
restrained from them, which they have imagined to do. Go to, let us go down,
and THERE confound THEIR Language, that THEY may not understand one another
Speech. So the Lord scattered THEM abroad from THENCE upon the face of all the
Earth, and they left off to build the City.

Which can admit no other construction, than that the Language of Th^se, that
were THERE, that is, at that place in Babylonia, not in India or elsewhere was
confounded. So in like manner THEIR Language, i. e. Their Language that were
with Nimrod, and of this Western Colony; not the Language of Noah, and his
Plantations in the East. Again also, That THEY, to wit, those children of men,
that built the Tower; not those generations that had no hand in building of the
same, might not understand one another speech.

Furthermore, the Lord scattered THEM abroad from THENCE, Which, says Sir Sir
W. Ral. par. 1. page 104.
W. Raleigh, has no other sense, but that the Lord scattered THEM, viz. those
that built this Tower, for those were from THENCE (to wit, Babel) dispersed
into all the Regions of the North and South, and to the Westward. The East
being inhabited before.

But let us consider the Context. The Scene was the valley of Shinaar; They
found a plain in the land of Shinaar, and they dwelt there. v. 2. The Offenders
were Nimrod and his Troops; And they said, Go to, let us build us a City and a
Tower, whose top may reach unto Heaven, and let us make us a name, lest we be
scattered abroad upon the face of the whole Earth. ver. 4. The fear of a
Judgment brought a Judgment upon them. And as the Offenders were those only at
Shinaar, so the Language of those only at Shinaar was confounded. Go to, let us
go down (says the Lord) and there confound their Language, that they may not
understand one another speech. v. 7 The punishment being justly inflicted,
where only the offense lay, and upon those solely that had offended. No man
shall answer for another fault: it is both the Law and Gospel. The soul that
sins, it shall die, Ezech. 18. v. 20. For we must all appear before the
judgment seat of Christ, that every one may receive the things done in his
body, according to that he has done, whether it he good or bad; 2 Corinthians.
cap. 5. v. 10. And I must not omit that the marginal notes of our Bible, for
the more clear exposition of the Text we are upon, refer us to the Wisdom of
Solomon, cap. 10. v. 5. where it is written; Moreover, the Nations in their
wicked conspiracy being confounded, She [Wisedome] found out the righteous,
and preserved him blameless unto God, and kept him strong against the tender
compassion of his son. Whereby, though it may be conceived, that in the
particular, this alludes unto Abraham his sacrificing of Isaac; yet in the
general, it is most evident, most certain thereby, that Those only that had
offended in the conspiracy of the building of the Tower, had their Language
confounded, and were convicted by that Judgment.

Thus from Scripture and approved History has been made appear, That the Ark
rested in the East; That Noah planted not far from the place, where it took
ground; and from thence by himself, and his offspring, that abode with him,
peopled the Eastern parts of the World, together with China; and that these
Plantations were undertaken and settled before the remove to Shinaar, and
Confusion of Tongues, by those that never came at Babel; and could not
therefore be ingagaged in that presumptuous work. But who they were of his
offspring that Noah kept with him, whether of the sons of Ioctan, or of all
the rest a certain number (Cham and his issue only excepted) cannot, says Sir
W. Raleigh, be known. Nevertheless Sir W. Ral. Hist. par. 1. page 101.
we are not to doubt, but that their numbers were so great, as not only
sufficed to husband those Plantations that Noah had settled, but also to send
forth Colonies elsewhere, as occasion required.

The Scripture also plainly declares, That the curse of Confounded Languages
fell upon those only that were present upon the place at Babel, and personally
acted in that ungodly design there. And therefore we may warrantably conclude,
That either the PRIMITIVE Language is to be found amongst those Plantations
that were made before the Babylonian Enterprise, by those that were absent
thence, and had not offended therein; or else it cannot be appropriated to any
Nation now extant in the World, or at this day known. For, as the people at
Babel, that had solely offended, were therefore from Shinaar scattered
throughout all the other parts of the un-inhabited Earth; so only the Language
which they brought with them thither, was there for their offense confounded;
and, as is conceived, divided into several other Languages, passing at this day
amongst us by the name of MOTHER-Tongues, which that they were seventy two in
number, he that has a mind to please himself with believing it, shall not
displease me.

Now here, Heylin is so courteous, as to befriend Heyl. Cosm. page 17.
me with an Objection. That admitting it for granted, that those who staid
behind with Noah, spoke the same Language which was common to the Fathers
before the Flood (be it the Hebrew or what else soever it was) there seems no
reason to the contrary, but that it might in time be branched into several
Languages or Dialects of the same one Language, by the Commerce and Intercourse
which they had with Nations of a different speech. To which, is thus answered,
That not only Commerce and Intercourse, but also Time and Conquest may possibly
cause the alteration of a Language, yet in regard that Conquests are of diverse
kinds, and Intercourse and Commerce of different natures, such alteration
cannot be effected by every manner of Commerce and Conquests.

For, on the one side, where an Invader enters a Country with a resolution
wholly to dispossess and expel the Natives, it inevitably follows, that the
speech of that Country, must, being subdued, receive such an absolute change,
as that no other, than that which the Conqueror brings with him can remain. And
thus we find, it succeeded at the conquest of the Land of Canaan by the
Israelites; who generally, expelling the Canaanites, introduced their own
Language (whatever it were) and extirpated the former. Where also an Invader
has made such a full Conquest, as that he can clear, or (as I may say) drive
the Country, and carry away the whole body of the Natives into captivity,
there, no doubt is to be made, but that the Language of the vanquished must
undergo a manifest alteration. And thus we find that in so short a time as the
captivity of Babylon, those of Judah had in such manner lost their speech, as
at their return home, they could not understand the Book of their own Laws, but
by an Interpreter. Nehem. cap. 8. v. 7. 8.

But on the other side, where the Invader enters, to possess new dwellings, and
plant himself and people; when he neither carries the Natives elsewhere into
captivity, nor utterly expels them, the old Language of that Country cannot be
extirpated; but may be altered, and by the mixture with new comers after long
tract of time, become generally a new kind of speech. Thus the invasions of the
Huns, Goths, and Longobards, and their Conquests, brought a new Language into
Italy. And thus the Goths and Vandals, Saracens and Moors into Spain. So
likewise where a foreign Enemy, out of an ambitious desire of Fame and Glory,
and for eternizing his name invades a Country, and having obtained a victory,
upon a certain tribute condescended unto by the Natives, for acknowledgment of
subjection, acquitteth it again, there it is impossible, the speech of that
Country should be changed. For, it cannot be imagined, that the Kingdom of
Porus, into which Alexander the Great no sooner leaped, than leaped out of it
again, could by such a conquest, have the Language thereof, either altered or
corrupted. In like manner, the conquests of the French in Italy, no more
altered the Italian Tongue, than our Invasions of Scotland, did the Pictish, or
Scottish speech.

There is moreover another kind of Conquest, where the Victor takes up the
Manners and Customs of the vanquished, and transporteth into his own Country
the Language, Arts, and Sciences of those that he has overcome. For the Romans
together with their victory over Greece, brought home with them, Sculpture,
Painting, and the Language of that People also; which Plutarch in the life of
M. Cato tells us, most of the Romans studied. Yet we find not, that the
Latin Tongue was corrupted, but rather refined thereby; and if it were
refined, then it was altered, for every refining is changing. But, this some
will perhaps say, is directly contrary to what is objected: for, here in this
case, not the Language of the vanquished by the Conqueror, but the Language of
the Conqueror by the vanquished comes to receive an alteration. After the same
manner, by their conquests in Asia, the Romans learned luxury and riot, to wear
silk, and live effeminately; the Asiatiques in the mean time composing
themselves to the ancient temperance, frugality and discipline of their Lords
and Masters the Romans. Thus also we find, that the Macedonians long before,
when they had conquered Persia, became not only in Language and Attire, but
also in Discipline and Customs Persians rather, than the Persians,
Macedonians. And this oftentimes happens, as all History informs, where the
Conqueror is either barbarous, or not in such a degree civilized, as those that
are subdued by him. Or else efflated by success, wholly gives himself over to
licentiousness, disdaining the manners of his native Country.

As for Time, it may, having especially Commerce its attendant, prevail
somewhat herein. For, we our selves can scarcely now understand the Language
that was used in the days of Chaucer. And yet nevertheless we know, that the
Latin Tongue, has from Caesar's time, maugre all conquests and intercourse
whatsoever, received not the least alteration, but remains both in the
Characters and reading the same, as then. and is as generally, if not better
understood, in these days, than it was fifteen hundred years since.

Lastly, concerning Intercourse and Commerce, it is true, that in such a
Nation, where a general Commerce is permitted, and free access granted to all
Strangers to trade and inhabit, as well in the Inland parts of the Country; as
upon the Frontires or Seacoasts, there a change of Language may by degrees
happen. And we need not go far for Example. For, with us our selves, by this
means chiefly, the Saxon Tongue, since the time of the Normans is utterly lost.
Insomuch that what by Latinizing, Italianizing, Frenchizing, and [as we must
have it called forsooth,] Refinizing, or rather Non-sencizing, our old Language
is so corrupted and changed, that we are so far from Saxonizing, as we have
scarcely one significant word of our MOTHER speech left.

But on the contrary, where Commerce is made, and intercourse allowed, upon the
Seacoasts and Frontires only, there we find the Language of the Natives in the
Inland parts, to remain without suffering any alteration. Hence Caesar tells
us, that he found some footsteps of the Gaulish Language upon the coast of
Britain, when within the land (though he advanced not far) the British Tongue
was spoken purely. And hence in Ise-and, though about four hundred years since
conquered by the Norvegians, in regard there is little access of strangers, but
only as some part of the Maritime shores affords; as also because they suffer
not their unexperienced youth to travail abroad into other Countries, the old
Runique or Gothique Tongue in manner yet continues, and is by diverse of the
Inhabitants understood, when in all the Septentrional World besides, it is
utterly forgotten and extinct. But what shall we say of the Basquish or ancient
Language of Spain? which notwithstanding all the Invasions of the
Carthaginians, Romans, Goths, Vandals, Moors remains yet pure in Biscay,
whatever Commerce and Intercourse soever that Country has in all times
enjoyed. Insomuch that the Inhabitants upon one side of the River running from
the mountains of Ordunia to Bilboa, and which carries the Iron-mills, speaking
the MOTHER Language, understand not one word, unless by an Interpreter, what
those on the other side of the same River say. What of the Irish Tongue? which
Country, although we have kept under subjection by lawful conquest, near five
hundred years, settled many Plantations therein, and permitted continually free
Commerce, yet nevertheless the natural Language of the Country continues
throughout most parts of that Kingdom pure and untainted at this day. And which
is remarkable, if a child born of English Parents there, and as curiously
overseen as possibly a child can be from hearing of the Native Irish speak,
chance to hear but one word of that Language, he will sooner remember the same,
and be apter to repeat it again, than he shall any one word of English, though
twenty times spoken before him. What of the old British Tongue? since that
through all the conquests of the Romans, Saxons, Danes, and Normans, and after
unlimited conversation with most Nations of the World, it has passed current,
and is yet remaining in Wales. In like manner, the Arabique continues
incorrupt in the hilly pares of Granata: and the ancient Epirotique in the
high, woody, and more mountanous parts of Epirus.

By all which it appears, That not any kind of Conquest can wholly alter or
extirpate the natural Language of a people, except by generally expelling the
Natives, or transplanting them elsewhere. And that Commerce and Intercourse
where a mixture of several Nations is wholly permitted, may in long tract of
Time produce an absolute alteration; but where tolerated on the Seacoasts or
confines of a Country only, can neither alter a Language, nor branch it into
several Dialects of the same, but may possibly in those places corrupt it,
whilst the Inland parts nevertheless enjoy purely their MOTHER Tongue.

When then it is reputed ridiculous to hear that Adam spoke Dutch in Paradise:
And when we consider, that the Hebrews have no surer foundation to erect their
Language upon, than only a bare Tradition of their own, which we all know is so
infamous an Historian; as Wisemen neither report after it, nor give credit to
any thing they receive from it: As also that the Samaritans by their often
removes were but a mungrel people, and in regard of their continual commerce
with Nations of a different speech; and the many storms and tempests of Wars
and Conquests, which they were always subject to, have but a mungrel Language;
for though it has, as is not to be denied, some proper and peculiar words of
its own, nevertheless it oftentimes uses the Arabique, and in forming of Nouns
and Verbs, sometimes follows the Hebrew, sometimes the Chaldaean, wherewith it
is of great affinity. And though they may have had, as they pretend, the
Pentateuch of Moses written in a strange Character, the Samaritan, as they call
it, yet their having had it in their custody contributes not an Iota to the
Antiquity of their speech, or that it should have anciently been the PRIMITIVE
Tongue, in regard those Characters not much differ from the modern Hebraique,
unless where either by the negligence of the Scribe, or variety of the Copies,
some diversity appears; as our famous Doctor Brian Walton, late Bishop of
Chester in his Introduction to the B. Walt. Intr. ad Ling. Or. p. 18, 19.
reading of the Oriental Tongues has very learnedly observed: And when in like
manner we consider, that it cannot with any probability of Truth be resolved,
that the Phoenicians, who are generally supposed to be the wicked offspring of
accursed Cham, the principal Actors, and Offenders in that daring conspiracy at
Babel, should enjoy so great a privilege, as to carry away with them, and be
infranchised to that Sacred Language, which even in the time of innocence was
spoken between God and Man: Why may we not reflect upon the CHINOIS? For we
shall make appear, that They were primitively planted in CHINA, if not by Noah
himself, by some of the Issue of Sem, before the remove of Nimrod to Shinaar,
and the Confusion of Tongues at Babel; Their Language to be the self same at
this day, as when they were first planted and began to be a people; Their
Country never subject to any such conquest, as could prejudice, but rather
dilate their language; Their Laws in all times to have prohibited foreign
Commerce and Intercourse; and Their dominions ever shut up against strangers,
never permitting any to set footing within Their Empire, unless by way of
Embassy solely; nor suffering Their own Natives to travail abroad without
especial license from their Emperor: So jealous have they evermore been, lest
Their Language and Customs should be corrupted. Considering which, together
with their infinite multitudes of People, and perpetual flourishing in Peace,
and all Arts and Sciences, whilst every Nation almost throughout the whole
Universe besides, have more than once in time been overrun and conquered; it
may with much probability be asserted, That the Language of the Empire of
CHINA, is, the PRIMITIVE Tongue, which was common to the whole World before the
Flood; and that it could never be branched into several Languages, or Dialects
of the same one Language, by the Commerce and Intercourse which they had with
Nations of a different speech; when they never had Commerce or Intercourse with
any. Nor were ever known to these parts of the World (scarcely to their
adjoining Neighbors) till about an hundred and fifty years since, by the
Portugals and Spaniards they were discovered.

But I find St. Hierome, and others that follow him, object, That the Hebrew
was the PRIMITIVE Language, in regard that all the proper names of men before
the Deluge, and immediately after the same appear to be naturally Hebrew. And
that it was necessary the Sacred Scripture should be delivered in that
Language, which Adam and the rest used before the Flood. To which the answer is
obvious, that the Names might be first imposed in the PRIMITIVE Language, and
that it was an easy matter for the succeeding Ages, understanding by Tradition
what they meant, to transferr them into the Hebrew Tongue; whereby also the
Names of men might equally answer to the Names of places, which otherwise they
could not do; for throughout the whole course of the Books of Moses and Ioshuah
it is manifest, that the names of the Places and Cities of Canaan, the ancient
names, I mean, by which they were called before ever the Israelites came to
dwell in them, were Hebrew names. Neither was there any more necessity, that
the sacred Oracles of God should be written in the first and most perfect
speech, than for CHRIST to be born of the most honorable and richest Parents,
and live in the most splendid and delicious manner. For, that the World might
know, man is not to attribute any thing to his own merits or greatness, but
that God gives all his Grace gratis, he has ever chosen humble and lowly
Ministers of his Grace. Thus of Abraham the son of an Idolater, and maker of
Idols, he made choice, to be the first founder of Circumcision. And so
ordained, that CHRIST himself, when he was to be born should scarcely have a
roof to shelter him, when he newly came out of his Mothers womb, from the
inclemency of the Air. And when CHRIST came to redeem us from sin and death, he
elected not, those, to preach his Gospel throughout the World, that were of the
Schools of the Philosophers, or of Demosthenes or Cicero, but made choice of
rude men, of a rude manner of life, Fishermen, and Boatmen to be the Heralds
for proclaiming of his Victory. Neither was it any King or Monarch, but an
Abject, who was cast forth and exposed to the mercy of cruel waves, and cruelty
of merciless Crocodiles, that delivered the Israelites from their slavery in
Egypt. And if we run throughout all, throughout all we shall find, those to
have pleased God most, that are wont to displease men most. There is no reason
therefore any should think that so contrary to the doctrine of God, either the
Typical Law or the fulfilling of the Law should be given in that Language which
all others excelled. But, as the fulfilling of the Law, which relates chiefly
to the Gentiles, was written in the Greek Tongue; because that Language being,
as it were, then generally known, the Nations might by reading it, the sooner
be converted, and brought within the sheepfold of CHRIST. So no doubt, the
Typical Law, wherein the Church of the Israelites was solely concerned, was
written, not in the PRIMITIVE, but for their better instruction, in the old
Hebrew Tongue, which Abraham brought, not out of Chaldaea, but learned in the
land of Canaan, whereby it became the Language of his Posterity, and by them
was vulgarly spoken, until, as some will have it, their Captivity. And this the
Scripture does in direct terms testify; when upon the calling of the
Egyptians it is said. In that day shall five Cities in the land of Egypt
speak the language of Canaan, and swear to the LORD of Hosts. Isai. 19. v. 18.
By which we are taught, that the Egyptians should not only be brought to offer
the same sacrifices and oblations to the LORD, as the Israelites did, but speak
the same speech with them also, which was the Language of the land of Canaan.
From whence we will at present depart, to enter upon our travail into CHINA.

MARTINUS Martinius in his famous Chinique M. Mart. Atl. Sin. page 1.
Atlas, after his much celebrating of Asia in general, for having been the
place of our first Parents, and Paradise, and original of all things,
proceeds to the Antiquities of the Empire of CHINA, in particular, after this
manner. But of Asia it self, says he, there is no part (at least since the
universal Deluge) more Noble, more Ancient, or more fertile than this extreme
part thereof, whether Politic Government, the use of Letters, or Industry be
respected. For, the History of it by the Chinois themselves even from all
Antiquity written, comprehends almost three thousand years before the birth
of CHRIST, as more evidently by the Epitomy and Chronology collected out of
their Annals appears. Ever since which time they are said to have had Letters,
Moral Philosophy, and Mathematical Sciences especially; which both their more
than Antique observations of the Stars, and those Laws of Government written in
most anciently ancient Volumes; and at these very times extant, more than
sufficiently show and declare. In the Epistle Dedicatory of his Atlas he
premiseth thus, In these Mapps, I present unto your view the situation and
limits of the most vast Empire of the Chinois, equal almost unto all Europe. It
has ever since the Flood of Noah, been inhabited by a most industrious and
civil people but hitherto wholly inaccessable to Strangers, until now at last
for the salvation of Souls, after great trouble and anxiety those of my
Society, says he, have gained entrance thereinto.

Isaacus Vossius (of whom our famous Dr. Usher Is. Voss. de Aetat. Mun. page 44.
late Archbishop of Armagh, gives so clear a testimony, that we are obliged to
acknowledge him a most learned man) in his dissertation of the true Age of the
world, having discoursed of those Nations, that are the greatest pretenders to
Antiquity, as the Hebrews, Samaritans, Chaldeans. and Egyptians, brings up the
Chinois in the rear, and of them delivers his testimony after these words. Let
us now come to those, that not so much by their own, as the name of their
neighbors are called Chinois. I mean, says he, the Serians. A race of men by
far the most skilled in letters of all the people that ever were. They preserve
a continued History compiled from their monuments, and annual exploits of four
thousand five hundred years. Writers they have more ancient than even Moses
himself. Ever since their beginning to be a Nation, they have never been
corrupted by intercourse with strangers, nor ever known what wars and
contentions meant; but addicted only to quietness, delight, and contemplation
of Nature, have run through the space (plusquam) of more than four thousand
years, unknown indeed to other Nations, but enjoying to themselves their own
felicity at pleasure.

Now, in regard Vossius names them Serians, I M. Mart. Atl Sin. page 1.
am compelled before proceeding farther to certify, that this outmost Region
of the known World, which Martinius calls the extrreme part of Asia, is by some
called Serica, Sina, or Chinois by others, by the Tartars Cathay and Mangin,
and which every man wondersat, not any of all these names, is at all known unto
the Chinois themselves,, that of Mangin excepted, the Tartars having ironically
in derision put that upon them, as scoffing at their being over arrogant and
proud of their civilities; for Margin in the Tartarian Tongue signifies
barbarous people. But the Chinois call their Empire Chunghoa, and Chunghue,
either name, says Martinius, being imposed for the excellency thereof. This
expressing the middle Kingdom (they supposing themselves to be scited in the
middle of the World) That signifies the middle Garden or Flower rather. But how
much these mysterious reasons of Names may import their Language to be the
PRIMITIVE Tongue, I shall leave unto Martinius, Goropius, and others, ere our
discourse brings us to a period, to acquaint you.

But seeing Martinius referred us to his Epitomy M. Mart. Sin. Hist. lib. 1. p.
12*
of the History of China, we are not to neglect him therein. Illud pro certo
compertum, Sinemsem de diluvio Historiam non multum a Noctico abesse, quippe
quae ter mill circi^er annis vulgarem Christi Ep^cham praegreditur. It is for
certain, says he, That the Chinique History that mentions the Deluge
reaches not far from the Flood of Noah, for it precedeth the birth of CHRIST
according to the vulgar computation about three thousand years.

Now, for that we are to make great use of Martinius his Authority, I conceive
it not impertinent to let you know, that he professes, after his having lived
many years amongst the Chinois, to have with great care and long study
epitomized their History from their Original Annals, and innumerable their
other Books, yet extant even at this day amongst them from their first
beginning to be a Nation. And to have brought it down with all clearness and
integrity to the incarnation of CHRIST, and since, to these times also, though
that part thereof, we are not so happy, as to have yet made public.

In this their History from the time of the Flood, he very much enclineth to
repose an assured M. Mart. Sin. Hist. Epist. ad Let.
confidence, telling us in his Epistle to the Reader, That the fidelity thereof
is so much the more warrantable, as that the Chinois for themselves only writ
the same; either contemning or not knowing foreign Nations; so that, seeing they
neither regarded to please Strangers, nor boast of their own actions, they had
no occasion to deliver untruths or report Fables. So much the less because they
have no Nobility either for Antiquity of birth or time to flatter. Every the
poorest man amongst them, if deserving it by his learning, being capable of the
highest preferment. Hence it proceeds, says he, that about their History there
are no controversies or disputes with them, no difference in the succession of
their Emperors, nor genealogies of their Royal families, of which nevertheless
amongst us so little care is taken, that every Chronologer almost differs
from another.

Now, though Martinius has this opinion of Id: p. 12*
the sincerity of their Annals since the time of the Flood; yet as to the Age
preceding the same, the Chinois themselves give little or no credit to what is
related in them, during their Government by the heads of Families, but from the
time they began to be ruled by a Monarch, of which, opportunity serving, we
shall take farther notice, and at present advise you only. That whereas by
their History it appears Fortrius who was their first Monarch began his reign
over them, about three thousand years before the birth of CHRIST, after the
common Chronology, Martinius tells us, that the credit thereof must rest at
their own doors, for a matter of such moment he will not take upon him to
decide; in regard it consents not with the judgment of our Chronologers, that
assign a much less space of time from the Flood of Noah. Yet nevertheless,
says he, the opinion of the Chinois seems not on M. Mart. Sin. Hist. lib. 1.
p. 13.
every side to be rejected: Several of the Chronologers of Europe favor it;
the Seventy Interpreters make for it, so also Sam satenus and others, neither
does the Roman Martyrologe, or computation of the Greeks much dissent therefrom.

But hearken unto Vossius; (Martinius consenting Is. Vos. d^ (...). Mun p. 46.
4^. M. Mart. Atl. Sin. page 26*
with him) Miranda artis and naturae opera quae ex hujus regni cognitione ad
nos perl^ta sa^, non est hujus loci recensere. Ea saltem referemus quae de
annis and antiquitate gentis comperimus, Serum itaque tempus historicum incipit
annis ante natum Christum 2847. The wonderful works both of Nature and Art,
which, says he, by the discovery of this Empire, are arrived at our knowledge,
this is no place to mention. We shall relate at least what we find of the Age
and Antiquity of the Nation. The Historical time therefore of the Serians
begins two thousand and eight hundred forty seven years before CHRIST was born.
This said, and having afterward computed from the said time, the several
reigns of their Emperors according to their several families, he thus
concludes, A principio itaque regni Serum, usque ad finem praesentis anni, qui
est 1658 post Christum natum, colliguntur in universum anni 4505. From the
beginning therefore of the Serian Empire unto the end of this present year one
thousand six hundred fifty eight after the birth of CHRIST, are numbered in the
total four thousand five hundred five years. Whereby appears, that according to
the vulgar Era, which Martinius follows, and which makes from the Creation to
the Flood of Noah one thousand six hundred fifty six years; and from thence to
the coming of CHRIST into the World two thousand two hundred ninety four years;
the Historical time of the Chinois begins several Ages, to wit, five hundred
fifty three years before the Universal Deluge, computing to the year one
thousand six hundred fifty eight: as Vossius does.

Alvarez Semedo, a diligent Author for his time, Al. Some. (...). del. Cin. par.
1. cap. 22.
as writing his relation of China about thirty rears since; discoursing of the
first Emperors thereof wholly omits Fotrius, with his five Successors till
Iaus, the better to dispense with their Chronology before the Flood, of which
he seems to have no great opinion: the most favorable judgment he will allow
thereof, being that their Emperor Iaus might precede that destruction twelve
years. And though he says, there may be a mis-computation thereby in the
History of this Emperor, and his Successors Xunus, and Ynus; he does
nevertheless assure us, that the matters related of them, are very coherent
with their Successions. His words being; Ad ogni modo, benche via sia errore
nel tempo, dall' historia di questo Imperatore e seguenti, e certo che le cose
vanno coherenti con le loro successioni. He tells us also, that these three
Emperors are by the Chinois reputed Saints, of whom they relate many things,
and that certainly there is no doubt to be made, but that they were great
Philosophers, and much inclined to moral virtue.

But in regard Martinius in his Tartarian War premiseth, that he has in his
Atlas of China deduced and taken their History from their own ancient Records
ever since the time of Noah. We therefore beginning also at the Deluge, will
now return to their Antiquity.

Of the Deluge their Writers make much mention, but of the original and cause
thereof, as can yet be found, they give not any account. Which therefore
whether it were that of Noah, or some other peculiar to the Chinois, as the
Ogygian anciently in A^ica, or the Deucalionian in Thessaly appears not. For
which a manifest reason may be given, because they have always reputed
themselves to be the only great people of the World; and that it contained
either few or no other Nations besides themselves, and those generally so
contemptible, as that they held them scarcely worthy the conquering, much less
enquiring after what successes or calamities befell them. And therefore with our
Authors, I am very much resolved to believe, that, that flood which happened in
China in the time of Iaus their seventh Empeeror, was the universal flood. For
our Chronologers of Europe referr the flood of Noah to the very reign of this
Emperor, and the Chinois themselves in their Annals relate, that during his
government great numbers of People flocked into their Country; and that at the
same time it was drowned, and overflown with waters, which were brought in by
the Deluge, Eas Author Sinicus ait diluvio invectas, says Martinius in the
life of Iaus. Considering which together with the coherence of Time, this
Deluge that thus drowned China could certainly be no other, than that, that
drowned the whole World besides. And the flocking in of those people thither in
such numbers, seems much to confirm the same. For thereby is evidently
discovered as well the great fears, that generally at last, possessed all
Nations, as the hopes they had by their flying out of the low and champain
Regions adjoining, to avoid and escape the threatening danger, upon the great
and high mountains, that run throughout, and as it were surround the Chinique
World.

But let us see how our Author proceeds. M. Mart. Sin. Hist. Lib. 1. p. 39.
And because that under this Emperor mention is made of the gathering together
of waters, which the History of China calls the Deluge; and that the
Europaean Chronologers from more certain grounds (from the computation of Moses
he might as well have said) reduced the flood of Noah to the time of this
Emperor. I could, says Martinius, easily grant that all the History of the
Chinois to this very time, is either fabulous, or comprehends those things,
which happened before the flood, whereof the memory might happily be preserved
in the Ark. For that many other things, which appertain also to our faith, were
vindicated from oblivion, and utter destruction even in the same place, is the
opinion of learned men. He farther tells us, That this extreme part of Asia,
whereof we treat, was for certain inhabited before the flood. But by what means
the memory of things could be preserved there, when all mankind was wholly
destroyed, if we have not recourse to the family of Noah, is to me, says the
same Author unknown. Hear Id. page 21.
him. Han^ enim, qua describo, extremam Asiam, ante Diluvium habitatam fuisse
pro certo habeo* verum quo pacio fuerit rerum servata memoria, humano genere
omni, si a Noetica familia discesseris, penitus deleto, mibi non liquet. And if
it should be objected, They might receive the memery of their actions more
ancient, than the flood by Tradition; that Tradition also must be acknowledged
either from Noah himself, or some of his sons to have proceeded.

Of all the Provinces of China, Xensi for Antiquity has the pre-eminence; in
regard the first of Mortals, that ever set footing in China after the Deluge,
planted, and took up their first seats within this Province. To which purpose
M. Mart. Atl. Sin. page 43.
Martinius in his Chorography thereof affirms; That by just right this most
noble Province of Xensi, may with all others the chiefest of this extreme part
of Asia, for greatness and Antiquity contend; for, from times of old, it has
been the seat of almost all the Chinique Emperors, even from the very original
of the Chinois, until the exit of the family of Hana, which happened two
hundred sixty four years after the nativity of CHRIST. And that this Province
also, was the first, as by their most ancient Annals appears, which was
inhabited by the first Planters of China; and that from the West drawing more
into the East, They came thither shortly after the general Deluge of the World;
I am* says he, from many and those most convincing arguments certainly
persuaded.

Observe in like manner, what Iean Nieuhoff in the late Embassage of the
Oriental Company of the United Provinces of the Netherlands to the Emperor of
China relates. This Province of Xensi, says Nieuhoff, is so famous, that for
grandeur I. Nieuh. (...) Amb. Or. par. 1. page 244.
and Antiquity, it may by just right dispute with all the Provinces of the
Higher Asia; for the Emperors of China, have from all times since the Universal
Flood, kept their Imperial residence therein, until the reign of the Family of
Hana. If Xensi then be the most ancient Country of the upper Asia, as Nieuhoff
positively asserts; and if of the upper Asia, Babylon be a Country, as all
Geographers unanimously affirm, it follows indisputably, that Xensi is more
ancient than Babylon, and consequently received a Colony into it, before Nimrod
and his Troops came into the valley of Shinaar.

Now if the credit of their Annals before the flood, should be suspected by us,
as they are by the Chinois themselves before the reign of their Emperor Folins,
we may probably conceive that Puoncuus whom they report to be their first
Governor, was the very Conductor of that Colony, that after the Deluge, and
before the Confusion of Tongues first came and planted China. Neither M. Mar^
Sin. Hist. Lib. 1. p. 17.
is authority wanting for the same. Indidem licet conjicere omissis argumentis
aliis, Puoncuum and Socios a cessatione Diluvii, imo ante Turris Babylonicae
molitionem ad Sinas venisse; From whence it may be lawful, says Martinius, to
conceive, setting other arguments aside, that Puoncuus and his Associates from
the cessation of the flood, yea, before the Enterprise of the Babylonian Tower,
came into Cbina. When then China was planted from the cessation of the flood,
it could not but be much more peopled, ere the Tower was set in hand, and far
more before the Confusion of Tongues. For Authors are of opinion, that in
regard of the vast greatness of the Foundations, and inestimable quantities of
materials requirable for the raising of such a prodigious work, in such a low
and moorish a Country, as Babylonia could not but as then be, Nimrod and his
Confederates Sir W. Ral. hist. par. 1. page 100.
consumed forty years, before the judgment of confounded Languages dissolved
their work, and dispersed them.

But from these his reservations, it may be much suspected, that Martinius in
his own thoughts, had an higher opinion of this people, than he deemed fitting
to be vulgarly made known. And hence happily it is, that Vossius says,
Chorographiae Sericae interpres, vir minime I. Voss. de Aetat. Mun. page 45.
ineptus, multo moderatius de gentis hujus virtutibus scripsit, quam sensit;
The Interpreter of the Chinique Chorography, a man that very well understood
himself, writ far more moderately of the perfections of this people, than he
thought. And therefore had Martinius, having in manner from his cradle to his
grave studied their Antiquities, written what he thought, and declaring his
mind plainly, vouchsafed us those other Arguments he has concealed, much more
no doubt might have been discovered toward the clearing of what ensues.

For, whether Puoncuus was the Ringleader of this first Colony or not, it may
be very much presumed, that Noah himself both before and after the Deluge lived
in China. Josephus attesteth, that Noah having warning of the flood given him
Iosep. Ant. Iud. lib. 1. cap. 4.
from God, seeing his persuasions to repentance and amendment of life, could
work no effect upon the Corruption of the Age, and fearing by the violence of
the times to perish for his zeal, departed from his native soil, and with his
wife and children traveled into another Country. Secedens cum suis in aliam
regionem migravit, says Josephus. Now, why might not this other Region into
which Noah retired be China? And that confluence of people (which you lately
heard of) resort thither, out of desire upon the report of his piety to hear
him preach, the better to be prepared against the approaching ruin? For it
seems they repaired thither not only in regard of the flood, but also excited
by the Fame of the virtues of Iaus and his uprightness, throwing themselves
upon his protection as into their fathers bosom, in such numbers that the then
Chinique Empire scarcely sufficed to contain them. From whence we may moreover
observe, that the greater the thronging in of their numbers was, the greater
probability there is, they thronged in thither, in hope to save themselves from
the Deluge. Considering especially, that the Chinique History records, their
Country was at that time destroyed by waters, and therefore Martinius is
clearly of opinion, that these were either the waters of Noah's flood, which for
a long time after kept the plains and lower places of this extreme part of Asia
overflown, or China was drowned by a peculiar inundation. Hear him. Ego malim
credere, a No^tica inundatione superstites in extremae hujus Asiae planitie,
locisque depressioribus resedisse; aut peculiari ^luvie Sinas inundatos. But
that this Deluge in China was not a peculiar, but the universal Deluge, he
himself has verily persuaded. Hear with him, Semedo also, maintaining, Pensano
alcui che quell acque A. Sem. Rel. del Cin. par. 1. page 22.
erano reliquie del diluvio, That some believe these waters were those that
remained of the Deluge, though of their original and increase the Chinique
History is silent. Hear Vossius likewise confidently I. Vos. de Aetat. Mun. p.
52.
affirming, Secundum enim nostrum calculum diluvium Sert^um exact cum Noachico
convenit, for according to our calculation, says he, the Serian Deluge agrees
exactly with the flood of Noah. And it is not to be omitted, that Iaus, time
being opportune, setting in hand to clear the Country of the Encumbrances
which the flood had made, caused the Channels and mouths of the Rivers choked
up, as Martinius conceives, by the mud and sand which the violence of the
Rains of the Noetique inundation had brought down, to be opened, and with banks
and trenches brought within bounds, about which either through the want of
skill in those that he employed, or hands in that newness of the World to
assist him, long time was consumed, and not until after many years. during the
reigns of his two next ensuing Successors brought to perfection in the end. For
the Chinois attribute extraordinary Merit unto Yuus for the Adjusting of these
Waters, as they call it.

It being then thus, Why might not that other Region into which Noah withdrew,
be China? And this Iaus, or Yaus (for I find the word both by Martinius,
Kircherus, and others indifferently used) be that Ianus (the middle Letter
Nadded only, gives us the very name, and to cut off the middle Letter, yea, the
middle Syllable oftentimes in the proper names of men is and ever has been
usually in the Eastern Languages done) be that Ianus, I say, whom most Authors
maintain was Noab? The History that relates to him, is by Nieuhoff, but
Martinius chiefly, set down in the life of Yaus, and some circumstances I.
Nieuh. l' Amb. Or. par. 2. page 106. M. Mart. Sin. hist. lib. (...). p. 3^.
attending it in the reign of his Predecessors; and which as in the most
compendious manner, I have thought fitting to present unto you, by the way of
Parallel, thus.

First, Noah had his name from the Comfort his father hoped to receive by him:
and Iaus had his name of the Happiness his father hoped should proceed from him.

Secondly, Noah was so just and righteous a man, as that he surmounted all
others of his Age: And Iaus so excelled in piety and virtue, as that he
surpassed all others of his time.

Thirdly, Noah was a Preacher, and taught the ways of God. And Iaus was a
Divine, and ordained sacred Rites, and prayers unto God.

Fourthly, Noab was an Husbandman; and Iaus prescribed rules of Husbandry to
his people.

Fifthly, In the days of Noah the whole World was drowned, and in the days of
Iaus the whole World was drowned.

Sixthly, Before the flood of Noah, was a Conjunction of all the Planets in one
Sign; and before the flood of Iaus was the like Conjunction of all the Planets.

Seventhly, The son of Noah, Cham, was a reprobate, and therefore by Noah made
a servant to his brethren; and the son of Iaus, Chus, was a reprobrate, and
therefore by Iaus excluded from succession in the Empire.

Eighthly and lastly, the Deluge of Noah happened in the year before CHRIST two
thousand two hundred ninety four; and the Deluge that destroyed China in the
time of Iaus agrees perfectly therewith; for he began his reign there, in the
year before CHRIST two thousand three hundred fifty seven.

Before the time of Moses the name of Jehovah, or rather Haiah, as Bailey in his
Practice of Piety observes, was never known unto the Israelites. And those are
not wanting that suppose, that name was derived from this Iaus. However the
Purch. Pilgrimage, lib. 2. page 138.
Samaritans, as I find in Purchase, begin their Chronicle after this manner. In
the name of Iah, the God of Israel; there is none like to Iah our God, one
Iehova, God of Gods, Lord of Lords, a great God strong and terrible. Iah is is
my strength and song, says Moses in praising God for the preservation of
Israel from the danger of Pharaoh, Exodus 15. v. 2. Wherefore it is Aynswor. in
Exodus
not un-observable that the very first utterance that an Infant at his birth
yields is, ya, ya, ya; as if the Lord had ordained, either that we should be
born with his name Iah in our mouths, which name is generally ascribed to him,
when some notable deliverance or benefit, according to his former promise comes
to pass, because he is the beginning and Being of beings, and gives to all,
life, and breath, and all things, Act. 17. v. 25. or else, that in our
swathling clothes we should have something of the PRIMITIVE Language, till
afterward confounded, as we are taught to speak. But by ya the Chinois intend
Excellens.

And how long soever the Chinois lived undiscovered to other Nations, it seems,
that of old, they were not to the Israelites unknown, as may be collected from
those words of the Prophet Isaiah, Ecce isti a longinquo venient ^ce quoque
illi ab Aquilone, and ab Occasu, denique isti a terra Sinaeorum; Behold, these
shall come from far: and lo, these from the North and from the West, and these
from the land of Sina. Isai. 49. v. 12. But when you shall find so many
reciprocally mutual customs between them, whether Theology, or Morality, or
what else be respected, as throughout our Essay shall be manifested, you will,
without all peradventure, assure your selves, that the Chinois immediately
proceeded from one and the same stem Noah, as the Hebrews originally did,
rather than that they seem to have been anciently to one another known.

We may therefore conclude, That if either sympathy of Qualities; Affinity of
names, Coherence of Times; Concurrence in events; or most memorable predictions
be of validity in the case: we have at last, after such curious enquiry by all
Writers upon this subject, and the Plantations of the World after the Deluge,
found out; what became of Noah after he departed out of his native Country,
and that he lived in China. Where after his descent out of the Ark, he might
betake himself immediately to his husbandry and planting, in a rich, if not the
richest soil of the whole Universe. And direct his Offspring unto such parts
of the Earth, as either himself formerly at first before the flood had lived
in, or knew most agreeable to their inclinations, and for their best advantage.
Without ever ranging over the World from Armenia to Arabia Foelix, thence into
Africa, afterward into Spain, and then into Italy, as Annius in his B^sus, and
those that follow him, have feigned (Noah was an husbandman, no wanderer: says
our learned Raleigh.) Or without making him to be Sabazius or Zagreus,
Prometheus, Hercules, Ogyges, Deucalion, Triton, and I know not who; all men,
in all places, at all times, as Gor^pius would have him.

But we must not leave Martinius behind us, in regard especially that how
resolved soever he may appear in other matters, we find him confidently
positive in and concerning this. Observe him therefore, Mihi vero religiosum
non sit, Yaum hunc nostrum eundcm cum Jano dicere; ita nominum and temporum
assinitate suaden^e, qui Janus multis Noe fuisse creditur. But I may, says he,
without fear assert, that this our Yaus, was the same with Ianus, the affinity
of names and times so persuading, which Ianus is by many conceived to have been
Noah. Yet how clear soever this Testimony is, let us moreover examine what
Authors have said of Ianus, and by what Character they have found him to be
Noah; setting aside their general consent, to which our Ianus so absolutely
corresponds, that they call him Bifrons, as seeing and knowing the Ages both
before and after the flood.

Of the Antiquity then of Ianus, Fabius Pistor as I find him cited by Sir W.
Raleigh gives this Sir W. Ral. Histor. par. 1. page 91.
testimony. Iani aetate nulla erat Monarchia, quia mortalibus pectoribus nondum
hoeserat ulla regnandi cupiditas etc. vinum and far primus populos docuit Ianus
ad sacrificia: primus enim Aras and Pomoeri^ and S^cra docuit; In the time of
Ianus, says he, there was no Monarchy, for the des^re of rule had not then
folded it self about the hearts of men. Ianus first taught the people to
sacrifice wine and meal: he first set up Altars, and instituted gardens and
solitary groves, wherein they used to pray; with other holy rites and
ceremonies.

Now let us consider how far our Ianus may be concerned herein; Sane sires ab
eo gestas ^ecte M. Mart. Sin. hist. lib. 1. p. 36;
expendas, omnes non modo Sinenses, sed orbis fere totius optimos quosque reges
virtute pariter and gloria vel vicit, vel aequavit. Verily, says Martinius, if
his actions be truly weighed, as well in virtue, as glory, he either equalled
or excelled, not only all those of China, but all whatever the best Kings, that
almost ever were in the whole World. He lived I. Nieuh: l' Amb. Or. par. 2.
page 106.
in the zeal of Charity; sowed the seeds of Prayer; consulted frequently the
highest Divinity; trampled vanity under his feet, gave himself to Fastings and
Prayers to free his Subjects from calamities; and undertook all things with
admirable prudence and conduct. But, as near as possible, we are to observe the
Chini^ue phrase, with a celestial piety, and singular wisdom he M Mart. Sin.
Hist. lib. 1. p. 37^
was endued, all welcomed him, as the approaching Sun; and by all was expected
with as much desire, as the thirsty fields expect clouds and rain: He was
powerful, but acted just things only; Noble and rich, but not proud; moderate
in habit; temperate in diet; loved simplicity in salutations and titles, Rich
household stuff he despised, Pearls and Diamonds contemned; Venereal enticings
not vouchsafe an ear unto; adorned houses did not inhabit in; but wearing
woollen garments, with the skins of Deer defended himself from cold. But, is
not this intended, may happily some say, by just Noah, whom I sephus calls the
Prince of the Jews, rather, than pious Iaus, the Prince of China? De religioso
p^tius viro, quamEthnico Imper atore dicta putes; of a man in holy Orders
rather, than an Ethnic Emperor, you may think them to be spoken, says
Martiniu^. However we have not ended yet, and scarcely can end, his merits are
famed to be such. For, he was of surpassing diligence, easy of access to all,
never offended with the importunity of any; much less with any incivility,
which through ignorance was committed in his presence. He readily heard the
differences between his people, and decided them himself; his patience was not
to be overcome; his affections not to be moved in treating of Affairs, and in a
cool temper with a compassionately moderate voice gave judgment on Malefactors.

And though it is true that Monarchy was then in use amongst the Chinois, (For
Fabius Pictor could not know more, than was then known, and perhaps might think
the Terrestrial Globe contained no other Countries, than what were arrived at
the Romans knowledge) the desire nevertheless of rule, the World being an Infant
and harmless, had not then folded it self about the hearts of men. For our
Ianus either weary thereof, or contemning it retired, and confining himself to
a solitary grove, lived there in the contemplation of Heaven and Heavenly
things; and from the motions of the Celestial bodies made such observations,
as that his Subjects afterward became fully instructed by him, not only in the
Institution of Gardens, and Groves for their devotions, but also in planting
and husbandry of whatever kind was requisite for the benefit of mankind.

Being returned from his solitude (and whether under this solitude may not lie
concealed, his going into the Ark, Time is to reveal, it being questionable
enough. For, Post haec, says Martinius, i. e. after his having given us the
relation of the abatement of the waters) our Ianus brought the Chinique Empire
into a better, yea, a new and another kind of form, than formerly it had,
ordaining Sacred Rites, Temples, and Sacrifices; constituting Laws both civil
and criminal, and appointing several Tribunals of Justice, for the greater ease
as well of the Subjects, as their Governors in succeeding times, which
continue in full force even at this day. In sum, he presented all things as
virtue required, with such a natural aptness, as if goodness had been born with
him, omnia virtute atque indole quadam sibi congenita exequebatur, being my
Authors words. Whereby he filled China with his just and pious deeds, and all
Ages with his memory; for he lives a reputed Saint amongst them at this day.

He disinherited his son Chus, for being (mark I pray) Loquax and contentiosus,
a Pratler and stubborn, saying one thing, acting another, seemingly virtuous,
really vicious.

After this, he deliberated of his own accord voluntarily, to make, whilst
living, a resignation of his Government, and would have surrendered the same to
the care of one Sungous, who though of high esteem for his abilities,
pretending nevertheless that the charge was too weighty for him, rejected the
same. And thereupon our Ianus resigned his Dominion to Xunus, a right pious,
but poor Countryman; who like Numa being invited to the Scepter from the
plough, lives as yet no less famous for his virtues amongst the Chinois, than
Numa amongst the Romans, but for his valor much more. I cannot forbear to
remember two principles of his; first, no father could be so wicked to whom his
son owed not obedience; nor any man so impious, but by instruction and benefits
might be induced to lead an honest and virtuous life.

Now Martinius and Nieuhoff by their late search find Iaus to have entered upon
his Government over China about sixty three years before the flood, though
Semedo in his time will scarcely allow him twelve. But whether twelve or five
times twelve, they compute, that he lived both before and after the Deluge,
from which that Noah only with his wife, and his sons, and his sons wives
escaped, nothing is more certain. And therefore who this Yaus, Iaus, or Ianus
could be, Noah excepted, is not to be understood by me, unless happily any
shall say, that the general Deluge happened long before the year of the World
one thousand six hundred fifty six, which I conceive no sober man, if he be not
Samaritanized will presume to think. For the Samaritans indeed by diminishing
the generations of Iared, Methusalah, and Lamech come short of the Hebrew
computation before the flood, and exceed it much more in the Genealogies of the
Patriarchs after the flood.

We are here to observe likewise, that on such a subject as we now treat of,
where the actions of an Ancient people, before these days unto the Europaeans,
or more truly, says Martinius, unto the universal World unknown, are to be
enquired M. Mart: Sin. hist. in Epist. (...)
into, the more modern Authors are the most warrantable. For heretofore their
Histories were reputed mere Fables, even by men of judgment, insomuch as
Lodovicus Vives (living about the time of their first discovery) writes, that
he wonders how any man could spend his time about such trifles.

Although their Histories be true, Historiae illorum, Is. Vos. Aet at. Mun.
page 45.
licet sint verae, says Vossius. For, since the Tartarian War, as if Divine
Power had decreed, they should be conquered to this end; Their discovery is
generally completed; Their Antiquity certainly known; Their Language plainly
understood, so far in present at least, as conduces to our enquiry; Time being
to make known the rest. For, now free conversation is permitted, and full
liberty granted to study in any of Their Libraries at pleasure, and to buy and
imprint any of Their Books; which when at first the Jesuits began to collect,
was by public Edict prohibited. Insomuch, that if we diligently make use, of
what is Providentially cast upon us, we shall not only not need much longer to
be inquisitive wherein Their Learning consists, but also find their Language
to be, as the most ancient, so the most delightful and harmless, of all others
at this day known throughout the World. Hoc demum aevo Serum calamitas, Serum
nobis dedit notitiam, now at last in this our Age, the calamity Id. page 46.
of the Chinois, has given us knowledge of the Chinois. As the same Vossius
has it.

In what part of the World Noah built the Ark, the Scriptures are altogether
silent; nor has any approved Author, Goropius Becanus set aside, written
thereof. Only this we are assured of, that the Ark was built, not in the North,
or Northwest, but in that part of the World which lay East from Shinaar: And to
my understanding, says Sir W. Raleigh, not far from the Sir W. Ral. hist. par.
1. p. ^3.
place, where it rested after the flood; for Noah did not use either Mast or
Sail (as in other Ships) and therefore did the Ark no otherwise move, than the
hulk or body of a Ship does in a calm Sea. Also because it is not probable,
that during those continual and downright rains there were any winds at all;
therefore was the Ark little moved from the place, where it was fashioned, and
set together. For it is written, God made a wind to pass upon the Earth, and
the waters ceased. Genesis 8. v. 1. From whence it may be gathered, that during
the fall of the waters, there was not any storm or forceable wind at all, which
could drive the Ark any great distance from the place, where it was first by
the waters lifted up. Thus far that Noble Gentleman.

Goropius Becanus in his Indo-Scythia does in maintenance of his opinion, that
the Ark took ground upon the mountains of Caucasus, suppose, that Noah built
the Ark near those mountains, because on those hills are goodly Cedars: and
that to this place Noah repaired both to separate himself from the reprobate
Giants, who rebelled against God and Nature, as also because he would not be
interrupted in building of the Ark; to which also he adds convenience of
Rivers to transport the Timber, which he used without troubling any other
carriages. Whereby Goropius appears you see very careful to supply Noah with
necessaries for so great a work; and considering his giving so near a
conjecture, as he does, at the place where the Ark might rest, he had great
reason to fortify the same, with as many circumstances, as the quality of that
Clime would admit.

But having discovered such manifest footsteps of the Residence of Noah in
China; after he withdrew from the corruption of the World, as that they far
outweigh whatever supposal to the contrary; we must now wave Caucasus, and
confidently affirm, that no Country in the habitable Earth could better
furnish Noah, with all manner of conveniences, and every sort of materials
proper for the building of such a Machine than China. For, if the Ark were made
of Pinetrees, as the Geneva translation renders the word Gopher, then Kircherus
will assure you, such Pinetrees are in China, that eight men can scarcely A.
Kirch. Chapter Ill. par. 4. p. 185.
fathom them, and that thirty eight men may stand within the body of them. If
according to the Rabbis of Cedar, then Purchase will tell Purch. ^ilgrim age,
lib. 4. page 438.
you, that their store is such, as the Chinois use Cedar for funeral coffins
and Tombs. If as the Septuagint of square timber, or as the Latin of smooth
timber, then Nieuhoff affirms, that of all I. Nieuh. l' Amb: Or. par. 2. p. 80
kind of trees for Carpenters work, such plenty, and of such several sorts is
to be found within that Empire, that the number is beyond admiration incredible.

And as for convenience of Rivers to transport the Timber, though without the
use of other carriages, it could never be brought to be put in work, either by
Noah or his Assistants; Caucasus must with Goropius his good favor give place
to China; for therein may be numbered no less, Id. par. 1. page 32.
than an hundred and eleven Rivers, some of them resembling Seas rather, than
navigable streams; so that, says Kircherus, there is scarcely a field A.
Kirch. Chapter Ill. par. 4. p. 165. M. Mart. Atl. Sin. p. 6. Heyl. Cosm. page 796.
but is watered by them; whereby the whole Empire is almost every where
passable by boat, says Martinius. Whereas Caucasus can boast of the
spring-heads only of three, those nevertheless very famous ones, Indus,
Hydaspes, and Zuraedrus; and though O^us is said to have his spring on the
North-side of Caucasus, as those other on the South; the mountains
notwithstanding are so inaccessible, as no timber could any way by whatever
humane help be transported from that part. But Kircherus by a late discovery
finds Indus, A. Kirch. Chi. Ill. par. 2. p. 49
together with Ganges, Ravi, and A^hec the greatest Rivers of all India to have
their first beginnings in the mountains of the Kingdom of Thebeth, above one
hundred leagues from Caucasus, whereby Goropius for confirmation of his
opinion, comes to be utterly deprived of the convenience of the chiefest of all
his Rivers.

Besides, as careful as he was, he has wholly forgotten to furnish Noah at
Mount Caucasus with pitch; for according to the peremptory command, He was to
make the Ark, and pitch it within and without, with pitch. Genesis 6. v. 14.
Whereof Sir W. Rale^gh taking good notice, and Sir W. Ral. hist. par. 1. p. 94.
well knowing the command being so positive, was not to be neglected, says,
That the pitch which Noab used, is by some supposed to have been a kind of
Bi^umen, whereof there is great quantity about the valley of Sodom, and
Gomorra, now the dead Sea or Asphaltes, and in the Region of Babylon, and in
the West India. But I must with all respect nevertheless to so celebrated an
Author, say, that the nearest of these places from the Caucasian mountains of
Ararat is distant about seven hundred leagues, and therefore somewhat too far;
as I conceive at least, for Noah to transport such quantities of Bitumen, as he
was of necessity to use upon so important an occasion. Now, of the great store
of pitch that China affords, no more assured testimony can be given, than
Their multitudes of Shipping, and infinite number of Pine-trees; but that kind
of pitch which these trees produces, and which is to us so welcome; the
Chinois have in little esteem; But use and ever did, a bituminous or pitchy
substance found in great abundance every where throughout Their Country, which
they make up, as we do mortar with the oil of a certain fish, and therewith
calk and dress their Ships. This pitch of Theirs, as Gonsalez Mendoza in his
History of China relates, is not only more G. Mend. hist. del Chi. lib. 3. page
167, 169.
tenacious than ours, but also breeds few worms (a matter of no small
importance in those Seas) and makes the timber endure like stone. So that one
Ship of Theirs will out-last two of ours, and did they not build them thin,
would last much longer.

Neither does Goropius acquaint us, how Noah in those barbarous and desolate
upland Countries confining Caucasus, came by workmen to assist him; for himself
and family, without the help of Angels, or the like miracle, could never of
themselves have accomplished such a Fabric. Whereas the natural ingenuity of
the Chinois might not only give him assistance, but advise also, in what manner
to put in work the directions that God had given him for building of the Ark;
which if it were made in that part of the World which lay East from Shinaar, as
most certainly it was, then no Country under the Sun can be found more
Eastward from thence than China.

The Vines which grow about Mount Caucasus, are much celebrated both by Sir W.
Raleigh and Goropius, they using them as a principal argument, for the resting
of the Ark there. But if ever in any part of the habitable Earth the Vine grew
naturally, it is in China in the Province of Xensi especially; but in Xansi,
says Martinius, A. Sem. Rel. del Cin. par. 1. c. 1. M. Mart. Atl. Sin. page
39, 41.
are the most delicious grapes of all others in China; where in the City of
Pingyang their never enough by them extolled Emperor Iaus resided. So that, as
Sir W. Raleigh observes of Noah, he needed not to travail far to seek out the
Vine; when it grew at his very door. But though they have Vines in all
abundance, and such as yield most delicious fruit, the Chin^is nevertheless
despise I. Nieu. l' Amb. Or. par. 2. p. 88.
the wine thereof, and drying up the grapes for Raysins make a wine of Rice, no
less generous and noble than ours, stieping therein the flesh of Kidds, I know
not, says Martinius, with what Art prepared. It is highly esteemed by the
Chinois, has an excellent body, is very strong, and grateful to the taste and
pleasant. They make it not of ordinary Rice; but a certain kind of it peculiar
to their Country, which serves only to make this liquor.

And as for that, that Goropius says, the Ark rested upon the mountains of
Caucasus, because of all others it is the highest mountain in the World, it is
no argument at all; unless it could be made appear, that, as it is feigned of
the Argos, the Ark had sense to direct it self, or Noah a rudder to steer it
thither. It may as well be said, that it took ground on the Pike of Tenariff,
which is conceived neither to yield to Caucasus, or any other whatever hill in
the Universe for height. This we are certain of, that the Ark rested on the
Mountains, and reason grants it was such a Mountain, as, were it more or less
high, after the abatement of the waters, the Ark first touched upon; and
settling afterward as they declined, firmed on the same. And therefore nor
Scripture nor reason will allow, it should be the highest of all others.

However, if need require, China will afford us mountains of inaccessible
altitude; for Kircherus A. Kir. Chapter Ill. par. 4. p. 169, 170*
tells us, That this Empire is adorned with innumerable hills; some of them
being in regard of their immense height clothed with perpetual serenity,
others again covered with a continual obscurity of hovering clouds. The
greatest and highest especially, the Chinois have in so great veneration, as
that they are transported with no study more, than a vain observation of them,
supposing all their felicity and fortune to consist in them. And why? because
the Dragon, whom they make the Lord of felicity inhabites them. But in regard
many things are now done whereof the original cause is hardly to be
conjectured, I should, were it lawful for me to interpose herein, conceive
rather, that this their imputing all their happiness and prosperity to their
mountains, might at first proceed from the felicity and good fortune they
attained, by their Ancestors being at the time of the flood preserved in the
Ark upon such mountains; great deliverances having in all times, amongst all
Nations, by several ways, with reference nevertheless to the occasion been
commemorated. Thus the Israelites observed the Passover, in remembrance that
their forefathers were passed over, and saved, when all the firstborn of
Egypt were slain. And I forget not to have read, That some are of opinion, the
Nemaean Games were by the Graecians solemnized, because Hercules slew the
Nemaean Lion, though others with more authority assert, they were solemnized in
regard of the preservation of Adrastus and his Army, that in their march
toward Thebes had all perished in the forest of Nemaea, if they had no been
preserved by Hypsiphile who directed them to a fountain of water there. And
those also are not wanting, that suppose the Lupercalia were instituted by the
Romans in honor of Pan, when more probably they were instituted in memory that
their Founders Romulus and Remus were saved by being suckled and brought up by
Lupa the wife of Faustulus. And that, from the preservation of their Ancestors,
as we said, this superstition of the Chinois may proceed, is not altogether
unwarrantable, but attended with a most remarkable circumstance. For by their
History it appears, that at the time when China was drowned, some people were
saved upon the mountain Feu near the City of Kaocheu in the Province of
Quantung. Which from Martinius you may M. Mart. At. Sin. page 139.
receive thus. Feu mons ad ortum urbis tantae altitudinis, ut hunc eluvionis
Sinicae tempore, vertice super aquas eminuisse velint, in eoque homines aliquot
salvos perstitisse and incolumes. Hear the same confirmed by Nieuhoff also, Si
nous voutions croire le Chinois, nous dirions que Kaocheu, septieme ville de I.
Nieuh. l' Amb. Or. par. 1. p. 89.
Quantung, avoisine une montagne, nommee de Feu, qui pour sa hauteur
incomparable servit d' Asyle, and deport a plusieurs hommes durant le deluge;
If we may credit the Chinois, they will tell us, says he, that Kaocheu the
seventh City of Quantung, has adjoining to it a Mountain called Feu, which
being of incomparable height served for an Asylum and Port to several men
during the Delug^ Now, why might not these, thus saved, be Noah and his family,
though no mention of the Ark be made, or its taking Port there? Considering,
that They only escaped the Deluge; that the Chinique Deluge was the same with
Noah's; and that by what means the memory of things, both before and at the
flood, should be preserved amongst the Chinois, when all mankind was wholly
destroyed, without having recourse to Noah and his family, is unknown. But my
conjecture is scarcely delivered, when an objection is cast in my way.

For it is now said, That if Noah lived in China before the flood, how could
the Ark rest upon the mountains of Ararat, as the Scripture says positively,
it did; when Caucasus being a mountain of Ararat is distant from China at least
four hundred leagues, and when the Ark having neither Sails to carry it, Oars
to row it, nor current to drive it, could, as has been said, hull up and down
only, as on a standing pool? And therefore it may be much more probable, that
Noah both lived and built the Ark not far from the Mountains of Cauasus, where
it took ground, as Sir W. Raleigh, and Goropius have supposed. To this is
answered, That in the Province of Lycia, a Region of Asia minor near the
Mediterranean Sea, that ledge of Hills begins, which Moses calls Ararat, now
known by the name of Taurus, and which running through the lesser and greater
Asia, not far from Caucasus meets with the Mount Imaus. Now, though the Ancient
Heyl. Cosm. page 796. A. Kirc. Chapter Ill. par. 1. page 46. M. Mart. Atl. Sin. p.
1. I. Nie^h. l' Amb. Or. par. 1. p. II. Ort. p. 105.
Writers could trace the course of this Mountain no farther, yet later
observations follow it to the wall of China; and find, that the main body of
it, having held on an even course from West to East, and there dividing, one
r^dge bounds China on the West, and the other continues on the North thereof,
even through Corea until it encounters with the East Sea there. And this not
only all the modern, and therefore perfect Geographical Descriptions of this
extreme part of Asia will testify, but hereof Heylin also, who has been as
diligent in the search thereof, as any, shall assure you: his words being*
China is bounded on the North with Altay, and the Eastern Heyl. Cosm. p. 864.
Tartars, from which separated by a continued chain of Hills, part of those
(mark I pray) of Ararat. Whereby it appears, that as Ararat had its Caucasus,
so China had her Ararat, upon which the Ark might rest, as upon the mountains
of Ararat, the Scripture says positively it did. And it is not un-observable,
the Scripture teaches us, that the Ark rested, not on the mountain in the
singular, but on the mountains of Ararat in the plural. A manifest argument
that Ararat was a general name, and had reference to the whole ledge of Hills,
not to any particular mountain so called. As we even at this day both in
discourse and writing use in the same sense to say, not the mountain, but
mountains of Taurus; not the Pyraenian hill, but hills; not the Alp, but Alps.
Neither must we forget, that if according to the Hebrew mode you cast your eye
from the right to the left, and admit Taura in the Foeminine, you shall find it
will produce Aruat. And had Goropius lived to have perused our late
discoveries, he G. Bec. Iudos. p. 476.
would never so contrary to reason, have raised, I know not how changeable and
violent winds to drive the Ark from the south of Paropamisus into the north to
the beginning of Caucasus, and then back to the southward again, until at last
upon the highest tops of Caucasus, by great good fortune, he makes it rest. Nor
he, or our Raleigh troubled themselves and Readers, with so many tedious
Arguments about this Mountain as they have done, but without doubt, have
concluded, that the Ark rested on the mountains of Ararat confining China. In
which Region Noah having lived before the flood, the Ark needed neither Winds,
nor Sails, nor Oars, nor Current to transport it; but being born up by the
waters, might in five months time, going upon them, be wafted by the weight of
them only, let the pool be as standing as you please, out of the plain Country
of China below, to the adjoining mountains of Ararat above, And thereby both
sacred Scripture fulfilled, and profane History certainly reconciled.

For, thus with the Scripture, Nimrod and his Troops might go from the East to
the valley of Shinaar, as the very letter of the Text says they did; whereas
Caucasus bends into the North. And as they journeyed from the East, they
found a plain in the land of Shinaar, and they dwelt there. As if the
Providence of God had decreed, that the World should begin to be planted, even
from the utmost extremity thereof, thereby to prescribe a rule to all after
Ages; in what manner they ought to conduct and carry on their Plantations by
degrees. Hence as it was with our forefathers, so by us in the settling of
Colonies, it is still observed, to follow always the Sun, wheresoever it is
free, and may without danger be done, lest otherwise the conduct of Nature
should seem without cause to be resisted by us.

Thus with Raleigh, Noah, at first when he came down out of the Ark after
returning thanks to God for his deliverance, might become an husbandman, no
wanderer; Nimrod be six years in travailing from the place, where the Ark
rested to Shinaar; and India the sooner inhabited by the way thither, whereby
the vast numbers of the army of Staurobates, with which he encountered
Semiramis, might have suf^cient time to be propagated, and consequently exceed
hers. Thus, with the same Author, Goropius and Heylin, the Ark might rest not
far from the place where Noah lived,, without calling sometimes the North,
sometimes the South winds to help, as Goropius does; and Noah be settled in the
East, and have well peopled all those parts, which lay nearest to him, before
he sent Nimrod and his Troop abroad to search for other habitations. Thus with
Raleigh also, might the sons of Ioc^an left behind with Noah, orderly and
quietly be planted in the several Regions of India beyond Ganges. Whereas
otherwise, being, as is conceived, they were not born, till after the Confusion
of Tongues, they could not possibly pass from Babel with their families,
flocks, and herds of cattle into such remote parts, through the interjacent
Kingdoms, fully peopled, and after the dispersion long before they could be of
Age to wander, all full of wars and tumults. Thus with Heylin might China be
planted before the rest of the Adventurers went to seek new fortunes at the
Tower of Babel. Thus, with Martinius might Iaus without scruple be Noah; this
extreme part of Asia whereof we write, be for certain inhabited before the
flood; the History of China preserved in the Ark; and the people thereof arrive
to the perfection of Arts and Sciences, so early as they did. Thus, with Willet
might Noah without dispute be exercised in planting of Religion, and doing most
excellent works for the benefit of Mankind; Thus, with Nieuhoff might Xensi be
of just right the most ancient Province of Asia, and in memory thereof the
Emperors of China keep their Imperial residence therein, ever since the
universal Flood, till the reign of the family of Hana. Thus, with Heylin and
Martinius both, might China unquestionably be peopled from the cessation of the
Deluge, before the Enterprise of Babel, and Confusion of Tongues. And thus may
the Language of the Empire of China be preferred to all others.

And hereby we find, that Sir W. Raleigh had great reason to assert, That these
Eastern parts of the World were the first peopled Countries after the flood,
and planted before Noah sent Nimrod and his followers abroad upon new
discoveries. And that Heylin might upon good Heyl. Cosm. p. 870.
grounds conceive, that China was primitively planted by some of the Posterity
of Sem before the Undertaking at Babel Which may probably be concluded, says
he, from the extreme populousness of the Country, the many magnificent Cities,
their Industry and Ingenuity in all Arts and Sciences, not to be taught them by
their neighbors more ignorant in those things than themselve. Et sane totius
Indiae populos Sinis M. Mart. Sin. Hist. lib. 6. p. 237
circumjacentes mere barbaros incultosque dixeris, si cum Sinis oomparentur:
And verily, says Martinius, you may say, that all the people of India
confining China are merely rude and barbarous, in comparison of the Chinois.
And the reason, wherefore the farther East should be the more civil; Sir W.
Raleigh has long since told us, is, because it had Noah himself for an
Instructor. But unto those Excellencies of the Chinois, we shall add their
Ancient Theology also.

CHINA of all Kingdoms the most vast and A Kirch. Chapter Ill. par. 1. page 3.
greatest, is, according to the late Geography environed on the East with the
Oriental Sea, on the North separated from Tartaria antiqui, the Realms of
Niuche, Niul^n, and part of Tangia by a vast wall, of which had the Ancients
had knowledge, they would without doubt have celebrated amongst their other
Wonders of the World. On the West it is surrounded partly with a ridg of most
high hills, partly with the sandy desert of Zamo, and several Kingdoms; and on
the South the Meridional Ocean with the Kingdoms of Tunching, Cochin-China,
Lio, and others bound it. Semedo says, it is as big as Spain, France, Italy,
Germany, the L^w-Countries, A. Sent^ Rel. del Cin. par. 1^ page 20. M. Mart.
Atl. Sin. page 2.
Great Britain, and all the Islands belonging to it. According to Martinius, it
extends in Longitude about thirty degrees, from the Head or Ptomontory of the
City of Ningpo (called by the Portugals Liampo) as far as to the Amasaean or
Damasian mountains. The greatest Latitude is from the eighteenth degree to the
fortieth second of the North Hemisphere. Whereby, the figure of it, as Nieuboff
has it, ^endeth to a square form, being four hundred and fifty German Leagues
I. Nieuh. l' Am^. Or. par. 1. page 41.
length, and three hundred and thirty in breadth. But in all this mighty
Continent are no such waste grounds or un-habitable Deserts as in other
Countries, but full of goodly Towns and Cities.

The Provinces of this Empire are fifteen, and in almost every one of them,
more men fit for War to be found, than in all England and S^otland. Insomuch,
that if the first blessing conferred on Mankind both before and after the flood
of Increase and multiply, Genesis 1. v. 28. Genesis 9. v. 1. was ev^r to this day
conspicuous in any Nation under Heaven, it is manifestly visible in this. For,
by the Rolls in which the number of People is registered, appears, that there
are therein ten Millions, two hundred eight thousand five hundred sixteen
families; and fifty eight Millions, nine hundred fourteen thousand, two hundred
eighty four fighting men; besides, the Royal family, Magistrates, Eunuch's,
Garrison-Souldiers, Priests, women and children, which are not numbered in the
Registers of the Provinces. Thus Nieuhoff casts up the account, from whom
Martinius and Kircherus do not much vary. And therefore we need not wonder,
that the Portugals at their first arrival in China, beholding such swarms of
people in every place, demanded, if their women there brought forth nine or ten
children at a birth.

And least such multitudes should be destitute A. Kirc. Chapter Ill. par. 4. page
167, 168.
of habitations, there are within the Empire one hundred and fifty
Metropolitan Cities, surpassing all others in magnificence and reputation; and
of a lesser degree, twelve hundred twenty six, all fortified with walls and
ditches; besides Castles, Fortresses, Burgoises, Towns, Hamlets, Villages, of
which there is no number. So that at the end of every mile at least, new and
new habitations appear. All the Cities nevertheless are built after one form,
viz. of a square figure, and he that has seen one of them, may easily
comprehend the manner of all the rest. The houses are for the most part of
Timber, and generally of one story high, whereby as they avoid the wearying of
themselves in ascending by stairs, so they take up much ground, what they want
in height being fully recompensed by the length. They are, without rude, but
within adorned with all manner of splendor and magnificence. Thus Kircherus.

But our Heylin more particularly proceeds, finding China to be provided with
five hundred Heyl. Cosm. page 864.
ninety one Cities, fifteen hundred ninety three walled Towns, eleven hundred
fifty four Castles, four thousand two hundred Towns unwalled, and such a number
of Villages, that the whole Country seems to be but one City. Besides, their
dwellings on Shipboard, wherein whole families reside, and where they buy,
sell, are born, live and die. In such numbers, as that the question may well
be, says Kircherus, whether more people live aboard their Ships, or in A.
Kirch. Chapter Ill. par. 5. p. 216.
the Countries and Cities, those especially that are on the Seacoasts. And of
Shipping such multitudes they have, that the Rivers seem to be no otherwise
covered with them, than the land with houses; whence the Chinois use, by way of
Proverb to say, that their Emperor is able to make a Bridge of Ships from
China to Malaca, which are five hundred Leagues asunder. And least any that tow
the Vessels in course of Trade, should be obstructed or retarded in their
passage, neither any Tree is suffered to grow, or other impediment permitted
within five foot of the waterside. And the same order is observed for the
better commoding of the highways to the use of Travelers.

But I cannot moreover desist from Kircherus Id. in Epist* Ded.
his farther description thereof. It is, says he, of such greatness of Power,
that in the circumference of the Earthly Globe, a more mighty Monarchy, and
more populous cannot comparable thereunto be found. The Kingdom of China alone,
we may see so adorned with innumerable, and those most flourishing Cities, that
if we should say, it were one entire Province, we should hardly say amiss. It
is so furnished with frequent Towns, Castles, Villages, and places dedicated to
their superstition; that if that wall of three hundred leagues in length,
memorable in all Ages, were extended from Sea to Sea, all China throughout how
great, how large soever, might not undeservedly be said to be one City, in
which is found such infinite plenty of whatever is necessary for the life of
mankind; as that, that which the wise industry of Nature has here and there
amonst other Kingdoms of the World dispersed, may all be summarily seen to be
contained within this one only.

I could acquaint you also, that the revenue of their Emperor amounts yearly
unto one hundred and fifty millions of Crowns, and how it is raised, and
disposed of; but I forbear, more important matters as to our present
disquisition, calling on me to proceed unto their Theology of old, before they
became infected with Idolatry.

Amongst all the Nations of the Universe, the I. Nieuh. (...) Amb. Or. par. 2.
page 54.
Chinois have most avoided to be guided by the light of Nature, and least erred
in the ru^es of their Religion; For, we know with what prodigious follies, the
Descendents of Cham and Iaphet, the Greeks, Romans, and Egyptians heretofore
stuffed their Divine Worship. When the Chinois on the contrary, have, from
immemorable times ever acknowledged one only God, whom they name the Monarc^ of
Heaven. And we may find, says Nieuhoff, by their Annals for more than four
thousand years, that in this particular, there were never Pagans that less
offended. Whereby the rest of their Actions are the more conformable to that
which right reason requires. And herewith Nicholaus Trigantius in his Christian
Expedition N. Trig. in Chi. Exp. apud Sin. lib. 1. p. 104 M. Mart.. Sin. Hist.
Lib. 1. p. 11.
into China fully consents.

But let us see what Martinius will afford us. Of the Great and first Author of
things, says he, there is amongst all the Chinois a wonderful silence, for, in
so copious a Language God has not so much as a name; oftentimes nevertheless
they use the word Xangti, by which they signify the Supreme Governor of
Heaven and Earth. This Numen, we may say, was the Tetragrammaton of the
Chinois; Deus Optimus Maximus being, Id lib. 4. page 149.
as is generally conceived, professed and adored by them of old under the name
of Xangti. Huic enim ut supremo numini sacra facicbant, fundebantque preces,
nullis ad religionem exciendam simulacris aut statuis usi; quippe qui numen
ubique praesens venerantes, illud extra sensus omnes positum, nulla crederent
imagine posse mortalium oeulis repraesentari. For unto him as to the supreme
God they offered sacrifices and poured forth their prayers, using neither
Statues nor Images for stirring up their devotion; for in regard adoring an
Omnipotent and Incomprehensible Deity, they believed he was not by the
resemblance of any thing to be represented to the eyes of Mortals. Now by whom
could this people be instructed in such divine principles as these, but by Noah
or Sem? For certain we are that the Hebrews who descended from Noah and Sem
held it unlawful to use the name Jehovah, except within the Sanctuary, when the
Priest blessed the People, according to the Law, in Number. 6. v. 23. And that
they were not to make unto Him any graven Image, or any likeness of any thing,
that is in Heaven above, or that is in the Earth beneath, or that is in the
water under the Earth; we find in Exodus 20. v. 4.

But Martinius will conduct us farther yet. In these our days they worship a
certain Numen, which what it is, they verily know not. As, the Athenians, I may
add, had an Altar dedicated unto the unknown God, which as the Apostle
instructs us, was God that made Heaven and Earth. Act. 17. v. 24. But that of
old, says Martinius, the Chinois professed the true God, from the Doctrine
delivered them by Noah, there is no doubt to be made. Olim vero quin ve^um Deum
agnoverint, ex doctrina Noe tradita dubium nobis nullum est; Being his words.

They have an opinion, that many go erring in M. Mart. Sin. hist. lib. (...).
p. 333.
the mountains that never die, and fly like Spirits ascending up to Heaven,
when they please; which Martinius inclines to conceive is grounded on the
History of Enoch and Elijah.

They were not without some knowledge of ^d. lib. 4. p. 149.
CHRIST, as the Books written by their Philosopher Confutius, styled the Plato
of the Chinois is manifest; he being an Author of as sublime and profound
Authority with them, as either Plato or Aristotle with us; and indeed more
ancient. Confutium praevidisse VERBUM carnem futurum, idque non dubia ste
praecepisse, quin and an^um in Cyclo Sinico, quo futurum esset cognovisse;
Confutius, says our Author, foresaw that the WORD should become flesh, and not
only confidently taught it, but knew in what year of the Chinique Cycle it
should come to pass. (The Cycle of China to remember it by the way, contains
sixty years, as the Olympiad of the Greeks did four.) And it is memorable, that
their Emperor that reigned at the birth of CHRIST Id. lib. 10. page 413.
would not be called Ngayus, as his name was, but Pingus, which signifies
Pacificns; by a wonderful Providence of God, that at the time that CHRIST the
true Pacifique King came upon the Earth, the Emperor of China should be called
Pacifique also.

I find in Purchase, that Nicolao di Conti relates, Pur. Pilgrimago, lib. 4.
page 460. Nic. di Conti apud Ramus.
that when the Chinois rise in the morning, they turn their faces to the East,
and with their hands joined, say, God in Trinity keep us in his Law. But in
regard it does not fully appear that from Antiquity they have used the same,
and that Martinius is silent therein, we shall not insist upon it.

To return therefore to Confutius, his usual saying, and wherein he concluded,
the highest perfection to consist, was, Ne facias ulli, quod pati nolis, which
is the Law and the Prophets. And as you would that men should do to you, do ye
also to them likewise. Luke 6. v. 31. Mat. 7. v. 12. And though he flourished
before CHRIST above M. Mart. Sin. Hist. lib. 4. p. 137
five hundred years, many of his offspring nevertheless, are yet remaining and
live in great honor, at this day; which is worthy observation it being not to
be said again of any family in any place under Heaven except in China: where
indeed many more like instances may be found, that especially of the now
Princes of Corea, they being lineally descended from Kicius, who in the year
one thousand one hundred twenty two before the Incarnation of CHRIST, had for
his eminent learning, that Kingdom given him in reward by Faus the first
Emperor of China, of the family of Cheva. Whereby it appears that the
Posterity of Kicius, have in a continued succession enjoyed the Kingdom of
Corea, two thousand seven hundred and ninety years.

The most learned Philosophers amongst the Id Lib. i. p. 13, 14.
Chinois, make the Chaos the beginning and original of all things; out of which
the highest Immaterial or spiritual Being created that, that is material. They
hold also, that the World was created in the winter Solstice; the Heavens
first, the Earth next, then living Creatures, lastly, Man. After the same
manner, as Moses has delivered. Genesis 1.

That the World shall be dissolved into the Chaos, from whence it came, and
tha^ before the dissolution thereof, there shall be great perturbation of all
orders, and all things; with mighty Wars, insurrections of Kingdoms, and from
thence public calamities shall arise throughout the universal Globe, they are
clearly of opinion. Now, how fully they accord with the words of our Savior
herein. Matthew. 24. v. 6, 7. declares.

Add unto these, that in their Books they frequently M. Mart. Sin. hist. lib.
1. p. 11.
assert, rewards to be decreed for virtue, and punishments for vice. But this
seems only to relate unto the condition of our present life; for that they have
any knowledge of the Judgment hereafter, from Martinius appears not. The
Antiquity of their Theology not conducting them so far. Yet nevertheless I find
in Trigantius, that N. Trig. in Christ. Exp. apud Sin. lib. 1. p. 105.
from all times they have made no question of the immortality of the Soul,
speaking often of the dead, as living in Heaven, but of the punishments of
wicked men in Hell, not a word.

The name of Justice they confine not to that virtue which is a constant and
perpetual will of M. Mart. Sin. Hist. lib. 3. p. 96.
giving every man his due. But allow it such a latitude that every action
consentaneous to reason is thereby signified. A true Maxim; for whatever is
agreeable to reason, we may justly say to be just. And by the name of Piety
they understand not the love only of God, their Parents, or themselves, but of
all men universally. For, as they define Justice to be the law and convenience
of doing well; so Piety, the means and rule of loving well. A Divine Principle,
for we are to love our neighbors as our selves; according to that in Matthew.
22. v. 39.

Now, this high Divinity of Theirs admits a particular reflection. H. Grotius in
his discourses of God and his Providence, as I find him Englished by Barksdale,
page 18, and 19. tells us, That Moses his Books, wherein those Miracles are
recorded, which at the Israelites coming out of Egypt, and in the wilderness,
and in their entrance into the land of Canaan had happened, are of certain
credit; not only because the present Jews from their Parents, as they from
theirs, and so forward until we arrive at those who lived in Moses and Joshua
his time, by certain and constant Tradition have received those miracles, but
also, because there has been a perpetual fame among the Hebrews, that Moses
was commended by the Oracle of God, and made a Leader of his People; and
because it is sure enough, that he was neither studious of his own glory, nor
partial to his own Posterity. All which declares, says Grotius, he had no
reason to deceive us. Now, finding this Theology of the Chinois, not by
tradition, and a perpetual fame, but in Books successively written from Age to
Age, ever since the Isaac. Chron. page 47.
universal Deluge, above seven hundred years before Moses was born, to be
equally agreeable and consonant towhat CHRIST himself and Moses has taught us,
and what we profess. And that in writing of these Books, the Chinois were
neither studious of their own glory, nor partial to their own posterity, which
declares they had no reason to deceive us. I see no cause to doubt, but that
they received this Their Theology, ex doctrina a Noe tradita, from the doctrine
taught them by Noah, as Martinius from their Books has positively affirmed.
Considering withal, that Noah was a just man, and perfect in his generations,
and Noah walked with God. Genesis 6. v. 9.

As for Their policy in government, I shall chiefly observe what Kircherus
delivers. That if A. Kirch. Chi. Ill. par. 2: p. 115
ever any Monarchy in the world was constituted according to political
principles, and dictates of right reason, it may be boldly said that of the
Chinois is. For therein every thing is found disposed in so great order; as
that whereas all matters are under the rule and power of their Literati, or
wiseman; so also hardly any thing is transacted throughout the whole Empire
which depends not upon them; neither can any man attain to any degree of
Honor, that is not very richly learned in their Letters and Sciences. In a
word, their Kings may be said to be Philosophers, and their Philosophers,
Kings; and they order every thing, says Semedo, in such manner, as may most
conduce to good government, concord, Al. Sem. Rel. del. Cin. par. 1. cap. 18.
peace, and quietness in families, and to the exercise of virtue: Insomuch he
tells us, that so great an Empire seems to be but, as it were, one well
governed Convent.

Their first form of Government, until the time of their Emperors was
paternal, as is written of Abraham and Lot. But no credit is given to whatever
their History relates, during this form of rule. For the Chinois themselves, as
has been M. Mart. Sin. hist. lib. 1. page 12
said, suspect the credit of their Annals before the reign of their Emperor
Folmis, as containing those things, that are for the most part ridiculous and
false.

Their first Emperors were elective, but about the year before CHRIST two
thousand, two hundred, and seven, which according to the Hebrew or vulgar
computation, and which with our Chinique Authors we follow, was forty four
years before the Confusion of Tongues, they began to rule by hereditary right;
and for numerous successions after the flood were not Idolaters, but Adorers of
the true God of Heaven and Earth; and were Priests also, and offered sacrifices
to him; as no question from the Example of Noah they had learned; and as the
Patriarchs Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob were afterward accustomed to do. For, it
was not lawful, says Martinius, for any to officiate in sacris but the
Emperor; nor for any to be inves^ed with the sacerdotal dignity, but he that
swayed the scepter, so highly have they ever reverenced their sacred matters.
Neither was Idolatry known unto them, till after the birth of CHRIST, when
Purch. Pilgrimage, lib. 1. page 67.
for many Ages preceding, the whole World had followed Idols; for, the
Offspring of Cham derive their Idolatry even from the time of Noah; and the
Israelites themselves had deserted God above one thousand years before. But
Corruption optimi p^ssima, for after the Chinois fell into Idolatry, neither
Babylonians, Egyptians, or Greeks were ever more superstitious, nor ever had
more Deities, than they.

Casting off their ancient Theology, they entertained that error of the
Eternity of the World; M. Mart. Sin. Hist. lib. 1. p. 11.
with which, as Martinius informs us, together with the worship of Idols,
they were, in the sixty fifth year after CHRIST, infected by an Indian
Philosopher that crept into China, as Xaverius the Jesuit to propagate the
Gospel among them, did of late times. But as the Jews at this day hold it a sin
to pronounce Jehovah; Bayl. Pr. of piety. p. 19, 20.
so, their present Idolatry notwithstanding, the Chinois at this day hold it
heinous for any, but their Emperor to sacrifice to Xangti; insomuch M. Mart.
Sin. Hist. lib. 1. p. 48.
that they put those to death that attempt the same. But this their ancient
knowledge of, and constant perseverance in the worship of the true God requires
as yet, a more serious consideration; For we find in Josephus that Noah at his
Ios. Ant. Iud. lib. 1. cap. 4.
coming forth of the Ark offered a sacrifice of Thanksgiving unto God for his
deliverance, but read nothing more of any such worship, till the days of
Abraham; who we are taught, was by God himself peculiarly chosen, and called
thereunto; Genesis 12. And who, says the same Josephus, first of all did most
manifestly preach and prove, that there was but one God, Governor and Maker
Id. cap. 8.
of all things. When as in China one God, by whom all things are governed and
preserved, was not only adored, during all that time from Noah unto Abraham;
but also has continually from Abraham to this very day, been adored amongst
them; their Literati especially. So that had this extreme part of Asia been
discovered in the time of St. Augustine, he might have assigned far larger
bounds to his City of God, and the Tents of Sem, than otherwise he has done.

That which Aristotle has delivered of the People of Asia, is verified in the
nature of the M. Mart. Atl. Sin. p. 5.
Chinois: We Europaeans exceed them in point of valor, They us in subtlety of
invention. They are wise, politic, and upon sudden emergencies most acute
and resolute. Laborious also they are and industrious, and suffer not any one
thing that is useful to be lost. For notwithstanding their great abundance of
all precious commodities, they collect and keep together the most vilest and
basest rags whatsoever, the bones of Dogs, Hens feathers, Hogs hairs, yea all
sorts of most filthy and stinking excrements, and make good merchandise of
them. Their fineness of ingenuity is oftentimes perverted; for, they take great
pleasure to outwit, and craftily cozen others. But they are professed enemies
to sloth and idleness, and where the least hope of gain appears, they think no
pains too great to obtain it. Id. page 7.
They are healthful and strong, very ag^le, nimble, and of a lively spirit, and
in some places contend with Europaeans for whiteness of complexion, and are
much conformable to them, if the flat nose, thin beard, prominent and long
eyes, and broad face be excepted. All both men and women delight in long and
black hair on the head. The women generally are low of strature, but in
countenance both generous and elegant. The chief grace and beauty of a woman
they attribute to the smalness of her feet. Wherefore, as soon as they are
born, they swaddle and bind them with fillets so straightly, that they can
never after grow. Insomuch that some of them in bigness scarcesly exceed Goats
or Calves-feet. A ridiculous verily and strange folly in such a polite people,
to whom if an Helena were brought, they would arraign her of deformity if her
feet were greater. So that their women endure willingly that kind of torment,
that they may appear the more amiably pleasing to the men.

The first Arts of the Chinois were the Mathematiques, Astrology, and
Astronomy, of which that they might receive the Elements from Noah, I conceive
none will suspect, the progeny of Seth before the flood having made such
progress therein, as that by writing they communicated to posterity what they
had found out concerning M. Mart. Sin. hist. lib. 1. p.. 17.
them. Inde constat scientiam primam apud Sinas Mathematicam fuisse, atque a
N^e adposteros quasi per manus propagatam; whereby it appears, says Martinius,
that the first science amongst the Chinois was the Mathematical, and from Noah
to their Posterity delivered as it were by hand.

They delight in no Art more, than Agriculture Id. lib. 8. page 330.
and Planting, nor ever from all Antiquity did; and are to admiration expert
therein. Insomuch that without prejudice to other Nations it may be affirmed
truly, they exceed all people in the World, and are so indefatigably diligent,
laborious and expert therein, that throughout all the Chinique Empire, there is
scarcely one hands breadth of ground to be found unmanured or barren, that
either by Nature is, or by Art can be made fertile. And therefore no wonder
that such multitudes of people are fully supplied with all manner of
Provisions: Nor that they should be so expert, since that Noah was an
husbandman and taught them. The ninth part of the land is the Emperor's; for,
upon settling any new Colony they always made an equal division, allotting to
every family alike proportion; which they subdivided again into nine parts,
whereof that in the midst was the Emperors. Whereby as the safety of the
Emperor lay in the hearts of his Subjects, so his lands also lay in the heart
of Theirs.

Their Physic consists in the knowledge of Plants and Herbs, of all other
undoubtedly the most safe and secure, and most agreeable to the constitutions
and complexions of Mankind. And they are so learned and expert herein, that
they M. Mar^ Sin. hist. lib. 1. p. 24.
say one of their Emperors having in the space of one day found out sixty
several sorts of poisonous simples, in the same day likewise found out, as many
other Herbs, as were Antidotes against them, whom therefore they call the
Prince and Author of Physicians at this day. But our Europaeans find their
profit too easy by consulting Galen, to trouble themselves with so great
study, as this kind of practice requires. Ours talk, Thetrs cure, says
Martinius. Their A. Kir. Chapter Ill. par. 4. p. 169.
Physicians, says Kircherus also, being learned by Tradition (traditional
practice, are his Authors, Martinius words) are famously skilful in the
knowledge of Pulses, whereby the causes, effects, and symptoms of Diseases are
admirably discovered by them, and agreeable remedies accordingly applied. They
never write any receipt, but A. Sem. Rel. de la Cin. par. 1. c. 11.
give the Medicine themselves unto the Patient whom they visit, and whom at
their coming they never ask where his pain lies, whether in his head, stomach,
or belly, but feel his pulse only with both their hands leaning on a pillow, or
some such other thing; and so observe the motion of it, for a good while, and
from thence declare what the Patient aileth; the learned Physicians seldom
failing therein.

Poetry is of high Antiquity amongst them. But it is far different from that,
that is in use with us; For, they stuff not their works with Fables, Fictions,
M. Mart. Sin. hist. lib. 4. p. 111.
and Allegorical conceits, such as when the Authors Poetical rapture is over,
himself understands not. But in Heroic verse chant forth instructions for
their Princes to govern justly, their Ministers of State to rule under them
uprightly; and their Subjects to obey them loyally: and in such manner composed
withal; that they infuse terror into the bad, and are a spur to the good to
live virtuously and well. Other Poems they have which are the subject of
Natural Philosophy; and others again, which treat of Love, not with so much
levity nevertheless, as ours, but in such chaste Language, as not an undecent
and offensive word to the most chaste ear is to be found in them. And which is
more, they have no Letters whereby to express the Privy parts, nor are they A.
Sem. Rel. de i. (...) Cin. pa^. 1^ cap. 11.
to be found written in any part of all their Books; which cannot be said of
any Language under the concave of Heaven, besides. Now, why may not this more
than remarkable silence proceed, out of the detestation of that shame, which
Noah received by the discovery of his nakedness, as a reproach throughout Their
generations to be for ever buried in oblivion? And be the cause also, why Wine
made of grapes should be odious to them? So that heretofore the Jesuits were
enforced to have the wine which they used in their Ceremony of the Mass from
Macao at exceeding charge, labor, and no less peril; lest, as it were, it
should be discovered. But, now they procure it from Xansi, to administer in
such Provinces, where otherwise it is not to be had. It is observable likewise,
M. Mart. Sin. hist. lib. 1. p. 54.
that he, who during the reign of Yuus, found out the way to make wine of Rice,
was banished for his industry; and though severe punishments were by public
edict decreed against all those that either made or drank it, nevertheless from
this kind of liquor they could never be induced to refrain, superstition might
persuade them to despise the One; no Policy could compel them to forbear the
Other. A. Sem. Rel. de Id Cin. pa^. (...) cap. 29.


As for Moral Philosophy, their Ancestors had these five Cardinal Virtues,
Piety, Justice, Policy, Prudence, Fidelity in such high esteem, as that all
their most ancient and fundamental Laws were framed out of them, neither are
they in less account amongst them at this day, than in times of old. We will
take leave to repeat them, as they in their own Idiom express them, thus, Gin,
Y, Li, Chi, Sin.

Gin, they say, signifies Piety, Humanity, Charity, Reverence, Love,
Compassion, which after this manner they explain, To esteem ones self less than
others; To be affable; To succor those that are afflicted; To help those that
are in necessity; To have a tender and compassionate heart; To bear good will
toward all men; To use all this more particularly toward their Parents.

Y, according to their doctrine is Justice, Equality, Integrity, Condescension
in all things reasonable and just; hereby the Judge is, To give every man his
own. The rich man, To take heed he presume not on his wealth; and To give some
part of it to the Poor; To adore, as Martinius has it, the Supreme Emperor of
Heaven and Earth; Not to be contentious; Not to be obstinate; Not to oppose
what is just, and conformable to reason.

Li, as they expound it, is Policy, Courtesy, to honor and reverence others
as is fitting, which they say, consists, In the mutual respect one man is to
bear another; In the mature consideration and circumspection which is to be
used in managing of affairs; In the modesty of outward deportment; In obedience
to Magistrates; In being gentle to young men, and respectful to old.

Chi, after their Philosophy, denotes Prudence, Wisdom; the which they place,
In reading of Books, In studying of Sciences, In being perfect in the liberal
Arts; In the knowledge of matters of Antiquity; In the good intelligence of
modern affairs; In observing well what is past, thereby the better to regulate
the present and future occasions; In discerning right from wrong.

Sin, they say, is Fidelity, Verity, it consists in a sincere heart, and real
intention; To do only that which is good; To imitate what is just; To make
their words aad works, and that which is hidden within, to that which appears
outwardly, agree.

As they have these five Cardinal qualities, so they reckon up five principal
degrees of Humane Society, The King and Subject; the Husband and Wife; Father
and Son; Elder and Younger Brothers; and one Friend to Another. The King is to
observe toward his Subjects, Love, Vigilance, and Clemency: and the Subjects
toward the King, Loyalty, Reverence, and Obedience. The Husband toward his
Wife, Love, kind usage, and union: She toward her Husband, Fidelity, Respect,
and Complacency. The Father toward his Children, Love and Compassion; They
toward their Father, Obedience and Piety. The Elder Brother toward the
Younger, Love, and Instruction; The Younger toward the Elder, (that is, to all
their Brothers that are Elder than they) Obs^rvance and Respect. Friends
toward one Another, Love, Faithfulness, and Sincerity. And as for degrees of
lesser rank M. Mart. Sin. Hist. lib. 4. p. 148
appertaining to visits, entertainment of guests, civil and modest behavior,
and what belongs to the decent composure of the body, they enumerate no less,
than three thousand, of all which in their Books, they treat most largely.

And for better propagation of Learning their Emperors erected Public
Schools, and Academies, that their Subjects might be instructed, in whatever
Arts and Moral Virtues; whereby from their childhood growing up to the elegancy
of most excellent abilities; they were endued with observance to their Elders,
and duty toward their Parents; who with all the most submissive reverence,
were ever; and still are honored by them; not only during their lives, but
after death likewise; so that no People under the Sun with more regret, and
greater ceremony condole the loss of their Parents, than the Chinois; Never for
three years together after theirdeaths, stirring out of their doors; never
sitting in A. Sem. Rel. de la Cin. par. 1. cap. 16.
a chair, but on a little stool; never lying on a bedstead, but the floor;
never drinking any of their wine, eating flesh, using any baths; or, if you
will believe them, lying with their wives; nor ever, during that time
transacting any public Affairs, whatever Office of State they are entrusted
with, even from the Emperor to the meanest degree of Magistrates. This being
done by them, says Martinius, that from the respect which M. Mart. hist. Sin.
lib. 9. page 378.
the living give unto the dead, their children may learn in what manner living
Parents are to be respected. As if their first Founder had taught them, Honor
thy father and thy mother, that thy days may be long upon the land, which thy
Lord thy God gives thee. Exodus 20. v. 12. And certain it is, that throughout
their whole Empire, they are generally known to live a long and happy life. A
Sem. Rel. de la Cin. par. 1. cap. 1.
We read, that there have been those amongst them, whose bones were twelve or
thirteen Cubits long, and that they lived one thousand years and more; which if
so, it must be before the flood. But in regard this seems to spring from
Tradition only, if according to Nieuhoff it be looked upon as a vapor of the
Chinois, and that I. Nieuh. l' Amb. Or. par. 1. page 122.
with him we admit it into the rank of Fables, yet the reason that he gives for
its untruth, does not hold good against it. For, he says, the Holy Scripture
tells us, that not one of the men of the first Age of the World lived unto a
thousand years. Now that there were Giants both before and after the flood is
manifest, Genesis 6. v. 4. Deuteronomy. 3. v. 11. And though we find Methusalah to have
lived nine hundred sixty nine years; nevertheless, that he was the longest
liver of all the men of the first Age of the World, we need not grant, neither
is he by Moses precisely so recorded to be. Indeed as to those ten generations,
that from the Creation to the Deluge proceeded from Adam, by the line of Seth,
with their several Ages, we must acknowledge it to be true, but whether those
seven of the line of Cain, or any of their Progeny outlived any of those of the
other ten, is not expressed in Sacred story. And it will seem more probable,
says Dr. Brown, That of the line of Cain, some were longer lived than any Dr.
Bro. Pseudod. Epid. lib. 6. page 255.
of Seth, if we concede that seven generations of the one, lived as long as
nine of the other. That Adam, who never was so young as any, was older than
all, is conceived by learned men. And if the usual compute will hold, that men
are of the same Age which are born within the same year, Eve was as old as her
husband and Parent Adam, and Cain their son coetaneous to both. However,
certain it is, that the Chinois, in vigor and perfect health, live commonly
unto seventy, eighty or an hundred years of Age.

The loss of Parents amongst them is not so much condoled by their children,
but that children are as dear unto their Parents, from whence it proceeds, that
their Nobility are so aversly disposed that the Emperor should marry any of
their daughters, because when once setting foot within his Palace, they are
eternally deprived of their ^t. Hence, if beautiful, they conceal them (...).
^rig. in Christ. E^p. apud Sin. lib. 1. p. 83.
from public view, lest more than ordinary notice should be taken of them,
and information given accordingly to the Court. And hence, the Emperors wife
comes generally to be of the meanest of the people; not her extract, but beauty
being respected. And it is a Maxim with their Literati, that to deprive a
father of his child, is to take away a beam from the Sun, the source from the
Fountain, the member from the body, and the branch from the tree. Thus, for
fatherly affection and filial piety, China may give example to all Nations of
the World. The union is reciprocal; the Parents indulge their children, and the
children esteem no time more unfortunate, than that same hour, which gives
beginning to the fatal period of their Parents lives.

In their Marriages they seem to have much Analogy with the Hebrews. For as in
the Law of Moses, Levit. 18. These were prohibited to marry within certain
degrees of consanguinity; so, by the Laws of their Forefathers, our Chinois
were not to wed any of the same name, which to this day they observe: Again, as
the Chinois have been accustomed to have two sorts of wives, A. Sem. Rel. de la
Cin. par. 1. cap. 15. T. Godwin Ant. Iud. lib. 6. cap. 4
a matrimonially wedded wife, and a Concubine, both of them accounted lawful;
so, the Hebrews had two sorts of wives, a wife married with ^uptial ceremonies,
and a Concubine, both of them reputed lawful. As the wife of These was as
Mistress, and the Concubine as an handmaid or servant; so, the Concubine of
Those was in subjection to the true wife, and as a servant upon several
occasions served her. Also the children by both wives were held legitimate in
either Nation. As likewise when the Concubine had brought forth a son, the wife
might, if she pleased send her away, as Sarah did Hagar, Genesis 21. v. 10. But in
China, where all these rituals are still observed, the Child stays behind,
acknowledging only for his mother, his fathers lawful wife.

The Widows of the Chinique Gentry are genererally inaccessable to a second
marriage. And their Virgins that by an untimely death have lost their Lovers,
forsaking all worldly pleasures retire commonly into the desert mountains,
leading in them a most deplorable and lamentable life, never by any allurements
of their Parents or Friends to be reclaimed, until either Lions or Tigers
intomb them in their bowels. But although as well their Virgins, as Widows are
thus chastely resolved. Barrenness in wedlock nevertheless, is, by them as with
the Hebrews placed in the number of their chiefest calamities, not only by
their Kings and Rulers, but also by the meanest of the people. And to be
enforced to depart, with the inheritance belonging to their Ancestors, is, they
conceive the greatest misery that can befall them.

We read of Solomon, that he prayed to God, to give him an understanding heart.
1 Reg. 3. v. 9. How nearly the First and Ancient Emperors of China may example
this, let their History declare; For, being now upon their marriages, I shall
only instance the prayer of a Chinois imploring a blessing upon his. In the
Province of Honan, says Martinius, one called Yetriang being to be married, M.
Mart. Atl. Sin. p. 62.
is thus reported to have invoked Heaven; I require not Riches, nor Pleasures,
neither therefore would I take a wife, but pray for good children only. And by
his wife he had three sons, which all proved most learned Philosophers, and
just Governors. His memory remains not only in their Annals, but by a
stately monument erected to his honor.

As for interrment of their dead, the Chinois A. Sem. Rel. de la Cin. par. 1.
cap. 16.
have always used to bury every one in the place of the scpulture of his
Progenitors, be it never so remote from that Territory where he dies; which
happens oftentimes to their Rulers, who being not to be advanced to the
Government of any place, within that Province where they were born, are sent to
command in several other parts of the Empire; and thereby many times departing
this life out of their own Country, are upon that occasion brought home, and
buried therein. As the body of Jacob was translated out of Egypt upon the same
account, Genesis 50. v. 7. and buried in the same sepulcher, wherein these five
Abraham, Isaac, Sarah, Rebekah, and Leah were laid, himself making the sixth;
the first Letters of all their names being contained in that one name of
ISRAEL. fo likewise were the bones of Joseph carried up out of Egypt, and
inhumed in Sychem in the land of Canaan, Exo. 13. v. 19. where in like manner
the other Patriarchs were buried; Act. 7. v. 16. And even by the modern Jews
this custom is observed at this day from a conceited opinion;; That if an
Israelite be buried in any strange Country out T. Godwin Ant. Iud. lib. 6. c.
5.
of the promised land, he shall not be partaker so much as of the Resurrection,
except the Lord vouchsafe to make him hollow passages under the earth, through
which his body by a continual volutation and rolling may be brought into the
land of Canaan. Wherefore from Italy, and other places where they are
tolerated, I have heard, that oftentimes they freight whole Ships with coffins
of dead bodies, which are transported to the Ports of Syria, and thence
conveyed into Iudaea, and there in^erred.

Furthermore, the Chinois observe the New and Full Moon-days with great
ceremony, and reckon the year by the Moon like the Hebrews; nearly relating to
whom, they have many more observances and institutions customary with them.
Amongst others the like Commandments, which A. Sem. Rel. de la Cin. par. 1.
cap. 29.
they print, and set up on the posts of their doors toward the street; As not
to kill; not to steal; not to lie; to honor Father and Mother, etc. Semedo
indeed thinks these not ancient, but that from all Antiquity, till their
falling into Idolatry, they were not to make the resemblance of any thing in
point of adoration, Martinius has fully assured us. And how ancient soever the
rest be, upon every day of the New and Full Moon, a little before Sunrising,
at one and the same hour, they make solemn publication of them, in all the
Cities, and all the streets throughout their whole Empire.

In the Province of Suchuen the same Martinius relates a memorable thing to
have happened. For M. Mart. Atl. Sin. p. 71.
they write, says he, that a certain woman, walking by the side of the river
Chocung, which runs by the City of Kiating, perceived a reed in the water, from
whence a voice proceeded, and taking it up found an infant lying therein (for
the reeds or Canes in China are about the bigness of little vessels) which she
carried home and brought up, and which not long after was called Yelang, and in
those parts that tend into the West, gave beginning to the Kingdom of Yelang.
And was not Moses found after the same manner in an Ark of bulrushes, taken up
and educated by the daughter of Pharaoh? And what an high Princedome be
afterward attained, we all know.

What should I say of the conversation of the Chinois? It inchants their
familiars rather, than delights them. What of their Entertainments? They are
stately and magnificent, and performed so silently, and in such goodly order,
as is not by any pen to be expressed. What of the education of their Children?
It makes all those admire that see them, being not brought up to wantonness of
speech, ostentation in habits, alluring enticements, to liberty and pleasures;
but unto duties beseeming their sex and condition; not knowing what either
arrogance or impudency means. So that their daughters not bring portions to
their husbands; but their Husbands provide all things whatsoever that are
needful for them. What of their servants? When every one, even the meanest,
with due respect and awful silence, knows how to do, and does it. What of the
disposition of their Natures generally? Since, enjoying all kind of the most
wealthy commodities, by which they might infinitely enrich themselves, they
sell them at inconsiderable prizes, desiring food and raiment only, as Jacob
did, Genesis 28. v. 20.

We might acquiesce here, and now insist no longer on particulars, these being
sufficient to declare, that China is the most ancient, and in all probability,
was, the first planted Country of the World after the flood. But in regard it
is much to be presumed that as well Asia as Europe is extremely indebted to this
industrious Nation; from which as from the fountain they have drained all their
chiefest Arts and Manufactures, somewhat more of their ingenuity is yet
remaining to be said. For the Chinois invented and have had M. Mart. Sin. Hist.
lib. 4. p. 106
in use amongst them, the Loadstone and compass for Navigation, above eleven
hundred years before the birth of CHRIST. An undoubted argument that the use
thereof being so long time since found out by the Chinois, has from them in
mine opinion, says Martinius, been brought into other Countries.

The making of paper the best undoubtedly of ^d. lib. 8. page 334.
the World, was invented by them, above an hundred and eighty years preceding
CHRIST, before which time they used the barques and leaves of trees; and until
they had invented ink, with a bodkin or style of iron dexterously formed their
Letters. They writ also many things on Lamins or plates of metal, and also on
vessels of molten metal, of which there are some yet remaining, which are held
in no small esteem by the owners, and all that see them. But now they use
paper, which is of so many sorts, and in so great abundance, that I am
persuaded, says Semedo, (...). Sem. Rel. de la Cin. pa. 1. cap. 6.
China in this exceeds the whole universe; and is exceeded by none in the
goodness thereof.

The making of Ink is amongst their Literati a liberal Art, as all things else
that appertain to M. Mart. Atl. Sin. p. 107.
learning; and it is made by them of the smoke of oil, after the same manner
possibly, as we do washing color of the smoke of wood; and being not liquid
but solid, they prepare it much after the like way, as our Painters do colors;
for they grind it on a smooth stone, dissolve it in water, and then use it, not
with a pen but pensil made of the flocks of an Hare, so that whereas anciently,
(as was remembered) they writ with a style of iron, they may now in regard of
their pensil be said to paint rather, than write their Characters. This Ink is
usually brought into Europe, and the Letters, which we see, formed thereon,
(for it is cast out of an oblong or parallelogram mould,) are verses in praise
thereof, the workmans name being added.

The Art of Printing which had its original among them about the fiftieth year
after M. Mart. Sin. Hist. lib. 8. p. 353.
CHRIST, we owe unto their studies also. Their manner is thus, they cut their
Letters with an instrument of iron, as we do woodprints, upon a piece of
Pear Tree, or some such other smooth wood, lightly gluing the written copy
thereon, whereby their books are free from all Errata's. They are very dextrous
at it, and will cut an whole sheet, as soon as a Composer with us can set one,
and one man will print off fifteen hundred in a day. This commodity they have
also, that they may be laid by for as many impressions as they please, and in
the mean time print off, no more copies, than they find sale for, both which
advantages are wanting in our manner of Printing.

One of their Emperors by the means of Chemistry, found out that thrifty and
frugal way of I. Nieuh. l' Amb. Or. par. 2. page 30.
killing of men, by the invention of Guns and Gunpowder. But the time when, I
find not in any Author. Their store of Powder is very great; in the use of
their Guns they have little skill and less delight; but in making Fireworks
are most curiously artificial, representing Trees, Fruits, Battles; with what
not other rarities. About which at the solemnity of the New year, we have seen,
says Trigantius, at Hanking more N. Trig. in Chi. Exp. apud Sin* lib. 1. p. 18.
Powder spent in one month, than for two years would serve for continual War.

The Manufacture also, of making and dying of Silk was invented and taught unto
women by the wife of their Emperor Iaus. And it is an honor to the Chinois,
and worthy their reputation, says Martinius, that, that kind of Manufacture,
as from the original spring, was, into M. Mart. Sin. Hist. Lib. 1. p. 38
Asia and Europe derived and brought from China.

I had almost forgotten their Potters mystery, the manner of their making of
Porcelain dishes, cups, vases, and the like utensils; which the richest
Cabinets of the greatest Princes not of Europe and Asia only, but throughout
the whole World also, glory to enjoy; and for which the Chinois are most
singularly famous. It is indeed, says Semedo, the sole vessel in the Universe
for neat and delightful cleanliness; and therefore the Chinois reject to be
served in plate, there being A. Sem. Rel. de la Cin. par. 1. cap. 4.
scarcely to be found amongst them, no not so much as in the Emperors Palace,
a vessel of silver of any considerable bigness, but generally all they use are
Porcelain.

It has been commonly reported, that they make their Porcelain of Egg-shells,
or the shells of Seafish beaten to powder, which they cast up in an heap
within the bowels of the Earth, and therein let it lie an hundred years at
least, before the matter will be ripe for making of those utensils. Which many
ages even to this present have vulgarly received for a truth, has nevertheless
by learned men been much suspected always, and now, the same may be worthily
laughed at.

The Porcelain then of the best sort is made at a place called Sinktesim^ in
the Province of Kiangsi, I. Nieuh. l' Amb. Or. par. 1. page 117.
and in other Towns thereof likewise but not so good; the principal Magazine or
Mart of it, and from whence it is dispersed throughout all China, is the Town
of Urienien within the same Province, being distant from Sinklesimo about forty
leagues. It seems very strange, that in all the precincts of Kiangsi there
cannot any earth be found proper to make the same, but they are enforced to
fetch it from the Province of Nanking, not far from the City of Hoeicheu, where
neither can they make it, which seems no less strange, though there the
material abounds. Some attribute the cause thereof to the quality of the water,
others to the quality of the wood, or temperature of the fire. But whatsoever
it be, certain it is, that the Earth, whereof they make their Porcelain, is
taken out of the mountains of Hoang, that environ the said City of Hoeicheu,
where they form it into square lumps, of the weight of three Catteos [which
make about four pounds of our weight, allowing sixteen ounces to the pound] and
in value half a Condrin [or fifteen pence sterling] which are transported to
Sinklesimo, and those other places they make it at, by ordinary Mariners, who
for avoiding all such deceits, as are commonly incident to the carriage and
selling of Commodities and Merchandise, are obliged to take an Oath not to
imbezil any, at least those, that are marked with the Emperors Arms. As to the
nature of the Earth it is very meager or lean, but fine and shining like
Sables, which they temper in water to reduce it into the fashion of those
little square lumps. When likewise at any time the Porcelain breaks, they stamp
and pound the broken pieces, and again make other utensils thereof, which
nevertheless have nothing of the lust^e, brightness and beauty of the former.
They prepare the earth and fashion it almost after the same manner, as the
Italians do, for making of their dishes at Faenza, or, as the Hollanders for
their white Potters-work. The Chinois are extremely quick and agile in giving
perfection to these vessels, and very expert in enriching them with glorious
colors, diaphanous and transparent. They represent upon them all forts of
Animals, Flowers, and Plants, with an inimitable grace and propriety. They are
so jealous also of this their Science, that one may sooner draw Oil out of an
Anvile, than the least secret of it from their mouths. Insomuch, that he
passes amongst them for one of the greatest Criminals, that reveals this Art
to any, but his own children. They make use of Indigo or Woad (which grows
abundantly in the Southern Provinces of the Empire) when with blew they would
paint their work. They are said likewise, to prepare their earth different
ways; and that some make vessels of it, as they receive the same, and as it
comes first to hand; and that some again quite contrary dry it, until it be as
hard as a flint, then beat and pound it in mortars or mills, which done they
searce it, and with water k^ead it like like dough, and thereof form their
vessels, into what figure they please; which for a long time they expose to the
winds and Sun, before they bring them to the Fire. Now, when they are thoroughly
dried they put them into Four^ (...) xa voit bien vo^ hes.
furnaces of timber well stopped, whereto for fifteen days together they keep
continual fire, which expired, they also let them stand therein as many days
more, to the end they may cool gently, and be less apt to break; for experience
has taught them, that when they take them hot out of the fire, they break like
glass. The fire must be made of very dry and light wood, otherwise the smoke
blackens, and renders them cloudy, and dulls the nobleness of their gloss,
which is not made or proceeds but from a strong, equal and proportionable heat.
The thirty days being past, the Superintendent of this mystery comes to open
the furnaces, and after having viewed those that are made; takes by way of
Tribute the fifth part for the Emperor, according to the Law established in
the Country.

But whatsoever else in relation to their industry, I. Nieuh. l'Amb. Or. par.
1. page 154.
we have remembered, or omitted their ingenuity in making of floating Islands,
is not in silence to be buried. The structure of which is so graceful and
natural, as that one would imagine them to be Islands indeed. These moving
Machines are made of those reeds, which the Portugals call Bamboes, and which
are bound together unto little joysts with cords, but so artificially and
neatly, that no moisture can ever offend the inhabitants, who dwell in Cabbins
built and raised upon the same. All which are made of planks, matts, and such
other light materials, and their streets are so well ordered, that one would
conceive them to be little Villages, and some are so great, that they contain
two hundred families. Upon these they commodiously transport their Wares and
Merchandises, and sell them to those which live upon the banks of the River
Crocens. And for removing of them, they use no Sails, but either by strength of
a^m tow them, or let them drive with the water, to the place where they intend
to traffic; where when arrived, they fix great stakes into the River, to
which they fasten their Islands, during the time of their riding there,

Much might be said of their Architecture; for Palaces and Public works
especially, which are stupendous and prodigious rather, than magnificent and
great. But being a particular discourse is more requisite for this, we shall
forbear, and at present, from giving any other account thereof, desist.

That the Descendents of Cham were great Masters in the knowledge of Arts and
Sciences, is not to be denied. For we read, That Moses was learned in all the
wisdom of the Egyptians. Act. 7. v. 22. Which being spoken for his praise, and
by way of Emphasis, argues the learning of that People to be very great. Now,
though much cannot be said in what particulars their wisdom did really
consist; yet what manner of Learning the Chinois certainly had, as much at
least as conduces to our purpose, you have briefly heard; That their knowledge
in Divine matters, of the true God especially, was taught them by Noah,
Martinius has positively assured us, there is no doubt to be made. And we may
almost boldly say, that the circumstances are so many, and of such weight, for
Noah's living both before and after the flood in China; that more, and more
valid cannot be produced to make good, si sacra excipias, any assertion of
whatever kind. But how great soever the consequence thereof is, to make our
Essay probab^e; Arguments of no less validity, together with the consent of
Authors have made appear; that China was peopled ere Nimrod and his Troops
undertook the work for building of the Tower of Babel, and before the Confusion
of Tongues happened. Wherefore having thereby, according to the Scripture fixed
the PRIMITIVE Language in China; let us in the next place enquire, whether this
Language may, by the Commerce and Intercourse, which the Chinois have had with
other Nations, be altered; or by the Conquests they have undergone, forgotten
utterly and extirpated.

BUT first it will not be impertinent, to let you know, the manner observed by
their Ancestors of old, for the peopling and enlarging of their Dominions,
whereby what ensues will the more clearly be understood; and whereby they will
be found not as the Offsprings of Cham and Iaphet, through the greedy thirst
of prey, cruel desire of revenge, and sacred ambition of rule, to have usually
invaded their confining neighbors. But by just and peaceable plantations, to
have settled themselves throughout the now China. For, as Martinius says, It is
not to M. Mart. Sin. Hist. lib. 4. p. 134.
be imagined, that in those times their Empire extended over all China, as now,
for it scarcely comprehended as then, an indifferent part of the present
Magnitude. For, as the first Planters thereof coming from the West, began to
inhabit the Province of Xensi, in that part which lies most toward the West,
so the heads of their several families by degrees sought out new seats from
thence. For, after the Province of Xensi, the next Hanan, Peking, Xantung began
to be inhabited. Which Provinces Imperial Dominion being thence forward
established among the Chinois, were all governed by a single person. The form
of the Government was just all the Provinces which lay along the great river
of Kiang toward the North, acknowledging one Emperor, and to his Authority
and rule of their own voluntary accord subjecting themselves.

But under Yuus, who was the third in succession from Iaus, and who brought the
Empire to an hereditary Dominion; all those Countries also, that lie on the
South of that River were surveyed, and Geographical descriptions made of them.
The people of them nevertheless were as yet but f^w, and submitted not to the
settled Monarchy of China. But afterward when the Emperors had oftentimes many
sons, excepting him that was Heir apparent, and to succeed; the rest were
either created Royallets of some particular Territory, or else, by now and then
leading forth of Colonies, sought out new habitations, and planted those
Southern parts. After this manner then setting up new Kingdoms, the people
being delighted with the virtue of their Princes, their inventing, instituting,
and encouraging humane Arts, Husbandry especially, and others of the like kind,
readily obeyed. Thus by degrees all China, far and wide, in every part, as
now, became to be inhabited; and as it was out of one body and one Offspring
peopled, so at length it grew into one body and form of Empire.

Having thoroughly settled themselves at home, their numbers multiplying, they
began to look abroad, and after their usual custom by sending forth of
Colonies planted the Peninsula of Corea, with the Island of Iapan, which
glories of her descent from them; so Iava, Ceilan, or, as Martinius observes,
Sinlan rather, because first peopled M. Mart. Sin. hist. lib. 6. page 236.
by the Chinois. As also the Island of St. Laurence, of which there can be no
more assured testimony, than that it is still possessed by the Chinois,
especially in the road of St. Clara; where the Inhabitants are white people,
and at this very day speak the Chinique Tongue; as to the Seamen putting in to
that harbor is well known. And not only these, but likewise most of the
Oriental Islands are of their Plantation. For, having Shipping, and the use of
the Compass, whither might they not transport themselves?

In the Continent likewise that Siam, Camboya, and the adjacent Regions drew
their original from the Chinois is evident. From whence it proceeds that they
use the Chinique Letters, yea, and express the denominations of numbers, not by
Figures but Characters, as the Chinois do.

And I could almost be apt no longer to admire at the stately Structures of
Mexico; or how Cusco came to be such a regular City; nor wonder at the
ingenuity, magnificence and government of those people, seeing Martinius is
disposed to conceive, that from China they had their Id. lib. 8. page 358.
beginning also. I could be of opinion, says he, that beyond Corea having with
their Ships penetrated the Straits of Anian likewise, the Chinois frequented
America, that part especially which lies toward the West. And that, that
people happily had their original from them. For their complexion, the manner
of wearing their hair, and the Air of their faces, makes it very probable to
me, of certainty nevertheless I can say nothing thereof.

But G. Hondius in his original of the Americans is confident of it, and by
many rational arguments very probably proves the same. For, as he says, it
must of necessity be, that such well (...). Hond. de Or. Amer. lib. 4. p. 223
ordered manner of living, Arts, Buildings, Policy, Writing, Books, great
industry and inclination to all kind of learning, as amongst those of Peru and
Mexico may be observed was derived from a more polite people than those, by
whom the rest of America was planted. Which polite people are asserted by him
to be the Chinois. Now, in regard my discourse tends to another end, I shall
unto what Hondius has learnedly pleaded for them, in relation to those of
Mexico, add only, that their public minds, manner of Oratory, with their
grave, succinct, and wise sayings, do in great likelihood confirm them to be
originally extracted from China. The Architecture of the Mexicans, as also of
the Peruvians, is by him much insisted upon; because for the stupendiousness
and vast dimensions of the stones it equally corresponds with the works of
China, whereunto I shall likewise say, that whereas the ornaments of the Temple
at Mexico, than which a more stately was scarcely ever seen, consisted chiefly
of Dragons and Serpents, variously and with much ingenuity composed; it is
manifest, that the Pagods and Regal Palaces in China, are all with the same
sort of enrichments, and in the same order generally adorned; the Dragon being
the Standard Royal of the Chinique Empire. That such like ornaments in
buildings were used by other people, either in the East or elsewhere, I have
not read in any Author, which has oftentimes made me very solicitous from
whence the Mexicans should have them, they being graceful, great and noble, but
I could never find it out, until the late histories of the Chinois came to my
perusal, which have clearly satisfied me, that the manner of them is peculiarly
proper to China, was brought from thence, and in memory and for the honor of
that Monarchy continued by the Mexicans.

As for Peru, whereas Hondius will have it to be peopled by the Chinois,
transported thither under the conduct of Mango the first of the Ingas about
four hundred years since, I conceive, they had discovered it, and therein
settled themselves diverse Ages before. For, although Mango with his followers
might at that time to avoid the fury of a prevailing Enemy forsake his native
Country, and landing in Peru, erect that Empire; nevertheless considering,
that the Spaniards at their entrance, found the massive monuments there, to
bear such a decayed Aspect, as that they demonstrated a far higher Antiquity,
than the date assigned; and that it was ever customary with the Chinois, to
send forth the surplusage of their numbers to shift for themselves, and seek
out new habitations; such castlings might in their wandering throughout the
South Sea (most of the Oriental Islands being formerly inhabited by their
Offspring) fall with the coast of Peru, and finding it rich and delightful,
possess themselves thereof, and settle there. until Mango with his company
arrived, and united them all under his own Sovereignty, as Hondius has
delivered. The rather, in regard that after their native Country was cleared of
that prevailing Enemy, which most Writers, though erroniously call the
Cathayans, of whom, ere long, the Chinois voluntarily freed all the Islands,
and all their foreign Plantations from obedience to them, and rested contented
with those bounds, which God and Nature had primitively bestowed on them. And
herein their contempt of vain glory is very observable, for how powerful soever
they are, were, or might have been, if thirst of Dominion had provoked them, I
never yet heard any of them all boast of N. Trig. de Christ. Exp. apud Sin.
lib. 1. p. 59. M. Mart. Sin. hist. lib. 1. p. 25.
the extent or greatness of their Empire, says Trigantius. And this now brings
us to their War.

The first War ever read of in the World was made in China, happening in the
Province of Peking, where, on the mountain Fan, near the City now called
Yenking, their Emperor Xinnungus the Successor of Fobius, was, they say, slain
about the year before the birth of CHRIST two thousand, six hundred, ninety
seven; which according to the Vulgar computation makes it before the flood
about four hundred years. It was civil, and of this Kind I find many, and most
bloody contests to have been amongst them; but managed with such Heroic
valor, and stratagemical policy, as far surmounts all Macedonian, Punique, or
any other known conduct in the World. These Wars proceeded principally from the
aspiring minds of the Royalets in the Southern Plantations, who were oftentimes
many in one and the same Province, and ruled absolutely under the Sovereign, as
so many petty Kings; though they paid Homage and Fealty to him, much according
to the same manner, as Dukes and Earls do, for the estates they hold of the
Emperors and Kings in Europe.

But after they were by little and little increased in power, sumptis in
affines armis taking up arms M. Mart. Sin. hist. lib. 6. page, 243.
against their own kindred and affinity, they troubled the whole Empire; out of
Ambition chiefly to reduce the Province in which they governed, and were at
first settled, under the immediate command of themselves, and their own issue
without dependence upon a superior. And sometimes moreover attempting to usurp
upon the Monarchy it self; when either they found their Sovereign was but weak
in Council, or had dis-obliged his people; till in the end they were all
brought under absolute subjection to the Monarch, and their Countries annexed
to the Imperial Crown, as they are at this day

But such civil disputes, you will happily say, could cause no change of
Language, no more than the like contests did between Judah and Israel, being
they were intestine, and made amongst the Natives themselves of one Lineage, and
the same speech. For, it is not to be found that ever foreign forces, were by
any the most ambitious of all Royalets called in, or when worsted invited to
assist them with their Aides. And thus the Irish Tongue notwithstanding the
Domestique wars, that almost perpetually succeeded between the several Kings of
that Island, in the times of old, and notwithstanding Danes, Norvegians, and
Scots were frequently waged by them to oppose the prevailng party, remained
uncorrupted, and so continues at this present time. Now, though these
examples, and several others of the like kind, may dictate to our reason, that
by such wars, as these, their speech could not be altered; nevertheless I must
say, that you will find, what through their long continuance, sometimes without
intermission for three hundred years together, what through the living of the
people without restraint in the mean while, and becoming by Degrees thereby as
rude and barbarous, as the Regions they inhabited were rough and mountainous,
these civil discords in China, did produce some difference in the Language of
these Provinces, where the greatest fury of the war fell. But what this
difference is, and in what Provinces it does differ, and in which without
change or alteration it remains pure and perfect, we shall in its proper place,
not forget, particularly to remember.

Heylin affirms, that it is not lawful for the King of China to make any war
but merely Defensive; and so, says he, they enjoy a perpetual Heyl. Cosm. Page
886.
peace. For, in regard war is equally destructive to the victors and
vanquished, Princes, People, Treasure being always consumed thereby; the
Chinois are of opinion, That nothing is more unworthy their Emperor, than to
enter into arms unconstrained; nothing more inglorious, than to seek for glory
in the slaughter of his subjects; nor more inhumane, than men by men to be cut
in pieces. And hence without doubt it is, Trigantius tells us, that although he
searched N. Trig. de Christ. Exp. apud Sin. lib. 1. p. 59.
diligently into their Annals, from four thousand years unto his time to inform
himself what foreign conquests had been made by them, yet he could never find
mention made of any: and that though oftentimes also, he seriously discoursed
with diverse of their Literati about them, they all resolved him, that they
never made, nor ever had been inclined to make any such. And therefore we are
not to wonder, that we hear so little of their invasions; For, the wars
excepted, which Martinius by a more full and free liberty of study, has of
late found out to have been undertaken by their Emperors Chingus and Hiarouus
their History, as to such expeditions, appears to be very silent.

Chingus surnamed Xius was the first that by general consent was declared
supreme Monarch of all China; and the first Emperor of the Family of Cina;
from whence Martinius conceives the name China originally proceeded. This
Prince having compelled several Royalets of the southern Provinces to submit
wholly to his obedience, and thereby wonderfully enlarged the Chinique Empire;
extended his arms into remote parts, and both by sea and land overran all
India, as far as Bengala, Scori, and Camboya. At which time being about two
hundred and forty years before CHRIST the name and same of the Chinois first
became known unto foreign Nations, to their adjoining neighbors the Indians
especially; among whom it afterward stuck, and from them the Portugals at
their achievements in India gained intelligence of China. He made war upon the
Tartars likewise, and by his victories in a short time enforced them to abandon
their habitations, and fly into the more remote Regions of the North for safety.

And this Chingus it was, that to secure his Id. page 238 A. Kirch. Chapter Ill.
par. 5. page 217.
Empire from the eruptions of that people; erected that stupendous and
wonderful work of the wall touched on before. This wall beginning at the
seacoast in Leotung, extends through China unto Lyncao a City of Xensi,
scited on the banks of the river Croceus; and except where opposed by the
horrid and inaccessible mountains encloseth not one, but four entire Provinces,
or Kingdoms rather, within its circuit. The whole length of it, the windings
according to the different situation of the places considered; for on this
side of China in regard of the mountains level ground appears very rarely, is
three hundred German Leagues, or twelve hundred English miles (accounting as
Martinius does fifteen German Leagues to a degree) being fortified with Castles
and Towers in convenient places, with Ports near them to issue forth as
necessity requires. The height of it is thirty Cubits, the breadth twelve and
sometimes fifteen, (the Chinique cubit being less than our foot by one only
eigth part of an inch) having a Parapet on each side, for the greater security
of those that pass thereon. In the building thereof three of ten of the people
throughout the whole Empire were continually employed in course for five years
together, and whosoever made any part of it, that a wedg of iron might be
thrust into the joints of the stones, was for his negligence immediately put to
death. The foundation of that end of it, which runs into the Sea at Leotung was
made by sinking of Ships two furlongs deep into the waves, laden not with
stone, but massive iron, as it was dug out of the Mine. It is built of great
squared Asteler on the outside, the Core being filled up with flints; was
erected in the two hundred and fifteenth year before the birth of CHRIST; and
at this very day contemning all injuries of Time, remains in a manner without
any fissure or settling. For the defense of it the Emperors of China do almost
always keep ten hundred thousand men in continual pay. Thus Martinius in his
Atlas of China, as I find him truly cited by Kircherus.

The other Hiavouur, the sixth Emperor of the Family of Hana, is no less
famous for his Love to learning, and learned men, than for his Magnanimity M.
Mart. Sin. hist. lib. 8. p. 345
and valor; and being of a great and excelse mind, as if the fame of Alexander
of Macedon had arrived at his Court, designed to bring the whole World under
his subjection. But fearing l^st some of the Royalets might, during the absence
of himself and forces, attempt to raise new stirs, as since his family began to
reign they had; he devised several Laws to restrain them. Ordaining, that for
the furure the Lands granted them in right of favor by the former Imperial
Decrees, should at their deaths be equally divided, as in Gavel-kind, amongst
their children lawfully begotten; whereby in time they became reduced to such
penury, as utterly disabled them, either to maintain the dignity of their
Ancestors, or practice against their Sovereigns, as anciently they had done. He
ordained also, that upon the Decease of any of them without lawful Issue, their
lands should escheat unto the Crown from whence they had originally been
alienated.

Having then by these and the like constitutions provided for the safety of his
Empire at home, he resolved upon Wars abroad, and by his Lieutenants subdued
many Kingdoms of India, to the Chinique Empire, in that part especially which
lies toward the South from Ganges inclusive to the Kingdom of Bengala. But
taking afterward the field in his own person, he brought under his Dominion
Pegu, the Kingdom of the Laios, with Camboya, Cothin-China, and many other
Countries and Islands. And to vindicate himself and Subjects upon ^ste Tartars,
that were their ancient and natural Enemies, and ever ready upon all advantages
to infest their borders, as the Scots sometimes did ours in hope of spoil;
invaded their Countries with three mighty Armies conducted by his Generals; and
having put them almost all to the sword, and made about the year before CHRIST
one hundred and twenty an absolute Conquest of them even to the North-sea,
divided Cathay amongst his Captains and soldiers in recompense of their valor.

But these by little and little in long tract of time forgetting the manners
and customs of China, by perpetual commerce and conversation with the Tartars
degenerated, and took up their customs; so that in the end, though
nevertheless after many Centuries of years, they began to invade their native
Country. For about the year of our Redemption twelve hundred and six, till
when (such ordinary commotions excepted as usually attend great Monarchies) the
Chinois had lived in continual peace and tranquillity these Cathaians conquered
China. But how? They spent almost, says Heylin, as much time in the conquest
thereof, as they did in the possession Heyl. Cos^ page 871.
of it. For after they had reigned therein ninety years only (seventy says
Martinius) they were totally expelled again, and were no losers thereby. For,
instead of compelling the Chinois whilst they had them under obedience to
submit to their Laws and Customs, they themselves submitted to the Rites and
Manners of those, whom they had for that time subjected; applying diligently
themselves to understand and learn, the Language, Conditions, Arts, and
Manufactures of the Chinois, which at their expulsion they carried into Cathay
with them. As the Romans did the Greek tongue into Italy, after the Conquest of
Greece; and as by their victories in Asia (the difference always between
civility and riot considered) they brought to Rome Effiminacy, Luxury,
Prodigality, which were in use chiefly in that Country.

This was the most severe misfortune, that ever till that time befell the
Chinois, after the prescription of so many hundreds of Ages to an indisturbed
felicity, considering nevertheless that the Cathayans had a desire by their
industrious recovery of them, to maintain the Arts and Sciences of their
Progenitors, it could not produce any great alteration in the manners of the
Chinois, much less in their MOTHER Tongue.

Here again we may observe; that as the Israelites from their first coming into
the land of Canaan, lived in the height of all prosperity, saving some civil
contentions happening between those of Judah and her fellow Tribes, never knew
what the fury of a Conqueror meant, till after they had overwhelmed themselves
in Idolatry: So the Chinois from their first beginning to be a people, having
lived in all worldly happiness, the like intestine broiles between their
families excepted, never understood what the rage of a foreign victor imported,
till they also had drowned themselves in the worship of Idols. Both famous
Examples, that innovations in Religion are always attended with dreadful
judgments.

But let us not omit the account, which Martinius M. Mart. Bell. Tart. page 1.
fol.
gives concerning this Invasion. In this tract of time the Western Tartars
forgetting their ancient vigor of mind, and warlike spirits, which the
pleasures and delights of China had mollified, being also weakened by so long a
peace, became of a sweeter temper, and received a deep tincture of the Nature
and disposition of the Natives of that Country. But though I find him thus
rendered into English, hearken to him nevertheless in his own words. Interea
Sinicis deliciis fracti, Sinicos induerunt mores, and paulatim fortitudinem
Tartaricam dediscentes, nimia debilitati pace, Sinae evaserunt; So that you see
the Tartars became Chinois, not the Chinois, Tartars; whereby it is most
manifest, that neither their Language nor Customs could be prejudiced by this
Conquest.

Now you cannot but take notice, that Martinius calls those People the Western
Tartars, which our Writers, and diverse others call Cathayans; and though they
have extremely erred thereby; yet nevertheless rather, than on the sudden I
should seem to contradict so general an opinion, I have thus far followed them
therein; For Cathay is no other Country, than the six Northern Provinces of
China, as Mangin the M. Man, Atl. Sin. page 28.
nine Southern; which were so named by these Tartars, upon this invasion of
Theirs; and which Paulus Venetus being personally present in this War
accordingly so calls And no wonder says Martinius, for by the Tartars and
Moors that use to bring tribute every three years to the Chinique Emperor,
they are called Mangin and Cathay at this day.

Add hereunto that Iacobus Golius in his treatise I. Gol. Additam. de Regne
Cath. page 1. in fol.
of Cathay tells us, the Cathayans and Chinois are all one people, and their
customs and Language have been one and the same throughout all ages.

Heylin tells us, that not long after they had freed themselves from this
Enemy, Tamerlane with an army of Tartars entered China, and having won a battle,
and taken the King prisoner, upon some acknowledgment of Tribute released him,
and quitted the Country again, as on the like success Alexander the Great did
the Kingdom of Porus. But Martinius positively maintains, Id. Bell. Tart. p^.
p^
that Tamerlane never invaded, nor ever was in China, much less conquered or
brought it under tribute, ut perperam quidam scripserunt, as some, says he,
have falsely written; for he flourished about the year one thousand four hundred
and six; at which time Taichangus Emperor of China, and the second of the
Taimingian race (the Tartars being before beaten out of his Kingdom) governed
peaceably all the Provinces included within the compass of that vast Wall
formerly mentioned.

Until the time the Chinois were in such manner A. Sem. Rel. de la Cin. par. 1.
cap. 22.
subdued by the Tartars, diverse of the Royalets had enjoyed their
Principalities, but their victorious Emperor Humvu having wholly expelled the
enemy, totally suppressed them likewise; and about four hundred years since,
united all China, as now it is, to the absolute obedience of one sole Monarch;
and not only re-established in the territories of those Royalets the ancient
manner of the Chinique Policy; but also adding thereunto many new Laws, brought
thereby the whole Empire into that form of government, wherein it stands at
this present.

By this union the Chinois enjoyed the like Halcyon days, yea generally, far
more the Royalets being extirpated, than their Forefathers had done, for many
generations together; until the people after an incursion of the Tartars of
Niuche, I Nieuh. l' Amb. Or. par. 2. page 115.
about the year one thousand six hundred thirty six falling into rebellion, and
not many years afterward taking Peking, where their Emperor Zunchinius,
having first with his own hands killed his wife and daughter, in despair hanged
himself in a garden of his Palace; Usangueius his surviving General called in
the Nieuchean Tartars to his assistance; who shortly after setting up for
themselves, crowned Emperor of China, Xunchius a child of about six years of
Age, the son of Zungteus King of Niuche; which Zungteus from his infancy had
secretly and unknown been brought up in China; where together with their
weaknesses, he had learned the manners, sciences, doctrine, Letters and
Language of the inhabitants; wherefore he much loved, and was no less beloved
again by all the Chinois. Whose miseries endured in this War, from their own
Countrymen the Rebels especially, as in all places it evermore happens where
Rebellion once gets the upperhand, are almost inexpressable.

But how calamitous soever their condition was, manifest it is* that they
received no prejudice in their MOTHER Tongue or Learning of old. For the
Tartars upon subjecting and settling the China Empire under their own dominion,
neither altered the Policy, nor ancient form of government; but permitted their
Literati to govern the Towns and Provinces as before, and left unto them the
promotions, and examinations of their Characters, as formerly they were
accustomed to enjoy. At which examinations, as the Doctors of the Chair in the
Universities with us, with much more diligence and rigor nevertheless, and
indeed with great severity; they appose and make trial what Proficients those
that stand Candidates for preferment are become in their Literature and
Characters of their Language, in the study of which by their books written, not
only their Learning, but also the Eleg^ncy of their Speech consists. So that,
if in making their compositions upon such Theams as the Examinator gives them,
they write not the Character most exactly true, (being not so fantastical as
the Europaeans, to A. Sem. Rel. de la Cin. par. 1. c. 8.
be weary of their old words, but using all possible means to preserve them in
their ancient purity) they are dismissed without taking their degrees, how
excellent soever otherwise their composures be; with liberty nevertheless to
return again for their promotion at the next examinations, which are commonly
held at every three years end.

But of the ratification of these proceedings, and likewise of their ancient
manner of government by the Tartars, Nieuhoff in his own words shall more fully
satisfy you. Ils ne changerent ni I. Nieuh. l' Amb. Or. par. 2. page 123.
la politic Chinoise, ni la ancienne form du government; mais permirent aux
Philosophes de l' Empire de gouverner les Villes, and les Provinces comme
auparavant, et laisserent les promotions et examens des lettres a l'
accoutommee. The same is by Martinius confirmed, saying, they changed nothing
in their politic government; nay, they permitted the usual customs of the
Philosophers of China, to govern the Towns and Provinces; they left also the
same examens as were used for the approbation of learned men. His own words
being. Stylum Politices Sinicae M. Mart. Bell. Tart. page 15.
modu^ue gubernationis omnino non mutarunt; imo Sinicis Philosophis, ut antea,
regendas Urbes ac Provinci^s concesserunt; examina Literatorum, ^t ante^,
reliquerunt. And so far, it seems, the Chinois are from having their ancient
constitutions altered by this Conquest, that he tells us likewise, they have
already induced the Tartars to forsake some of their barbarous Id. page 3.
customs, which for many ages together they had used.

NOW therefore as their Conquests will not, so the Commerce and Intercourse,
which they have had with Nations of a different speech, and which is the main
part of Heylins objection, cannot, give change unto their Language, much less
branch it into several languages, or Dialects of the same one Language. For by
their Fundamental Laws, the Chinois are neither permitted to go into the
Countries of strangers, nor admit any strangers into their own. Inter caeteras
leges, ista caput obtineat, qua omnis exterorum in China aditus intercluditur;
Among their A. Kir. Ch Ill. par. 2. p. 116.
other laws, the chiefest, says Kircherus, is that, by which all access of
strangers is prohibited into China. And such strict care is taken for the
execution of this law, that it is almost impossible for any stranger to remain
concealed amongst them, because his very speech, if nothing else, will betray
him to be a foreiner; and when detected, he is immediately apprehended, put to
torments, and if he escape with life, never suffered to return out of the
Country again.

Over the door of every house, says the same Id. par. 4. page 1^8, 169.
Kircherus, is affixed a Table, or Escutcheon, wherein the number of men living
therein, together with their condition is set down; to the end that the Lau-ye
(the Portugals style them Mandarines, we may call them Prefects or their
Magistrates) to whose office the knowledge thereof belongs, may, by a memorable
politic way, understand how many men every City contains, as well for
avoiding seditions, as collecting of Tributes. Therefore, i^ ought not to seem
a wonder to any, as the same Author observes, if that strangers by what means
soever at length getting into China, are immediately detected, their hosts being
under grievous punishments obliged to discover them.

And though the Jesuits have of late times obtained permission to reside
therein, whenever nevertheless their supreme Moderator intends to send any
Novice thither, he is in the Island of Macao first diligently instructed, both
to speak and write the Chinique Language, least being discovered for want
thereof, he should before arriving at their Residency, be imprifoned, and the
Society thereby put to infinite trouble and expense to procure his liberty, as
oftentimes even since toleration granted them they have been. By which
toleration they have so far prevailed upon the Natives, that were it not for
Poligamy, that vast Empire might long Id. par. 2. page 117.
ere this time have been converted to Christianity.

Nor is it only thus criminal, for strangers to Heyl. Cosm. ^ag. 866.
come into China; but also, says Heylin, for any Chinois to go out of the
same, all politic means being endeavored by them to prevent innovation in
their manners, by which the old being neglected, and laid aside, their ancient
way of government might be disturbed, and the safety A Sem. Re. de la Cin. par.
1. c. 29.
of their state endangered. And we read that this in part at least the Hebrews
were commanded to observe, for the same reason also. For whenever any Nation
or People, by introducing new, alter their ancient customs, the destruction of
that People or Nation not far off approaches. Thus the Commonwealth of Rome by
taking up prodigality and voluptuousness, instead of her ancient temperance and
sobriety, lost her liberty. And thus the Chinois themselves, as you shall
shortly hear, became subject to the Tartars.

Howbeit it seems, that the extreme jealousy of their customs is not the
sole cause of these restraints, but least by permitting liberty of Intercourse
the wealth and weakness of their Empire should be discovered; for though their
conquests and civil broiles renders them essere stata gente bellicosa, e di
valor, (to use Semedo's words) to have been anciently a valiant and Id. part.
i. cap. 20,
warlike Nation; now nevertheless, by their surfeiting on continual peace, and
long enjoyment of all variety of pleasures, no people under heaven the like,
they are become generally effiminate; and in regard no preferment is to be
hoped for, but by becoming excellent in their learning, they all unanimously,
as it were, apply themselves to the study thereof. So that the soldiery are no
otherwise accounted of with them, than the basest sort of people are with us.

But in regard whatever is prohibited, is commonly most desired; strangers,
their Laws notwithstanding, found out a way to creep in amongst them. For
considering that upon an Embassy made by the Tartars about the year forty eight
before CHRIST, in tender of their perpetual submission to the Chinique Empire,
Ambassadors might be received; several people under the pretense of the like
addresses have oftentimes since gained admittance into the Country, and made
some trading therein, privately nevertheless, and not otherwise, as Martinius
M. Mart. Sin. Hist. lib. 2. p. 65.
informs us. For whereas China, says he, is so shut up against strangers, that
no access is easily allowed to any, saving Ambassadors; Turks, Laios,
Samarchandians, and those of Tibeth by land, and the Siamites with Camboyans by
sea, come into China; where, under color of Embassy, they negotiate private
commerce. Observe herewith what Nieuhoff relates; No man can I. Nieuh. l' Amb.
Or. par. 2. p. 8.
enter China except Ambassadors, unless with resolution to end his days
therein, so strong is the opinion of this people, who for many Ages have been
persuaded, that they shall be betrayed and sold to some foreign Prince. They
cannot traffic with their neighbors without license from their Emperors;
and if they be necessitated to send Ambassadors into other Kingdoms, they
hardly find any that will undertake the charge; and whosoever accepts the same,
is no more or less lamented or bewailed by his Relations, than if he were going
to his grave. So hateful is the knowledge of strange countries, and conversation
with strangers to them. Either they know not foreign Nations, or contemn them,
Says Martinius. M. Mart. Sin. Hist. in Epist. ad Lect.


But the Chinois considering, that these Embassies are but feigned, and that to
espy and corrupt them rather, than for any submission or amities sake such
addresses are made, give them reception accordingly (as from Martinius, Semedo,
Trigautius, and several misfives of their Society we have collected) after this
manner. So soon as the Ambassador either by land enters upon their confines, or
from sea puts in to any of their ports, a guard is set immediately upon him, by
which (some few being allowed for his splendor and ostentation sake to
accompany him) he is brought unto the next Mandarine; who, the place from
whence he came known, assigns him to the Palace for him, and his Retinue to
reside in, placing good guards upon them, least any should enter or come forth
without his license, all manner of necessaries, as well for provisions as
carriages, how long soever they stay within the Country, being provided for
them at the public charge. The Mandarine takes a memorial also of their
goods, which with incredible expedition by a Currier (for at every ten furlongs
Chinois, which make somewhat less than three of our English miles, they
continually place one) is sent to the Emperor at his Court, with the name of
the Ambassador, from what Country and Prince he comes, what number of
followers attends him, and what Presents and other things he brings; signifying
likewise the great desire that the Ambassador has to make his address unto
the Imperial Court. If by the precise day, according to the limitation in their
laws, no answer appears from the Emperor, then the Ambassador is presently
sent away again re infecta. But if the Emperor grants his access, then the
Mandarine takes great care, that not any of them be suffered to pass into the
inner parts of the Empire, but directly to the place where the Emperor
resideth; and therefore sends him and his Attendants unto the next Mandarine,
under guards nevertheless like Captives, though time out of mind they have been
their Friends and Allies, not permitting them to see any thing, much less
converse with any man throughout their whole journey; and at nights, like brute
beasts in stables, they are, under I know not how many locks and keys, shut up
in the Palaces appointed for them to lodge in. And thus they are conducted from
Mandarine to Mandarine after the same manner (as we pass beggars in England
from one Constable to another) until they arrive where the Emperor resides.
Where commonly after some short attendance, the Ambassador is led, not before
the Emperor, for he neither sees, nor speaks with him; but the Council of
Rites: who by the Royal order treat with him, and receiving his Presents give
him his dispatch; and of the rest of his Merchandise which he brought, if the
Emperor desires any thing, he sends to see and buy it. At his departure the
Ambassador is rewarded with much more in value by far than he presented. This
done, and returning to his Palace, power is given him to vend the remainders of
his goods, which either himself or those with him, brought with them to the
Court; or left behind at the place where the rest of their company, or Caravan
rather, as may be said, were kept at their first coming to the Country. For,
in regard they come but rarely, their numbers are usually very great; but these
are not permitted to enter within the Empire, but for their abode have some
Villages assigned them without the Wall; where having sold their own wares,
they may buy others likewise, so that they do it in presence of their guards.
And when at length they have made sale of their commodities, and ended their
whole Trade, the Ambassador and his company being conveyed to them, in the
like manner as they went from them at first, they all return very richly laden
to their own Countries again, though by their Commerce not any thing the wiser
for intelligence, nor the Chinois one Iota the worser either in their form of
Government or Language.

But it may be now demanded, what needs all this Policy, this circumspection,
or why such peremptory Laws against the admission of strangers? When Nature her
self seems to have so provided for them, as if she had decreed they should
never have been so much as known, or discovered to the rest of the World, or
seen by them rather, much less molested with invasions, or corrupted with the
access of foreiners. For, from Trigautius, Kircherus tells us, That (...).
Kirch. Chapter Ill. par. 4. p. 164.
Nature least any entrance should be permitted unto any to come within China,
has, to the North, and North-west (besides the Wall of three hundred German
Leagues) enclosed it with a vast and endless desert of sand; on the East and
South so munited it with the most dangerous and yet unknown currents of the
East and South Ocean, with obscure rocks and unfaithful harbors, as that
without manifest shipwreck, what through the violence and cruelty of the winds,
what through the most impetuous ebbings and flowings of the sea, the shores are
scarcely approachable. And least from the West any should obtain entrance,
behold Nature has obstructed the passes and avenues that way into it, with an
unapproachable, inaccessible, and to this day impenetrable enclosure of
mountains, harboring so many, and such cruelly wild Beasts, and deadly
stinging Serpents, as that, with a certain body as it were of garrison
soldiers, she has so armed it, as from this part no mortal man can ever hope
for passage.

But through all these obstructions of Nature and Policy; both Policy and
Nature have contributed the means, whereby not in learned Greece or pleasant
Italy, but in the remote and hitherto unknown China, are now at last found out,
the true Indigenes, that ever since the flood of Noah, being born and bred
within their own Country, never permitted or admitted conversation with foreign
people. But living contentedly at home, in all abundant prosperity, under their
own vines, and under their own fig trees, their swords being turned into
ploughshares, and their spears into pruning hooks, have consumed at least four
thousand years without commixture or commerce with other Nations.

From their demeanor toward strangers Heylin Heyl. Cosm. page 858.
calls them an unsociable people; but whether they were unsociable thereby or
not certain it is that their peace and safety consisted therein. Quamdiu ignoti
caeteris vixere mortalibus, tam diu fuere faelices; as long as they lived
unknown to the rest of mankind, so long they lived happy, Is. Vossius de Aetat.
Mun. page 46.
says Vossius. For by once only infringing these Laws, and granting liberty of
Trade to the Tartars of Niuche, though but in Leotung a Province in the very
utmost North-East corner of their Empire, that war by degrees, and that
rebellion took rise, which by afterward calling in those Tartars, as was said,
is likely to prove their fatal and final ruin. So dangerous and destructive it
is, to alter the ancient and fundamental constitutions of a Kingdom.

Thus has been fully manifested, that Commerce and Conquest, the two principal
Agents in all sublunary mutations, have had no influence to extirpate, alter,
or change either the Laws, Customs, or Language of China. Neither has Time it
self, which challenges so great a Prerogative in the vicissitude of things,
had, through the revolution of all Ages, since the general Deluge, power
sufficient to supplant them. But least this may seem to be suspected, Martinius
forgets not positively to affirm, That the same customs both at home and
abroad; the same Letters; and the same fashion of habit, as of old; they all
use throughout their universal Empire, how far soever it extends even at this
day, Hear M. Mart. Sin Hist. lib. 1. p. 35.
him in his own words, Omnes enim domi forisque moribus, omnes iisdem literis,
and eodem corporis cul^ in universo, qua patet, imperio etiam hodie utuntur.
Unde conjectari potest, quanta sit animorum in iis conjunctio, qui adeo nulla
in resunt inter se divers^, Whereby may be conjectured, says he, how great a
conjunction of minds there is amongst them, that not so much as in any one
thing they differ among themselves.

THE objection made by Doctor Heylin being now thus fully answered, our subject
requires, to give you some account of the Language and Letters of the Chinois;
which (even that little, that hitherto is arrived at our knowledge) in regard of
their great Antiquity, and unalterable usage will be found sufficiently enough,
to make our Essay probable at least. And about this I shall no longer detain
you, than that I may therewith bring my discourse conveniently to a period. Not
that language I mean of the Southern and other Colonies, which by nursing up
the people in barbarity, through the ambitious negligence of the Royalets, is
differently pronounced, and from whence it comes to be said, that many
Provinces in China have a different speech. But their true MOTHER and NATURAL
Tongue, which from all Ages has been used by them in their first plantations,
and ancient Demeasns of the Crown, and which by their Characters originally
composed to the same, is spoken genuinely perfect unto this day. Trigautius and
Semedo call it Quonhoa, or the language of the Mandarines in regard of the
Elegancy, and commodiousness thereof; Martinius the language of the Literati,
not so much because the pronunciation of it is learned by the Natives from
their Cradles, as is by some conceived; but for that it is spoken purely and
elegantly over all China by their learned men, according to their written
Characters.

Now considering, it appears from Bishop Walton, that nothing is more exposed
to mutation than Languages, which are in perpetual Bish. Walt* Intr. ad liu.
Orient. page 12.
floting, as all the commonly known languages of the East clearly demonstrate;
and that the life of language depends upon Letters and Inscriptions: for not
any thing can more assure us of the alteration and change of the Hetrurian and
Latin Tongues, and that they differ at this day, from what they were in times
of old, then their ancient Epigraphs, as is thus delivered by him, Quantum
Hetrusca and Latina hodierna ab Id. page 13.
antiqua recesserunt, ex inscriptionibus and tabulis Eugubinis Hetruscis
literis antiquis exaratis, and ex columnis rostratis, quas nemo adhuc
explicavit, cuivis constat. Therefore in regard written records are such
certain evidence, it is my intention in this scrutiny to appeal for the
uncorruptedness of the language of China to their Characters, which have
remained in writing on record, throughout all times since their beginning to be
a people; and not oblige you to rely wholly upon their speech, whatever
nevertheless has or shall be said, to make good, that it continues the same at
this day, as primitively it was.

And since we are to carry on our Essay in an Historical manner only, we think
it improper to launch forth into any other kind of proofs whatsoever, though
(by the way) you are to understand, that whatever arguments of worth are
produced by any Authors for any language to prove the primativeness thereof,
may probably much more agree to this; of which we shall have occasion to say
somewhat more hereafter. And if we should say, that the learned Author of the
Philosophical Language lately published has founded his Notions chiefly on the
Principles of This, we should not happily say amiss; though for the form of his
Character, he has followed rather the Gothique or Runique of old.

THAT the World and Letters are eternal, Pliny is of opinion. Now, if thereby
he meant, that Letters are as ancient as the World, his meaning, perhaps, might
not be far from Truth. But, that Language or speech, was, before the World had
form; the Scripture warrants. For, we read; Dixit, and factum est, not factum
est and dixit: God said before he created, not, created before he said. Which
shows, says Ainsworth, how God created things by his word; saying, Alnsw. in
Genesis 1.
and it was; commanding, and it was created; Psalm. 33. v. 6, 9. and 148. v. 5.
So that if we are to understand the Text, Genesis 1. v. 3. according to the Letter
as he does; Speech was before either things, or creatures were made; and
consequently is, of more divine Antiquity, than either the world or men.

That the PRIMITIVE Language was not a studied or artificial speech, nor taught
our First Parents by Art and by degrees as their Generations have been, but
concreated with them, is certain. For, we read that God no sooner questioned
Adam, then Adam answered him. And the Lord God called unto Adam, and said unto
him, Where art thou? And he said I heard thy voice in the garden, and I was
afraid, because I was naked, and I hid my self. Genesis 3. v. 9, 10. Whereby we
are assured, that as the Creation of man himself was admirably perfect; so his
language was originally plain and meek; nothing of that being found in either,
which necessity afterward compelled the posterity of the Conspirators at
Babel, for their greater reputation to style Art; because God having given them
over to themselves, they had no other way left to compose and regulate their
Actions, then what either their ingenuity or experience by enforced and
premeditated means afforded them. And seeing it is presumed that Adam by his
creation knew whatever might be advantageous for mankind; I see no reason but
we may conceive, that the first Characters, that were ever framed to language
were of his invention; for, that they were found out in the very infancy of the
world, is, says Sir W. Ral* hist. par. 1. page 67.
Sir W. Raleigh questionless, and the World was never more an Infant, than in
the days of Adam. He that gave names to all things, knew best how to invent
Characters for all things, whereby in their proper natures, those names should
be communicated and continued to his Offspring. In like manner, having letters
there is no doubt to be made, but that they had books also; for some part of
the books of Enoch, containing the course of the stars, their names and
motions, is said to be found after the flood in Arabia Faelix, within the
dominion of the Queen of Saba (says Origin, as loco citato quoted by our
Historian) of which Tertullian affirms, that he had seen and read some whole
pages. And as little question there is to be made, but that the letters with
which in stone and brick either Seth or Enoch, or both engraved the Secretiora
of their inventions, were significative and hieroglyphical; such we may say, as
were invented by Adam for the benefit of them and their posterity. For, though
in several Authors we find they used Letters; yet that they or either of them
first found them out appears not in any Author. Seeing then, they are only said
to be the first that made use of them, whereby it is manifest they followed but
a former president, the glory of the invention remains absolutely unto Adam,
unless any man will go about to yield the honor thereof to Cain, or the first
of his issue, before either Seth or Enoch was born. And though this may perhaps
Dr. Brow. Pseud. Epi. l. 5. p, 223.
seem singular, Doctor Brown nevertheless much inclines thereto; for, having
told us, that many conceive Hieroglyphics were the Primitive way of writing,
and of greater Antiquity than Letters, and that thereby the Language consisting
of things they spoke unto each other by common notions of Nature, he concludes
saying, This indeed might Adam well have spoken, who understanding the nature
of things, had the advantage of natural expressions.

That afterward likewise in succeeding times, as if they also took example
from those engravements, they began to write the^r learning in Ciphers, and
Characters, and Letters bearing the form of Beasts, Birds, and other Creatures,
Raleigh also maintains. And it was the best evasion for all those that
suffered from the Confusion of Babel, says Doctor Brown.

With Sir Walter's opinion herein, that, that Purchase from Hiurnius the
Chaldaean relates, Purch. Pilgrimage, lib. 1. p. 82.
seems fully to consent, saying, that the Phaenicians before the Israelites
departed out of Egypt used Hieroglyphical Characters, which he thinks they
learned from Abraham; the same which Seth and Enoch (mark I pray) had before
used. As also, that Moses received the first Alphabetary Letters in the Table
of the Decalogue, and from the Hebrews the Phaenicians; who could not want
sufficient time to learn and imitate them, for Moses flourished an hundred
years before Cadmus wandered into Greece. Which Sir W. Raleigh from Eupolemus
and Artabanus Sir W. Ral* Hist. par. 1. page 268.
confirms, telling us, that Moses found out Letters, and taught them to the
Jews, of whom the Phaenicians their neighbors received them, and the Greeks of
the Phaenicians by Cadmus. In Eusebius likewise it appears, that Moses first
taught Eusebius. praeparat. Eva. lib. 18.
the use of Letters to the Jews, and that the Phaenicians learned them from the
Jews; and the Graecians from the Phaenicians; Godwin attesteth. T. Godwin Ant.
Iud. lib. 6. c. 7.


If then as well before the flood, as long after it, significative Characters
only were in use; for without all peradventure that famous Inscription at
Persepolis in Persia consists of such Characters; and although it differs, its
true from the received Hieroglyphical way, being composed of the form of
Triangles several ways transverted only. Yet we cannot but allow, in regard
the people in those early days framed the Characters to their Language
correspondent to the fancy of their imaginations; but that they must be made
according to the more or less ingenuity of the People that so framed them. And
should it be objected that this Inscription seems so to exceed all Antiquity,
that some suppose it may be written before the flood; it may be answered, that
though the world then had but one Common language; nevertheless according to
the diverse humors, and capacities of the People, as has been said, for they
could not be all alike ingenious, the then Characters might not be general but
doubtless different. For, the Language was of God, who is not given to
mutability; the Characters were of men, that are wholly inclined to variety.

And if until the days of Moses, Alphabetary Letters were not known, which by
violence of Conquerours, mixture with foreign Nations, liberty of Commerce, long
tract of time, desire of Novelty, and s^veral other ways are aptly disposed to
alteration and corruption. In vain do we search for the PRIMITIVE Language to
remain with those Nations whose Languages consist in Alphabets. For it cannot
in reason be imagined, that Letters could be brought at first into such a
studied order, and methodical way; but accidentally as it were at random
invented after a plain and simple manner, conformable to the speech; as all
other Arts from small beginnings and ruder notions have grown to perfection in
time and by degrees; many Ages and long experience being required to perfect
any invention of whatever kind. And if those Inscriptions reported by Pomponius
Mela, and Pliny to have been found at Ioppa, witnessing that Pom. Mela lib. l.
cap. 11. Plin. lib. 5. cap. 13.
it was built before the flood; and that Cepheus or Ceheus reigned there, and
on which were engraven the titles of him, and his brother Phin^us, together
with a memorial of the grounds and principles of their Religion, had been
communicated to posterity in the proper Character, nothing could have more
assured us hereof. For, our learned Seldom used to profess, that for
adjustation of time and action, he more valued one Antique Inscription, than an
hundred arguments of the Schools. Wherefore it is much to be lamented, that
those worthy Gentlemen both of our own Nation and others, that at such hazard
and charge have travailed into the remote parts of Asia, from whence all
Antiquity is derived; have neglected to exemplify some at least of those many
Inscriptions, which remain frequently dispersed in that part of the World, and
which are such, if what has been related to me be true, as that they will very
probably confute several Pretenders to this Title. But not intending to dispute
of this;

Certain it is, that there has hardly been ever any People so barbarous, or
Nation so uncivilized, which to manifest their Couceptions amongst themselves;
have not had their Characters either in a significative or Alphabetary manner
as the experience of times and places teach us. By the Alphabetary kind, as
with us, and other nations, as well in the East, as other parts of the World, the
Vulgar come vulgarly to know whatever action is performed: But by the
significative, those especially I mean, that involved mystically the whole
conception of some certain matter, the Vulgar came to know nothing, but what
vulgarly befitted them for to know.

Thus, not to mention others. the Egyptians, Brachmanes, and Runians of old,
made use of Hieroglyphics to keep their Arcana Theologiae and Imperii sealed
up, as it were, in the breasts of their Priests and Ministers of State only,
And thus the Chin is invented their first Characters, and formed them from all
things that are obvious to sight; as Beasts, Birds, Wor^es, Fishes, A. Kir. Ch
Ill. par. 6. p. 227.
Herbs, Branches of Trees, Ropes. Threads, Points, Circles, and the like; with
this difference nevertheless, that whereas the Egyptians, and the rest
invented their Hieroglyphics to conceal their Arcana from the people; the
Chinois on the contrary framed their Characters to communicate their Concepta
to the people. For, as the Characters of These were invented for declaring
precisely the conceptiors of single words, and names only, no other mystery
being included in them: So, the Hieroglyphics of Those did not express single
words or names, but Id. p. 234.
involved aenigmatically entire Ideal conceptions. Whereby the difference
between the Hieroglyphics of the Egyptians and Characters of the Chinois, is
evident; and that they are not in omnibus aemuli, as Kircherus would persuade.
But with what other differences are between them, or whether in any manner they
may seem to correspond, we intend not now either to trouble you, or our selves.

THE Inventour of the first Characters of I. Nieuh. l Amb. Or. par. 2. page 105.
Chind, was Fohius their first Emperor, who according to the time that is
given to the beginning of his reign might be contemporary with Enos. For, as
has been said, Martinius and Vossius affirm, that the Historical computation
M. Mart. Sin. Hist. lib. 1. p. 22.
of the Chinois begins from that year wherein Fohius entered upon his
government, which was in the two thousand eight hundred forty seventh year
before the birth of CHRIST. Now that year before the birth of CHRIST answers to
the five hundred fifty third year before the Deluge, and Enos died in the year
of the World eleven hundred and forty, which preceded the flood five hundred
and sixteen years, whereby Fohius might be contemporary with Enos thirty seven
years, according to the Chinois historical account, and as by our vulgar
Chronology is evident. The most accurate Chronography of Is. Voss. de Aetat.
mun. p. 18,
the Chinois, by the calculation of Moses, precedes the deluge seven or eight
Ages; says Vossius.

But I find Xircherus very much to dissent herefrom. For, he says, that the
Chinois as from A. Kirc. Chapter Ill. par. 6. page 225.
their Annals and Chronography may be collected, place the first invention of
their Letters almost three hundred years after the Deluge, of which their first
King, Fohius by name, was the first Institutor; as by the book of the
succession of their Kings appears.

Now, this variance arises, because Kircherus for his calculation uses not
the same Europaean, but a different Chronology from the rest. For whereas
Trigautius, Martinius, Semedo, with Nieuhoff, deduce their computation from the
vulgar Era of CHRIST, by which according to the original Hebrew Text, the
flood happened in the year of the World one thousand six hundred fifty six;
Kircherus on the contrary takes his from the Era asserted by Isaac Vossius,
whereby according to the Seventy, the flood is made to happen in the year of
the World two thousand two hundred fifty six; the difference being six hundred
years. And by this computation indeed, we shall find, that the first Letters of
the Chineis came to be invented by Fohius two hundred forty four years before
the Confusion of Tongues; and consequently not much less than three hundred
years after the Deluge, as Kircherus has alleged, the precise time being two
hundred eighty seven years. For Vossius to make good his Chronology affirms,
that the dispersion at Babel succeeded at the birth of Phaleg, which, says he,
was five hundred thirty one years after the Flood: Quam factam esse Is. Vossius
de Aetat. Mun. page 47.
diximus ante and post nativitatem Phalegi annis post diluvium 531. being his
words.

But although by this it more than manifestly appears, that China had
letters, and was planted two hundred forty four years before the Babylonian
Confusion, and that thereby the Chinois could not be obnoxious to the curse of
Confounded Languages; nevertheless (except their Letters, as Semedo conceives,
were born with them, and together with their Theology, taught them by Noah)
that also they were a people, and consequently had a Language, long before they
could have letters in use, reason must grant, and Vossius will not deny. For he
informs us, That his Serians, (our Chinois) in their Annals record, that in
the more ancient Id. page 48.
times which both preceded, and immediately succeeded the universal Deluge,
their Country was inhabited, though they will not for certain affirm the same,
but willingly rather acknowledge their error therein. But if in them it be an
error, then is Vossius himself most eminently guilty of the same error. For,
he has long since delivered his judgment, that by his calculation, the
Chinique deluge corresponds exactly with the flood of Noah. But unless China
were peopled, it could not, according to his own position be drowned. For, with
great vehemence he disputes, that those Countries that were not inhabited,
perished not in the Deluge. Hear him, Ut vero diluvii inundationem ultra orbis
I. Voss. de Aetat. Mun. page 54.
habitati terminos producamus, nulla jubet ratio, imo prorsus absurdum dicere,
ubi nullae hominum caedes, illic etiam viguisse effectus poenae solis hominibus
inflictae; But that we should draw, says he, the Inundation of the Deluge
without the limits of the habitable Earth, no reason enjoins, yea verily, it is
absurd to say, that where men had no habitations, there also the effect of the
punishment, inflicted on men only, should take place. So that his argument
stands thus; That Country which was not peopled, was not drowned by the flood;
But China he himself affirms was drowned by the flood; Therefore China
according to his own affirmation was peopled before the flood. Either then the
Chinois are not in an error for so recording, or Vossius is in an error for
so affirming. But China without all peradventure was inhabited besore the
flood, and consequently drowned, and therefore both the Chinois and Vossius are
in the right. And he himself has furthermore and very lately acknowledged,
That the Chronology of China, by the Mosaical account, precedes the flood seven
or eight Ages.

Mark nevertheless I pray, how learnedly in thus disputing of the Deluge,
Vossius occultly pleads the very case of those plantations, that were settled
before the Conspiracy at Babel, and how those that were absent thence could not
be guilty of the Crime committed there* nor liable therefore to the punishment
ensuing thereupon.

Now although, which of these two computations, are, according to the letter of
the Scripture most warrantable, I will nor presume to argue; yet nevertheless
what our Mede and others have delivered concerning them, I am not to decline.
We know, says he, the first I. Mede lib. ^5. page 1094. 1095.
Ages of the Church followed the computation of the seventy altogether, though
it were most wide of truth; and the chiefest Doctors the Church then had,
through ignorance of the Hebrew, for a long time knew not, or believed not,
there was any other computation. He also adds, that the great difference which
is found between these Chronologies proceeds chiefly, because the Seventy
translating in Egypt, voluntarily and of set purpose, increased the years of
the first generations, to make them reach the Antiquity of some stories of the
Egyptians, and thereby exceeded the Hebrew computation, above thirteen hundred
years. And Doctor Brown affirms, that the Hebrew is incontrovertibly the
primitive and surest text to rely upon, and to preserve the same entire and
incorrupt Dr. Brown Pseu. Epid. lib. 6. page 238.
there has been used the highest caution humanity could invent. Wherefore no
man shall persuade me, no man, I say, of how great Authority soever he be, to
believe any thing that openly contradicts, what Moses has delivered; which is
the most certain rule of all histories, and unto which unless we consent, we
cannot consent to truth. However, leaving every man to liberty of conscience
herein; I shall, with my principal Authors also, proceed with the vulgar Era,
as I begunn, in all reverence submitting to the written Word of God according
to the Hebrew Text; not daring to vindicate the Antiquities of China, so
highly, as with Vossius to say, Quamvis autem odiose dicium possit Is. Vos. de
Aetat. Mun page 3.
videri, dicam nihilominus, non defuisse, qui fortius istas Antiquitates
adseruerint, quam alii Mosem defenderint.

It suffices us, allowing which computation you please, that China was
inhabited before the Confusion of Tongues, that for several Ages before that
Canfusion the Chinois had the use of Letters; to wit, ever since the time of
Fohius, whether likewise you admit him to have reigned either before or after
the flood; and that at this present day the self same letters abstracted only,
are in use amongst them. For we must observe, that the Characters they now use
were abbreviated, from those that Fohius with other of his Successors first
composed to their speech, as by Kircherus, having elegantly enlarged upon that,
that others have but hinted at, is manifestly evident,

But before proceeding thereunto, seeing we are thus accidently fallen again
upon their Chronology and Annals, I conceive it very pertinent, to let you know
the surpassing care, and nor to be paralleld order, the Chinois have from all
Antiquity observed in writing of them, lest our following discourse chiefly
relating to their Language, should otherwise seem to receive an interruption
thereby.

Martinius then tells us, it was of old, and as M. Mart. Sin, Hist. lib. 1.
p. 20.
yet is used by this Nation, that the writing of the life and actions of the
deceased Emperor, that it may be free from all deceit and flattery, is by his
Successor committed to the charge of some of their most learned Philosophers,
which trust is reputed of all others the greatest honor, and is by their
chiefest men ambitiou^ly desired. Whereby the Chinique History has been ever
so continued like it self, as that, though from time to time as the Ages
succeeded, it be enlarged by several Pens, it seems nevertheless to be the work
of one only Author. For, it is unlawful for any but the Historiographer Royal
to intermmeddle therewith, and criminal also, for the Writer of the succeeding
times, to alter the preceding History.

In confirmation whereof, observe likewise the I. Nieuh. l' Amb. Or. par. 2.
page 104.
report that Nieuhoff makes. The Emperors of China, says he, have evermore
labored to have the Annals of their Empire written by the most learned of all
their Philosophers, whom they choose and oblige to that end, which makes this
people glory, that there is nothing that surpasses the truth of their
Histories, and particularly those which are written from the two thousand, two
hundred, and seventh year before the birth of CHRIST, unto this present time.
Whereby their exact care in their Chronology admirably appears; for, it falls
out justly with the fortieth fourth year before the Confusion of Tongues, of
which we had cause though upon a different occasion (when stating at what time
their Empire became hereditary) formerly to take notice, and as directly
answers to the end of the reign of Xunus, who first ordained this order to be
perpetually observed, and who upon the casting off of Chus, succeeded Iaus, as
is already said. And it confirms also, what Martinius asserteth, That M.
Mart: Sin. hist. lib. 1. page 20.
there is hardly any Nation in the whole World to be found comparable to the
Chinois for their certainty in Chronology. Qua cura non ullam facile nationem
Sinis in Orb reliquo parem invenias; being his words. And likewise, lest it
were not sufficient for him once only to assert it, he affirms the same again,
saying, Qua in re mirabile Sinarum semper studium emicuit, wherein the Id. page
12.
wonderful care of the Chinois has evermore excelled. Which Vossius iu like
manner attesteth, frequently calling the same accuratissima Chronographia,
certissima Chronologia, the most certain Chronology, the most exact
Chronography.

We well known, those are not wanting, that make Nimrod to have arrived at
Shinaar in the year one hundred and one after the Flood, and the Confusion to
have been at Phaleg's birth; but although it is not to be believed; as Vossius
says, Id. page 17.
that the building of the Tower, the Confusion of Tongues, and dispersion of
the people should be made, before scarcely one Age after the Deluge Sir W. Rai.
hist. par. 1. page 99.
was expired; and though, as Sir W. Raleigh tells us, These men do all by
miracle, and beget whole Nations without the help of Time; nevertheless let it
be as improbable, and the time as much abridged as it will, even by this
computation also, the Classique History of the Chinois begins fourteen years
before the Confusion of Tongues happened.

It was in the year after the universal Inundation one hundred and one, at
which time Phaleg was born. Genesis 11. v. 16. that the division of the Earth, if
understood to be at the birth of Phaleg, was made by Noah among his
grandchildren; and that done, that they then went from the Eastern parts unto
the valley of Sennar; Archbishop Usher is of opinion. Whereby it manifestly
seems, that from their removal out of the East, Dr. Usher Ann. page 3
until the curse of confounded Languages, what in regard of their
transmigration, what of the prodigiousness of their work, a considerable space
of time interlapsed, but what that interval might be, he silently pretermits.

And therefore, if you consult the Era, that some marginal notes upon our
Bible, Goropius, Sir W. Raleigh, and the most learned Antiquaries follow, which
gives one hundred thirty one years before Nimrod came to Shinaar; and then if
according to Glycas, as cited by Raleigh, you Sir W. Ral. Histor. par. 1. page
100.
add thereunto forty years more to be consumed about bringing the Tower to an
height before the Confusion ensued thereupon, you will readily find, that the
History which the Chinois esteem so authentic commenceth thirty years before
the dispersion at Babel, following Archbishop Ushers account; and by this
other Era observed by Raleigh and the rest it will appear, that the same
history takes beginning eighty four years before the Confusion of Tongues, the
which in manner accords rightly also, with what Trigautius and Nieuhoff have
delivered, that by their Annals it appears they have had the knowledge of one
only God, above four thousand years; for we know that from the Flood to this
present time three thousand nine hundred sixty two years have elapsed. Now
Nieuhoff and Trigautius follow (I need not repeat it) the vulgar Chronology,
and deduce their account from Iaus, who began to reign four thousand twenty
five years since, and whose memory lives by these Annals (which from Xunus
seem to be called Xuking) Initium M. Mart. Sin. hist. lib. 8. page 352.
ejus lihri est Yaus Imperator, that Book takes beginning at the life of Yaus,
says Martinius. From whence we may observe, that though this their History
precedes the Flood, it came nevertheless to be' written in the succession after
it; which much more contributes to the manifesting of the verity of their
Annals, and who this Iaus might in all probability be. The certainty then of
their Annals and Chronology being thus apparent, it remains only to enquire
after their Language and Letters, and with what certainty they have been
continued.

Alvarez Semedo tells us, That the Language A. Sem. Rel. de la Cin. pa. 1. cap
6.
which they use in China, is of so great Antiquity, that many believe it to
have been one of the 72 at the Tower of Babel. Of which opinion my self also
will perhaps be, when either any of his Society, or other in his behalf shall
make evident, so many Languages to have been spoken upon the Confusion there.
It is true, that as well many learned men, as Semedo, according to the number
of names laid down in the tenth Chapter of Genesis, being seventy, have
supposed that the PRIMITIVE Tongue was confounded into the like number of
Languages. But this, says Heylin, I take to be but a conceit. It being plain,
that Canaan and his Sons, eleven in all, had but one Language Heyl. Cosm. page
8.
amongst them, which was the Hebrew, or Language of the land of Canaan. And as
for Iocian and his Sons, being thirteen in number, considering he was the
younger brother of Phaleg, in whose time this Confusion happened, it is most
probable, and avowed for a certain truth, that either none of them were born,
or if they were, yet were all of them too young to have had an hand in the
design for the building of Babel; and consequently could not be within the
curse of Confounded Languages. So here is a third part of the seventy to be
taken off, as possibly might all the sons of Mizraim be, if it were worth the
while to insist upon it. With this Willet, Purchase, Mede, and diverse others
agree. Therefore A. Will. in Genesis 11. Pur. Pilgrimage, lib. 1. page 40. I.
Mede, lib. 1. page 368. M. Casaub. de 4 ling. page 5.
with them and Heylin, I take this but for a fancy, and till made otherwise
appear, shall conceive, that the Language of the Empire of China, is of far
higher Antiquity, and as ancient, as the World it self and Mankind.

Some again are of opinion, that the PRIMITIVE Language was not divided at all
into any more or less others, but that the Judgment which fell upon the
Conspirators at Babel was nothing else, than that their minds, and their
notions of things being consused, though they might speak the same words, as
they did before, yet they could not understand one another. Others again, that
it was a forgetfulness of the former speech, and being forgotten, they
afterward mattered or babbled forth confusedly, whatever came next unto their
Tongues-end. From whence it is supposed the word to Babble, used by us for a
senceless discourse, proceeds. But whether a division, stupefaction,
oblivion, or absolute extirpation, (for what is confounded is reduced to
nothing) it befell those only that were There in the Region of Babylon, and were
either advisedly or actually contributors to the building of the Tower. And
therefore concerns not us, who were thoroughly warm in our goodly seats long
before that Confusion happened, and being not guilty of that crime, could not
be within that curse, nor subject to that Judgment whatever it was. But to
proceed. N. Trig. de Christ Exp. apud Sin. lib 1. cap. 5


In the Language of the Chinois the Element, Syllable, Word, are all one and
the same; Idemque est apud eos Dictio, Syllaba, Elementum. Says Trigautius.

Their Idiom is very succinct, insomuch that as in multitude of Letters they
surpass all other A. Kirch. Chapter Ill. par. 1. p. 11.
Nations of the World; so likewise in paucity of words they yield to all. For
the number of their words scarcely exceeds sixteen hundred. All of them also
end in vowels, some few excepted which terminate in M, or N, and they are all
Monosyllables and Indeclinables, as well Nouns, as Verbs; and so accomodated to
their use, that many times the Verb serves for a A. Sem. Rel. de la Cin. par.
1. c. 6, 11.
Noun, and a Noun for a Verb, and an Adverb likewise, if need require; whereby
there is not much pains required to put them together in Syntax: And for the
same reason we are assured by Semedo also, that their Language is more easy to
be learned, than the Latin, the Grammar only whereof takes up all our younger
years. Hear him, Con che si facilita per essere studiata piu che la Latina la
cui sola Grammatica si piglia gli anni dell'eta puerile. Now these being his
words, it seemed very strange to me to find, that in the Essay toward the
Philosophical Language, page 452, it is said, that upon the account of the
great Aequivocableness Alvarez Semedo affirms the Chinique Tongue to be more
difficult, than any other Language of the World, quoting Histor. China Par. 2.
Cap. 2. But, the truth is, the Author is too learned to commit such an error
himself, and therefore deserved a more careful Transcriber; for those words are
neither in the place quoted, nor in any part of Semedo's whole relation. Who,
on the contrary, will likewise ere we conclude, not from casual hearsay, but
his own long experience, receiving what he writ, not from the ears of others
but his own ^ys, attest, that upon the very self same account pretended it
surpasses for sweetness all other Languages at this day known.

It depends not, moreover, upon Letters disposed into an Alphabetical form like
ours, nor have they in their Language any words compounded A* Kirc. ^h. Ill.
par. 6. page 226
of Letters and Syllables; but every single Character imports a single word
or name, whereby they had need of as many Characters, as there are things, by
which they would deliver the conceptions of their minds. For example, if any
should go about to render Calepine into their Idiom, so many and different
Characters he ought to have, as there are different words therein. Neither do
they use Declensions or Conjunctions, seeing all these are involved in the
Characters themselves. So that it behooves that man to be endued with a good
memory, that intends to attain, but even unto an indifferent perfection in
the Chinique Learning. Insomuch that he that by long study, throughout in
manner his whole life time, arriveth to the highest perfection therein, as also
amongst us whilst living we still learn, obtains deservedly the prime honors
and dignities of the Empire. And as they are more or less learned, so are they
less or more esteemed. From G. Mend. Hist. de la Chin. lib. (...) page 140.
whence it proceeds, as Mendoza affirms, that none how miserably poor soever
they be, but learn at least to read and write, it being infamous amongst them
to be illiterate.

It may nevertheless not undeservedly seem admirable unto any man, says
Kircherus, why so many, and such Characters, which in their Onomasticon, called
Haipien, to wit, the Ocean are numbered at sixty thousand, should be involved as
we said in so few words, which that it may be manifest we are to know, that the
words of the Chinique Language, as we lately showed, hardly exceed sixteen
hundred. We may with Semedo distinguish them. Their Language has not in all,
says he, more than three hundred and twenty vocaboli [words, I suppose
unaccented and unasperated] and of parole [words which though really the same,
differ in the aspiration and accent only] one thousand two hundred twenty
eight. But as every of these words has many and diverse significations, so,
unless by the different accents they are not to be understood. For, one word
signifies sometimes ten, and sometimes twenty several things, intelligible only
by the different pronunciation of the A. Kirch. Chapter Ill. par. 6. page 235, 236.
Accent. Whereby in regard of the double sense, their Language to strangers is
very difficult, and not without great labor, intentive stady, and with a
thousand reflections to be learned by them. So that, it is one thing to know the
Chinique Characters, another, to speak the Chinique Tongue. For any stranger
that has a good memory, and diligent care withal, may attain to the height of
Learning by reading of the Books of China, although he can neither speak the
Language, nor understand what the Natives speak to him. From whence may be
collected, that as the Frenchman writes, not as he speaks, so the Chinois
speaks not, as he writes. And we know, that even at this day, in all
generally, as well ancient, as modern Languages, there is between the reading
and speaking a difference either more or less. However, as for that in China,
N. Trig. de Chapter Exp. apud Sin. lib. 1. p. 25.
Trigautius tells us, That all the difference between the speaking and writing
consists in the connection of the words only.

But hereof Nieuboff will particularly inform I. Nieub. l' Amb. Or: par. 2.
page 12.
you, There is no Language, says he, that has so many words of a double sense
as the Chinique; which is apprehensible by the different cadency of the voice.
The incommodity received thereby is very great; for one cannot write any thing,
that is read to him in this Language, nor of himself understand a word, unless
he have recourse to their Books, to know the double sense thereof by the
Characters, whereby he may readily find it out; when in speaking, he cannot
conceive what the Native means. So that, one is not only obliged to have the
words repeated, but likewise either with Ink to have them set down in writing,
or if that be wanting, with water on the Table, or some other thing expressed.
This double sense may in some measure he apprehended by five different
cadencies or principal Tones, which are hard to be distinguished nevertheless,
in regard of their sweetness: One word oftentimes receives (amongst strangers
especially) five several meanings through this variety of Tones. And there is
not one word also, which has not one of them, and likewise twenty or thirty
significations, according to the diversity of the Aspirations, which the
Natives learn from their cradles, but is very difficult for a stranger to
attain. And with the reason thereof Trigautius shall ere long acquaint you.

Iacobus Golius conceives the Language of China to have proceeded not so much
from chance I. Gol. Addit. de reg. Cathay^ page 7.
and necessity, as from meditation and Art. But being it is destitute of all
those troublesome aides that are brought in to the assistance of Art; for they
have no Rules either for Grammar, Logic, or Rhetoric, but what are dictated
to them by A. Sem. Rel. de la Cin. par. (...) cap. 11.
the light of Nature; though greater Eloquence, than amongst them has scarcely
been ever read. Therefore being it is so nakedly free from those superfluous
guides which we are constrained to search after in learning whatever other
Language; we may well conceive, that it was at first infused or inspired, as
the PRIMITIVE Language was into our first Parents, and so from them received,
rather than otherwise invented and taught the Chinois. And whereas some fancy,
that it is in many respects very imperfect, and exceeding equ^vocal; yet in
regard no Author of credit extant, has given us so much as in general terms,
any the least notice of any such imperfections, I may say, that if any such
imperfections shall be found therein, they relate in regard of the high
Antiquity unto Artificialness only. For, without all peradventure it is a
perfectly natural speech, and was a Language before the World knew, as to this
particular at least, what that, which we now call Art, meant. And as for the
double sense of the words, those that have long lived in China, those that have
diligently studied the same, and who are most concerned, and can best tell,
shall give you full satisfaction in due place, that this aequivocableness makes
it not only a sweet, but also a compendious, pleasant, and graceful Language,
not naturally defective.

But Golius himself shall presently attest it, verily, says he, their Language
in this is truly singular, and it is almost incredible, that all their words
are not only Monosyllables, and guiltless of Grammatical differences, but also
of such very great affinity between themselves; that, not otherwise, than by a
most fine variety of pronunciation scarcely perceptible by other people, they
are distinguished. And that throughout all Ages their speech has been one and
the self same; he formerly assured us.

Now had he withal said, that their Characters were artificial, much Rhetorique
needed not to have persuaded us into a belief thereof; in regard their first,
confisting of Beasts, Birds, Plants, Fishes, and the like, could not be made
without some knowledge in Design. Whereby also this Art appears certainly to
be, if not more, at least as ancient, as Hieroglyphics. And as for those which
they use at present, though it is true, that according as they are written,
either in a set or running hand, they yield a deviation in figure: nevertheless
they are grounded on the Mathematiques; for, they be composed of perpendicular,
rectangular, parallel, and circular lines, as we shall shortly prove, being now
obliged thereunto.

The Characters of the Chinois are twofold, An^ient and more Ancient; or, the
Originals and their Abstracts. The more Ancient are those first or primier
Characters of theirs, which we find to be of such great Antiquity, what
Chronology soever is followed; and which upon especial ocsions only, are now in
use amongst them. And the Ancient are those, which from the other were
abstracted, and bearing the very same signification in their speech, are
throughout their whole Empire in general use at this day.

Now the first or primier, which, because their abstracts are of above three
thousand seven hundred years continuance, we have for better distinction sake,
called their more Ancient Characters, consisted of sixteen several kinds, taken
from the various flyings, goings, creepings, turnings, windings, growings,
encreasings, decreasing of volatile and reptile things, after the formerly
mentioned significative manner. Kircherus thus sets them down.

The first, from Serpents, and Dragons, and their various complicatures. A.
Kirch. Chapter Ill. par. 6. p. 228, etc.


The second, from things belonging to Husbandry.

The third, from the Wings of Birds, accordto the position of their Feathers.

The fourth, from Shellfish and Worms.

The fifth, from the Roots of Herbs.

The sixth, from the Prints of the feet of Birds.

The seventh, from Tortoises.

The eighth, from the Bodies of Birds.

The ninth, from Herbs and Water-flaggs.

The tenth, from -- But they seem to be derived from Ropes or Threads.

The eleventh, from Stars.

The twelfth, from -- But it is a Character wherein of old their Edicts,
Charters, and Letters Patents were written.

The thirteenth, from --

The fourteenth, from -- But the Characters express Rest, Joy, Knowledge,
Ratiocination, Light, Darkness.

The fifteenth, from Fishes.

The sixteenth, and last from -- -- But it seems our Author finding, that his
Society know not as yet, how to read this kind of them, thinks it needless we
should know, from whence Antiquity composed the same.

Of These (besides what others of their Philosophers invented) each of their
first six or seven Emperors found out one, Fohius the first sort, M. Mart.
Sin, Hist. lib. 1. p. 22.
Idem Imperator Sinicos Characteres reperit, quos loco nodorum adhibuit, sed
ipsis nodis intricatiores; The same Emperor accidentily devised the Chinique
Characters, which he used in the place of Knots, but more intricate, than the
Knots themselves. Kircherus, as was said, not unaptly, in regard of their
involvings, tells us, he took them from Serpents and Dragons; as Iaus, the
seventh sort from Tortoises, and their several postures: Septima A. Kirch. Chapter
Ill. par. 6. p. 230.
characterum forma ex testitudinibus constructa, signatur literis HIKLM, quos
invenit Yao Rex; the seventh form of Characters framed from Tortoises, which
King Yaus invented, is signed with the Letters HIKLM. Which are his
countermarks to demonstrate how exactly they correspond, with those they now
use. In every one of these Characters six things were to be considered, the
Figure, Sound, Use, Signification, Composition and Explication.

Now, it cannot but be here observed, Martinius says, that their Emperor
Fohius introduced his invention of their Characters in the place of Knots;
whereby it may be collected, that as the Americans afterward, in their
Histories, by Quippoes, and the Laplanders and Samoeds at this day, in their
Exorcisms, by Knots; so the Chinois more anciently expressed the conceptions of
their minds by the like way. And to this purpose I find, in our Author, that
not much before Fohius his days one Suius governeed M. Mart: Sin. hist. lib.
1. p. 19.
China, and that he, instead of Characters and Letters, first found out knots
of Ropes, for easing of the memory, and taught them the right way of using them
in Schools.

Furthermore, it appears by Martinius, that they have a certain sort of
Characters in use at this Id. page 17.
day, which were invented long before the reign of Fohius. For, Thienhoangus,
who was their next governor after Puoncuus, and, who first civilized, and
brought them into order, invented that double sort of Letters, from which by
joining them together, the Chinois afterward, about the year before CHRIST
according to the vulgar computation two thousand six hundrrd and seventy,
framed their Cycle of sixty years. The first sort consists of ten Letters,
which they call Can; the second contains the twelve hours of the day, which not
by numbers, but particular Characters they express and signify. From the
connection of these same characters, they suppose to know, not only the name and
quality of the year, but also of the whole year, and every day thereof, the
secret motions of the Heavens, and their influences upon terrestrial bodies and
natural things.

Posteriores vero Sinae rerum experientia doctiores, A. Kirc. Chapter Ill. par. 6.
page 226.
cum magnam in tanta Animalium Plantarumque congerie confusionem viderent,
characteres hujusmodi vary figuratos, certis punctorum linearumque ductibus
aemulati, in breviorem methodum concinnarunt, qua and in hunc usque diem
utuntur; But the succeeding Chinois, says Kircherus, more learned by
experience, when they saw the great confusion proceeding from such a mass of
Animals and Plants, reformed those characters so variously figured, and in
imitation of them, by substracting certain points and lines from them, reduced
them into a more compendious method, which even unto this very day they use.
Now, that the Characters which even unto this very day they use, how many Ages
soever their first Characters were invented before, have been above three
thousand seven hundred years used by them, will very suddenly from warrantable
Authority be made good.

Of these Characters the number is so great, as that it is scarcely known.
Martinius and Semedo compute them at sixty thousand; Trigautius at seventy or
eighty thousand; Kircherus says eighty thousand, and Nieuhoff from Mandeslaus
in his History of Persia, finds them to be more than an hundred and twenty
thousand. A. Sem. Rel. de la Cin. par. 1. cap. 6 N. Trig. de Exp. Christ apud
Sin. lib. 1. cap. 5.
Of which nevertheless eight or ten thousand are sufficient to learn their
Idiom* that a man may tollerably converse, and know how to write the
Characters, and perhaps throughout their whole Empire, there is not any man,
says Trigautius, that knows them all. And when they meet with any that they
call a cold Letter, they have recourse to their Vocabulary, as we to ours for
any Latin word we understand not; which evidently declares, that he amongst
them, that knows the most Letters is most learned, as with us, he is the best
Latinist, that is best acquainted with his Dictionary, or he the greatest
Scholast that has read or studied most. The first of their Characters
signifies God (their Xangti happily may be intended) as the Character G. Merc.
Atl. in Chapter pa. 670.
of the Cross gives beginning to our Alphabet, says Mercator, in his Atlas.

Now to form all this multitude* of Letters, they use nine strokes or touches
with the pen only; yet so disposed nevertheless, that by adding, diminishing,
or turning of a stroke, they make other new and different ones, and of
different significations. For example, the straight line marked A, signifies
One; being crossed with another line, as at B, it expresses Ten; made with
another at the bottom, as at C, it denotes the Earth; and with another at the
top, as at D, it stands for a King; by adding a touch on the left side
between the two first strokes, as at E, it is taken for a Pearl; but that which
is marked with F, signifies Creation or Life; and lastly by the character under
G, is intended Sir.



That their Characters, for Contracts, Policies, Pleadings, and such like
transactions between party and party, are written with a running hand,
answering to that which our public Notaries use; and that for their
Manuscripts and printed Books another more set form is observed; as also that
some of them are more difficult, and require more study to be understood, A.
Sem. Rel. de la Cin. par. 1. cap. 6.
than others, I need not mention; the Characters essentially being still the
same. But must not omit the great Antiquity they carry; Le Lettere che usano,
par chesiano cosi antiche, come le gente medesima, perch conform all loro
memori^ Historiche; le riconoscono da piu tree mila set cento anni, insino a
questo del 1640, nel quale scriviamo questa relatione; The Letters which they
use, says Semedo, seem to be as ancient, as the People themselves, for perfect
notice of them may be taken from their Historical Records, for above three
thousand seven hundred years, accounting to the present 1640, in which this our
Relation, says he, was written. Now, as from him is not to be collected; how
many more, than three thousand seven hundred years, his words da piu may imply,
so in regard they relate not to their first or primier Characters, but those
particularly which they now use, and to the time chiefly when they came to be
reformed, we have no need to insist upon them. Though the formerly mentioned
plusquam of Vossius, purposely inserted that it may be observed to this end,
comprehends no less, than five hundred years. Wherefore following his
assignation precisely, I say, it is plainly manifest thereby, that not only the
reducing of their primier Characters to a more compendious method, than
formerly they were, happened two hundred thirty four years after the flood; but
also that ever since that their reducement, their Letters have continued
without any alteration, and are the self same at this instant time, as when
primarily they were reduced. In like manner Kircherus throughout the sixth part
of his China Illustrata most certainly demonstrates, that every particular
Letter of them, bears at this very time the self same signification in their
Language as the peculiar primier Character, from which it was abstracted,
anciently did. And both Martinius and Nieuhoff very late Writers, and by so
much the more unquestionable, have long since declared, that their primier
Characters were invented almost three thousand years before the birth of
CHRIST. And indeed, that the Invention of them long preceded their Reformation,
not any man can possibly doubt, considering especially, setting what has
formerly been said aside, that being they were devised by several persons,
succeeding one another in several Ages, they must of necessity take up many
years of time; before likewise their posterity could gain so much experience,
as to perceive the great disorder atterding such a mass of Animals and Plants,
diverse years also must necessarily elapse, and at last the bringing of them,
being so numerous, into their present form, in regard of the frequent
consultations, mature deliberations, and manifold transcriptions, could not in
like manner be performed at an instant. Therefore, without all peradventure,
their first Letters must be much more ancient by far than those which they now
use; as Nieuhoff and Martinius have asserted. But if you incline rather unto
Kircherus, and the computation which he follows, then it appears thereby, that
their Primier Characters were first found out, no less than two hundred forty
four years before the Confusion of Tongues, but at what time, or in what Age
their Emendation succeeded, is not to be gathered, either from him or Vossius.

The Chinois give willingly great sums of money for a Copy of their ancient
Characters well formed, and they value a good writing of their now Letters far
more than a good painting, whereby from being thus esteemed, they come to be
reverenced. Insomuch that they cannot endure to see a written paper lying on
the ground, but finding it immediately take it up, and carry the same to the
Childrens Schools, where in an appointed place for keeping the like papers,
they remain, till afterward at certain times they burn them, not out of
Religion as the Turks, but only out of the love they bear to Letters.

From Semedo we have somewhat more to say, A. Sem. Rel. de. la in. par. 10 cap.
6.
[Il Linguaggio] e vario, perch sono varii li Regni, delli quali hoggi si
compone questa Corona, and anticamente non eransuoi, ma p^sseduti da Barbari,
come tutte le Provincie Australi, and alcune Settentrionali; The Language is
different, says he, because the Kingdoms are different, of which at this day
this Empire is composed, and anciently did not belong unto this Crown, but were
possessed by Barbarous people, as all the Southern Provinces, and some of the
Northern. By which it is evidently manifest, that in those Countries which did
anciently belong unto this Crown, the speech does not differ but remains pure
and uncorrupted.

And hence it is that Martinius throughout his Atlas of China, when giving us
the Chorographical descriptions of their ancient Imperial Countries, delivers
not so much as one only word of any whatever difference they have in speech.
Whereas when describing those other of Northern Provinces together with the
Southern, that not until these later Ages of the World were wholly reduced to
obedience of the Empire, and brought into civil order; he not only acquaints us
with their various Language, but also in what manner, and by what ^cans they
came to vary therein. For, being as he frequently calls them, rude and
uncultivated men, Mountaineers and fierce people, and having been at first but
few, and no care taken of them, till the main Colonies were peopled, could not
afterward when their numbers were multiplied be readily brought to submit to
the Supreme Sovereignty; but for many generations through the disloyalty of
their Governors stood out, and opposed the same, as has been already said.

Now, the Provinces which from all Antiquity M. Mart. ^in. hist. lib. 1. p. 26.
have belonged to the Imperial Crown of China, are generally those that lie on
the North of the Kiang, where their first Plantations were settled. For
Martinius informs us, that the old limits of their Empire extended unto that
Sea, which we may term the Eoan. But that as then it was so called, we are not
to conceive. On the North Tartaria Antiqua, on the South that great River,
which they call the Son of the Sea, bounded it. This River commonly called
Kiang* running from West to East, divides the whole Empire as now it is, into
North and South China, being the sometimes boundary thereof. He further tells
us, that it was (...). Atl S^n. ^g. 3.
of old divided into twelve Provinces by the Emperor Xunus. Then into nine by
his Successor Yuus, before the birth of CHRIST above two thousand, two hundred
years; for at that time it contained the Northern parts only* from almost the
fortieth degree of Latitude to the thirtieth, where the great River Kiang gave
bound unto the Provinces. Afterward by little and little the Southern parts
were brought under subjection, and from barbarity reduced to the Chinique
policy. Then at last was the whole Empire of China divided into fifteen mighty
Provinces.

Whereby it manifestly appears, that their Language continues in its ancient
purity at this day, not in a nook or corner, as the old Spanish in Biscay; nor
in the hilly or mountainous parts of the Country, as the Arabique in Granata;
or as the ancient Epirotique in Epirus; but throughout all their first
Plantations, and Countries which did anciently belong unto the Crown, which
Martinius has told us, extend from almost the fortieth degree of Latitude to
the thirtieth, where the great River Kiang boundeth them.

But, observe the opinion of M. Casaubon concerning M. Casaub. de 4 ling. page
8.
the difference of their Language. I confess, says he, that in some sort there
may be a diversity in the speech of the Provinces of China: not any man
nevertheless can possibly think, that this diversity could happen, until there
were several Provinces, but much more rather, that the diversity proceeded from
the difference of the Regions, and the Governments of them. Which is not to be
denied; for, we cannot suppose, but that their speech might come to be
different, either according to the temperature of the Air, or as the situation
of the Province was more or less mountanous, which naturally causes greater or
lesser rudeness in the pronunciation of a Language; or else according to the
care in Government, as they were less or more trained up in civility, and kept
within due order; which accordingly preserves Language in its purity and
perfection. In like manner the conduct of the Plantations, might be of great
concernment therein, as when either the new Planters arose from the first
swarm, or were of a second or third castling from other places; whilst the head
Colony, as may be said, or main body of the Monarchy retained and enjoyed
purely their genuine or natural speech. Wherefore admitting; that in those
Northern and Southern Regions the Language does differ, as much perhaps as our
Southern, Western, and Northern- English, for it will scarcely appear to differ
much more, yet it is still one and the same speech. Do we not grant, that the
Greek was one Language, though there were five several Dialects thereof? And
the Language of the Ephraimites, Hebrew, or Canaanitish, though they could not
pronounce Shibboleth? Otherwise he that lispeth or stammereth, which is a
defect in Nature, not corruption of speech, may be said to have lost his MOTHER
Tongue. But let the Vulgar Idiom of the Chinois be as different as it will,
they have not any one Book written therein, no more than we in our Northern or
Western Dialects, but all their Books are written in their tr^e ORIGINAL N.
Trig. in Chr. Exp. ^pud Sin. lib. 1. page ^5. (...). Mend. (...) st. d^lla
(...). lib. 3. (...) ^39.
Language, and the Characters of them are, and ever have been one and the same
throughout their whole Empire.

Mendoza makes mention of this difference also, and therewith somewhat
acquaints us wherein it does consist. He tells us then, that it is admirably
strange, that though in the Dominions of this Empire, they have several kinds
of speech, nevertheless all generally understand it by the Letters, not Words.
But the reason is, says he, because one and the same figure, and one and the
same Character, is common to all in the signification of one and the same
thing, although it be diversely named in the speech; as for example, the
Character for a City is universally known throughout their Empire, though in
some places they call it Leombi, and in others Fu, the like happening in all
other nouns. Now, this proceeds not only in regard their Language is aequivocal
through the diverse significations of the Letter according to the Accent; but
also because they have peculiar words for particular things according to the
respective dignity and quality that the thing spoken of, carries in their
speech; as Semedo, Nieuhoff, and Kircherus have told us, and as from Martinius
you will very suddenly hear. And therefore Mendoza ought to have declared what
kind of City the Chinois intend by Leombi; for, what manner they mean by Fu
will appear ere long. And of all of them the words are perfect Chinois, and
after the purity of their Idiom pronounced accordingly. As in like manner with
us, though in the North of England they call that a Dove-cote, which in the
South is called a Pigeon-house, the names nevertheless are good English; So
also Ensis is as true Latin for a Sword as Gladius; and (...) as pure Greek
for Urbanitas as (...). But to our purpose Cheu is as uncorrupted Chinique for
a City as Fu, and Hien as either; the diversity of Terms proceeding from the
different dignities M. Mart. Atl. Sin. p. 108.
they bear. For, thus says Martinius, The Chinois call not the greater Cities
Fu, but Cheu, and those lesser ones which are under their jurisdiction Hien.
They call a Royal City also Kingsu* for as the same Author has it, it is to be
observed, that Kingsu is the common name of dignity for their Regal Cities, but
not for any one properly and singularly so called. But to what degree of Cities
Leombi answers, I cannot find, unless happily it might be mistaken for Ni^po, a
Port Town, which the Portugals as Martinius informs me, are wont by ^d. p. 118.
somewhat a corrupt name to call Liampo.

Whereby it is observeable that by one only word they express that, which we
are enforced to signify by diverse. As thus also, for to say amongst us
Europaeans the manner of taking A Sem. Rel. de la Cin. par. 1. cap. 6.
any thing, either with the whole hand, or with some particular fingers
thereof, we are always obliged to repeat the Verb Take, amongst the Chinois it
is not so, for each word signifies the verb, and the manner likewise. For
example, Nien, to take with two fingers: Tzo, to take with all the fingers:
Chua, with the whole hand turn downwards: Toie, with the hand open turned
upwards* So also with the verb, Is, whereas we say, He is in the house; He is
eating; or He is sleeping: They have a word, wherewith at once they express,
both that He is and the manner how He is. We to say the foot of a Man, the foot
of a Bird, or the foot of any Beast* are always necessitated to specify it
with the same word foot; but the Chinois do it with one single word; as Kio,
the foot of a Man: Chua, the foot of a Bird: Thy, the foot of any Beast
whatsoever.

The Natives of China speak generally as from their Infancy they are taught,
without observing any Accents at all; whereby in diverse places the People, like
our country Peasants, as they afterward attain to a more or less habit of
civility and learning speak finer, or broader, and with a fuller mouth than
others. For, it may be collected from Martinius, that he among M. Mart. Sin.
Hist. lib. (...). page 276.
the Chinois that is not well read in the Language, and understands not the
Characters rightly, ore loquentem rustico, speaking in a rustical manner,
delivers his mind harshly; whereas he that is learned in them pronounces his
words with a grace genuinely. To These the Language is familiar; from Those not
so welcome or commendable.

Thus in the Province of Chekiang, that which the Literati after the elegant
manner of the Id. Atl. Sin. page 110.
speech incorruptedly call Kingsu, the vulgar sort of people speaking after the
common way less exactly, call Kingsai; from whence in P. Venetus the name
Quinsai springs. So likewise in Fokien where they speak clownishly they
usually change N, into L, as Lankin for Nankin, and the like. For thus
Martinius also, in his description Id. page 9^
of Nankin. The Portugals, says he, vulgarly call it Lankin receiving the
error from the Fokiens, with whom they chiefly trade; for these being very
rude in speaking by a most common vice of their Country are wont to change
every N into L. After the same manner, as in the East of England they say a
Chim-Ney, and in the West a ChimLey; or as with us in several parts of
Somersetshire, S, is changed into Z; as Zuch for Such; and F, into V, as Vather
for Father and the like. Where also many of the People, the farther West
especially, speak so confusedly in the mouth, that he, that is not acquainted
with their Idiom, can hardly understand either what they mean or say; though
nevertheless, that which they speak is English.

Those people of Fokien are the only they almost of all the Chinois, that
adventure to go to sea and trade; and that non obstante the Laws of the Empire
maintain free Commerce and Intercourse with foreign Nations; whereby they use
not all, says Martinius, one and the same M. Mart. Atl. Sin. p. 121.
speech, but in several Cities it differs, insomuch that hardly and with
difficulty one understands another, the polite elocution of the Literati common
to all the other Provinces, being less known and used here, than in any place
else. But in Ienping and the territories belonging to it (for every Province
has several, as great as Id. p. 128.
some of our Europaean Kingdoms) which was planted by a Colony from Nanking,
the Inhabitants speak as the Literati, which in regard they live amongst such
rusticks is accounted singular in them. Now, Semedo in celebrating A Sem. Rel
de la Cin. p. (...). cap. 6.
the Chinique speech will assure you, that at Nanking it is spoken purely. His
words being, H^o piu del soave che dell' aspro, e se si parla perfettamente,
come d'ordinario si ode in Nankin, lusinga ludito; Their Language, says he, is
more sweet than harsh, and if it be spoken perfectly, as it is ordinarily at
Nankin, it flattereth the attention of the Auditors, or is very delightful to
the Ear. As our English Translation has it.

By all which it appears, that from the different appellations given to one and
the same Character, and the diverse pronunciation of their Characters in diverse
places, though the words are the very same, the diversity of their Language
proceeds. Therefore to make an end of this difference at once for all; The
natural roughness of the Regions, attended by the ambitious proceedings of the
Royaltes, in those Provinces where they domineered, causing a rough nature in
the inhabitants made them live like Barbarians, and speak accordingly; whilst
the pure Language of their Ancestors lay neglected, and their morality trampled
in the dirt. But what through their beginning to be reduced to the Imperial
Diadem by Chingus first, and afterward by Hiavouus about an hundred and forty
years before the birth of CHRIST; what through their final reducement and union
to the Crown, by the victorious Humvu, as was said, their ancient Language has
taken root again, and spreads it self throughout all those united Provinces,
though each of them nevertheless still retains their so rudely ingrafted
speech, as b^ing by long time become habitual and natural to them, and not in
possibility on the sudden to be easily either refined or reformed. So that with
Semedo we may confidently say, it is so far from being lost, that though the
Language in those Provinces by their revolts became different, it returns again
by their Union into one only throughout the whole Chinique Empire. Pero la
lingua della Cina venne essere (...). Sem. Rel. de la Cin. par. 1. cap. 6.
una sola, che chiamino Quonhoa, o lingua di Mandarini; perch essi con l'iste
esso passo col quale inducevano il lor governo in altri Regni, introduoevano
anche la lingua: e cosi hoggi corre per tutto il paese, come il Latino per
tutta l'Europa; anzi piu universalmente, conservando anche ciascuno la sua
natural favella; Therefore, says he, the Language of China comes to be one
only, which they call Quonhoa, or Language of the Mandarins; for with the same
pace as they introduced their Government into those other Kingdoms, they
brought in their Language also; and so it runs throughout the whole Country at
this day, as the Latin throughout all Europe, but more universally, every one
likewise keeping their natural, or clownish manner of speech, as Nieuhoff calls
it, by which the Inhabitants of I. Nieuh. l Amb. Or. par. 2. page 13.
one place scarcely understand one another, as was instanced in the Province of
Fokien, unless they have recourse to their Books and Characters which are all
one and the same, whereby they readily comprehend the sense and meaning of him
that speaks. Hence it is, that we Europaeans endeavor wholly to perfect our
selves in N. Trig. de Chapter Exp. apud Sin. lib. 1. p. 28.
the Language of the Literati, because it is more easy and more gen^ral; for
thereby says Trigautius, Strangers may converse with the Natives in any
Province. Hence it is, that the style they write, is far different from that
they speak; A. Sem. Rel. de la Cin. par. 1. cap. 6.
although, says Semedo, (and mark him, I pray) the words are the same, so that
when one goes about to write, he had need to recollect his wits, for he that
will write according as commonly they speak, may worthily be laughed at. Hence
it G. Mend. hist. della Chi. lib. 1. p. 159.
is, that Mendoza tells us, the Language of the Chinois, is, as the Hebrew,
better understood by writing then speaking, the Characters being distinguished
by points, which serve not so commodiously for speech. And hence it is, that
Trigautius, N. Trig. de Chapter E^p. apud Sin. lib. 1. p. 37.
giving us another reason for it, says, I do verily believe, that the cause
thereof is, for that from all memory of Ages, this people have endeavored to
write elegantly rather than so to speak, insomuch that all their Eloquence even
to these our days consists not in pronunciation but writing only. Hic porro
scribendi modus, quo singulis rebus singulos appingimus characteres, etsi
memoriae sit permolestus, tamen adfert secum insignem quandam nostrisque
inauditam commoditatem, etc. But al though this way of writing, whereby we are,
says he, to set down a particular character for every thing, be extremely
troublesome to the memory, yet it brings with it a certain famous and
incredible advantage to us, in regard of the universality of the Letter. Which
incredible advantage, that as well the whole World. as we Europaeans may enjoy,
our learned Dr. John Wilkins by the proposal of a Real Character has made a
fair overture lately, and if others would as willingly contribute their
studies, as he has ingeniously begun* for no humane invention, but Divine
creation can make any thing perfect on the sudden; we might no longer complain
of the unhappy consequences that succeeded the Confusion at Babel, nor China
glory that she alone shall evermore triumph in the full fruition of those
abundant felicities that attended mankind, whilst one common Language was
spoken throughout the World.

Now, though it is not to be denied but that Language precedes Letters, for we
speak before we can either read or write, nevertheless it must be granted
withal, that we could neither write nor read, unless Characters had been framed
to Language. And Characters were at first framed to Language, not only that by
them, the actions of the respective people might be commemorated, but also that
by such commemoration the Language it self should be preserved to Posterity.
Therefore the certainty of Language consists not so much in the speaking and
pronouning, as in the reading and writing: not in the words but Letters. For
thus, he that is well read in the Oriental tongues, we declare to be a great
Linguist, as being learned in the speech of the Eastern Nations. By which it
manifestly appears, as Bishop Walton formerly asserted, that by Inscriptions
the truth of Language is discovered. Now Nieuhoff, Vossius, and others have
assured us, that the Chinois can and will in maintenance of the truth of Theirs
produce faithful witnesses, Ancient Records written from Age to Age in not
Alphabetary, but significative Characters, such, as the World in the Infancy
and Nonage thereof had in use, and such as Martinius, Semedo, and our Chinique
authors have generally affirmed, are the same at this very day, as when
primitively they were invented: which eminently convinces that their Language
remains as pure and incorrupt at this present in those Characters, as when they
first began to have a Language.

But the Reverend Bishop proceeds farther, and positively, as formerly cited,
concludes, saying, Idcirco linguae omnes, quas libri scripti a communi clade
non servant, vicissitudini, ut omnia humana, semper obnoxiae sunt, and singulis
soeculis insignem mutationem subeunt; Wherefore all Languages that written
books have not preserved from common ruin, are, as all humane things, ever
obnoxious to change, and in every Age undergo a notable mutation. Whereby it is
more manifestly evident (And to this end especially he thus delivered his
judgment) that such Languages which have been preserved in written books are
not subject to change. And therefore, finding from those Authors that living
many years in China, have N. Trig. de Christ. Exp. apud Sin. lib. 1. page 3 M.
Mart. Sin, Hist. in Epist. ad Lector.
not only been eye witnesses, but also day and night most studious in their
Antiquities (Martinius professing that for ten years together, except for his
set prayers, he never took any book in hand but Theirs) finding I say from such
unquestionable Authorities; That the Chinois have been a people ever since the
flood of Noah, and before the Confusion of Tongues; That their Language has
continually in all times, from their firstbeginning to be a Nation, been
preserved in written books; That the Characters wherewith those books be
written, are the self same, which from all Antiquity were extracted from their
Original Hieroglyphics: That in those Characters their Language has ever
since consisted, and according to them, is at this present day spoken purely:
And That by the some Characters their Language is generally and universally
understood throughout the whole Chinique World, We may safely conclude that the
MOTHER or NATURAL Language of the Empire of China, perdures in its Ancient
purity without any change or alteration.

And I must not omit, that several books yet live amongst them, written in
their first and original Hieroglyphics, which still remaining in their
Libraries, are understood by all their A. Kirch. Chapter Ill. par. 6. p. 228, A.
Sem. Rel de la Cin. par. 1. c, 6. M. Mart. Sin. hist. lib. 1. p. 16.
Literati, though they are no longer used, except in some Inscriptions, and
Seals instead of Coats of Arms. Among these sort of Books is extant one called
Yeking of great Antiquity, as taking beginning with Fohius, and of as great
esteem for the Arcana it contains. This Book seems much to confirm the opinion
of those, that would have the Inscription at Persetolis more ancient than the
flood. For, as This in Persia consists only in Triangles several ways
transversed: So That in China consists only of straight lines several ways
interrupted. It treats especially of Judicial Astrology, Politic Government,
and occult Philosophy.

But some may perhaps say, that with the change of their Ancient Theology, the
Chinois might change their Language also. But this Argument is of no validity
at all; for, it may as well be said, that the Israelites because they set up
the Golden Calfe in the Wilderness, lost their natural Tongue; or at least when
under Jeroboam, ten whole Tribes making a defection followed the like Idolatry.
But to come nearer home, every man knows, that our selves changed our Religion
in the time of Edward the sixth; yet not any man knows, that thereby* our
speech received an alteration. Besides the Chinois did not so totally fall from
their Ancient Theology, but that (as has been said) they have Xangti, their
being infected with Idolatry notwithstanding, N. Trig. de Christ. Exp. apud
Sin. lib. 1. p, 105
in as great veneration at this day, as ab antiquo; also their Literati not
only not worship, but likewise have no Idols, still adoring one only Deity, by
whom they believe all things here below are governed and preserved; and they
use the same Language now, as when they first were taught to adore one God
only, which according both to Trigautius and Nieuhoff is above four thousand
years since.

NOW, in regard that those who have written of the PRIMITIVE Tongue, may be
observed to recommend unto us six principal guides to be directed by, for the
discovery thereof; viz. Antiquity, Simplicity, Generality* Modesty of
expression, Utility, and Brevity, to which by some is added Consent of Authors
also; We having already spoken sufficiently, as to the Antiquity, will consider
in what degree the Language of the Chinois may correspond with the rest of
these Remarques, and then submit our selves to censure.

First then as to Simplicity, our Chinique is a Language that consists (and it
is singular therein) all of Monosyllables, not one Dissyllable, or Polysyllable
being to be found in it; nor has it any Vowels or Consonants, but a peculiar
Hieroglyphical Character for what ever can be conceived, either in the mind, or
may be obvious to the sense. And if in this our Essay you have met with some
words of many syllables, note nevertheless that every syllable is a particular
N. Trig. in Exp. Christ apud Sin. lib. 1. p. 26.
word, but because that diverse syllables are taken to signify one only thing,
those which we have had occasion to mention herein, are by us connexed after
the manner of our speech in Europe. And although the Chinois have as many
Characters as there are things, they know nevertheless so well how to join them
together, that they exceed not above seventy or eighty thousand, as you have
heard.

Neither does their Language consist, says M. Mart. Sin. hist. in Epist. ad
Lector.
Martinius, as ours, of any certain Method, or order of Alphabet, but every
thing has a figure, by which it may be differently expressed from others,
composed by no Art or Rule, and as it were by chance attributed to the
subject matter; and fitted, as I may add, to the Infancy and Simplicity of
Time. Furthermore the Chinois are never put to that irksome vexation of
searching out a Radix for the derivation of any of their words, as generally
all other Nations are; but the Radix is the word, and the word the Radix, and
the syllable the same also, as Trigautius has long since affirmed; which
persuades a facility in their speech not to be paralleld by any other Language,
and that the true, genuine, and original sense of things seems to remain with
them. Besides they are not troubled with variety of Declensions, Conjugations,
Numbers, Genders, Moods, Tenses, and the like Grammatical niceties, but are
absol^tely free from all such perplexing accidents, having no other Rules in
use, than what the light of Nature has dictated unto them; whereby their
Language is plain, easy, and simple, as a NATURAL speech ought to be. And it
is worthy observation, that, whereas, in point of Theology, they of all other
people have been least guided by the light of Nature; in point of Language,
they of all other people have been most, yea, only guided by the light of
Nature. But it was Nature that from God taught them their Language, and it was
the God of Nature, that by Noah taught them their Theology.

Moreover, the Letters, then which nothing can be more certain, testify, that
it is sine ulla vocum peregrinarum mixtura, without any mixture of foreign
words. The Hebruitians would have us accept account of the Hebrew; and
therefore well knowing how superstitiously our Divines for the most the same
part are affected toward the Hebrew Tongue, and that they will not allow it to
be the Language of Canaan, but the Original Speech; we leave them to enquire,
whether the Language of the Chinois (whose twelfth sort of their first or
Primier Characters, seem in no mean degree to correspond even with the now
Hebrew Letters) may not be the really true, pure, and ancient Hebrew Tongue.
Which they say was lost in the time of the Captivity, or as others rather
before the entrance of the Israelites from Egypt into the land of Canaan. For,
(let their Language be what you please) if it became utterly forgotten, in the
seventy years their Captivity endured, much more questionless might it be
corrupted in the some Centuries of years during their affliction in Egypt.
When the Taskmasters that Pharaoh and his Council set over them were
Egyptians, the Text being plain, that, They did set over them Taskmasters to
afflict them with their burdens, Exodus I. v. 11. and Exodus 5. v. 1^* When to
increase their afflictions the more, they lived dispersedly over all the land
of Egypt, So, says Moses, the people were scattered abroad throughout all the
land of Egypt, to gather stubble in stead of straw. Exodus 5. v. 12. When that
Text also, Speak now in the ears of the People, and let every man borrow of his
neighbor, and every woman of her neighbor Jewels of silver, and Jewels of
Gold, Exodus II. v. 2. shows, that not only they lived promiscuously among the
Egyptians; but likewise used the Egyptian Tongue, how else could their
neighbors (Egyptians says Aynsworth) understand what they desired to have,
unless either they spoke the language of the Egyptians, or the Egyptians
theirs, whatsoever it was? And when they went up from thence accompanied with a
mixed multitude; And a mixed multitude went up also with them. Exodus 12. v. 38.
Which were Egyptians and other Nations, says Aynsworth, but the Chaldee
Paraphrast many strangers, whose numbers Willet finds to be not fewer Ainsw. in
Exo. 11. and 12. Willet in Exodus 12.
than five hundred thousand persons, that having either lived in Goshen with
the Israelites, or drawing together with them from the several parts of Egypt
accompanied them from thence, being moved by the works of God to go out of
Egypt with them. And in regard these had so great an influence upon them, as
in so short a time after, to corrupt their ways by making them to murmr
against God, and lust after flesh, Numb. 11. It may not be improbable, but by
their long and constant continuance amongst them, they might contribute much to
the corruption of their Language in like manner; they being readily prone, as
by their frequent Rebellions it appears, to entertain any thing, how pernicious
soever to their succeeding generations.

Cluverius as I find in M. Casauhon, uses it as M. Casauh. de 4 ling. page 33.
an argument in opposition to the Antiquity of the Hebrew Tongue, that almost a
thousand words may be collected therein, which to most or many Languages at
least are common. But how many soever Cluverius has collected those foreign
words to be, I shall now remember one only, Ophir, from whence Solomon had his
Gold, precious Stones, Ivory, and other Rarities; in regard especially Writers
so much differ concerning it. Some taking the same for pure Gold it self;
Others supposing it to be that Region of America, which is commonly called
Peru, and of which there being two, the North and the South; they will have
them to be jointly called Parvaim; and that goid, the gold of Parvaim: Others,
Cep h ala or Sophila in Aethiopia* Others again an Island in the Red Sea; and
Others Hispaniola. Now that which has caused this diversity of opinions, and
that the place has hitherto been unknown is, the mistaking of Ophir to be
Hebrew, when A. Kirc. Chapter Ill. par. 2. page 58, 59
indeed it is an Aegyptique or Coptique word, and amongst the Egyptians of old
was the name for India, and no other place whatsoever.

But if this mixture of words may be brought in bar against the Hebrew, what
judgment shall be given in behalf of that people, which have ever since the
universalflood used a speech, that has not any one word thereof common to
other Languages; such Countries as have been subdued, or such Colonies perhaps
as have been planted by them excepted? And if ever our Europ^ans shall become
thoroughly studied in the Chinique tongue, it will be found, that not only the
Chinois want words to other Languages common, but also that they have very many
whereby they express themselves in such Elegancies, as neither by Hebrew, or
Greek, or any other Language how elegant soever can be expressed. Besides,
whereas the Hebrew is harsh and rugged, the Chinique appears the most sweet and
smooth Language, of all others throughout the whole World at this day known.

And as if all things conspired to prove this the PRIMITIVE Tongue. We may
observe, how forceably Nature struggles to demonstrate so much. The very first
expression we make of life, at the very instant minute of our Births, is, as
was touched on before, by uttering the Chinique word Ya. Which is not only the
first, but indeed the sole and only expression, that Mankind from Nature can
justly lay claim unto.

The Language of China as has been showed also consists all of
Monosyllables, and in our Infancy, the first Notions of speech we have are all
Monosyllables; as Ta, for Father; Ma, for Mother; Pa, for Brother; the like
happening in all other terms, until by hearing and observing what others in our
confused Language say, we alter accordingly, adding now and than a Letter or
Syllable by degrees; whereby in the end we are brought to plain words. For, it
is not by natural instinct, but by imitation, and as we are instructed that we
arrive at speech, that is, in simple terms and words to express the open
notions of things, which the second act of Reason compoundeth into
propositions, and the last into forms of Ratiocination.

The Chinois have not the Letter R, nor can I. (...) l' Amb. Or: par. 2. page:
13.
ever by any possible means be brought to express or pronounce the same,
whatever labor or diligence is used by them. And when our Children attain to
riper Age; as if Nature abhorred the Confusion, what care and pains do we take,
what opportunities not lay hold of, by practicing and repeating to make them
pronounce this Letter, till education after long contest prevailing they arrive
thereat? Thus from our Births to our Infancy, and from our Infancy to Riper
Age, till Nature is compelled to yield by the enforced power of instruction,
unto corrupt speech, we generally throughout the Universe appear in our
Language direct Chinois.

But peradventure here likewise some will be ready to suggest, that the
Language of China is not plain and easy, but difficult, not to strangers only,
but the Natives also, in regard of the diverse Accents and great Aequivocation
of the words proceeding from them. To which is answered, that let the
difficulty be supposed as great as thought may think, or Art can make, it
relates unto strangers solely; and therefore cannot in the least degree reflect
upon the Primitiveness of the speech; because when the whole World had one
common Language; throughout the whole World none were strangers to that
Language; but all people universally understood and spoke the same, being born
Natives thereon, and learning it from their Mothers breasts, as the natural
Chinois now do, or as any other Nation ever did theirs. It was the Confusion of
Tongues, that first made strange Languages, and Strangers to them, whereby they
became difficult to be attained. But afterward, when either curiosity invited,
or necessity compelled men to learn them, Art entered to act her part therein,
and by methodical ways, and orderly Rules sweetened difficulty, and induced her
to submit to diligence, which after much study nevertheless prevailed; and
finally got the upper hand.

And this China it self shall witness, for Pr. Iacobus Pantoya finding it
absolutely necessary for propagating of the Gospel, to know the true Idiom of
the Language, framed our Europaean musical notes UT, RE, MI, FA, SOL, LA, to
answer in pronuntiation unto the elevations and cadencies observable in the
Chinique Accents which are these, ^ `

The first Accent ^ answers to the Musical A. Kirch. Chapter Ill. par. 1. p. 12.
Note UT: but the Chinique sound or pronunciation, denotes the same, and it is
the first producing an equal voice.

The second, answers to RE, and amongst the Chinois, it is as much to say, as a
clear equal voice: or as Golius has it a word directly and equally cast forth.
I. Golius addit. de Reg. Cath. page 4.


The third ` answers to MI; expressing with them of China, a lofty voice: more
strongly delivered, but more flat in the pronunciation than the former.

The fourth answers to FA, and Chiniquely signifies, the lofty voice of one who
is going forth; that speaks, in contrary to `, more freely and in an higher
Tone; or as if it proceeded from one that puts a question.

The fifth answers to SOL, and thereby in the Language of China, the quick or
hasty voice of one that is coming in, is intended.

The last,, as also, ^ denote a plain voice.

By this invention the Society came to be much aided in overcoming the
difficulty of the speech: And by the help of these notes strangers learn the
Language, but with what labor, and by how many reflections, is easier in
thought to be imagined, than by the pen, says Kircherus, to be expressed. So
that it is clearly manifest this A. Kir. Ch Ill. par. 6. p. 236.
difficulty relates unto Foreiners particularly; for the native Chinois, as
the same Author affirms, never observe any Accents at all, but from their
cradles, as almost all other Nations, are accustomed to the pronuntiation of
their MOTHER Tongue, although their Literati not only in actu exercito, but in
actu signato, both in the Practique and Theory, know and teach every Letter to
be pronounced truly, according to the respective Accent due to it. Which more
fully adjusts the simplicity and purity of their Language; and the strict care
they take to preserve the same.

Now, as this difficulty is great unto strangers, who always in attaining
whatever speech encounter much; So they are abundantly recompensed, and more
advantaged in other respects; not only in regard as you lately heard, of the
incredible commodity they receive, by saving the labor of learning diverse
Languages, whilst in China it self the Idiom varying, and in the adjacent
Kingdoms the languages being different, they all agree in writing; but also in
regard of the many Elegancies arising from the double sense of the words, on
which the difficulty is grounded. For this Aequivocableness is accounted the
Elegancy of their Language, which consists, as was said, in the written
Character rather, than the vocal word, and therefore to furnish That, the
Chinois neglecting N. Trig. de Christ. Exp. apud Sin. lib 1. p. 27. Pur. Pilgr.
l. 4. p. 447
This, all their negotiations of what kind soever are transacted, even all
their most familiar messages sent, by way of memorial in writing, not by word
of mouth. And from this Elegancy it is, that those of Iapan though they have of
late times invented forty eight Letters for the dispatch of their ordinary
affairs, by the connection of which they express and declare whatever they
please. Yet nevertheless the Characters of the Chinois in regard of the
excellent terms, and phrases their Language affords, either (to use Semedo's
words) for delivering of their minds with respect, submission, or in applause
of another merits, are still in such request, and so great estimation amongst
them, as that those forty eight letters, howsoever they be more commodious to
express their conceits are little regarded in comparison, but by way of
contempt accounted, and called the women's Lettes. As Christo. Barri a late
Italian Writer C. Barri in Cochin-Ch. cap. 6. M. Mart. Atl. Sin pa. 5.
in his Cochin-China asserts.

Secondly Generality, Whereunto may be said, it is a matter exceeding all
admiration, that a people whose numbers of all sorts consists of not fewer than
two hundred Millions of souls; whose Empire contains of Continent at least two
millions, five hundred ninety two thousand square miles, should understand one
and the same Character, and that the self same Character should be in use
amongst them. either in M. S. or printed Books, for more than three thousand
seven hundred years. Certainly it seems impossible it should be thus, and
certainly thus it is, without some peculiar care of Divine Power.

Neither are their Characters understood throughout their whole Empire only,
how far and wide soever it now extends, and by those people generally that were
in time either Colonies A. Kirch Chapter Ill. pa 6. page 2 G. Men Hist. del lib. 3.
p 140, 14
of theirs, or conquered by them, as the Iaponians, Coreans, Laios, those of
Tonchin, and Sumatra, with the Kingdom of Cochin-China; but several other
bordering Countries and Islands also, although in speaking them, they
understand one another no more than Greeks do Dutchmen. Because reading the
Characters depravedly, they pronounce them in a different manner, alio atque M.
Mart. Atl. Sin. p. 147.
alio ab iis legantur modo, as Martinius has it, which more confirms, that
those people that read and pronounce the Letters truly, speak the Language
purely; and that could those foreign Nations read them rightly, they might not
only speak the Chinique Language perfectly, but also understand one another
plainly, in regard the speech continues incorruptedly in the Character.

And hence it is that Mendoza tells us, that in China letters missive ready
written and accomodated to all affairs, are publicly to be sold by every
Bookseller in his shop, whether they be to be sent to persons of Honor, or
inferior degree, or for to supplicate, reprehend, or recommend, or any other
intents whatever occasion requires, although it be to challenge one another to
the field, so that the buyer has no more to do, than to subscribe, seal and
send them to the place intended at his pleasure.

But their way of writing, is different from all other Nations of the world.
For, whereas the Hebrews, Chaldaeans, Syrians, Arabians, and Egyptians write
from the right to the left, and the Greeks, Latins, and other people of Europe,
from the left to the right. The Chinois draw their Characters from the top
downwards, as by Antiquity Hieroglyphics were accustomed to be written, Their
first perpendicular line nevertheless beginning on the right hand of the page.
And in their writing they observe such equal distances, that there cannot be
any thing more exact.

Thirdly, Modesty of Expression; for it much reflects upon the Hebrew, as to
the Antiquity thereof especially, that there are in it many somewhat obscene
words; whereas by all learned men, it is presumed that the PRIMITIVE Language,
was an harmless and in nothing immodest speech; but as innocent as the time in
which it was at first infused into Mankind. Verba parum honesta (qualia in
omnibus linguis aliqua) M. Casaub. de 4 ling. page 28.
objicit Nyssenus, the Hebrew has words scarcesly honest, says Nyssenus, in
his objection against it, as in M. Casaubon; who had he been acquainted with
the Chinique Tongue, might have spared his Parenthesis. For Semedo will assure
you, that the Chinois with great advantage exceed in this, for they are most
modest in whatever they write, A. Sem. Rel. de la Cin. par. 1. cap. 11.
and very rarely in their Verses (which in all other Languages are more or less
lascivious) is a loose word to be found; and what is more, they have not any
Character whereby to write the privy parts, neither are they found written in
any, or in any part of any, of all their Books. And from what cause happily
this may proceed, has been remembered before.

Under this head we may also add, that the Hebrews are very famous for their
honorable terms toward others, and humble toward themselves. As Jacob said
unto his Brother Esau, Let my Lord, I pray thee, pass over before his servant.
Genesis 33. v. 14. Thy servant our father is in good health, said the Brothers of
Joseph to him. Genesis 43. v. 28. And, thy servants shall bring down the gray
hayrs of thy servant our father with sorrow to the grave. Genesis 44. v. 31. For
which the Chinois A. Sem. Rel. de la Cin. par. 1. cap. 12.
are no less famous also. The son speaking to his father, says, his Young son,
though he be the eldest and married; the servant to his Master styleth himself
Slave. In speaking one with another, they always do it with expressions of
Honor, as amongst us, Sir, your Worship, and the like. Besides, even to
inferior and ordinary people, they give an honorable name; as, a servant, if he
be grave, they call, The great Master of the House; and we are taught, that
Joseph termed his Steward, The Ruler of his House, Genesis 43. v. 16. We read
likewise, that Abraham called his wife Sister, saying, She is my sister, Genesis
20. ver. 2. And, Take no care my sister, said old Tobit to his wife, Tob. 5. v.
20. And if a Chinois speaks unto a woman, though she be not of any kin to him,
he calls her, Sister-in-law.

In like manner the Hebrew is much celebrated, for the mysterious
significations of the proper names of men, in which Prophetical predictions
were contained; and which Goropius in his Indo-Scythia, says, the first
Hebrews, might either by interpretation from the PRIMITIVE Language, or new
imposition assign unto them. But though Moses might receive by Tradition from
his Ancestors, that in the FIRST speech, names were thus mystically imposed;
nevertheless, that by Divine Revelation he might so record them also, there is
no doubt to be made. As; that Adam signified Red Earth, out of which he was
created. Eve, that she should be the Mother of all living: Lamech, that he was
to be the first, that should infringe the Rites of Matrimony instituted by God,
in having two wives: Phaleg, that in his days the Earth should be divided. Now,
what these Scripture names may signify in the Chinique Tongue; or whether yea
or no, they have any such; or how the names of the Fathers of their first
Families before they came to be governed by a Monarch may correspond to them, I
leave unto the Chinique Lit terati. For, to have acquainted you with the
affinity between the names of Noah, and Iaus suffices us.

But I am not to forget, that, as in the PRIMITIVE, so likewise in the Language
of China the proper names of men have mysterious significations in them,
Martinius in his History and Atlas will ascertain you. For, their sixth
Emperor was called Cous as foretelling the eminent virtue he should be endued
withal: Faus at his attaining the Crown changed his name and would be called
Uus, as giving his subjects to understand thereby, what a warlike and valiant
Prince, they should find him to be: Ngayus would at his coming to the Throne
take upon him the name of Pingus, i. e. Pacificus, as if inspired that CHRIST
the true Pacifique King should during his reign be born: And Chingus was called
Xius, which name the Chinois afterward found too truly imposed; for he
observed no moderation in any thing, being sometimes virtuous, sometimes
vicious, equally valiant and cruel.

Besides not only of their Kings and Great Purch. Pilgrimage, lib. 4. page 445.
men, but also of all the people generally, both the names and surnames are
significant; their surnames are ancient and unchangeable, and there are not of
them a thousand in all China; N. Trig. de Christ. Exp. apud Sin. lib. 1. p, 84.
but their other names are arbitrary at the pleasure of the Father. What should
I say of the mysterious names of their Empire, having touched upon them before,
seeing Trigautius tells Id. lib. 1. p. 4.
us, that it was of old called Than, as being unbounded and without limits;
then You, as the place of rest and quietness; afterward Hia, as much to say, as
Great; then again Sciam, as enriched with all things; then Cheu, a place of
perfection; but pretermitting others, Han signifies the milky way in Heaven.
For, from all Antiquity it has been customary with them, when any new family
came unto the Crown, according to the mystical signification of the proper name
thereof, to give a new name unto the Empire.

Fourthly, the Utility; for, the Language of China affords us, the
Acknowledgment of one only true God; Theology taught by Noah; Predictions of
CHRIST in exotique Regions many Centuries of years before his Incarnation:
devout Ejaculations, such, as cannot (Oh the shame!) among Christians without
difficulty be found; eloquent Orations, fuch, as nor Greek nor Roman oratory
exceeds; Warlike Stratagems, such, as Hannibal and Fabius were, and the
greatest Captains are to learn: Valor giving place to none; Physic not to be
paralleld by any; Agriculture surmounting all: The Mathematiques; Mechaniques;
Morality; I cannot have words for all unless from China. But if ex ungue
Leonem, from the claw the greatness of the Lion may be judged; then, for Policy
in government, Rules for Magistrates, Laws for People, not executed
negligently like ours (in Europe) as if no matter whether yea or no they were
ever made, neither Empire, nor Kingdom, nor Commonwealth ever or at this day*
known, can be brought to stand in competition with the Monarchy of China.
Whereby, since her dominion became successive (the inconsiderable duration of
the Western Tartars set aside) she has enjoyed the same in a continued
succession of Monarchs of her own blood, three thousand eight hundred fifty one
years, accompting to the year of CHRIST one thousand six hundred forty four, at
which time the now Tartars took posession of her Throne.

Fifthly, and lastly the Brevity. Lasua Brevita la fa aequivoca, ma per
l'istessa causa compendiosa; The Brevity of the Chinique Language makes it A.
Sem. Rel de la Ciu. par. 1. c, 6.
aequivocal, but for the same reason compendious, says Semedo. Whereby we may
observe, that the Aequivocableness which is said to be so difficult and
troublesome to strangers, is even by strangers themselves celebrated; and in
regard of the compendiousness most acceptable and pleasingly welcome to the
Chinois, who are very particular affectors of brevity in speech. Insomuch that
our Author is of opinion, that they were either imitators of (which because
they are far more ancient they could not be) or imitated by the Lacedaemonians.
And elsewhere he conceives, that Lycurgus had his Law for prohibiting the
access of strangers into his Commonwealth from China. Wherefore, and in regard
that Plutarch finds him to have been in India, and to have conferred with the
Gymnosophists there, we may presume to think, that Lycurgus during his forien
travails was in China likewise, and adorned his Laws not only with those
customs of theirs, but also several others the like, as they are by Plutarch
in his life recorded, though nothing in relation thereunto can otherwise be
collected out of the Histories of the Greeks. And why? For that the Lawgivers
of the Ancients, Lycurgus, Solon and the rest, amongst the Graecians; as also
Numa among the Romans were too politic, and ambitious of glory, to proclaim
from whence really they derived their knowledge; whilst one must have his
Aegeria, another his Pyrhioness; so Mahomet had his Dove, and Fohius his
Dragon, who because his Chinois reputed the sight of that Creature to be a
great Omen of Felicity, persuaded M. Mart. Sin. hist. lib. 1. p. 22.
them into a belief, that he took the invention of his Characters, and their
use, from the back of a Dragon, as it came out of the water, that by a Prodigy
the greater estimation might be set upon his new Art. And in like manner, as
most Lawgivers have fathered their Laws upon one Deity or other, the more to
^onfirm the people in an awful reverence of them, and their institutions.

But if the Brevity of a Language be a remarque of the PRIMITIVE Tongue, as it
is asserted to be; the Chinique seems to surpass all other Nations of the
World therein. For as thereby, the Aequivocableness is enriched with
compendiousness, so is the compendiousness beautified with gracefulness and
sweetness, beyond in a manner all Example. To which purpose Semedo proceeds,
saying, con esser lingua eosi limitata, e tanto dolce, che quasi supera tutte
l'altre che conosciamo, that by being so succinct a Language, it is so sweet,
that it exceeds, as it were all others that we know. And that we might not
acquiesce in a single testimony, Nieuhoff assures us also, La Brievete de
cette Langue est si agreeable, quej'oserois I. Nieuh. l'Amb. Or. par. 2. p. 13.
presque luy donner le primier rang enter tou^es celles qui nous sont con^es
jusq^s a present; the Brevity of this Language is so graceful, that I dare
almost give it, says he, the first rank amongst all those that are at this day
known.

Now to give a Language the first or primier rank, as to succinct Sweetness,
and graceful Brevity is a great step toward the granting of it to be, the
PRIMITIVE Language; Considering which, together with the exemplary Utility;
remarkable Modesty; admirable Generality; great Simplicity, and high
Antiquity; we may from these Arguments almost dare to affirm, that the Language
of the Empire of China is the PRIMITIVE Language. But, having moreover found
Noah to have lived both before and after the flood in China, and that Their
speech has from all Antiquity been in one and the same Character preserved in
books to this day; which is such a plea, as can be drawn up and entered, for no
other Nation under Heaven, since the Creation of the World besides; we may more
than almost dare to affirm, that the Chinois have obtained a full and final
decree, for the settlement of this Their claim to the FIRST of Languages
without all farther dispute.

Now, as for consent of Authors to strengthen our Assertion. It may be
demanded, what consent of Authors H^ had, that first found out there were
Antipodes; or He that first discovered the Circulation of the blood? Thos^ that
so absolutely pin their belief upon the shoulders of such consent; are, we may
say, like sheep; whither one leads, the rest all run, without weighing whether
the right or wrong way be taken; so that many times they bring not only
themselves, but also their followers into errors, who by their prevarication
the more increase them. But what consent of Authors can be expected? The
Scripture teaches, That the whole World was drowned; Noah and his family being
saved only: Authors consent, that at the same time China was drowned; some few
only escaping on a mountain there. The Scripture, That Nimrod came from the
East to the valley of Shinaar: Authors, That in the East diverse Nations were
planted before Nimrod came to the valley of Shinaar. The Scripture, That from
the flood until the Confusion of Tongues, the whole Earth was of one Language:
Authors, That from the flood until that Confusion, that Language was
universally common, as well to Those, that were in the East, as Those, that
were at Babel. The Scripture, That the Language of Those only that were at
Babel, was confounded: Authors, That the Language of Those, that were before
planted in the East was not confounded. And all of them unanimoufly consent,
that China was planted before the Confusion of Tongues; and that at this day
the Chinois use the same Language, and have the same Letters, as when at first
they were planted, and became a People.

We have for many years heard many discourses of this extreme part of Asta;
many relations have been published thereof; and many learned men conceived
those relations to be fabulous; suspecting as it were the Providence of God,
that any people should live upon the Earthly Globe, in so great happiness, in
so great felicity, so many thousands of years unknown. But of late, what
through the unconquerable patience of Those, that contemning all difficulties
and perils, have adventured to conquer Idolatry, and advance the standard of
JESUS CHRIST; what through the opportunity, that has been given to others
also, by the late Conquest of the Tartars, to hold free commerce in China; we
now at last have obtained, though scarcely twelve months since, the true and
authentic Histories of that Empire. Scarcely twelve months since I say,
wherefore perhaps, as yet they are not so much as turned over by those that
have procured them. Let them be read, perused, and studied, and then it will be
found, Authors have so far consented; That if the Chinique Tongue be not the
PRIMITIVE, I might, for my own particular, consent with that great Dictator of
learning H. Grotius. That the first speech which men used before the (...).
Grotius in Genesis c. 11.
Deluge, remains now properly in no place, only the Relics thereof may be
found in all Languages. But finding our no less learned Bishop Walton, and many
other famous men, altogether unwilling I should submit thereto; and that
Grotius was not acquainted with our late Chinique writers, I will now at last
take leave to be positive, that more, and with more certainty cannot for the
speech of whatever other Nation under Heaven, be said; and that there is so
great consent already both of sacred Scripture, and unquestionable Authors,
that we may well conclude, until as full consent, and as great certainty be
produced for any other, the Language of the Empire of CHINA is the PRIMITIVE
Language.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 5. lin. 27. For words, read viands. p. 9. l. 12. r. the whole world. Id.
l. 13. r. in the whole world. p. 16. l. 19. r. Plantations before, as
themselves were sent from elsewhere. Ibid. l. 21. read procure. p. 24. l. 3. r.
calum. p. 28. l. 32. r. ad hoc credendum. p. 31. l. 14. r. Iudaea. p. 33. l. 2.
r. that although those. p. 49. l. 15. r. Chungque. Ibid. l. 16. expresses. p.
51. l. 13. r. Fohius. and so in page 52. 57. 93. page 59. l. 24. r. alcuni. p.
63. l. 19. r. as rich. p. 64. l. 2. r. reserved. Ib. l. 20. r. Fabius Pictor.
p. 67. l. 12. r. prosecuted. p. 72. l. 4. r. Zaraedras. p. 77. l. 3. r. ut hunc
solum eluvionis. p. 82. lin. ult. r. Tangiu. p. 83. l. 21. r. in length. p. 87.
l. 6. r. Trigautius, and so elsewhere. p. 88. l. 19. r. ex doctrina (...) Noe.
p. 102. l. 5. r. their Emperors of old erected. page 106. l. 15. Yebiang. p.
109. l. 11. r. Natives. p. 111. l. 27. r. Nanking. page 112. l. 24. r. which
though many. Ib. l. ult. r. Ucienian. p. 113. l. 1. and 20. r. Sinktesimo. p.
114. l. 16. r. Indico. p. 115. l. 33. r. Croceus. page 123. l. 31. r. all the
Royalets. p. 124. l. 18. r. those Provinces. page 125. l. 14. r. free liberty
of conversation and study. Ib. lin. 16. r. Hiavouus. page 128. l. 16. r.
Cochin-China. p. 153. l. 15. r. Kircherus. p. 155. l. 13. r. seeds. p. 170. l.
2. r. decreasings. p. 177. l. 31. r. of the Northern. p. 182. l. 26. r. turned
downwards.

In the Margin.

Page 98. For, I. Nieuhoff, par. 1. page 11. r. page 1. Page 114. r. Forneu^
(...) ^ois bien bouches. page 131. For, Id. r. M. Mart. Bell. Tartar. page 1.


