The Key of Knowledge, Opening The PRINCIPLES of RELIGION; And The Path of Life,
Directing The PRACTICE of true PIETY: Designed For the Conduct of Children and
Servants, in the right way to Heaven and Happiness.

By T. W. D. D.

Prove. 22.6. Train up [or, Chatechize] a Child in the way he should go: and
when he is Old he will not depart from it.

Psalm. 119.9. Wherewith shall a Young man cleanse his way? By taking heed
thereto according to thy Word.

LONDON. Printed for Tho. Parkhurst, at the Bible and three Crowns, at the
lower end of Cheapside, near Mercers Chapel. 1682.

The Preface.
To all young Persons, who desire a happy life here; and, in the end, Eternal
life in Heaven.
REmember thy Creator in the Days of thy youth, Eccles. 12.1.
is the wise Counsel of the wisest of men, Solomon. A multitude of young People
neglecting this great Duty, and never seriously thinking of that God that made
them, have run headlong into Hell fire. And what a woeful thing is it for any
to spend their time in vain Pleasures here, and then to lie roaring in
intolerable pains in Hell for ever and ever! Take heed lest this be thy state,
who now read these Lines. Know, though thou perceivest it not, thou now
stand upon the very edge and brink of Eternity. The least touch of God's
hand may send thee into another world. Thou art a mortal Creature. As sure as
thou live, thou must at length die: and then what shall become of thy Soul to
Eternity? When thy Body drops into the dust, thy Soul which never dies, will go
to Heaven or Hell, there to remain for ever and ever. And how soon thou may
die thou know not. If thou vainly flatterest thy self with hopes of long
life, Luke 12.20.
God may say to thee, Thou fool, this night thy Soul shall be required of thee,
And then where art thou? Do thou yet know thy State? Thou wast born in Sin,
Joh 9.34. Ephesians. 2.3.
being by Nature a Child of Wrath, and Heir of Hell. If thou art still in this
state (as thou certainly art, unless thou art born again) thou stand upon
the Brink of Hell, Joh. 3.3.
and art every moment in danger of eternal Damnation. Nothing but the Patience
of God, upon which thou do daily trespass by every Sin thou committest,
keeps thee out of the burning Lake, Rev. 21.8.
that place of torment which is prepared for Sinners. And though thou can eat,
drink, and be merry, and when the night is come, lie down in thy Bed and sleep
secure, certain it is thou art all this while within an hand's-breadth of
Hellfire. For what is thy Life? Psalm. 39.5.
Behold (says David) thou have made my days as an hand-breadth, and mine age
is as nothing before thee: verily every man at his best state is altogether
vanity. And again says he, the wicked shall be turned into Hell. Psalm. 9.17.
So that while thou art in the guilt of Sin, thou hangest by a brittle thread,
a frail Life, over the burning Lake; and by every Sin thou committest, thou
provokest God to cut this thread in two. How can thou live secure, when there
is nothing but this poor Paper-wall of a mortal body between thy Soul and
Hellfire?

Now if thou art not strangely stupid, and one whom God has already sealed up
under hardness of heart to Damnation, Romans 2.5. Acts 28, 27.
thou may plainly perceive, that thou art infinitely concerned, with all
possible speed, to take care that thy Soul may be saved, that so, whenever it
shall please God to take thee hence by death, thou may be for ever happy in
heaven. How happy would thou be all the rest of thy days, if thou had but
once secured the salvation of thy Soul, and wast but well assured thou
should be happy for ever?

But what shall I do to be saved? Acts 16.30.
What must I do that I may go to heaven when I die? If I knew how to secure the
salvation of my Soul, it should be the first thing I would do.

Is this thy Enquiry and Resolve? Art thou in good earnest? Then know that this
little Book is very happily come into thy hand. For the very Design of it is to
make plain the way to Heaven to thee, and to tell thee what thou must know, and
do to be saved, and give thee a plain direction for the doing of it, so that,
if thou do not wilfully destroy thy self, thou may certainly be
everlastingly happy.

Know then that there are some things which God has made necessary to be known
and believed to Salvation: and some things necessary to be done. The knowledge
of God and Christ, and Obedience to the Gospel, requiring Repentance, Faith,
and Holy life, are altogether necessary to Salvation. For the Lord Jesus
Christ, the Son of God, who is the only Savior of lost men, has plainly
declared that he will not save any but upon these terms, And therefore though
This is a faithful saying and worthy of all acceptance, 1 Timothy 1.15.
that Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners: yet it is no less
certain, that He shall at length be revealed from Heaven, with his mighty
Angels, in flaming Fire, to take vengeance on them that know not God, and that
obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ; 2 Thessalonians. 1, 7, 8, 9.
who shall be punished with everlasting Destruction from the presence of the
Lord, and from the glory of his power.

Now these things which are so necessary to salvation, are here briefly
comprehended in a short Scripture-Catechism, which therefore I advise thee to
get perfectly by heart. Know the Answers are the very words of Scripture, which
is the very Word of God, on which thou may safely venture thy Soul. And when
thou can readily repeat these words, with the mention of the places of
Scripture where they are to be found, thou will be able to give any man that
asks thee, 1 Pet. 3.15.
a Reason of thy Faith, or Hope, by a ready mention of that Scripture on which
it is grounded.

But that thy Hope may not make thee ashamed, Romans 5.5.
rest not in the bare repeating of these words, and bearing them in thy memory,
but be sure thou know well the meaning of the things required of thee for
thy Salvation, by thy own sense and experience; as of Repentance and
Regeneration or being born of the Spirit, faith in Christ, and Obedience to the
Gospel. Do the things, and so shall thou best know the meaning of the words,
for thy Souls good. To do God's will is the only way to have a saving knowledge
of his word. Joh. 7.17.
If any man (says our Savior) will do his Will, he shall know my Doctrine to
be of God. Act. 3.19.
Repent therefore and be converted; break off thy sins with a hearty sorrow
that thou have thereby offended a good God, and lead a new life: Act. 16.31.
Believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, and trust in him alone for thy Salvation.
Mat. 12.21.
Submit thy self to him, and seriously endeavor to do all those things which
he requires of thee in his word and Gospel, and thou shall be saved, and
inherit life Eternal.

What Duties God requires of thee, whether as a Child or a Servant, I have
plainly showed thee from the word of God* Read thy Duty often, and never sail to
do it. This is the way to bring down God's Blessing upon thee, and to become
happy in his favor.

When thou come to be of a competent Age (that of sixteen years is the
ordinary time) prepare thy self for the right receiving of the Blessed
Sacrament of the Lord's Supper. Know that in thy Baptism a solemn Covenant was
sealed, whereby thou wast obliged to forsake the World, the Flesh, and the
Devil, and to believe in God, Jack. 1.74, 75.
and serve him, in Holiness and Righteousness all the days of thy life. Now
know, if the Vanities and Pleasures of this world, gratifying thy natural
appetites and Inclinations, have drawn off thy mind and heart from the
Remembrance, Love and Service of God, thou have broken thy Baptismal vow. For
in stead of forsaking the World for God, thou have forsaken God for the world,
and thereby gratified thine own Flesh and Satan, to the certain hazard and
hindrance of the salvation of thy Soul. But in the Holy Sacrament of the Lord's
Supper, God is pleased to invite thee to renew thy Covenant with Him, for thy
Reinstatement in thy forfeited Felicity, and thy more firm establishment in a
happy state of Grace and Salvation. For herein upon thy hearty Repentance, and
steadfast Faith in Christ, he will seal unto thee the free and full Pardon of
all thy past Sins, and a Right to all the Privileges of the Covenant of Grace,
and Felicities of the Kingdom of Glory.

Oh think it a happy Opportunity, wherein thou may begin the world anew with
God and be in as fair a State of Favor with him, and have as firm a Hope of
Happiness in Heaven, as if thou had never sinned against him. For the Blood
of Christ is exhibited in its Virtue in that Sacrament, Mat. 26.28.
to cleanse thee from all Sin; 1 John 1.7. Isa. 1.18.
so that though thy Sins were as Scavlet or Crimson, thy Soul shall become as
white as wool, or snow in Salmen, in the sight of God. And moreover hereby thou
may expect a Communication of those graces and comforts of the Spirit of God,
which may enable thee to that cheerful obedience to his holy Commands, which
will fit thee for the fruition of all the Privileges of the Covenant of Grace,
and prepare thee for all the Felicities of the Kingdom of Glory.

That thou may not fail of these inestimable Benefits, do not neglect this
Blessed Ordinance; but when thou have an opportunity to receive it, seriously
prepare thy self for it. For this purpose get by heart the Catechism for
Communicants. And when the time of the Administration approaches, withdraw thy
self from all Company into thy private chamber, or some convenient place, and
there setting thy self as in the sight and presence of Almighty God, seriously
set upon the necessary work of Self-Examination.

This I have made very plain and casie to thee, in that Pattern or example of
it which I have set before thee. Read it only with a serious attention and
Self-application, and thy work is done. For hereby thou may clearly discern
thy Spiritual State, which is the great end of Self-examination. And when
hereby thou discoverest thy Sins and Defects, humbly and heartily bewail them
before God, and earnestly beg Mercy and Grace, steadfastly resolving to lead a
new Life, and to honor God by a better obedience for the time to come. This
thou may do in the use of that Confession and Prayer, which is here fitted
for that purpose. Fall down on thy knees therefore, and with all the
seriousness, humility, and devotion thou can, make thy Confession and Prayer
to God; and so may thou with safety and comfort go to the Lords Table, that
the Pardon of thy sins, and the Promises of the Covenant may be sealed up to
thy Soul, in the Blood of thy Savior; and that all thy Defects and Wants may
be supplied from his abundant Grace; and so thou may be furnished with
strength for his service, and filled with comfort and Joy in the hopes of his
Salvation.

Having thus seriously engaged thy self in a holy course of life, persevere in
it to the end. Know now, Heaven is before thee, Hell behind thee: it is woeful
to draw back to Perdition; and therefore persevere to the saving of thy Soul.
Heb. 10.39.


To this end be instant in Prayer, Romans 12.12.
and endeavor to make a constant Progress in Piety, to grow in knowledge and
Grace, 2 Pet. 3.18.
whereby thou will daily make a nearer approach to the Kingdom of Glory.

Let no day pass without Prayer. Consider in the morning, it was God that kept
thee the last night; and if he do not keep thee and sustain thee, thou can
not live another day. And why should he keep thee, if thou will not praise him
for thy preservation, nor pray to him to preserve thee? Go not out then without
Prayer, lest God be angry; and either cut off thy life from the Earth, or shut
thee out of Heaven.

At night, kneel down on thy knees to pray, before thou lie down on thy bed
to sleep; lest presuming to sleep in the guilt of sin, thou should awake in
the flames of Hell. Make thy peace with God therefore by a hearty sorrow for
the sins of that day, with an earnest Prayer for pardon. So may thou lie down
in peace, Psalm. 4.8.
and sleep in safety, under God's protection. But still think this night, this
day may be my last, and so demean thy self as if at the end thereof thou wast
to appear before God in judgment.

For thy help in this holy course I have here furnished thee with certain Forms
of Prayer and praise: do thou add Spirit and life to them by offering them up
daily with a holy fervor of affection to God. The tongue may repeat the words,
but it is the heart must make the Prayer. For that is no Prayer to God, which is
not offered up with a holy motion, a pious affection of the heart and Soul of
man. Pray then that thou may have grace to live well, and then live as thou
prayest, and live for ever.

And that thou may so live here, as that thou may for ever live with God
in glory, diligently observe those Rules of good life, which I have given thee
out of the word of God. Read them often on the Lord's Days, and especially on
those days on which thoureceivest the Holy-Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, and
therein renewest thy resolution and obligation to honor God by a Holy life.
Live according to these Rules: carefully shun every known sin, and neglect no
known Duty, that thou may be able to say (with St. Paul) herein do I
exercise my self to have always a conscience void of off ence, Act. 24.16.
hoth toward God, and toward men.

And that thou may proceed in this path of Piety with more pleasure, I have
furnished out a short Banquet for thy Entertainment with Holy Delight, in a
brief Collection of some few pieces of Divine Poems, which may serve to
imbellish the memory, and delight the mind.

Having thus begun, and proceeded, Heb. 6.4.
endeavor to go on to Perfection. Not to go forward still in Gods way, is to
go backward. The path of the just is as the shining light, Prove. 4.18.
that shines more and more unto the perfect day. To this end daily read the
Holy Scriptures, wherein God has revealed his will to man, unfolded the
mysteries of Grace, and made plain before us the path to eternal Life and
Glory. This is God's Book, and therefore to be read with Reverence, and
preferred before all other Writings in the world. On the Lord's Day especially
spend some time in reading God's word. And when thou take this Blessed Book
into thy hand, lift up thy heart to Heaven, and pray for the Illumination of
the Spirit, Ephesians. 1.17, 18. Act. 8.30.
that thou may understand what thou read Meditate on what thou have read
and heard, and endeavor to turn it into practice, and improve it to thy
comfort and joy in the hope of glory.

And thus I have showed thee the Way to Heaven, a plain path to an eternal
Paradise. If thou love thy soul, delay not to enter into it, and walk in it.
Doubtless there are thousands of young people, who sometimes resolved to repent
and lead new lives: but being loath so soon to leave off the Pleasures of sin,
alas! they were surpised with Death, and must now suffer eternal pains in
Hell. Be warned; be wise: be good betimes, and be happy for ever.

Assure thy self by setting with seriousness upon the Practice of true Piety,
thou shall not loose the pleasures of life, but exchange them for purer and
sweeter. So much joy springs up in a truly pious Soul, in the sense of God's
Favor, and in the hopes of Heaven, that it far exceeds all the Pleasures and
Delights of this world; and the delight of welldoing surpasses the pleasures of
sin, Heb. 11.25. Prove. 14.9. and 10.23. Psalm. 40.8. Eccl. 7.6.
that are but for a season. They are Fools that make a mock and sport of sin:
but it is the speech of a serious Saint, I delight to do thy will, O my God!
yea, thy Law is within my heart. The laughter of a fool (and such is the
Sinner, that laughs while he stands on the brink of Hell and Destruction) is
but as the crackling of thorns under apot; it is but a flash of vain mirth,
which will end in bitter pangs of long-abiding Sorrow. What reason has he to
laugh here, that shall weep and mourn in Hell? But the joy of a good man is as
the Daybreak of eternal Bliss: Psalm 34.8. 1 Pet. 2, 3.
Oh taste, and see then that the LORD is good and gracious. He that may freely
drink pure wine, will never be persuaded to quench his thirst with puddlewater.
He that pursues the pleasures of Lust and sin, seeks to quench his thirst at a
vile puddle; when in the Practice of true Piety, he might daily drink of the
wine of Paradise. Such are those holy Comforts and Joys which spring up in a
pious Soul, in communion with God and Christ. Certainly a Holy life is the
happiest life of man on earth, and the certain way to everlasting happiness in
Heaven. Thus live then, and when thou die, be happy for ever. Jude v. 24, 25.


Now unto him that is able to keep thee from falling, and to present thee
faultless before the presence of his glory with exceeding joy, to the only
wise God our Savior, be Glory and Majesty, Dominion and power, both now and
ever. Amen.

The TITLES of the several TRACTS, or PARTS of this Book.
I. A brief Compendium of Scripture-Catechism, exhibiting the first principles
of the Oracles of God.

II. The Scripture-Monitor, declaring the duties of Children and Servants.

III. A Catechism for Communicants, for the Instruction of those who are to
receive the Sacrament of the Lords Supper.

IV. Self-Examination; showing the Qualification of a worthy Communicant.

V. Christian Devotion, in Forms of Prayer and praise, for Children and
Servants.

VI. Christian Conversation, or directions for leading a good Life.

VII. Apples of Gold in Pictures of Silver; or some choice Pieces of Divine
Poesy, for the Use and Delight of young people.

A Brief Compendium of Scripture-Catechism: Exhibiting The first PRINCIPLES of
the OR ACLES of GOD Heb. 5.12.
.
1. Of God.
Q. WHAT must you do that you may be happy for ever?

A. Know God, and serve him; 1 Chronicles. 28.9.

Q. What is God?

A. God is a Spirit, and the Father of Spirits; John 4.24. with Heb. 12.9.

Q. But what is he for Excellency and Dominion?

A. The King eternal, immortal, invisible, the only wise God; 1 Timothy 1.17.

Q. Are there more Gods than One?

A. There is but one God; 1 Cor. 8.6.

Q. But how many Persons are there in the Godhead?

A. There are three; 1 John 5.7.

Q. By what names are they called?

A. The Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost; Mat. 28.19.

Q. Are these three but one God?

A. These Three are one; 1 John 5.7.

Q. By what name has this one true God manifested himself to men?

A. By the name of God Almighty; Exo. 6.3.

Q. Is he not as well Merciful as Mighty?

A. The LORD is Merciful and Gracious; Psalm. 103.8.

Q. What is he for Counsel and Execution?

A. Great in Counsel, and Mighty in work; Jer. 32.19.

Q. What great work has God done?

A. God made the World; and all things therein; Acts 17.24.

Q. Is he then Lord of all?

A. He is Lord of Heaven and Earth; Acts 17.24.

Q. And does he govern all as King?

A. His Kingdom rules over all; Psalm. 103.19.

Q. Is it he then that has made us, and all men?

A. It is he that has made us, and not we our selves; Ps. 100.3.

Q. And are we all sustained in life by him?

A. In him we live, and move, and have our being; Acts 17.28.

Q. And does he give us all we have?

A. He gives to all Life, and Breath, and all things; Acts 17.25.

2. Of Man.
Q. OF what did God at first form man

A. The LORD God formed man of the dust of the ground; Genesis 2.7.

Q. In what likeness did he make him?

A. God created man in his own Image; Genesis 1.27.

Q. Wherein was man made like to God?

A. In Knowledge, Righteousness, and true Holiness; Col. 3.10. with Ephesians. 4.24.

Q. When God had thus made man, where did he put him?

A. Into the Garden of Eden; Genesis 2.15.

Q. And what Charge and Command did he give him?

A. Of the Tree of the knowledge of Good and Evil thou shall not eat; Genesis 2.17.

Q. Did he notwithstanding eat of it?

A. He did eat; Genesis 3.6.

Q. Were many the worse for this fault of one?

A. By one man's disobedience many were made Sinners; Romans 5.19.

Q. What evil came upon all men hereby?

A. By the offense of one judgment came upon all men to Condemmation; Romans 5.
18.

Q. Shall all men then, being thus condemned, everlastingly perish?

A. There is no Condemnation to them that are in Christ- Jesus; Romans 8.1.

3. Of Christ.
Q. Who is this Jesus?

A. Jesus is the Son of God; 1 John 5.5.

Q. And was he sent to be our Savior?

A. The Father sent the Son to be the Savior of the World; 1 John 4.14.

Q. And did he accordingly come to save us?

A. Jesus Christ came into the world to save Sinners; 1 Timothy 1.15.

Q. After what manner did he come into the world?

A. He took upon him the form of a servant, and was made in the likeness of
men; Phil. 2.7

Q. Is he not true God?

A. He is the true God; 1 John 5.20.

Q. Being true God; how was he made in the likeness of men?

A. Being made of a woman; Gal. 4.4.

Q. What was this woman?

A. A Virgin espoused to a man, whose name was Joseph; Luke 1.27.

Q. And what was the Virgin's Name?

A. The Virgins Name was Mary; Luke 1.27.

Q. Being a Virgin, how came she to be with child?

A. By the Holy Ghost; Mat. 1.18.

Q. And where was he Born of her?

A. Jesus was born in Bethlehem; Mat. 2.1.

Q. What was this Bethlehem?

A. The City of David; Luke 2.11.

Q. Being thus made man, what did he for man's Salvation?

A. He humbled himself, and became obedient unto death, even the death of the
Cross; Phil. 2.8.

Q. What was done to him after his death?

A. He was buried; 1 Cor. 15.4.

Q. But did he not rise again?

A. He rose again the third day; 1 Cor. 15.4.

Q. And whether did he then go?

A. He was received up into Heaven, and sat on the right hand of God; Mark.
16.19.

Q. What mean you by his sitting on the right hand of God?

A. God has highly exalted him; Phil. 2.9.

Q. What power has he given him?

A. All Power is given to him in Heaven and in Earth; Mat. 28.18.

Q. Is he then fully able to save lost Sinners?

A. He is able to save them to the uttermost that come to God by him; Heb. 7.25.

Q. And is there no Salvation in any other?

A. Neither is there Salvation in any other; Acts 4.12.

Q. Who shall be saved by him?

A. He that Believes, and is Baptized, shall be sased: but he that Believes
not, shall be damned; Mark 16.16.

4. Of Duties.
Q. IF Believing be so necessary to Salvation, tell me how we must come by this
Faith?

A. Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the word of God; Romans 10.17.

Q. What call you the word of God?

A. The Holy Scriptures, which are able to make me wise to Salvation; 2 Timothy
3.15.

Q. Is Baptism ordinarily necessary to Salvation?

A. Except a man be born of Water, and the Spirit, he cannot enter into the
Kingdom of God; Joh. 3.5.

Q. What mean you by being born of water and the Spirit?

A. The washing of Regeneration, and the renewing of the Holy ghost; Tit. 2.5.

Q. Does the promise of the Holy ghost, which is the ground of Baptism, belong
to us that believe only, or to our children also?

A. The promise is to you, and to your children; Acts 2.39.

Q. In whose name is baptism to be administered?

A. In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost; Mat.
28.19.

Q. How should we walk who have been baptized?

A. We should walk in newness of life; Rom 6.4.

Q. How should we walk in newness of life?

A. Denying ungodliness and worldly Lusts, we should live soberly, righteously,
and godly in this present world; Tit. 2.12.

Q. That we may so live here then, as that we may enter into life eternal in
the end, what must we do?

A. Keep the Commandments; Mat. 19.17.

Q. Which is the first and great Commandment of the Law?

A. Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy Soul,
and with all thy mind; Mat. 22.37.

Q. Which is the second that is like to it?

A. Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self; Mat. 22.39.

Q. But what need is there of our Obedience? Did not Christ by his sufferings
become the Savior of all Sinners?

A. He became the Author of eternal Salvation to all them that obey him; Heb.
5.9.

Q. What has he in his Gospel said to us, to engage our Obedience unto him?

A If ye love me, keep my Commandments; Joh. 14, 15.

Q. What special Commandment has he given us?

A. To love one another; 1 John 3.23.

Q. And what charge has he given us concerning our enemies?

A. Love your Enemies, do good to them that hate you, Luke 6.27.

Q. What must he do that will become Christ's Disciple indeed?

A. Deny himself, and take up his Cross daily, and follow Him; Luke 9.23.

Q. And what has he said to encourage us to his Service?

A. Where I am, there shall also my Servant be: and if any man serve me, him
will my Father honor; Joh. 12.26.

Q. Besides Baptism for our admission into the Church, what are we enjoined for
our holding Communion with the Church?

A. To eat the Lord's Supper; 1 Cor. 11.20.

Q. What charge has Christ given us concerning this?

A. This do in remembrance of me; 1 Cor. 11.24.

Q. Do not we hereby show forth the Death of Christ?

A. As often as ye eat this Bread, and drink this Cup, ye do show the Lord's
Death till he come; Cor 1.11.26.

Q. That a man may rightly receive this Holy Supper, what must he do?

A. Let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of that Bread, and drink of
that Cup; 1 Cor. 11.28.

5. Of Privileges.
Q. WHAT special Benefits have we by Christ upon Believing?

A. Being justified by Faith, we have peace with God; Romans 5.1.

Q. But when we have offended God, what must we do, that our sins may be
forgiven us?

A. Repent and be converted; Acts 3.19.

Q. But what has our Savior said, shall become of us if we repent not?

A. Except ye Repent ye shall all -- perish; Luke 13.3.

Q. What other Benefits besides Remission of Sins, do we receive by Christ?

A. The Adoption of Sons; Gal. 4, 5.

Q. And what do we receive hereupon?

A. The Spirit of Adoption, whereby we cry Abba Father, Romans 8.15.

Q. And does God hear our prayers?

A. If we ask any thing according to his Will, he hears us; 1 John 5.14.

Q. That you may obtain all good things then at his hand, what must you do?

A. Watch and pray; Mat, 26.4.

Q. That having done all these things, you may not fall short of eternal life,
what must you do?

A. Be faithful unto death; Rev. 2.10.

Q. Must you then and all men die?

A. It is appointed unto men once to die; Heb. 9.27.

Q. But shall not the dead rise again?

A. As in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive; 1 Cor. 15.22.

Q. Shall the dead then be raised by Christ?

A. All that are in the graves shall hear his voice, and shall come forth; Joh.
5.28, 29.

Q. When the dead are thus raised, what shall we all do?

A. We shall all stand before the Judgment Seat of Christ; Romans 14.10.

Q. How shall he then Judge all men?

A. He will render to every man according to his deeds; Romans 2.6.

Q. Shall not men then be called to account for their words?

A. Of every idle word that men shall speak, they shall give account in the day
of Judgment; Mat. 2.36.

Q. What will God bring into Judgment at that day, besides men's words and
deeds, which have been openly spoken and done?

A. Every secret thing whether it be good or evil; Eccl. 12.14.

Q. Whether shall the Righteous go thereupon, and what shall become of the
wicked?

A. These shall go away into everlasting punishment; but the Righteous into
Life Eternal; Mat. 25.46.

Rev. 22.20.21. He which testifies these things, says, surely I come quickly.
Amen. Even so come Lord Jesus. The Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you
all. Amen.

THE Scripture-Monitor. Declaring
The Duties of children and servants, which are required of them by the express
Commands of God himself, in his Word and Gospel.

The Duties of Children.
COME, Psalm. 34.11.
ye Children, hearken unto me: I will teach you the fear of the Lord. I will
plainly tell you what the God that made you requires of you, If ye mind not
these things to do them you despise the Word of God which requires them. And
remember, Whosoever despises the World shall be destroyed: but he that fears the
Commandment shall be rewarded; Acts, 17.31. Eccl. 12.14.
Prove. 13.13. And there is a Day of Judgment appointed, wherein God will
certainly call you to account for these things, and either punish your
Contempt, or reward your Obedience.

Now if you will indeed hearken to the Voice of God, Psalm. 81.8. Mat. 7.21.
hearken to the Voice of God, and obey his Will (as you must do, if you would
go to Heaven when you die) These are the Things which you must do.

I. You must honor your Parents, carrying your self reverently toward them.
For it is said,

Honor thy Father, and thy Mother, Exo. 20.12. Deuteronomy. 5.16.
(which is the first Commandment with Promise) that it may be well with thee,
and thou may live long on the Earth. Ephesians. 6.2, 3.

II. You must obey your Parents, readily doing what they bid you to do, unless
it be any Thing which you know is forbidden of God. For it is said,

Children obey your Parents in the Lord: for this is right. Ephesians. 6.1. And
again, Children, obey your Parents in all things: for this is well-pleasing
unto the Lord. Col. 3.20.

And remember what further Charge is given you, Do all things without
Murmurings and Disputings, Phil. 2.24. And know, If you may not murmur,
youhnust not rebel, Absalom rebelled against his Father, and came to an
untimely End. 2 Samuel 15.14. with Chap. 18.14.

III. You must hearken to the Instruction of your Father and Mother, and be
willing to be taught by them. Says Solomon to his Son,

My Son, hear the Instruction of thy Father, and forsake not the Law of thy
Mother. For they shall be an Ornament of Grace unto thy Head, and Chains about
thy Neck. That is, the Virtues they teach you, will make you more lovely in the
eyes of all men, than the richest Jewels and Ornaments.

IV. When they chastize you for your faults, you must bear this Correction with
patience and humble Submission; and amend what is amiss. For says the Apostle,

We had Fathers of our Flesh, which corrected us, and we gave them reverence.
Heb. 12.9.

You must know, if they do not correct you for your faults, they do not indeed
love you, For, He that spares his Rod, hates his Son: but he that loves him
chasteneth him betimes; Prove. 13.24.

For if they should let you go on in Sin without Correction, you might at
length fall into Hell, and be destroyed without Remedy. And therefore God has
said,

Withold not Correction from the Child: for if thou beatest him with the Rod
he shall not die. Thou shall beat him with the Rod, and deliver his Soul from
Hell. Prove. 23.13, 14. And is it not better that your Parents should chastize
you for your Faults with a gentle Rod, than that God should deliver you up for
your Crimes into the hand of the Devil, to torture you with a flaming scourge
in the dark Mansions of Hell for ever? Its surely better for you to ask
Forgiveness for your Faults and to amend what ever is amiss, than to murmur
against them that correct you for your Good. It is not against them you murmur
but against God, who has commanded them to chastise you, when you do amiss,
that you may do so no more.

And there fore if a Son was stubborn, and would neither hearken to the
Admonition of his Father or Mother, nor be reclaimed from his ill Courses by
their Correction, he was by Gods appointment, under the Law of Moses, to be put
to Death. For it is said,

If a man have a stubborn and rebellions Son, which will not obey the Voice of
his Mother, and that when they have chasten'd him, will not hearken unto them:
then shall his Father and his Mother lay hold on him, and bring him out unto
the Elders of his City, and unto the gate of his Place: and they shall say unto
the Elders of his City, This our Son is stubborn and rebellious; he will not
obey our Voice: he is a Glutton and a Drunkard. And all the men of his City
shall stone him with stones that he die: so shall thou put evil away from among
you, and all Israel shall hear and fear. Deuteronomy. 21.18. -- 21.

Though this Law does not take place amongst us, God is no less offended with
such stubbornness of Children now, than he was then: and therefore tho? such a
one may escape a Temporal Death, he cannot escape Eternal Damnation.

V. You must learn to know God, and be careful to serve him. Said David to
Solomon.

And thou Solomon my Son, Know thou the God of thy Father, and serve Him with a
perfect Heart, and a willing Mind: for the LORD searches all Hearts, and
understands all the Imaginations of the thoughts: If thou seek Him. He will
be sound of thee; but if thou forsake Him, He will cast thee off for ever. 1
Chro. 28.9, 10.

VI. You must not mock God's Ministers; but observe them with due Reverence.
Remember what befell the Children of Bethel, who mocked the Prophet Elisha. For,

As he was going up by the way, there came forth little Children out of the
City, and mocked him, and said unto him, Go up thou bald-head, go up thou
bald-head. And he turned back and looked on them, and cursed them in the Name
of the LORD: and there came forth two She-Bears out of the Wood, and tare
forty and two Children of them, 2 Kin. 2.23, 24.

VII. You must not mock your Parents, nor despise them; no, not in their old
Age; much less curse them, or strike them: but cover their Infirmities, and do
all you can to preserve their Honor.

Hearken unto thy Father, that begat thee; and despise not thy Mother, when she
is old. Prove. 23.22.

Remember Eli's two Sons were wicked, and they despised their Father in his old
Age, not regarding his Reproof, and God destroyed them both. For it is said,

Eli was very old, and heard all that his Sons did unto all Israel, and how
they laywith the women, that assembled at the Door of the Tabernacle of the
Congregation. And he said unto them, Why do ye such things? For I hear of your
evil Doings by all this people. Nay, my Sons; it is no good Report that I hear;
ye make the LORD's people to transgress. If one man sin against another, the
Judge shall judge him. But if a man sin against the LORD, who shall entreat for
him? Notwithstanding they hearkened not to the Voice of their Father, because
the LORD would slay them. 1 Samuel 2.22.25.

And accordingly it came to pass. For the Philistines sought, and Israel was
smitten, and they fled every man into his Tent: and there was a very great
slaughter; for there fell of Israel thirty Thousand footmen. And the Ark of God
was taken; and the two Sons of Eli, Hophni and Phinehas were slain, 1 Samuel
4.10, 11.

To despise the Admonition and Reproof of your Parents is a great Sin: but to
mock at your Father or Mother is a greater. And therefore it is said,

The Eye of him that mocketh at his Father, and despises to obey his Mother,
the Ravens of the Valley shall pick it out, and the young Eagles shall eat it
Prove. 30.17.

It is written in the Law, Cursed be he that sets light by his Father or his
Mother: and all the people shall say; Amen. Dent. 27.15.

And, every one that curses his Father, or his Mother, shall surely be put to
Death: he has cursed his Father, or his Mother; his Blood shall be upon hun.
Lev. 20.9.

And again, Whosoever curses his Father or his Mother, his Lamp shall be put out
in obsecure darkness. Prove. 20.20. That is, he shall have no Child to call him
Father, and so dying without Children, his Memorial shall perish, and his Name
shall be blotted out from under Heaven.

And, He that smites his Father, or his Mother, shall surely be put to Death.
Exo. 21.15.

Remember how the Sons of Noah carried themselves toward him, and take Notice
why that one was Cursed, and the other Blessed. As it is said.

Noah began to be an Husbandman, and he planted a Vineyard, and he drunk of the
wine and was drunken, and he was uncovered within his Tent. And Ham, the Father
of Canaan, saw the Nakedness of his Father, and told his two Brethren without.
and Shem and Japheth took a Garment, and laid it upon both their shoulders, and
went backward, and they saw not their Fathers Nakedness. And Noah awoke from
his Wine, and knew what his younger Son had done unto him. And he said, Cursed
be Canaan, a Servant of Servants shall he be unto his Brethren. And he said,
Blessed be the LORD God of Shem; and Canaan shall be his Servant. God shall
enlarge Japheth, and he shall dwell in the Tents of Shem. Genesis 9.20 -- 27.

VIII. If your Parents fall into wants you must be ready to relieve and support
them. Thus the young Storks feed and sustain the old ones.

Thus in the years of Famine, Joseph nourished his Father, and his Brethren,
and all his Fathers Household with Bread, Genesis 47.12.

Our Savior thus blames the Pharisees; Ye say; If a man shall say to his
Father or Mother, It is Corban, that is to say, a Gift [to the Temple] by
whatsoever thou might be profited by me, he shall be free [from an
Obligation to relieve them.] And ye suffer him no more to do ought for his
Father or his Mother, making the Word of God of none effect through your
Tradition. Mark 7.11. -- 13.

IX. You must not wrong your Parents, by taking away any thing of theirs
without their Consent.

For, Whosoever robs his Father, or his Mother, and says it is no Trangression,
the same is the Companion of a Destroyer. Prove. 28.24.

X. You must be kindly affectioned toward your Brethren and Sisters. There
must be no strife nor Anger amongst you, and you must not call one another by
any bad Names. For says the Psalmist,

Behold how good, and how pleasant it is for Brethren to dwell together in
Unity! Psalm. 133.1.

And Abram said unto Lot, Let there be no Strife, I pray thee, between me and
thee; for we are Brethren. Genesis 13.18.

Said Joseph to his Brethren (whom he treated with great Kindness
notwithstanding their ill usage of him) See that ye sall not out by the way.
Genesis 45.24.

Mind the words of our Blessed Savior Jesus Christ. I say unto you that
whosoever is angry with his Brother without a Cause, shall be in Danger of the
Judgment; and whosoever shall say to his Brother, Raca [that is, Thou vain or
empty fellow] shall be in danger of the Council: but whosoever shall say, Thou
Fool, shall be in Danger of Hellfire. Mat. 5.22.

Thus, Children, you see your Duties. Now be it your Care to do them: And then
you shall not only be beloved of your Parents, but God himself will love you,
and bless you, and give you the Kingdom of Heaven for your Inheritance.

The Duties of Servants.
NOW you that are Servants, Know, if you will fear God and serve him, God will
accept you and honor you; He will take you to be His Sons and Daughters, and
great shall your Reward be in Heaven. But if not; it will not be possible for
you to escape His Wrath and Hellfire.

Know then, These are the Duties which God in his Word requires from you.

I. You must honor your Masters, giving a due Respect to them. For says the
Scripture,

A Son honors his Father, and a Servant his Master. Mal. 1.6. And therefore,

Let as many Servants as are under the Yoke, count their own Masters worthy of
all Honor; that the Name of God and his Doctrine be not blasphemed. And they
that have believing Masters, let them not despise them, because they are
Brethren; but rather do them Service, because they are faithful, and beloved,
Partakers of the Benefit. 1 Timothy 6.1.2.

II. You must readily obey their lawful Commands, without Gainsaying or
Contradiction. For the Gospel requires Servants to be obedient to their own
Masters, and to please them well in all Things: not answering again. Tit. 2.9.
Again says the Apostle,

Servants be obedient to them that are your Masters according to the Flesh,
with Fear, and Trembling, in singleness of your Heart, as unto Christ. Ephesians. 6.5.

III. You must be subject to them, and serve them diligently and heartily. Yea,
though your Masters are of a froward Disposition, and hardly pleased, you must
notwithstanding be subject to them. For says the Apostle,

Servants be subject to your Masters with all Fear, not only to the good and
gentle, but also to the froward, 1 Pet. 2.18.

And whatsoever ye do, do it heartily, as unto the Lord, and not unto men;
knowing that of the Lord ye shall receive the Reward of Inheritance: For ye
serve the Lord Christ. Col. 3.23, 24.

VI. You must be faithful in your trust, and not do them the least Wrong in
any thing.

For he that does wrong, shall receive for the wrong which he has done; and
there is no respect of Persons. Col. 3.25.

Servants therefore must be careful to preserve their Masters Right, not
purloyning, but showing all good Fidelity, that they may adorn the Doctrine of
God our Savior in all things. Tit. 2.10.

V. You must be very careful and diligent to do your Masters work and Will, as
well when he is absent, as when he is present. For God in the Gospel requires
Servants to serve their Masters,

Not with Eye-Service, as men-pleasers, but as the Servants of Christ. Ephesians. 6.6.

Remember when you are not under your Masters Eye, the Eye of God is upon you,
who will call you to Account for whatsoever you do. Eccl. 12.14.

VI. You must carefully shun ill Company, and ill Courses; as Fighting and
Quarrelling, Drinking and Revelling in your Masters Absence, especially if you
have any chief Place or Charge in the Family.

Who then is that faithful and wise Servant (says our Blessed Savior) whom
his Lord has made Ruler over his Household, to give them Meat in due Season?
Blessed is that Servant whom his Lord when he comes, shall find so d^ing. Of a
truth I say unto you, that he will make him Ruler over all that he has. But if
that evil Servant shall say in his heart, My Lord delayeth his Coming, and
shall begin to smite his Fellow Servants, and to eat and drink, and to be
Drunken, or to eat and drink with the Drunken: the Lord of that Servant [even
his Lord that is in Heaven] shall come in a Day when he looks not for him,
and at an Hour that he is not aware of; and shall cut him asunder, [or margin
cut him off] and appoint him his Portion with the Hypocrites: there shall be
weeping and gnashing of Teeth. Mat. 24.45. -- 51. with Luke 12.42. -- 46.

VII. If ye are rebuked, buffeted or beaten by your Masters, though it be without
just cause, you must take it patiently.

For this is thank worthy, if a man for Conscience Sake toward God, endure
Grief suffering wrongfully. For what Glory is it, if, when ye be buffeted for
your Faults, ye shall take it patiently? But if when ye do well and suffer for
it, ye take it patiently, this is acceptable with God. For even hereunto were
you called: because Christ also suffered for us, leaving us an Example that ye
should follow his steps: who did no Sin, neither was guile found in his Mouth:
who when he was reviled reviled not again; when he suffered he threatened not;
but committed himself to him that judges righteously. 1 Pet 2.19. -- 23.

Thus you now know your Duty: be careful to do it; and so in serving your
Masters, you shall serve God; and the Reward you shall receive from Him, will
be infinitely better to you than the wages you expect from them. Know, it is no
small Glory to be a good Servant. A Christian Servant is the Lord's Freeman.
Every Star shines in its own Sphaere. A good Servant is in God's Eye more
honorable and glorious than a bad King. It Is a higher Honor, a greater Glory
to serve God, than to Command over men. If in the Discharge of the Duty of your
Place, you faithfully serve Christ here, 2 Timothy 2.12.
you shall reign with him in Heaven, to whom be Glory for ever and ever, Gal.
1.5.
Amen.

A Catechism for Communicants: WHEREIN The Nature and Use of the Sacraments of
the New Testiament are explained, for the Instruction of those who are of
competent Age, to receive the Holy Sacrament of the Lord's Supper.
Q. WHAT does God require of man in Order to his Salvation and eternal
Happiness?

A. Deuteronomy. 32.46.47.
The serious Exercise of the true Religion.

Q. Which is that true Religion, which is the only sure way to Salvation?

A. 2 Thessalonians. 2, 13, 14, 15,
The Christian Religion, which was instituted by Christ himself, and is
prescribed in his Holy Gospel.

Q. What does the Christian Religion comprehend?

A. Faith, Obedience, Prayer, and Sacraments.

Q. What is the Sum of your Faith?

A. I believe in God, the Father Almighty, etc.

Q. How must you manifest the Truth of your Faith? Jam. 2.18


A. By Obedience.

Q. What is the Rule of your Obedience?

A. The Law of God, which is briefly comprehended in Ten Commandments. Deuteronomy.
27.9, 10. Romans 3.31. Deuteronomy. 10.4.


Q. Rehearse them.

A. God spoke all these Words, saying, I am the LORD thy God, etc. Exodus 20.1
-- 17.

Q. Have you kept all these Commandments?

A. 1 John 1.8. Exodus 36.27.
No, I have not; neither can I so keep them as I ought, without the help of
God's Grace.

Q. What must you then do?

A. Hos. 14.2.
Earnestly pray to God for pardon, and Grace.

Q. What is the most excellent Pattern of your Prayers?

A. The Lord's Prayer.

Q. Rehearse it.

A. Our Father, which art in Heaven, etc. Mat. 6.9 -- 13.

Q. In whose Name and Mediation must you make your Addresses to God in your
Prayer?

A. Joh. 16.23, 24. 1 Timothy 2.5. Mat. 21.22. Jam. 1.6. Romans 12.14. Jum. 5.16
In the Name of our only Mediator, Jesus Christ.

Q. But how must you pray that you may prevail?

A. I must pray in Faith, with Fervency of spirit.

Q. What is the Ground of your Faith?

A. The Word and Promises of God.

Q. Has God afforded you any special Helps of Faith?

A. Yes, the Sacraments.

Q. What are the Sacraments?

A. Signs of things not seen, Romans 4, 11
Seals of the Covenant of Grace, and visible Pledges of the Performance of all
God's Promises.

Q. Why were they appointed?

A. That Faith might be relieved. by Sight, and Devotion assisted by Sense.

Q. How many Sacraments are there?

A. Only two, Baptism and the Lord's Supper.

Q. Of what special Use are these to us?

A. Acts 2.41 42 1 Cor. 12, 13.
By Baptism we have Admission into the Church, and hold Communion with it in
the Lord's Supper.

Q. But what is their different Use in respect of the Covenant of Grace?

A. By Baptism we enter into Covenant with God, and renew it in the Lord's
Supper.

Q. How else do they differ?

A. Joh. 3.5. and 6.48 -- 58.
Baptism is a Sacrament of our New Birth, and the Lord's Supper of our
spiritual Nourishment and growth in Grace.

Q. How often must we receive these Sacraments?

A. Baptism but once; the Lord's Supper often: for we can be but once born, but
must be often fed.

Q. What must we consider in the Sacraments?

A. The outward Signs, the Things thereby signified, and the spiritual Benefits
thereof.

Q. What is the outward Sign in Baptism?

A. Water. Joh. 3.23. Acts 8.36, 38. Ezekiel. 36.25, 26.


Q. What does the Water in Baptism signify?

A. The renewing Grace and purifying Virtue of the Spirit of God.

Q. What does the washing of the Body with water signify?

A. Acts 22.16.
The cleansing of the Soul from Sin.

Q. What is the Spiritual Benefit of Baptism?

A. A Regeneration, Joh. 3.5;
or a New Birth.

Q. What mean you by Regeneration, or the New Birth?

A. A Change of our Nature, Tit. 3.5. 1 Cor. 6.11.
which being depraved by Sin, is therein renewed by the Spirit of God.

Q. How is Baptism to be administered, and by whom?

A. Mat. 28.19.
By the Ministers of Christ, in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of
the Holy Ghost.

Q. Who are to be Baptized

A. Acts 2.38, 39.
Converts to the Christian Religion, and the Children of Christians

Q. To what are we bound by our Baptism.

A. Romans 6.3 -- 13.
To forsake our Sins, believe in Christ, and lead our Lives according to the
Laws of God, and Rules of the Gospel.

Q. Wherein stands the Lord's Supper, and how is it to be celebrated?

A. Mat. 26.26, 27. Luke 22.19, 20.
In a solemn blessing, breaking, and cating of Bread, and Drinking of Wine,
with Thanksgiving, in Remembrance of Christ.

Q. What is the Intent and Meaning of this?

A. 1 Cor. 11.28.
The setting forth of the Death and sufferings of Christ, whose Body was broken
on the Cross, and his Blood shed for our Sins.

Q. What are the outward Signs in the Lord's Supper?

A. Bread and Wine. Mat. 26.26, 27.28.


Q. What do this signify?

A. The Body and Blood of Christ.

Q. Has Jesus Christ a true Body?

A. Yes; Phil. 3.21.
the same Body which was crucified on Earth, is glorified in Heaven.

Q. Luk 22.19, 20. and 24.39.
Is the Bread in the Sacrament the very Body of Christ, and the Wine his Blood?

A. No; they are but the signs of his Body and Blood, and Pledges of the
Benefits we receive thereby. 1 Cor. 10.16.


Q. What does the breaking of the Bread signify? 1 Cor. 11.24. Gal. 3.1.


A. The breaking of Christ's Body in his Crucifixion.

Q. What does the Minister's giving the Bread and Wine to the Communicants
represent?

A. Christ's giving himself, Luke 22; 19.
with the Benefits of his Body and Blood, to Believers.

Q. What does the receiving, eating, and drunking signify?

A. Our receiving and applying of Christ, Joh. 5.12. and 6.48 -- 58.
and his Benefits to our selves by Faith.

Q. What are the Benefits of this Holy Supper?

A. Mat. 26.28.
Remission of Sins, and Ratification of the New Testament.

Q. What mean you by the New Testament?

A. Heb. 8.6. and 9.15, 16.
The Covenant of Grace under the Evangelical Administration, which is now
established as the last Will and Testament of Jefus Christ, whereby he has
bequeathed unto us an eternal Inheritance.

Q. What follows upon the Ratification of it?

A. Heb. 8.8, 9.10.
An assured Right to all the Blessings of the Covenant, with a renewed
Obligation to Obedience: for herein Christ gives himself with all the Benefits
of his Death to me; and I give my self up to serve him all the Days of my life.

Q. How must you receive this Sacrament?

A. Heb. 12.22 -- 29.
With great Reverence and Devotion, in Remembrance of Christ crucified, who is
herein lively set forth before mine eyes, 1 Cor. 11.24, 25. Gal. 3.1.
as broken, bleeding, dying on the Cross.

Q. But that you may be meet to receive it, and partake of the Benefits
thereof, what must you do?

A. I must examine my self, 1 Cor. 11.28.
concerning my spiritual State.

Q. Herein what must you chiefly inquire after?

A Whether I consent to the Covenant of Grace, lead my life according to the
Law of God, and obey the Commands of the Gospel.

Q. Jer. 31.33. with Heb 8.10.
What is the Tenor of the Covenant of Grace.

A. I will be their God, and they shall be my people.

Q. What does the Law of God require of you?

A. Exodus 20.2, 3, 8, 12.
To acknowledge the true God, and worship him alone as God; to fanctifie the
Sabbath, and honor my Parents.

Q. And what does it forbid?

A. Idolatry, Exodus 20.4, 5, 7, 13 -- 17.
and Abuse of God's Name, Murder, Adultery, Thest, Lying, and coveting what is
another man's.

Q. What does God in the Gospel require of you?

A. Mark 1.15. 1 John 3.23. 2 Pet. 1.7.
Repentance, and Faith; Brotherly Love, and Charity.

Q. In examining your self concerning these Evangelical Graces, what must you
inquire?

A. 2 Cor. 7.10, 11.
Whether I am heartily sorry for all my sins, and steadfastly resolved to lead a
new Life; Gal, 3.21, 22. Romans 15.12. Acts 16.31. 1 Pet. 1.22. and 4.8.
whether I steadfastly believe the Promises of the Gospel, and put my whole
Trust in Christ for my Salvation; whether I unfeignedly love the Children of
God, as my Brethren in Christ, and am in Charity with all men.

Q. But wherein must you exercise this Charity?

A. Mat. 5.44. and 6.14, 15. Romans 12.20, 21. Epb. 4.28. Gal. 6.10.
In loving mine Enemies, in forgiving of Wrongs, in doing Good against Evil, in
releiving (according to my Ability) them that are in want, and doing Good (as I
have opportunity) to all men.

Q. But why are these Graces of Faith, and Brotherly Love, and Charity,
especially required for the right receiving of the Lord's Supper?

A. Mat. 26.28. Luke 24.47. Mat. 18.34. and 6.14.
Because the Blood of Christ is therein exhibited for the Remission of Sins,
and without Repentance there is no Remission; and if we do not from our Hearts
for give them that have trespassed against us (which is an Act of Christian
Charity) God will not forgive our Trespasses against him: And lastly, nothing
can be more necessary than brotherly Love in the Lord's Supper, which is a
Feast of Loves, and the Communion of Saints, 1 Cor. 10.17. Genesis 43.16.
wherein (as the Brethren of Joseph, with him.) we feast with our Elder
Brother, Jesus.

Q. When you have thus examined your self concerning your spiritual State, what
must you further do, that you may rightly receive this Holy Supper?

A. 1 Pet. 5, 6.
I must cast my self down before God, and with Sorrow in my Heart, 1 John 1.9.
make an humble Confession of my Sins, and earnestly implore Mercy in the free
pardon of them in the Blood of my Savior; 1 Thessalonians. 3.10.
I must bewail my weaknesses and wants, and earnestly crave of God those Aids
and Supplies of his Grace, which may enable me to honor him by a Holy
Obedience for the time to come; I must put forth in my Soul the Acts of Faith,
Mat. 5.6.
brotherly Love and Charity, and stir up in my Heart hungring Desires after
Christ, and the Participation of his saving Benefits in his Holy Supper.

Q. Why must you thus examine and prepare your self, before you come to the
Lord's Supper?

A. Lest I should receive it unworthily.

Q. What is the Sin and Danger of unworthy receiving?

A. 1 Cor. 11.27, 28.
He that receives unworthily is guilty of the Body and Blood of the Lord (as
the wicked Jews, Acts 7.52.
who were his Betrayers and Murderers) and eats and Drinks Gr. (...),
rendered in the Marg. Judgment. See v. 30, 31, 32.
Judgment or Damnation to himself, being for this Sin liable to temporal
Afflictions, yea, to eternal Damnation, in the just Judgment of God.

Q. When does a man receive unworthily?

A. When he presumes to come to the Lord's Table in the guilt of any known Sin
unrepented of, or wanting that Faith, Love, and Charity, which are required in
a worthy Receiver.

Q. If the Sin and Danger of unworthy Receiving be so great, is it not safer to
forbear, than to come to the Lord's Table?

A. He that forbears to come to the Lord's Table, incurs a greater guilt and
Danger: for to the guilt that would make him an unworthy Receiver, Luke 22.19.
he adds the Contempt of Christ's Command, and of the Benefits of his Blood, 1
Cor. 10.16.
freely offered to him in this Holy Supper.

Q. What then must you do, that you keep your self clear from this Guilt, and
safe from this Danger?

A. I must be very careful and serious in examining my self, and finding my
self guilty, 1 Cor. 11.28, 31.
I must judge and condemn my self, that I may be graciously acquitted by the
Lord, and accepted as a worthy Receiver.

Q. If you rightly receive this Blessed Sacrament, what Benefit shall you have
thereby?

A. Mat. 26.28.
God will seal to my Soul the Pardon of all my Sins in the Blood of Christ,
with a Right to all the Blessings and Privileges of the Covenant of Grace.

Q. If after you have received this Holy Sacrament, you should return to your
former sins, what will your State and Condition be?

A. Luke 22.20. Heb. 10.28, 29. 2 Pet. 2.20, 21, 22.
Worse than before: For I shall greatly provoke the wrath of God, by the
Breach of a solemn Covenant, ratified with the Blood of Christ.

Q. How must you demean your self then after you have received?

A. 1 John 5.18 Col. 2.6, 7.
I must carefully keep my self from Sin, that Sin especially to which I am most
inclined; and humbly walk with God in the ways of Holiness, Psalm. 18.23.
being diligent in every good Duty.

Q. What will be the Issue of this Holy Course?

A. I shall at length see my Blessed Savior Jesus Christ glorified in Heaven,
1 John 3.2. Joh. 17.22 -- 24.
who was Crucifi^d for me on Earth, and shall for ever live and reign with him
in Glory.

COL. 11.6, 7. As ye have therefore received Christ Jesus the Lord, so walk ye
in Him: rooted and built up in Him, and established in the Faith, as ye have
been taught, abounding therein with Thanksgiving.

If any by reason of the Weakness of their Memory, or want of Ability to read,
cannot learn by Heart the foregoing Catechisin, that they may not be kept from
the Lord's Table, nor come unprepared, I have comprehended the most necessary
things in the following Abridgment. Let such then, when they can repeat the
Creed, the ten Commandments, and the Lord's Prayer, learn this Shorter
Catechism. But if they learn this only at their first Admission, they shall do
well for an Increase of Knowledge, to endeavor to learn the other also, for
their greater Benefit in their after-receiving.

A Shorter Catechism for the Younger Communicants.
Q. WHAT Religion is the only sure way to Salvation?

A. The Christian Religion.

Q. What does the Christian Religion comprehend?

A. Faith, Obedience, Prayer, and Sacraments

Q. What is the Sum of your Faith?

A. I believe in God the Father Almighty, etc.

Q. What is the Rule of your Obedience?

A. The Law of God which is comprehended in Ten Commandments.

Q. Rehearse them.

A. God spoke all these Words, etc. Exo. 20.1 -- 17.

Q. What is the Pattern of your Prayers?

A. The Lord's Prayer.

Q. Rehearse it.

A. Our Father, which art in Heaven, etc. Mat. 6.9 -- 13.

Q. What are the Sacraments?

A. Seals of the Covenant of Grace.

Q. What is the Tenor of the Covenant of Grace?

A. I will be their God, and they shall be my People.

Q. How many Sacraments are there?

A. Only two; Baptism and the Lord's Supper.

Q. Of what Use are these to us?

A. By Baptism we enter into Covenant with God, and renew it in the Lord's
Supper.

Q. How else do they differ?

A. Baptism is a Sacrament of our New Birth; the Lord's Supper of our Spiritual
Nourishment and Growth in Grace.

Q. How often must we receive them?

A. Baptism but once, the Lord's Supper often: for we can be but once born, but
must be often fed.

Q. What must we consider in the Sacraments?

A. The outward Signs, the Things thereby signified, and the spiritual Benefits
thereof.

Q. What is the outward Sign in Baptism?

A. Water.

Q. What does the water in Baptism signify?

A. The Grace of God's Spirit.

Q. What does the washing of the Body with water signify?

A. The cleansing of the Soul from Sin.

Q. What is the Benefit of Baptism?

A. Regeneration, or a New Birth.

Q. What is Regeneration?

A. A Renewing of the Nature of man, by the Spirit and Grace of God.

Q. In whose Name is Baptism to be Administered?

A. In the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.

Q. Who are to be Baptized?

A. Converts to the Christian Religion, and the Children of Christians.

Q. To what are you bound by your Baptism?

A. To forsake my Sins, believe in Christ, and obey him.

Q. What are the outward Signs in the Lord's Supper?

A. Bread and Wine.

Q. What do they signify?

A. The Body and Blood of Christ.

Q. Has Christ a true Body?

A. Yes; the same Body which was crucified on Earth, is glorified in Heaven.

Q. Is the Bread in the Sacrament the very Body of Christ, and the Wine his
Blood?

A. No; They are but the Signs of his Body and Blood.

Q. What does the breaking of the Bread signify?

A. The Breaking of Christ's Body in his Crucifixion.

Q. What does the Minister's giving of the Bread and Wine to the Communicants
represent?

A. God's giving of Christ, and His Benefits to Believers.

Q. What does the receiving, eating, and Drinking signify?

A. Our receiving and applying of Christ by Faith.

Q. What are the Benefits of this Holy Supper?

A. The strengthening and refreshing of our Souls by Communion with Christ in
the Graces and Comforts of his Spirit.

Q. Why was this Sacrament instituted?

A. To show forth the Death of Christ.

Q. How must we receive it?

A. In Remembrance of him.

Q. But that you may receive it aright what must you do?

A. Examine my self whether I live in any Sin.

Q. Why so?

A. Because if I live in any known Sin I shall be an unworthy Receiver.

Q. What is the Sin and Danger of unworthy Receiving?

A. He that receives unworthily is guilty of the Body and Blood of the Lord,
and eats and drinks Damnation to himself.

Q. What must you then do?

A. Repent of my Sins, and resolve to lead a new Life.

Q. But with what Graces must you be furnished, that you may be fit to come to
the Lord's Table?

A. With Faith in Christ, brotherly Love, and Charity.

Q. Wherein must you specially show this Charity?

A. In loving mine Enemies, doing good to them that hate me, and forgiving them
that wrong me.

Q. If you rightly receive this Blessed Sacrament, what Benefit shall you have
thereby?

A. God will seal up to me the Pardon of my Sins, and the Salvation of my Soul.

Q. But how must you demean your self after you have received?

A. I must carefully keep my selt from every known Sin, and be diligent in
every good Duty.

Q. What will be the Issue of this Holy-Course?

A I shall at length see my Savior in Heaven, and for ever live, and reign
with him in Glory.

Joh. 14.5. If ye love me, keep my Commandments.

Self-Examination, Directed by way of Example: wherein The Qualification of a
Worthy Communicant is disclosed by the Answer of a good Conscience, to some
Necessary Inquiries.
The Apostle's Precept.
1 Cor. 11.28. Let a mau EXAMINE himself, and so let him eat of that Bread, and
drink of that Cup.


The Christians Practice.
IHAVE now an Opportuniof receiving the Blessed Sacrament of the LORD'S SUPPER.
I cannot neglect it without the Guilt of a great Sin; the Breach of Christ's
Command, Luke 22.10.
who has said, This do in Remembrance of me; yea, the Contempt of Christ
crucifid, who therein offers himself freely, with all the Benefits of his Body
and Blood, to my Soul; and the Resusal of the Renewall of my Covenant with God,
whereby as I am bound to a Holy Obedience, so I am assured of everlasting
Blessednefs. And yet if I receive it unworthily, I shall be guilty of the body
and Blood of the Lord, 1 Cor. 11.27.29.
and eat and drink to my self Judgment, and become liable to Damnation. Yet I
know the neglect of my Duty, is no way to escape this Danger. But the way both
to escape the Danger, and to enjoy the Benefit, is to Examine my self, 1 Cor.
11, 28.
and so to come to the Lord's Table. This then, with the Help of God, will I
do. I will here set my self as before God, and as in his sight and Presence
examine my self, as he has commanded.

Now the Lord direct and assist me in this Work, that I may so know the State
of my own Soul, as that I may rightly dispose my self for the receiving of the
Blessed Sacrament of Christ's Holy Supper, and the Participation of the
inestimable Benefits of his Body and Blood.

This Holy Supper, 1 Cor. 11.25.
I know, is a Seal of the Covenant of Grace, or New Testament, which is
ratified in the Blood of my Savior. Now if I rightly receive this Sacrament, I
must heartily consent to this Covenant, the Tenor whereof is this; Jer. 30.22.
Heb. 8.10.
Ye sahll be my People and I will be your God. Now,

Q. Examination of 1 Consent to the Covenant. Psalm. 42. 11. and 37.26.
1. Do I heartily take God for my God, and am I really willing to be one of his
People? Am I really willing to renounce all my Lusts and Sins, and to love,
serve, honor, and obey God all the days of my Life; and do I rest satisfied
in Him, as my God and my Portion for ever.

A. O Lord my God! I have grievously sinned against Thee; I have forgotten Thee
Days without Number: Jer. 2.32.
but now I return to Thee, and here most seriously and heartily give my self up
to Thee, both Body and Soul, to be Thine for ever. I desire not to live a Day
longer, than I may serve and glorify Thee. I heartily rejoice that Thou art
pleased to give thy self to me, Jer. 32.40.
by an everlasting Covenant, to be my God and Portion, my Shield and exceeding
great Reward. Genesis 15.1.
I thankfully take Thee to be my God, and I rest fully satisfied in Thee, as
the chief est Good, and my only Happiness. For whom have I in Heaven O God!
but Thee? Psalm. 73.25.
And there is none upon Earth that I desire besides Thee.

But, alas! I am a guilty Sinner. But having now a happy Opportunity of getting
the Pardon of all my Sins sealed to me, in the Blood of my Savior, I am
resolved to review the Actions of my Life, Lam. 3.40.
and to make a diligent Search for the Discovery of my Sins, that upon my
penitent Confession of them, I may obtain a gracious Pardon, according to God's
faithful Promise, who has said, He that cooereth his Sins shall not prosper,
but whosoever confesses and for saketh them, Prove. 23.13.
shall have Mercy.

Q. 2, Sin.
2. What then are the Sins I am guilty of before God? If I was sure I should
not live to see the Light of another Day, what Sin would make me afraid to
die? What Good have I omitted that I might and ought to have done? What Evil
have I committed? Wherein have I transgressed, and offended God, the Great
Governor, and Just Judge of the whole World, in whose Hand my Life is? Ah
Lord! How many are mine Iniquities and my Sins? Joh. 13.23.
Oh that God would make me, to know my Transgressions, and show me my Sins! And
then as for these Enemies of my Soul, Oh that (as the Egyptians in the Red Sea)
they might be all destroyed by my Savior's. Exodus 14.13.
that henceforth I might see them again no more for ever.

For the finding of them out, in Order to this End, I will now make a diligent
Enquiry. And for the Discovery of my Transgressions, I will lay the Law of God,
even the Ten Commandments before me, and consider whether I have led my Life
according to God's Law, or not.

GOD has said in his LAW, Exodus 20.2, 3, 4, etc.
I am the LORD thy God, etc. Thou shall have no other Gods before me. Thou
shall not make unto Thee any graven Image, etc. See Exodus 20. 1 -- 17. Now

1. The Breach of 1. Commandment 1 John 2.15, 16.
Have I so taken God for my God, as to love and honor Him above all? Have I
not loved the World, and the Things of the World, Riches and Honors, Pleasures
and worldly Delights, more than God? Have I not lived in much Forgetfulness of
God, Jer. 2.32.
and estrangement from Him? Have I not feared men more than God? Mat. 10.28.
Have I not set my self up above God, serving my own Will, Joh. 5.30. Romans
15.1, 2, 3.
more than His; and seeking to please my self more than him?

2. Though I have not worshipped Idols, II. Com.
ave I not neglected the Worship of God, or showed less Reverence to Him, than
the poor Pagans do to dead and dumb Idols? Have I diligently attended the
Ordinances of God's Worship, and so demeaned my self therein, as under his Eye?
Have I watched over my Heart, and not suffered my Thoughts to wander from the
Holy Service I have had in Hand? Have I been very serious and sincere in the
Service of God? Isa. 29.13.
Have I not often drawn near to God with my Mouth, and honored him with my Lips,
when my Heart has been removed sar from Him? III. Com.


3. Have I not taken the Name of God in vain, using it lightly and customarily
in my Communications, saying, O Lord, and O God, when I have not thought of
Him; or abusing it in Oaths and Curses? Mat. 5.34.
Has my Heart accompanied my Tongue as often as I have used the Name of God in my
Prayers? Have I never made a Jest of any Thing that is Sacred? Have I
endeavored so to adorn the Doctrine of God my Savior in all things, Tit. 2.10.
that the Name of God might not, 1 Timothy 6.1.
through me, be blasphemed by any?

4. Have I remembered God's Day, IV. Com.
and disposed my self to the keeping of it Holy? Have I with as much Diligence
and Seriousness, Constance, and Cheerfulness, attended the Service of God, and
the blessed Means of the Salvation of my Soul, on the Lord's Day, as I have my
worldly Business or Disports on my own Days? Have I not been soon weary of the
Service and presence of God, Mal. 1.13. Am. 8.5.
wishing the Sermon ended, and the Sabbath done, that I might be let loose to
my worldly Employments or Recreations? Have I not often spent the most part of
that Day, which is consecrated to the Service of God, in idle Talk, or worldly
matters, Isa. 58.13.
or carnal Delights, without serious minding of the great Concerns of my
immortal Soul. V. Com.


5. Have I so honored and obeyed my Father and Mother, my Master and
Superiors, as I ought to have done? Have I not despised their Authority, and
refused to obey their Commands? Phil. 2.14.
Have I done all things without Murmurings and Disputings? Have I hearkened to
their Admonitions, and received their Reproofs without Cavilling; Tit. 2.9.
or answering again?

6. VI. Com. Mat. 5.22. 1 John 3.15.
Though I have not been guilty of gross Murder, or killing any body, yet have I
not been angry with my Brother without a Cause? Have I not hated him in my
Heart, and so been a Murderer in the Sight of God? Gal. 5.20. Prove. 12.18. Romans
12.19. Col. 3.13.
Have I not been given to Quarrelling and Contention? Have I not given
provoking Words? And when I have thought my self wronged, have I not born
Malice in my Heart, and meditated Revenge.

7. VII. Com.
Have I not by wanton Looks or Gestures, Words or Thoughts, Mat. 5.27, 28.
committed Adultery in my Heart, or by any vile Acts or Provocations of Lust,
made my self unclean in the Sight of God? Ephesians. 4.19.
Have I endeavored by Temperance and Sobriety, to keep my Body pure, and my
Mind chaste and undefiled? Col. 3.8.
Have no vile Lusts lodged in my Heart, and has no filthy Communication at any
time come out of my mouth?

8. VIII. Com.
Have I injured any one by Theft, Deceit, or Cousenage? Have I been just and
true in all my Trusts and Dealings? Have I not wasted much Time in sloth,
Idleness, and Vanity? Ephesians. 4.28.
Have I not wasted what I had in Sports and Gaming? Have I not consented to or
concealed the Frauds or Wrongs that have been done by others? Psalm. 50.18.


9. IX. Com.
Have I not been guilty of Lying and Slandering? Have I not taken pleasure in
hearing my Neighbor reproacht and evil spoken of behind his back? Psalm. 15.3.
Have I not abetted to the injuries done him by others, by bearing false
witness against him? Have I not sometimes scoft at men for those Infirmities,
which I ought to have covered in Love? 1 Pet. 4 8.
Have I been careful to keep my word, and to perform all my Promises to every
man?

10. X. Com.
Have I been truly content with my own State and Condition, without coveting
any Thing which is another man's? Have I not envied others their Happier
Estate, and repined at the meanness of my own Condition? Have I not more
complained of the Wants and Evils I have sustained according to my Deserts,
than I have been thankful for many undeserved Mercies and Blessings.

A. Jam. 3.2.
I confess I have offended in many Things. I am guilty of very many
Transgressions, in so much as if God should enter into Judgment with me, Psalm.
143.2.
He might most justly condemn me. But I hope in His Mercy, who has promised
Pardon to all that truly repent. Acts 3.19.
But

Q. 3. Repentance.
Do I truly and heartily repent of all my Sins, and am I steadfastly resolved,
by the Grace of God, to lead a new Life?

A. I am heartily sorry for all my Sins, which I have committed against that
God to whom I owe my Life and Being, and who has been very good and gracious
to me all my Life long; and I do steadfastly resolve forthwith to forsake all my
Sins, and to endeavor to lead my Life in all Things according to the Holy Law
of God, and Rules of the Gospel, for the Time to come; and I do heartily
beseech Almighty God to enable me by his Grace so to do.

Q. 4. 4, Faith in Christ.
Do I believe in the Lord Jesus Christ? Am I fully persuaded that He is the Son
of God, and Savior of the World; and that all. He has revealed and said in
his Holy Gospel is most certainly true? Do I heartily take Him for my Lord and
Redeemer, and trust in Him alone for my Salvation? Jam. 2.18.
And can I show my Faith by my Works?

A. I do steadfastly Believe that God the Father sent his Son to be the Savior
of the World; 1 John 4.14. Acts 8.37.
that Jesus Christ, who died at Jerusalem, is the Son of God; and I do heartily
take Him to be my Lord and Col. 2.6.
Savior; and submitting my self to his Sovereignty, I trust in Him alone for
my Salvation. Mark 1.15.
I am fully persuaded that whatsoever He has said or revealed in his Gospel is
most true. And I shall endeavor, by God's Grace, to persist in this Faith, and
to demonstrate the Truth of it by my Works, Jam. 2.18
and constant Obedience to His Holy Commands all the days of my Life.

Q. 5. 5. Brotherly Love.
Do I entirely love all the Children of God, as my Brethren in Christ, even
because they are God's Children, bear His Image and are beloved by their
Heavenly Father.

A. I have a Love for all men, Romans 13.9.
and do Desire to love my Neighbor as myself; 1 John 3.14.
but for those who truly fear-God, I have a great esteem of them, and a hearty
Love to them; Psalm. 16.3.
I account them the only excellent Ones in the Earth. And the more excellency
I see in them, the more my Heart is endeared to them. I chiefly delight in
their Company; and when I can enjoy mine own Choice, psalm. 119.63.
I am a Companion of them that fear God, and keep his Commandments.

Q. 6. 6. Charity. Luke 6.37. Mat. 5.44, Romans 12.21. 1 Cor. 5.8.
Am I in Charity with all men? Can I freely forgive them that have wronged me,
and find in my Heart to do good to them who hate me, and ahve done and would do
me Hurt.

A. I thank God, I bear no Malice in my Heart to any man. I do freely forgive
them who have wronged me, and account it but a very small matter, if my Lord
will graciously be pleased to remit me a Debt of Ten Thousand Talents, Mat.
18.23 -- 35.
to forgive to my Fellow Servants a Debt of an Hundred pence. And God knows my
heart if it lay in my power, I could freely do Good to the worst Enemy I have
in the World. If he was in Danger, I would do my best to preserve him: If I
knew him to be in any Extremity, I would to my Ability, Romans 12.20.
very freely relieve Him. I know I more need mercy from God, than any man can
need Mercy from me: and I am ready and willing to show Mercy to any man, Jam.
2.13.
as I do expect and desire to obtain Mercy from God, in the Forgiveness of my
Sins, and the Salvation of my Soul.

Q. 7. Defire of Christ.
7. Have I an Appetite to my Spiritual Food? Have I an earnest Defire to have
Communion with Christ, and to partake of his saving Benefits in his Holy
Supper.?

A. Without Christ, alas! I am an undone Creature. Ah Lord God! What will thou
give me, if I go Christless? Give me therefore, O give me Christ, or I die. It
is Pardon, and Grace, and spiritual strength, and Comfort, which he is pleased
to communicate to Believers in his Holy Supper. These I want; these I earnestly
defire. 1 Cor. 15.10.
I must have Pardon, or perish: Without Grace I can do no good. Peace with God
is an inestimable Privilege: without this I cannot hope to see His Face in
Heaven. I want Strength to do my Duties, conquer my Corruptions, bear my
Burdens, and withstand my Temptations. And my Soul thirsts after those Holy
Comforts, which are far sweeter than all worldly Joys. Psalm, 4.7.
These are the Blessings I earnestly defire. These are the Benefits of my
Blessed Lord and Suviour Jesus Christ. And I am willing to part with the
Pleasures of Sin for ever, to partake of these Holy Comforts; and there is no
Treasure in the whole World that I prize or desire in comparison of these
inestimable Privileges, which I beseech God to communicate to me in this Holy
Feast. Psalm. 63.5 Luke 1.47. Jude v. 25.
So shall my Soul be satisfied as with Marrow and Fatness, and I shall greatly
rejoice in God my Savior, to whom be Glory and Majesty, Dominion and Power,
both now and ever. Amen.

Now if upon this serious Self-Examination, thou can from thy Heart make
these Answers to these Questions, doubt not but God will accept thee as a
worthy Communicant, and thou shall be^^. (...) Guest to the Lord's Table. God
in that Blessed Ordinance of Christ's Holy Supper, will seal up to thy Soul the
Pardon of all thy sins, and that Covenant of Grace. whereby he assures thee of
a Kingdom of Glory for thine etenal Inheritance.

Conclude this Work of Self-Examination with that Confession and Prayer, which
is fitted for that Purpose.

Christian-Devotion. IN Some short Forms of PRAYER and PRAISE.
Prayers for Children.
A Prayer for the Morning.
O LORD God, and my Heavenly Father, I give Thee humble and hearty Thanks, for
that Thou have preserved me this Night past, and raised me up in Health and
Strength this Morning; whereas Thou might in the Darkness of the Night, have
cut me off for my Sins, and cast me into everlasting Darkness in Hell. Pardon,
O Lord, all my past Sins, and keep me from sinning for the time to come.

Guide, bless, and keep me this Day in Thy Fear; and grant that I may demean my
self always as in thy Sight. And seeing I must at length appear before the
Judgment Seat of Christ, to receive according to my Works, and must then give
an Account of every idle Word, grant that I may keep my self this Day from all
foolish-speaking and evil-doing: Especially grant that I may keep my Heart with
all Diligence, seeing out of it come those evil Things which defile both Body
and Soul.

Keep me, O Lord, by thy Grace, from all wanton thoughts, Words, and Looks, and
from all those fleshly Lusts, which will defile my Soul, and make me loathsome
in thy Sight. Oh keep me from my special sin, and quicken me to every good
Duty. Keep me from mispending my precious Time in Vanity and Idleness, seeing
upon this little Moment of my Life depends an Eternity of Joy or Torment.

Sanctify me throughout by Thy Holy Spirit, and enable me by thy Grace to live
to thy Glory. Plant in my Heart a Hatred of Sin and Love to Holiness; that I
may delight to do Thy Will O my God! Psalm. 40.8. Joh. 4.34.
and account it my Meat and Drink to be employed in welldoing.

Grant I may love Thee with all my Heart and Soul, and serve Thee with all my
Strength, all the Days of my Life; that in the End I may be happy for ever.

Make me like Christ in meekness, Patience, Humility, that I may be like to Him
hereafter in Glory.

Keep me this Day from Sin and Danger, and give me all things both for my Soul
and Body, which Thou see to be needful and good for me. Make me ever
Thankful for Thy Mercies, and truly contented with my Condition.

Do good, O Lord, Psalm. 125.4.
to them that are good, and convert Sinners from their evil ways that they may
be saved. Bless my Parents; Give them Health, Prosperity, and Length of Days
here, and everlasting Happiness in Heaven. Bless all my Friends and dear
Relations; give them Grace and all good things both for Body and Soul.

Bless me, even me also, O my Father, with the Blessings of thy Love and guide
me in thy Holy ways to Life eternal, through Jesus Christ my Lord and Savior,
to whom with Thy Self, and Holy Spirit, be all Honor and Glory, now and for
evermore, Amen.

A Prayer for Noon.
BLessed be Thy Name, O Lord my God, that Thou have preserved me this Day
hitherto. Blessed be Thy Name for all the Blessings which Thou have be stowed
upon me. Forgive me all the Sins which I have committed, and keep me the rest
of this Day from all evil. Grant O Lord, that I may continue to serve Thee
faithfully and truly this Day, and all the Days of my Life, that it may be well
with me for ever and ever, through Jesus Christ my Lord and Savior, to whom with
Thy self and Holy Spirit be Glory and Honor, Power, Praise, and Thanksgiving,
both now and for evermore; Amen.

A Prayer for Night.
O Lord my God, I humbly and heartily bless and praise Thy Holy Name, for thy
merciful Preservation of me this Day past; and for all the Blessings which Thou
have bestowed upon me. I bless Thee for my Health and Strength, Food and
Raiment, Peace and Safety, and above all for my Redemption by Jesus Christ, and
my Hopes of Salvation by Him.

Forgive me, I beseech Thee, all the Sins which either in Thought, Word, or
Deed I have committed against Thee this Day. Forgive me that I have neglected
any good which I might and ought to have done, or negligently done it. I have
forgotten Thee, O Lord, and I have done evil in Thy Sight. But I am heartily
sorry for all my Sins, and do earnestly desire, and seriously resolve to serve
Thee better for the Time to come. Remember not against me any of my past
offenses, but be in Christ fully reconciled unto me. And give me Thy Grace,
that I may henceforth walk in thy Ways, and obey Thy Will in all Things.

Take me into Thy Tuition this following Night. Keep me when I cannot keep my
self. Keep me, O Lord, from all evil Thoughts, and hurtful Lusts. Keep me from
the Power of Satan, the Prince of Darkness. Let Thy Holy Angels be my Guard,
and thy mighty Power my Defense. Defend me from all Dangers and Disquiets. Hide
me under the Shadow of Thy Wings, Psalm. 17.8.
and keep me as the Apple of the Eye. When I am awake, let me remember that
Thine Eye is upon me; Psalm. 139.2.
and that Thou see my down-lying, and discernest my secret Thoughts. Give
me, O Lord, quiet Rest and Sleep, and raise me up the next Day with renewed
Health and Strength to do Thee Service. Continue thy Favor to me through all
my Life, and in Death show me thy Salvation.

Bless and keep Thy whole Church, Continue Truth and Peace in this Land. Bless
and preserve my Parents in Life and Health. Let all my dear Friends and
Relations be Happy in Thy Love and Favor.

Bless me, O Father, and save me for Thy Mercies sake, in Christ Jesus my
Redeemer; To whom, with thy Self and Holy Spirit, be Honor, Glory, and Praise,
for ever and ever, Amen.

Prayers for Servants.
A Prayer for the Morning.
O Lord God, I heartily bless Thy Holy Name for keeping me this Night past in
Safety, and raising me up with renewed Health and Strength this Morning Had
Thou dealt with me, O Lord, according to my Deserts, Thou might have sent me
into the Land of Darkness, and I might have made my Bed in Hell. But, O Lord,
as Thou have mercifully kept me when I could not keep my self, so take me, I
beseech Thee, into Thy Holy Tuition, and keep me henceforth from all Evil:
Pardon my Sin, and preserve me to Thy everlasting Kingdom.

Direct me, O God, and lead me forth in Thy Fear; and so bless and prosper me
in all the Works and Businesses of this day. Grant that I may faithfully and
diligently discharge the Duties required of me, in the Place wherein Thy
Providence has set me. Keep me, O Lord, from all evil Thoughts, which may
defile my Heart, and from all evil Words and Actions, whereby I may offend
Thee, and deprive my self of Thy Blessing and Favor. Grant that I may so
remember Thine All-seeing Eye, as to demean my self always as in Thy Sight,
studying and endeavoring to please and honor Thee in all things, that at the
last Day I may give up my Account with Joy.

Protect Thy whole Church by thy Power, and bless all Thy People with Peace.
Bless this Land, and preserve the true Religion. Bless this House and Family
wherein I live, with all Temporal and Spiritual Blessings. Bless, guide, and
keep thy Servants to whom Thou have committed the Care and Government thereof.
Give me Grace, O Lord, to look upon them as standing in Thy stead to me, that
by the Honor and Obedience which I yield to them according to Thy Command, I
may serve and honor Thee; and, according to thy Promise, receive my Reward in
Heaven. Grant, O Lord, that the Beauty and Goodness of Thy Government of Thy
Household the Church may appear in their wise and good Government of this House
and Family committed to their Charge; that this House may be to me, and all
that live therein, as the Gate of Heaven, and Way to everlasting Happiness. Let
thy Blessing, O Lord, crown all the Labors of thy Servants with good Success,
that whatsoever they do may prosper; and man may have Occasion to say. The Lord
be magnified which has Pleasure in the Prosperity of His Servants. Psalm. 35.27.


Bless all my Friends and Relations, and all that have been Instruments of Good
to me: let all who have showed any Kindness to thy unworthy Servant, be ever
Happy in Thy Love and Favor.

Now, O Lord, be with me I beseech Thee this Day, and bless me both in Body and
Soul. Put Thy Fear into my Heart, that I may not sin against Thee: Give me
Health and Strength, that I may cheerfully serve Thee. And when Thou have
finished Thy Will with me on Earth, fulfill my Desire, O Lord, and make me
perfectly happy with Thee in Heaven, through the Merits of my Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ; To whom, with Thy Self and Holy Spirit, be Glory, Power, and
Praise, now and for evermore; Amen.

A Prayer for Night.
O Lord God, who art Great in Power and rich in Mercy, I Thy Poor Creature do
here humbly cast my self down at Thy Footstool, beseeching Thee for the Lord
Jesus Christ's sake, to forgive me all the Sins of the Day past, yea, all the
Sins which I have ever committed against Thee. Forgive me, O Lord, all my loose
Thoughts, all my rash Words, all my irregular Actions, whatsoever Thy pure Eye
has at any time seen amiss in me, and be in Christ fully reconciled to me. For
I confess my Transgressions, and am heartily sorry for my Sins. Give me Grace,
O Lord, for the time to come, to serve and honor Thee by a better Obedience.
Heb. 8.10.
Put Thy Laws in my Mind, and write them in my Heart. That I may know and do
Thy Commandments. Restrain me, O God, by Thy Grace from those sins to which I
am most inclined, and keep me from those Evils which I am most apt to commit.
Help me to withstand Temptations, and make me wise to avoid all Occasions of
sin. Seeing my life is but short on Earth, Lord suffer me not to sin my Soul
into Hell.

Bless all those I am bound to pray for; my Friends and Kindred in the Flesh.
Do good to all that are good, and requite all those who have done me Good: let
all the Benefits I have received from them, be redoubled into their own Bosoms.

Bless this House and Family wherein I live: Preserve thy Servants to whom Thou
have committed the Care and Government of the Family, and all that belongs to
them in safety. Grant Lord, that I may so show all good Fidelity to them, that
I may find Favor with Thee, who alone can make me truly Happy for ever.

And now Blessed be thy Name O Lord, who have as well appointed the Night for
Rest as the Day for Labor. Keep me, I beseech Thee, this Night from all Evil.
Give me that comfortable Rest and Refreshment, which may fit me for the Duties
of the following Day. And grant, Lord, that where after a few days I shall
sleep in the Dust, my Soul may rest with Thee in Glory, through the Merits of
my Blessed Lord and Redeemer Jesus Christ, to whom with Thee, O God the Father,
and God the Holy Ghost be Glory and Majesty, Dominion, Power, and Praise, now
and for evermore; Amen.

If thou art weary and sleepy, or not being able to Read, can not learn the
foregoing Prayers by Heart, rather than lie down at Night like a Beast, and
rise up in the Morning, and go out to thy Work, without any serious Remembrance
of God; or pious Acknowledgment of thy Dependence on Him, Acts 17.28.
in whom thou live, movest, and have thy Being, and without whose up-holding
Hand thou can not subsist a Moment, without dropping into Dust, and (if in
thy Sins) into Hell, Kneel down on thy Knees, and say,

At Night.
Blessed be Thy Name, O Lord God, who have kept me this Day past. Forgive me, I
beseech Thee, all my Sins, and keep me from Sin and Danger this Night, and
raise me up, refresht with quiet Rest and Sleep, to serve Thee better the
following Day, to Thy Glory and my Salvation, through Jesus Christ my only Lord
and Savior; Amen.

In the Morning.
Blessed be thy Name, O Lord, who have kept me in Safety, and refresht me with
Rest and Sleep this last Night. Now be with me, I beseech thee, and keep me
this Day from all Evil. Guide me in all my ways, and bless me in all my Works,
and bring me in the end to everlasting Life in Heaven, through Jesus Christ, my
Lord and Redeemer: Amen.

A Prayer for the Lord's Day.
O Most Holy and Glorious Lord God, Thou art great in Thy Self, and yet good to
man: Thou art gloriously exalted above the greatest of Kings, and yet have a
gracious Regard to the meanest of Thy Creatures. The Heavens, O Lord are the
Work of thy Hands, and Thou have made the Earth, and all things therein Thou
art great in Power, Dreadful in Majesty, and glorious in Holiness. Psalm. 8.4.
Lord, what is man, that Thou remembrest him? or the Son of man, that Thou
regardest him? and 39.5.
Verily every man at his best State is altogether Vanity. And yet how
wonderful are Thy Works, and 107.8.
O God, which thou have wrought for the Children of men! For man thou have made
the World, and replenisht it with a rich Variety of Creatures, both for his Use
and Delight. Thou have appointed all things to serve him, that he might with
more cheerfulness and Delight serve Thee. For man thou have sent and slain
Thine own Son; that guilty, lost man, whom Thou might have justly thrown
into everlasting Darkness in Hell, might for ever live with Thee, in a Paradise
of Divine Pleasures, in a Heaven of Bliss and Glory. O Lord, grant that I, thy
poor Creature, may so love Thee and serve Thee here, that I may at length enjoy
Thee fully, and praise Thee eternally in heaven.

In Order to this End, I bless Thy Name, O Lord, that Thou have appointed a Day
of Rest from all worldly Labors, that I might attend upon Thee in the Duties
of thy solemn Worship and Service. O Lord, make this Day of rest, to be to me a
day of spiritual Refreshment and holy Delight. Grant that I may this Day hear
the Voice of my Savior calling to all that labor and are heavy laden to come
to Him, that he may give them Rest; Mat. 11.28.
and make me so sensible of the Burden of my Sins, that I may betake my self to
Him by a hearty Repentance and lively Faith, and may obtain a Holy Rest, in the
Remission of my sins, and the salvation of my soul.

Keep me this Day, O Lord, from Vanity and Idleness, from foolish-speaking and
evil-doing; and make me very diligent and serious in the Duties of Thy service,
that I may not let slip a happy opportunity of insuring my salvation, nor
mispend that Time, which Thou vouchsafest me for the Good of my soul; but
seriously employ it in the Duties of true Piety, for the getting and increasing
of Knowledge and Grace, and treasuring up for my self Glory in Heaven.

Keep me, O Lord, from all vain, worldly, and wanton Thoughts, which may take
off my Mind from a serious Attention to Thy Word, and hinder me from joining
with a Holy Devotion in Thy worship: Grant that I may enter into Thy House as
into Heaven, and demean my self there as in Thy sight and Presence; and Lord
send me not away without Thy Blessing.

Grant, O Lord, that to Day, Heb. 3.13.18.
even while it is called to Day, I may hear Thy Voice Thy word, with a serious
Resolution to obey Thy will in all Things, lest Thou swear in Thy Wrath, that I
shall never enter into Thy Rest. O let me not go from Thy House, Genesis 28.17.
the Gate of Heaven into everlasting Darkness in Hell. But, Lord, speak to Thy
servant this day, those words which may effectually conduce to my salvation.
Grant, I humbly beseech Thee, that I may so serve Thee this Day, and all the
days of my Life, that in the End I may be truly Blessed for ever, through the
Merits of my only Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, to whom, with Thy self and
Holy Spirit, Be Glory and Honor, Dominion and Power, Thanksgiving and Praise,
now and for evermore, Amen.

A Prayer before Reading the Holy Scriptures.
OPen my Understanding O Lord, Luke 24.45. 2 Timothy 3.15.
that I may understand the Scriptures, which are able to make me wise to
Salvation. Grant that I may so believe Thy word, as to do Thy will, and walk in
that way, which will bring me in the end to Life eternal Eternal, through Jesus
Christ, my Lord and Savior. Amen.

A Prayer at the first Entrance into the Church.
LOrd, Luke 18.13.
be merciful to me a sinner, and forgive me my sins, that make me unworthy to
come into Thy Holy Presence. Assist me, O God, by Thy Grace, to the duties of
thy Service. Grant that I may serve Thee acceptably, Heb. 12.28.
with Reverence and Godly Fear. Oh send me not away without a Blessing. And as
Thou have now brought me into Thy House, in the End bring me to Heaven, through
the Merits of Jesus Christ, my Lord and Savior; Amen.

At Departure from Church.
Forgive me, O Lord, all my wandering thoughts, and want of due seriousness in
thy holy service. O let not my infirmities hinder thy Acceptance, and deprive
me of thy blessing. Joh. 14.26.
Teach me, O Lord, by Thy Spirit what thou have taught me by thy word, and
grant that I may so remember and do thy Will, that I may be Blessed in my Deed,
Jam. 1.25
and in my End Happy for ever, through Jesus Christ, my Lord and Savior; Amen.

A Confession and Prayer to be used after Self-Examination, in Order to the
Receiving of the Blessed Sacrament of the Lord's Supper.
O Lord my God, Ezr. 9.6.
I have just Cause to be ashamed to lift up mine eyes to Heaven, or once to
look up toward Thee, whom I have so grievously offended by my sins. Psalm. 58.3
and 51.5.
For, O Lord, I have gone astray from the Womb; yea, I was conceived and born
in Sin, and brought forth in Iniquity. It might have been just with Thee to
have snatched me from the Bosom of Mother, and cast me into the Belly of Hell.
But, O Lord, Thou wast pleased to prevent me with the Gifts of Thy Grace, and
Fruits of Thy Goodness. For before I was capable to know Thee, or to discern
betwixt Good and Evil, Thou wast pleased, by Thy Holy Baptism, to admit me into
Thy House and Family, and to accept me for one of Thy Children. Thou wast
pleased to take me into a Holy Covenant with Thy self, and to promise me the
Kingdom of Heaven for mine Inheritance: and Thou have been very Good and
Gracious to me from that Time to this very Day. But, O Lord my God, I have
grievously sinned against Thee, by too great a Compliance with the World, the
Flesh and the Devil, contrary to that mighty obligation which was laid upon me
in my Baptism. I have not, O Lord, so steadfastly believed Thy Truth, and obeyed
Thy Will, as lought, I have daily offended Thee by the Breach of Thy Holy
Commandments, and have justly deserved Thy Wrath and Hellfire. I am no more
worthy to be called Thy Son, Luk 15.19.
or to be accounted one of Thy servants.

But, O Lord, I am heartily sorry for my sins, and steadfastly purposed by Thy
Grace to lead a New life. Psalm. 57.1
Be merciful unto me, O God, be merciful unto me, and pardon all my sins, for
thy Names sake; and seal that Pardon to my soul, in the Blood of my Savior.
Thou have promised Pardon, Acts 3.19 Joh. 3.16.
O Lord, to the truly penitent; and to him that believes in thy Son Jesus
Christ, life eternal. Behold, O Lord, I heartily repent of all my sins, and
steadfastly believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, putting my whole Trust in him
alone for my Salvation. Behold, I give my self up entirely to him, being
desirous to live to him, and willing to dye for him, rather than by denying his
truth, or disobeying his Voice, to dishonor him. For his sake speak Peace to
my soul in the Pardon of my sins and the Assurance of my salvation. And, O
Lord, so renew me by thy Grace, and uphold me by Thy Spirit, that I may not
relapse into any of my former sins, but continue to glorify Thee by a holy
Obedience all the days of my life.

Grant, O Lord, that I may love my Brethren, 1 Pet. 1.22.
that bear thine Image with a pure heart fervently; and that (whatsoever usage
I receive in the World) I may be in Charity with all men. Behold O Lord, I
heartily forgive all them, who at any time have done me wrong, and I beseech
thee to give them, that still live in the guilt of their sins, true Repentance,
and a gracious pardon, that their Souls may be saved in the Day of the Lord
Jesus.

Draw forth my Heart, O Lord, in hungring desires after Christ, and satisfy my
Soul as with Marrow and Fatness, with plentiful Communications of Grace from
his fullness. Fit me, O Lord, for a Holy Communion with him, and raise me to a
nearer Conformity to him, in all his imitable excellencies, that I may at
length be made like to him, and live with him in Glory.

Furnish me, O Lord, with all those Heavenly Graces, and Holy Affections, which
may make me meet to Feast with my Blessed Savior in his Holy Supper. Therein
seal up thine Everlasting Covenant of Grace to my Soul, Communicate to me the
benesits of my Savior's Body and Blood, and refresh me with the Holy comforts
of thy Spirit. And grant that, all the rest of my life, I may seriously
endeavor to answer a renewed Obligation to Obedience, by a constant Holy care
to keep all thy Commandments. Enable me, O God, by thy Grace to persevere to
the end, that I may be certainly Blessed for ever, through the merits of my
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, to whom with thy self, and Holy Spirit, be all
Honor and Glory, now and for evermore; Amen.

A Prayer before Receiving of the Lord's Supper.
GOod Lord, pardon my sin, and seal that pardon this day to my Soul, in the
Blood of my Savior; Give me a lively Faith in him, that as I shall receive the
Bread and Wine, I may partake of the saving benefits of his Body and Blood, in
his Holy Supper. Strengthen and refresh my Soul, O God, with Spiritual Food,
and preserve me both Body and Soul to Eternal Life, through Jesus Christ my
only Lord and Savior; Amen.

At the receiving of the Bread, say with your self.
O Lord, I heartily accept thy Son to be my Savior; and as he gave his Body to
be broken for me, I give my self, Body and Soul to him for ever.

O Blessed Jesus, let me rather be broken in pieces, than ever do any thing
which may dishonor thee, my Dear Redeemer.

At the Receiving of the Cup* say,
Now Lord, wash away all my sins in the Blood of my Savior, and save my Soul
for thy Mercies sake.

Then having drunk of the Wine, say,
How sweet is thy Love, O Dear Jesus, who have shed thy Blood for my Salvation?
O let me rather shed my dearest Lifeblood for thee, than ever willingly sin
against thee.

Behold, Lord, I now give my self up to thee, and thy service: O let me see thy
Salvation.

Having Received, say with your self,
Now, O Lord, thou art my God, and I am thine, both in Body and Soul, by a
perpetual Covenant, sealed with the Blood of my blessed Savior. O let my soul
be furnished with thy Grace, and filled with thy Spirit, that I may cheerfully
serve thee, while I live, and when I dye, fully enjoy thee for ever; Amen.

When you depart from the Lord's Table, labor to feel your Heart inflamed with
love to God and Christ, and filled with satisfaction and joy in his Love to
you, and to find your Soul fixed in a firm Resolution of Holy Obedience to your
Lives end. Take heed your heart do not entertain Earthly Thoughts, and that you
do not open your ears, or loose your tongue to Worldly Discourse. But meditate
on the mercies of God to you in Christ, on the Promises and Privileges of the
Covenant of Grace, on the duties of Obedience, whereby you must glorify God on
Earth, and on the Glory and Blessedness reserved for you in the Kingdom of
Heaven.

Being returned home, retire your self to give thanks to God for his Mercy in
Christ.

A Thanksgiving after Receiving of the Lord's Supper.
BLESS the LORD, Psalm. 103.1.
O my Soul, and all that is within me, bless his Holy Name; who has sealed up
to me this day the forgiveness of my sins in the blood of my Savior; who has
entertained me with Heavenly dainties at his Holy Table. Grant, O God, that in
the strength of this Spiritual Food, I may walk before thee in the ways of a
Holy obedience, till I shall at length attain to Eternal Blessedness, through
my only Savior and Redeemer, Jesus Christ; Amen.

As often as thou receivest the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, be sure to read
thy Duty, as a Child or Servant, before declared, and the Rules of good Life
here following.

Grace before Meat.
Bless and Sanctify thy good creatures to me, O my God, through Jesus Christ;
Amen.

After Meat.
Blessed be thy Name, O my God, for these, and all other thy good gifts,
through Jesus Christ; Amen.

In Company with others.
Before Meat.
God be merciful to us, and bless us, and give us a Sanctified use of these,
and all other his Blessings, through Jesus Christ our Lord; Amen.

After Meat.
Blessed be God for these, and all his Blessings. Give us Grace, O Lord, to
spend the strength we receive from them in thy service, to thy Glory, and our
Salvation, through Jesus Christ our Lord; Amen.

Christian Conversation; IN Some necessary Cautions and Directions to Young
People for the Government of their Thoughts, Words and Actions: Or, RULES of
Good LIFE.
I. HAve a great care of your Thoughts. These are the springs of Action; Though
the thoughts of men's heart are secret, and indiscernible, they ost become very
visible in their Lives. Words and Actions are but the Apparel of the Thoughts,
These appear upon the open Stage of the world, and proclaim what was before
done in the secret Chambers of the Soul.

Evil Thoughts are the seeds of sin and vice, which not suppressed, will (as
noxious weeds) overgrow the whole Life; These little sparks first kindle the
fire of Lust, and then of Hell.

Know thoughts are not free; God's Law limits them: nor are they hidden; God's
eye sees them. Ps. 139.2.
Thou understandest my Thoughts afar off, says David. Remember God's eye is
upon your heart, and so do not harbor any evil thoughts. Heb. 13.2.
Be not forgetful (says the Apostle) to entertain strangers: for thereby some
have entertained Angels unawares. Be careful say I, not to entertain evil
thoughts: for so may you entertain the Devil unawares. The Devil by evil
thoughts, insinuates himself into the hearts of men, that he may corrupt their
Lives, and destroy their Souls.

Vain Thoughts, though little regarded (as the swarms of Flies that corrupted
the Land of Egypt) are very pernicious. Exodus 8.24.
Jer. 4.14.
O Jerusalem (says the Lord) wash thine heart from wickedness, that thou
may be saved: Psalm 119.113.
how long shall thy vain Thoughts lodge within thee? Cease not then, till you
can say with David, I hate vain Thoughts, but thy Law do I love.

II. Keep a constant watch against all evil words. By evil thoughts you defile
your own Soul, by evil words you may defile others also. The malignity of the
heart is often diffused by the tongue, to the infection of many: And therefore
let David's resolution be yours; Psalm. 39.1.4.
I said I will take heed to my ways, that I sin not with my Tongue. Remember
the wise and Holy God hears all the words you speak. There is not a word in my
Tongue (says Holy David) but lo, O LORD, thou know it altogether.

Let your words be few therefore, Eccl. 5.2.
and free from Folly. A fool's voice, (says the wise man) is known by a
multitude of words, Prove. 17.27.
but he that has knowledge spares his words. Think before you speak, silence
is usually safe: whereas rash words often recoile to the hurt of him that spoke
them. Eccl. 5.7.
However, in the multitude of dreams, and many words, there are also diverse
vanities: but fear thou God.

Temperance of Tongue is a necessary virtue of true Religion; And therefore
says the Apostle, Jam. 1.26.
If any man among you, seem to be Religious; and bridleth not his Tongue, but
deceives his own heart, this man's Religion is vain; c. 3.2.
But, If any man offend not in Word, the same is a perfect man, and able also
to bridle the whole body.

Especially take heed of all filthy and impure speeches; Remember how strict a
charge is given you in the Gospel. Ephesians. 2.29.
Let no corrupt Communication come out of your Mouth, but that which is good to
the use of edifying, that it may Minister Grace unto the Hearers. 31.
Let all clamor and evilspeaking be put away from you. And as for
Fornications, ^. 4.3.
and all Uncleanness or Covetousness, let it not be once named amongst you, as
becomes Saints; 4.
Neither filthiness, nor foolish talking, nor jesting, which are not convenient:
but rather giving of thanks.

And that your words may be Holy, keep the heart pure; Mat. 12, 34, 35, 36, 37.
For out of the abundance of the heart, the mouth speaks. A good man out of
the good treasure of his heart brings forth good things: and an evil man, out
of the evil treasure, brings forth evil things. But I say unto you (says our
Savior) that every idle word that men shall speak, they shall give an account
thereof in the day of Judgment. For by thy words thou shall be justified, and
by thy words thou shall be condemned.

III. Psalm. 119.163.
Count it a great wickedness to tell a lie. I hate and abhor lying, (says
David) but thy Law do I love. And he that loves God, and his Law, Prove. 12.22.
must needs hate and abhor Lying; For Lying Lips are an abomination to the
LORD: but they that deal truly are his delight. Yea, a Liar is hated both of
God and men: men hate him because he seeks to deceive them, and God hates him,
because he plainly despises him, whom he knows he cannot deceive.

The sin of Lying subjects men to punishment, both from God and men. The common
punishment amongst men is this, he that is known to have told a Lie, shall not
be believed when he speaks Truth. God for one Lie struck Ananias and Sapphira
with sudden death; Act. 5.1. -- 10.
And yet the greatest punishment of Lying remains in Hell; Rev. 22.15.
For whosoever loves or makes a Lie, shall be shut out of the Kingdom of
Heaven. Joh. 8.44.
Lying is the Devil's sin, and subjects man to his punishment; Rev. 21.8.
For, All Liars shall have their part in the Lake, which burns with Fire and
Brimstone; which is the second death.

Lie not to excuse a Fault: What will it avail you to seem innocent before men,
if you become doubly guilty before God? To escape a rebuke from man, will you
venture to incur the wrath of God? What folly is it for one to avoid the
pricking of a Pin, to run upon the point of a Sword? Though God do not punish
the fault, are you sure he will pardon the Lie? To presume is the way to
perish. Know God will not pardon it, except you repent; And what desperate
Folly is it for a man to do that, which he knows before he shall either
certainly repent, or must Eternally perish.

Lie not for gain; Its a woeful gain which is acquired by the loss of God's
favor, and an immortal Soul.

Lie not at all. He that tells a Lie strikes at God, and stabs his own Soul.
When Lying shall mourn in Hell, Truth shall fit triumphant in Heaven.

IV. Shun swearing and cursing as much as you do Hell and Damnation; For if you
become guilty of the sin, Mat. 5.34 37.
how can you escape the punishment? Swear not at all (says our Savior) but
let your Communication be yea, yea, nay, nay; Yea, (says the Apostle) Above
all things, Jam. 5.12.
my Brethren swear not, neither by Heaven, neither by the Earth, neither by any
other Oath: but let your yea be yea, and your nay, nay, lest ye fall into
condemnation; For most certain it is, Exodus 20.7.
God will not hold him guiltless that takes his Name in vain. Curse none of
God's creatures, least God curse you; Its the Character of a wicked wretch,
Psalm. 10.7.109.17.
His mouth is full of cursing, as he loved cursing, (says the Divine Prophet)
so let it come unto him; as he delighted not in Blessing, so let it be far from
him. How dreadful will the State of Swearers and Cursers be, when Christ Jesus
the Judge of the world shall say to them, Mat. 25.41.
Depart from me ye cursed, into Everlasting Fire, prepared for the Devil, and
his Angels.

Let not your words then swell with the poison of Oaths or Curses. He that
shoots these impoison'd arrows up toward Heaven, shall at length find they
will fall down on his own head.

I saw says St. John, Rev. 16.13.
three unclean Spirits like frogs, come out of the Mouth of the false Prophet.
Surely an Oath or a Curse coming out of the Mouth of a Christian, is as
monstrous, as if you should see a Toad coming out of the Mouth of a man. If the
Spirit of God be in the heart, how can the Language of Hell fall from the lips?

V. Provoke not any to Anger, and be not your self soon or long Angry. A man in
Anger is as a House on fire; If a fire be kindled in a house, you should
endeavor to quench it: but when there is none, its a great wickedness to
kindle it. He is a very mischievous Fool, that sets his own house on fire. When
Anger is joined with desire of revenge, the house is set on fire of Hell. Matt.
5.21.22.
Rash Anger is a degree of Murder; And therefore though provoked by an injury,
Be not hasty in thy Spirit to be angry: Eccl. 7.9.
for Anger rests in the Bosom of Eools.

Anger in excess opens a door to the Devil; where some evil there, that is a
just cause of anger, Ephesians. 4.26.
is done, Be ye Angry, and sin not: let not the Sun go down upon your wrath,
neither give place to the Devil. He that lies down to sleep in his Anger, has
the Devil for his Bedfellow.

Consider, there is none can so much provoke you to anger, as you daily provoke
God. If he, who is so great, bear with you, how much more ought you to bear
with others? If you become a Firebrand on earth, take heed least God make you
one in Hell. Know, nothing does better become a Christian, than the meekness
and gentleness of Christ. Put on therefore (as the Elect of God, Col. 3.12.13.
Holy and Beloved) Bowels of mercies, kindness, humbleness of mind, meekness,
long-suffering; Forbearing one another, and forgiving one another, if any man
have a quarrel against any: even as Christ forgave you, so also do ye.

VI. Flee youthful Lusts, 2 Timothy 2.22.
and endeavor to preserve a chaste mind in a pure Body. Defile not that Body
with Lust, which was washed with Christ's Blood in Baptism. Know your Body is
the Temple of God, 1 Cor. 6.19. etc.
which was consecrated by Baptism to his Holy Service; Now, 3.17.
if any man defile the Temple of God, him shall God destroy: Now the body of
man is not left defiled by fleshly lusts, then the Temple of God by being
turned into a loathsome stie for filthy swine.

As he therefore who has called you to the Profession of Christianity is Holy,
1 Pet. 1.15.
so be ye Holy and pure, both in Body and Mind. For this is the will of God, 1
These. 4.3.4, 5, 7.
even your Sanctification, that ye should abstain from Fornication: that
everyone of you should know how to possess his Vessel his [ 1 Samuel 21.5.
Body the Vessel of his Soul, and for his Food] in Sanctification and Honor,
not in the Lust of concupiscence, even as the Gentiles which know not God: for
God has not called us unto Uncleanness, but unto Holiness.

If Saints, 1 John 3.2.
ye are the Sons of God, the Brethren of Christ, and Heirs of Heaven. Romans
8.17. Col. 3.4.
And when Christ, who is our Life shall appear, then shall ye also appear with
him in glory. Now; every man that has this hope in him purifieth himself,
(...).
keeps himself chaste, even as he is, (...).
chaste and pure.

The happiness of such chaste and pure persons in the presence of God in Heaven,
was represented to St. John in Vision. I looked, Rev. 14.1 -- 5.
(says he) and lo a Lamb [the Lord Jesus Christ] stood on the Mount Sion, and
with him an Hundred Forty and Four Thousand, having his Fathers Name written
in their Foreheads; And I heard a voice from Heaven, as the voice of many
waters, and as the voice of a great Thunder: and I heard the voice of Harpers,
harping upon their Harps: and they sung as it were a new Song, before the
Throne, and before the four Beasts, and the Elders, [the Angels and Saints in
Heaven:] and no man could learn that Song, but the Hundred and Forty and Four
Thousand, which were Redeemed from the Earth. These are they which were not
defiled with women; for they are Virgins: these are they which follow the Lamb,
which way soever he goes: these were Redeemed from among men, being the first
Fruits unto God; and to the Lamb; And in their mouth was found no guile: for
they are without fault before the Throne of God. Now if you desire to share in
the happiness of this Virgins-Company in Heaven, you must endeavor to prefer
an immaculate purity here on earth.

To this end, keep a strict guard upon your Senses. Open not your ears to
impure Speeches, nor suffer your eyes to behold vanity; For whosoever looks
on a woman to lust after her, has committed Adultery with her already in his
heart, Mat. 5.28.
says our Blessed Savior; For the prevention of this danger says Holy Job,
Job. 31.1.
I made a Covenant with mine eyes; why then should I think upon a Maid? Wanton
looks, as flashes of Lightning, and wanton Thoughts, as sparks of Fire, often
kindle those Flames of Lust, wherein both the Body and Soul is offered up as a
Holocaust to Satan. And therefore says our Savior, Mat. 5.29.
if thy right eye offend thee, pluck it out, and cast it from thee: for it is
profitable for thee that one of thy Members should perish, and not that thy
whole Body should be cast into Hell.

But especially shun the company of a wanton woman, which is as a Murtheress
that lies in wait for the life of a man. Prove. 7.13, -- 18, -- 21, 22, 23.
Such was the Harlot of which Solomon speaks, who caught the young man, and
kissed him, and with an impudent face said unto him, come let us take our fill of
love until the Morning, let us solace our selves with Loves. With her much fair
Speech she caused him to yield; with the flattering of her Lips she forced him;
He goes after her straight way, as an Ox goes to the slaughter, or as a Fool
to the correction of the Stocks: Till a dart strike through his Liver; as a
Bird hastes to the snare, and knows not that it is for his Life. Carefully
shun therefore all occasions of falling into the company of such a woman. Take
the Counsel of Solomon; Prove. 5.8. and 7.27.
Remove thy way far from her, and come not nigh the door of her house; For, her
house is the way to Hell, going down to the Chambers of death.

VII. Shun Revelling and Drunkenness; These are sins so inconsistent with the
Christian Religion, which oblige all that embrace it, to Temperance and
Sobriety, that whosoever gives himself up to Revelling and Drunkenness, does in
effect renounce his Christianity; And he is certainly a desperate wretch, who
for a little sensual pleasure, will quit all his hopes of Heaven, and sell the
joys of Paradise. He that lives in these sins, travels in the common Road to
Hell.

Lasciviousness, 1 Pet. 4.3.
Lusts, Excess of Wine, Revellings, Banquetings, and abominable Idolatries,
were the sins of the Gentiles, before their Conversion to Christianity. How
unworthy is it of a Christian, to stain the Glory of his Holy Profession with
the guilt of the sins and vices of Heathens.

Christians know there is a day appointed, Act. 17.31.
wherein they must give an account to God for the time they have spent in the
world, and for all the Actions of their lives; And therefore says our Savior;
Luke 21.34.
Take heed to your selves, least at any time your hearts be overcharged with
Surfeiting and Drunkenness, and cares of this Life, so that day come upon you
unawares. Surfeiting and drunkenness breed diseases in men's Bodies, and shorten
their Lives. The punishment is here linkt to the sin; whereas Temperance and
Sobriety are a fair and pleasant path to Heaven; by Surfeiting and Drunkenness,
men take the foulest way, that they may make the shortest journey to Hell.

Drunkenness is a vile debasement to a man. No person, that has but the heart
of a Man, would suffer himself to be so vilely abused and debased by another,
as by Drunkenness he abuses and debases himself. A Sober Servant is to be
preferred before a drunken Son. A drunken Servant is no better than a very
Beast. In Drunkenness a man commits two or three sins in one; For he at once
abuses God's Blessings, and his own Body, and dishonours and wrongs any to whom
he owes Service and Obedience, which, having transformed himself into a brute
beast, a raging Bedlam, or a senseless stock, he is not capable to perform. How
woeful is it, that he, that is called to be a Christian, should cease to be a
man! And how just is it, that God should cut him off in his sin, and cast him
into Hell, who has made himself incapable to answer the end of his Calling, as
a Christian, yea, of his Being, as a man.

Know, you were born in a Night of darkness, a state of ignorance and sin: but
by institution in the Mysteries of the Christian Religion, you may perceive the
dawning of a day of Light, a State of Knowledge and Salvation by Jesus Christ.
Let the Apostle's Exhortation then prevail with you for a suitable demeanor.
Romans 13.12, 13.14.
The night (says he) is far spent, the day is at hand: let us therefore cast
off the works of darkness, and let us put on the Armor of Light. Let us walk
honestly as in the day, not in Rioting and Drunkenness, not in Chambering and
Wantonness, not in Strife and Envying. But put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ, and
make not Provision for the Flesh, to fulfill the Lusts thereof.

VIII. Avoid ill Company. The keeping of ill Company has been the utter
undoing of many Young men. For while they have been carried on hereby in an
idle, licentious course of life, they have destroyed themselves Bodies and
Souls for ever. He that once engages himself in that society of sinners, which
is as the Corporation of Hell, shall hardly ever recover so much freedom and
honor as to become a Citizen of Heaven. Happy is the man then that carefully
keeps himself from evil Company, yea, this is the man who is pronounced Blessed
by an Oracle of God. Blessed is the man that walks not in the Counsel of the
ungodly, Psalm. 1.1.
nor stands in the way of sinners, nor sits in the seat of the scornful.
And therefore David, to clear his Integrity, thus makes his Profession; Psalm.
26.4, 5.
I have not sat with vain persons, neither will I go in with Dissemblers. I
have hated the Congregation of evil doers: and will not sit with the wicked.
But, Psalm. 119.63.
I am a Companion of all them that fear thee, and of them that keep thy
Precepts.

Man's a sociable Creature, and mutual converse is the delight and sweetness of
Humane Life. But then it greatly concerns us to make choice of good company.
For, Prove. 13.20.
he that walks with wise men shall be wise: but a Companion of fools shall be
destroyed. If it be known that a man has the plague, or some infectious disease
upon him, will not every man shun his society? Sin is the disease of the Soul,
not less infectious than the Plague. Should you not have more care of your Soul
than of your Body? Is a Temporal Life in this World, to be preferred before
Eternal Life in Heaven? Can you touch pitch, and not be defiled? familiarly and
delightfully converse with sinners, and not contract the guilt of sin? It Is
impossible. Do you seriously reprove them for all their Oaths and Curses, all
their evil words and actions, all their vanities and vicious excesses? If so,
their company will soon become unpleasant to you, and yours to them. If not,
know you go away guilty of all their sins in the sight of God. Oh! What a load
of guilt do men carry home with them from ill Company? Now are not thine own
sins enough to damn thee? How then will thou hold up thy head at the Judgment
Seat of Christ, when thou shall be charged with all the horrible sins of that
Company, with which thou did delightfully converse? For he that keeps another
Company in sinning, heartens and hardens him in his sins, and so at once
promotes his and his own Damnation. Surely, if thou saw the Wrath of God,
and his Judgments hang over the heads of these sinners, if thou saw those
Black Devils that stand at their Elbowes, to prompt them to wickedness, if thou
saw the burning Lake which is kindled underneath, them, into which they are
ready to fall every step they take, every sin they commit, thou would be
afraid to come into their Company, and no Gold should ever bribe thee to become
one of their Society?

If thou art wise, and have any regard to thy own welfare; Ephesians. 5.11, 12.
Have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, but rather reprove
them. For it is a shame even to speak of those things which are done of them in
secret. Keep thy distance then from them, and bind thy self with firm
resolutions, altogether to refrain their Society. Hear the Counsel of the
wisest of men, Solomon, and know therein thou hear the voice of God; Prove.
4.13, 14.
Enter not into the Path of the wicked, and go not in the way of evil men;
avoid it, pass not by it, turn from it, and pass away. Observe here, the wise
man repeats expressions of the same import, no less than six times, to engage
thee to shun the Society of sinners, as if he should cry out aloud to thee, and
say, fly, fly, fly, fly, fly, fly evil Company, if thou love the life of thy
Soul; or otherwise thou art a dead man, utterly undone for ever.

Know for certain, such as the Company is, in which thou delightest in this
World, such shall thy Company be hereafter, either the Saints in Heaven, or the
Damned in Hell.

If thou know not where to have Society with good men, know its far better
to remain solitary, and to hold converse with God, wherein the Pious Soul
ascends to Heaven, than to be traveling on with a great deal of merry Company
toward Hell.

IX. Be very serious and constant in the Duties of God's Service. Know the
service of God, and the Salvation of your Souls, are your great work and
business in this World, which you are to mind above all other things. And be
sure what you do in these matters, you do with all your might. No man will
endure a negligent and slothful servant, who is still mindless and heedless in
what he goes about. Trifling with God, in matters of Eternal Consequence, is
utterly intolerable.

Be very diligent in attendance on the solemn Worship and Service of God, on
the Lord's Days, and be constant in the performance of the duties of Religion,
Prayers and Praises to God on your own days also: but be sure you serve God in
both, with all humble Reverence, Holy Seriousness, and hearty Devotion. God's
Service is the most excellent employment, and you must always attend it with
the greatest earnestness of Spirit. Stir up your self to serve God with all
your strength: employ all the powers of your Soul in the duties of Religion.
Genesis 32.24 -- 30. Hos. 12.4.
Jacob wrestled with God in Prayer, and so gained a Blessing. If you play the
Hypocrite in your Prayers, you must expect nothing but the Portion of
Hypocrites in Hellfire. Mat. 24.51.


When you approach the presence of God, remember he is that great and dreadful
God, who is Glorious in Majesty, and Infinite in Excellency, and so address to
him with all possible Reverence and Humility. Heb. 12.28.
Let us have Grace (says the Apostle) whereby we may serve God acceptably,
with Reverence and Godly Fear. For our God is a consuming fire. Psalm. 95.6.
And O come (says the Psalmist) let us worship and bow down: let us kneel
before the LORD our Maker.

How intolerable is the Pride and Arrogance of some Persons in this duty of
Prayer! The greatest Subject of the Kingdom, if he have a request to the King,
presents his Petition to him on the Knee. But you shall see a sorry Servant to
a Mortal man, that will not be persuaded to bow his Knees to Almighty God, when
he should join with the Assembly in Public Prayers. The rude Carriage of such
persons in the special presence of the All-Glorious God, plainly discovers a
profane and Atheistical Spirit. Such an one, though he be come to God's House,
Genesis 28.17.
which is the Gate of Heaven, sits there upon the brink of Hell.

It Is a great instance of the Divine Patience, that such a Person is not
smitten with death in the place where he sits. Lev. 10.1, 2, 3.
Nadab and Abihu the Sons of Aaron, we know for a like presumption, were both
punished with sudden Death. For, says the LORD, I will be Sanctified in them
that come nigh me, and before all the people I will be Glorified.

And therefore as you tender the Honor of God, and the good of your own Souls,
approach Gods presence with great Reverence and Humility, and serve him with
great seriousness and sincerity of heart, in all the Duties of Religion.

X. Let all your Actions and Employments, your Labors and Delights, even your
most pleasant Recreations be seasoned with the Fear of God, and a serious
Remembrance of Death and Judgment. Where ever you are, whatsoever you do,
remember the Eye of God is upon you, and so demean your self as in his sight
and presence. For, His Eyes are upon all the ways of the Sons of men, Jer.
32.19.
to give to every one according to his ways, and according to the Fruit of his
Doings.

Remember the day is coming, when you must give an account before all the
World, for whatsoever you have done in the Flesh. Do nothing now, which you
would be afraid or ashamed to own then. When in the most secret place, you are
tempted to any wicked deed, remember, though no man beholds you, the Eye of the
great God is upon you, and so say with Joseph; How can I do this great
wickedness, and sin against God? Thus, Genesis 39, 9. Psalm. 4.41.
stand in aw, and sin not. Let the fear of God restrain you from whatsoever is
evil; and let the Love of God carry you on with Delight, to whatsoever is good.

And though God do not deny you those innocent Delights and Recreations, which
are agreeable to your youthful years, and which may fit you for a more cheerful
discharge of your respective duties, yet you must be careful that those very
Delights be seasoned with the remembrance of God, and the day of Judgment.
Mind, what the wise man says to you, and what charge he gives you concerning
this matter. Eccl. 11.9.
Rejoice, O Young man in thy Youth, and let thy heart cheer thee in the days
of thy Youth, and walk in the ways of thy Heart, and in the sight of thine
Eyes: but know thou that, for all these things, God will bring thee into
Judgment.

Know, thou art Mortal: and consider that every Action thou do is a step to
Eternity, and every day thou live, sets thee a day nearer to thy death. And
therefore live so now, as thou will wish thou had done when thou come to
dye. The time of death is uncertain; But most certain it is, Christ Jesus will
shortly come to call every one that has been faithful in his fervice, from
Labor to Rest, and Sorrow to Joy. Then happy shall he be who has been most
serious in God's Service; His Rest shall be sweet, and his Reward Glorious.
Make good use then of this inch of time, upon which depends the following
Eternity. Thy Glass is running: be sure thy work be done before the last sand
drop. Spend thy Life in God's Service, and in Death thou shall see his
Salvation. Think still, my Lord is at hand, and so be ever well-doing. Blessed
is that servant, Mat. 24.46, and
whom his Lord when he comes shall find so doing. He will say to him, Well done
good and faithful servant; 25.21.
thou have been faithful in a little, take Possession of much; Enter thou into
the joy of thy Lord.

Now the God of all Grace, 1 Pet. 5.10.
who has called us to his Eternal Glory by Christ Jesus, make you perfect,
stablish, strengthen, and settle you; To him be Glory and Dominion for ever and
ever. Amen.

Thou shall do well to repeat these Rules of Life (as also thy Duty before
declared, as a Child or Servant) upon the Lords Day once a Month, for the
better preserving them in Memory for thy direction in thy daily Practice. For
certainly, the most of the sins that men commit, to the dishonor of God, and
wounding of their own Conscience, are committed through want of a present
remembrance of their Duty, or a due consideration of the mighty Obligations
that lie upon them to do it. This great mischief may be happily prevented by a
frequent reading of these Rules of Life. Read therefore, and Remember, and do
these things, that it may be well with thee for ever.

Apples of Gold IN PICTVRES of SILVER, FOR The Use and Delight of Children and
Servants: BEING A Collection of certain Verses, from some of our Divine Poems,
more fit to be Imprinted on the Memories of Young People, than Profane Songs.
The Preface.
FOR the close of your entertainment, I here present you with a Delicate Dish.
It Is choice Fruit, which grew in a Rich Soil. It Is as the Fruit of Eden, that
Tempted Eve, good for Food, Genesis 3.6.
pleasant to the Eyes, and desirable to make one Wise. Only here is the
difference; She could not eat of that without Sin against God, and Hurt to her
self: your eating of this may keep you from Sin, and prove the Health of your
Soul. Freely feed then on this Fruit; it is not less wholesome than pleasant.
It Is not as the Banquet of Midas or Plut. Mor.
Pythes, a Mock-Feast; it is Gold for worth, Prove. 25.11:
but Food for use. A Word fitly spoken ( says Solomon) is like Apples of Gold
in Pictures of Silver. And instruction in virtue, to Persons in the Flower of
their Age, is a word fitly spoken. Such are these pieces of Divine Poesy,
wherewith I here present you, Read, Remember and Practice them: so shall you
learn that Knowledge and Wisdom, which is better than Silver and Gold; seeing
it will at once make you Rich and Happy. Prove. 3.18.
For Wisdom is a Tree of Life ( says Solomon) to them that lay hold upon her;
and Happy is every one that retains her. And therefore, Receive my
Instruction, (says He) and not Silver, and Knowledge rather than choice Gold.
For Wisdom is better than Rubies; and all the things that may be desired are
not to be compared to it. Here you have the Words of Wisdom, which are Golden
Apples, by the curious Art of Divine Poesy, set in Silver Frames. Take and eat:
for here you have both Food and Treasure. What can you desire more than what is
here offered to your Acceptance? Accept and Improve, and you shall not fail at
once, to find both Profit and Delight.

And Profit with Delight combined,
Is Meat and Music to the Mind.
The Names of the Authors, from whose Poems the following Verses are Collected.
G. H. Mr. George Herbert's Sacred Poems, called the Temple. R. C. Mr. Richard
Crashaw's steps to the Temple. F. Q. Mr. Francis Quarles, his Emblems and
Divine Fancies. J. D. Dr. Donne's Poems. G.F. Mr. Giles Fletcher's, Christ's
Victory and Triumph. G. S. Mr. George Sandy's, his Paraphrase of the Psalms and
Scripture Hymns: A. C. Mr. Abraham Cowley's Sacred Poems. Some few others of
less note, are signified by the first Letters of their Names.
Counsel to Young men. G. H.
THou, whose sweet youth, and early hopes inhance
Thy rate and price, and mark thee for a Treasure;
Hearken unto a Verser, who may chance
Rhyme thee to good, and make a bait of Pleasure.
A Verse may find him, who a Sermon flies,
And turn Delight into a Sacrifice,
Beware of Lust: it does pollute and foul
Whom God in Baptism washed with his own Blood.
It blots the Lesson written in thy Soul;
The Holy Lines cannot be understood.
How dare those eyes upon a Bible look,
Much less toward God, whose Lust is all their Book?
Drink not the third glass, which thou can nottame,
When once it is within thee; but before
May rule it, as thou list: and pour the shame,
Which it would pour on thee, upon the Floor.
It is most just to throw that on the ground,
Which would throw me there, if I keep the round.
He that is drunken, may his Mother kill
Big with his Sister: he has lost the Reins,
Is out-lawed by himself: all kind of ill
Did with his Liquor slide into his Veins.
The Drunkard forfeits man, and does divest
All worldly Right save what he has by Beast.
Take not his name, who made thy mouth, in yain:
It gets thee nothing, and has no excuse.
Lust and Wine plead a pleasure, Avarice gain:
But the cheap swearer through his open sluice
Lets his Soul run for naught, as little fearing:
Were I an Epicure, I could bate swearing.
When thou do tell another Jest, therein
Omit the Oaths, which true wit cannot need:
Pick out of Tales the Mirth, but not the sin.
He pares his Apple, that will cleanly feed.
Play not away the virtue of that name,
Which is thy best Stake when griefs make thee tame.
Lie not; but let thy heart be true to God,
Thy mouth to it, thy actions to them both:
Cowards tell Lies, and those that fear the Rod;
The stormy working Soul spits Lies and Froth.
Dare to be true. Nothing can need a Lie,
A fault, which needs it most, grows two thereby.
Fly Idleness; which yet thou can not fly
By Dressing, Mistressing and Complement.
If those take up thy day, the Sun will cry
Against thee: for his light was only lent.
God gave thy Soul brave wings: put not those feathers
Into a Bed, to sleep out all ill weathers.
When thou do purpose ought (within thy power)
Be sure to do it, though it be but small.
Constancy knits the bones, and makes us stowre,
When wanton pleasures becken us to thrall.
Who breaks his own Bond, forseiteth himself:
What nature made a Ship, he makes a shelf.
Do all things like a man, not sneakingly:
Think the King sees thee still; for his King does.
Simpring is but a Lay-hypocrisie:
Give it a corner, and the Clew undoes:
Who fears to do ill, sets himself to task:
Who fears to do well sure should wear a Mask.
Look to thy Mouth: Diseases enter there.
Thou have two Sconces, if thy Stomach call;
Carve, or discourse, do not a Famine fear.
Who carves is kind to two; who talks to all.
Look on Meat, think it dirt, then eat a bit;
And say with all; Earth to Earth I commit.
By all means use sometimes to be alone.
Salute thy self: see what thy soul does wear.
Dare to look in thy Chest; for it is thine own:
And tumble up and down what thou find there.
Who cannot rest till he good fellows find,
He breaks up house, turns out of doors his mind.
In Conversation boldness now bears sway.
But know that nothing can so foolish be,
As empty boldness: therefore first assay
To stuff thy mind with solid bravery;
Then march on gallant: get substantial worth,
Boldness gilds finely, and will set it forth.
Laugh not too much: the witty man laughs least:
For wit is News only to Ignorance.
Less at thine own things laugh; lest in the jest
Thy person share, and the conceit advance.
Make not thy sport abuses: for the Fly
That feeds on Duug, is colored thereby.
Pick out of Mirth, like stones out of thy ground,
Profaneness, Filthyness, Abufiveness.
These are the scum, with which course wits abound:
The fine may spare these well, yet not go less.
All things are big with Jest: nothing that is plain
But may be witty, if thou have the vein.
Toward great persons use respective boldness:
That temper gives them theirs, and yet does take
Nothing from thine, in service, care or coldness
Does ratably thy Fortunes mar or make.
Feed no man in his sins: for Adulation
Does make thee parcel-Devil in Damnation.
Scorn no man's Love, though of a mean degree;
(Love is a Present for a Mighty King)
Much less make any one thine Enemy.
As Guns destroy, so may a little sling.
The cunning workman never does refuse
The meanest tool, that he may chance to use.
Render to God his due, part of thy time:
Treasure purloin'd cankers the whole Estate.
Sundays observe: think, when the Bells do chime,
It Is Angels Music; therefore come not late.
God then deals Blessings: If a King did so,
Who would not have, nay give, to see the show.
Let vain or busy thoughts have there no part:
Bring not thy Plough, thy Plots, thy Pleasures thither
Christ purged his Temple, so must thou thy heart.
All worldly thoughts are but thieves met together
To cozen thee. Look to thy Actions well:
For Churches are either our Heaven or Hell.
Judge not the Preacher; for he is thy Judge:
If thou mislike him, thou conceiv'st him not.
God calls Preaching Folly. Do not grudge
To pick out treasures from an Earthen pot.
The worst speak something good: if all want Sense,
God takes a Text, and Preaches Patience.
He that gets Patience, and the Blessing which
Preachers conclude with, has not lost his pains.
He that by being at Church escapes the ditch,
Which he might fall in by Companions, gains.
He that loves God's abode, and to combine
With Saints on Earth, shall one day with them shine.
In brief, acquit thee bravely, play the man.
Look not on pleasures as they come, but go.
Defer not the least virtue: life's poor span.
Make not an Ell, by trifling in thy woe.
If thou do ill, the Joy fades, not the pains:
If well, the pain does fade, the joy remains.
The Confession. G.S. in Psalm. 51.
LORD, to a sinner Mercy show:
Which since in thee so infinite;
Let all thy streams of Mercy flow,
And purify me in thy sight.
My sins unmaskt, before thee lie;
Who have deserved thy wrath alone:
Which I confess, to testify
Thy truth, and make thy Justice known.
In sin conceived, brought forth in sin;
Sin sucked I from my Mothers Breast:
Thou love a heart sincere within,
Where wisdom is a constant guest.
Blot out my crimes; O scparate
My trembling guilt far from thy view!
A clean Heart in my Breast Create;
A Mind, to thee confirmed, renew.
Nor cast me from thy Presence, Lord;
Nor, O! Thy Holy Spirit withdraw:
But thy Life-quickning Grace afford;
Enlarge my will, to embrace thy Law.
The Resolution. G. S. in Psalm. 119.
YOung man thine Actions by God's Precepts guide:
From these let not thy zealous servant slide.
Thy word, writ in my heart, shall curb my will.
Lord, teach me how I may thy laws fulfill.
Those by thy tongue pronounced I will unfold.
Thy Testaments by me more prized than Gold.
On these I meditate, admire; there set
My Souls delight: these never will forget.
O let me live, t'observe thy laws: mine eyes
Illuminate to view those Mysteries.
Me, a poor Pilgrim, with thy truth inspire:
For which my Soul even faints with desire.
The proud is cursed, who from thy Precepts straies,
Bless and preserve my soul, which them obeyes.
No hate of Princes from thy law deters:
My Study, my Delight, my Counselors.
The Bible. A. C.
THis Holy Book, like Heaven it self, does shine,
With thousand lights of truth Divine.
So numberless the Stars, that well they may
To Heaven's Gate make a Milky way.
Yet reason must assist too; for in Seas
So vast and dangerous as these,
Our course by Stars above we cannot know,
Without the compass too below.
Tho Reason cannot through Faith's Mysteries see,
It sees that there, and such they be;
Leads to Heaven's Door, and there does humbly keep
And there through chinks and key-holes peep.
Though it like Moses, by a sad command,
Must not come into the Holy Land;
Yet thither it infallibly does guide,
And from a far it is all descried.
Charms and Knots. G. H.
Who read a Chapter when they rise,
Shall never be troubled with ill eyes.
A poor man's Rod, when thou do ride,
Is both a weapon and a guide.
Who shuts his hand has lost his Gold:
Who opens it, has it twice told.
Who goes to Bed, and does not pray,
Makes two nights to every day.
Who by aspersions throw a stone
At the head of others, hit their own.
Who looks on ground with humble eyes,
Finds himself there, and seeks to rise.
When the hair is sweet, through Pride or lust,
The Powder does forget the dust.
Take one from ten, and what remains?
Ten still, if Sermons go for gains.
In shallow waters Heaven does show:
But who drinks on, to Hell may go.
God's Greatness. G. S. in 1 Samuel 2.
GOD our secret thoughts displayes;
All our works his balance weighs;
Giants bows his Forces break;
He with strength invests the weak.
Who were full, now serve for bread;
Those who served, infranchised.
Barren wombs with children flow;
Fruitful Mothers Childless grow.
God frail man of life deprives:
Those who sleep in death revives:
Leads us to our filent Tombs;
Brings us from those horrid Rooms:
Riches sends, sends Poverty:
Casts down, lifts up on high.
He from the despised dust,
From the dunghill takes the just;
To the height of honor brings;
Plants them in the Thrones of Kings.
Man's Meanness. G. S. Psalm. 8.
LORD, how illustrious is thy Name!
Whose power both Heaven and Earth proclaim!
Thy Glory thou have set on high,
Above the Marble-arched Sky.
The wonders of thy power thou have
In mouths of Babes, and Sucklings placed;
That so thou might thy Foes confound,
And who in Malice most abound,
When I pure Heaven, thy Fabric see,
The Moon and Stars disposed by thee;
O what is man, or his frail Race,
That thou should such a shadow Grace!
Next to thy Angels most renowned,
With Majesty and Glory Crowned;
The King of all thy Oreatures made;
That all beneath his feet have laid:
And that on Dales or Mountains feed;
That shady woods or deserts breed;
What in the Aerie Region glide,
Or through the rolling Ocean slide.
Lord, how illustrious is thy Name,
Whose Power both Heaven and Earth proclaim!
Humility. G. S. Psalm. 131.
THou Lord, my witness art:
I am not proud of heart;
Nor look with lofty eyes;
Nor envy, nor despise;
Nor to vain pomp apply
My thoughts, nor soar too high:
But in behavior mild;
And as a tender child,
Weaned from his Mothers Breast
On thee alone I rest.
The word of God. G. S. in Psalm. 19.
GOd's laws are perfect, and restore
The Soul to life, even dead before.
His Testimonies, firmly true,
With wisdom simple men indue.
The Lord's Commandments are upright,
And feast the Soul with sweet delight.
His Precepts are all purity,
Such as illuminate the eye.
The fear of God, soiled with no stain,
Shall Everlastingly remain.
Jehovah's Judgments are Divine,
With Judgment he does Justice join.
Which men should more than Gold desire,
Than heaps of Gold refined by fire:
More sweet than honey of the Hive,
Or Cells, where Bees their treasure stive.
Thy servant is informed from thence,
They their observers recompense.
The World. F. Q.
O What a Crocodilian world is this,
Composed of treacheries and imnaring wiles!
She clothes destruction in a formal kiss,
And lodges death in her deceitful smiles;
She hugs the Soul she hates, and there does prove,
The veryest tyrant, where she vows to love:
And is a Serpent most, when most she seems a Dove:
Thrice happy he, whose nobler thoughts despise
To make an object of so easy gains;
Thrice happy he, who scorns so poor a prize
Should be the Crown of his heroic pains;
Thrice happy he that never was born to try,
Her frowns or smiles, or being born did lie
In his sad Nurses Arms an hour or two, and dye.
The Quip. G. H.
The merry world did on a day,
With his Train-bands and Mates agree
To meet together where I lay,
And all in sport to jeer at me.
First, Beauty crept into a Rose,
Which when I plucked not, Sir said she,
Tell me I pray, whose hands are those?
But thou shall answer, Lord, for me.
Then Money came, and chinking still,
What tune is this, poor man? said he;
I heard in Music you had skill;
But thou shall answer, Lord for me.
Then came brave Glory puffing by,
In Silks that whistled, who but he?
He scarce allowed me half an eye.
But thou shall answer, Lord, for me.
Then came quick wit and Conversation,
And he would needs a comfort be,
And to be short, make an Oration.
But thou shall answer, Lord, for me.
Yet when the hour of thy design,
To answer these fine things shall come;
Speak not at large, say, I am thine:
And then they have their Answer home.
The Rest. F. Q.
How is the anxious Soul of man befooled
In his desire,
That thinks a Hectic Fever may be cooled
In flames of Fire;
Or hopes to rake full heaps of burnisht Gold
From nasty Mire!
A whining Lover may as well request
A scornful Breast,
To melt in gentle tears, as woe the world for rest.
Whose Gold is double with a careful hand,
His cares are double;
The Pleasure, Honor, Wealth of Sea and Land
Bring but a trouble;
The world it self, and all the world's command
Is but a bubble:
The strong desires of man's insatiate breast
May stand possessed
Of all that earth can give, but earth can give no rest.
The world's a seeming Paradise, but her own
And man's Tormenter;
Appearing fixed, but yet a rowling-stone:
Without a tenter
It is a vast circumference, where none
Can find a Center:
Of more than earth can earth make none posrest;
And he that least
Regards this restless world, shall in this world find rest.
The Retreat, Return. F. Q.
Lord, when we leave the world, and come to thee,
How dull, how slug are we!
But when at earth we dart our winged desire,
We burn, we burn like Fire.
If pleasure becken with her balmy hand,
Her beck's a strong command.
If honor call us with her Courtly breath,
An hours delay is death.
If Profits Golden finger'd-charms inveigle's,
We clip more swift than Eagles.
Lord, stop our Flight, and turn our Course, that we
May fly as fast to thee.
Sunday. G. H.
O day most calm, most bright;
The Fruit of this, the next world's Bud;
The Indorsment of supreme delight,
Writ by a Friend, and with his Blood;
The Couch of time, cares Balm and Bay;
The week were dark but for thy light:
Thy torch does show the way.
The other days, and thou
Make up one man, whose face thou art,
Knocking at Heaven with thy brow:
The worky days are the back part;
The burden of the week lies there,
Making the whole to stoop and bow
Till thy release appear.
Man had straight forward gone
To endless death: but thou do pull
And turn us round to look on one,
Whom, if we were not very dull
We could not choose but look on still;
Since there is no place so alone,
The which he does not fill.
Sundays the Pillars are,
On which Heaven's Palace arched lies:
The other days fill up the spare
And hollow room with vanities.
They are the fruitful Beds and Borders
In God's rich Garden: that is bare
Which parts their ranks and orders*
The Sundays of man's Life
Threaded together, on time's string,
Make bracelets to adorn the wife,
Of the Eternal Glorious King.
On Sunday Heaven's Gate stands open;
Blessings are plentiful and rife,
More plentiful than hope.
This day my Savior rose,
And did enclose this Light for his:
That as each Beast his Manger knows,
Man might not of his Fodder miss.
Christ has took in this piece of ground;
And made a Garden there for those
Who want Herbs for their wound.
The Rest of our Creation
Our great Redeemer did remove
With the same shake, which at his Passion
Did earth, and all things with it move.
As Sampson bore the doors away,
Christ's hands though nailed, wrought our Salvation,
And did unhinge that day.
The brightness of that day
We sullied by our foul offense:
Wherefore that Robe we cast away,
Having a new at his expense,
Whose Drops of Blood paid the full price,
That was required to make us gay,
And fit for Paradise.
Thou art a day of Mirth:
And where the week days trail on ground,
Thy Flight is higher as thy Birth.
O let me take thee at the bound,
Leaping with thee from seven to seven,
Till that we both, being tossed from Earth,
Fly hand in hand to Heaven.
The Church. G. S. in Psalm. 84.
O how amiable are
Thy abodes, great God of war!
Happy men who spend their days
In thy Courts, there sing thy praise.
Happy, who on thee depend;
Thine their way, and thou their end.
One day in thy Courts alone,
Far exceeds a Million.
In thy house contemned and poor,
I had rather keep a door,
Than with wicked men possess,
All that they call happiness.
O thou Shield of our defense!
O thou Sun, whose influence
Sweetly glides into our hearts!
Thou, who all to thine imparts!
Happy! O thrice happy he,
Who alone depends on thee.
The Young Man's Mirth. F. Q.
Eccl. 11.9.
Young man Rejoice: what jolly mirth is here!
Let thy heart cheer thee: what delicious cheer!
In thy Young days: thy cares will relish sweeter.
Walk thy own ways: thy cares will pass the fleeter.
Please thine own heart: carve where it likes thee best.
Delight thine Eyes: and be a joyful Guest.
But know withal, the day will come, whereon
Thy Judge will doom thee for the deeds thou have done.
O what a Feast! O what a reckoning's here!
Thy cates are sweet; the shot's extremely dear.
Grace. G. H.
My Stock lies dead, and no increase
Does my dull Husbandry improve:
O let thy Graces without cease
Drop from above.
If still the Sun should hide his Face,
Thy house would but a Dungeon prove,
Thy works nights Captives; O let Grace
Drop from above.
The Dew does every Morning fall;
And shall the Dew outstrip thy Dove?
The Dew, for which Grass cannot call,
Drop from above.
Death is still working like a Mole,
And digs my Grave at each remove:
Let Grace work too, and on my Soul
Drop from above.
Sin is still hammering my heart
Unto a hardness, vold of love:
Let suppling Grace, to cross his Art,
Drop from above.
O come! for thou do know the way:
Or if to me thou will not move,
Remove me where I need not say,
Drop from above.
Contentment. R. S.
I dwell in Grace's Court,
Enricht with Virtue's rights:
Faith guides my wit, Love leads my will;
Hope all my mind's delights.
In lowly vales I mount
To pleasure's highest pitch:
My honest meanness Honor brings,
My poor Estate is rich.
My Conscience is my Crown,
Contented thoughts my rest.
My heart is happy in it self;
My Bliss is in my Breast.
Enough, I reckon wealth;
A mean, the surest Lot;
That lies too high for base contempt,
Too low for envies shot.
My wishes are but few;
All easy to fulfill:
I make the limits of my power,
The bounds unto my will.
I feel no care of Coin;
VVell-doing is my wealth:
My mind to me an Empire is,
While Grace affords health.
Prosperity. F. Q.
Take heed, thou prosperous sinner, how thou liv'st
In sin, and thriv'st.
Thou that do flourish in thy heaps of Gold,
And Sums untold.
Thou, that had never reason to complain
Of Cross or Pain:
Whose unafflicted Conscience never found
Nor check, nor wound.
Believe it, Prosper, thy deceitful lease
Affords thee neither wealth, nor joy, nor peace.
Thy Golden heaps are nothing but the price
Of Paradise:
Thy flattering pleasures, and thy aerie joys,
But painted toys:
Thy peaceful Conscience is but like a dog,
Tied in a clog.
Believe it, Prosper thy deceitful Lease
Allows thee neither wealth, nor joy, nor peace.
Thy heaps of Gold will stand thee in no steed.
At greatest need:
Thy empty pleasure will convert thy laughter
To groans hereafter.
Thy silent Conscience when enlarged, will roar,
And rage the more.
Believe it, Prosper thy deceitful lease
Affords thee neither wealth, nor joy, nor peace.
Paradise. G. H.
I bless thee Lord, because I GROW
Among thy trees, which in a ROW,
To thee both Fruit and Order OW.
What open Force, or hidden CHARM
Can blast my Fruit, or bring me HARM,
While the enclosure is thine ARM.
Enclose me still for fear I START,
Be to me rather sharp and TART
Then let me want thy hand and ART.
When thou do greater Judgments SPARE,
And with thy knife but prune and PARE.
Even fruitful trees more fruitful ARE.
Such sharpness shows the sweetest FRIEND:
Such cuttings rather heal then REND:
And such beginnings touch their END.
Several sins. F. Q.
Drunkenness.
It is a Thief, that often before his face,
Steals man away, and lays a beast in's place.
Cross sin.
It is a shower, which e're we can get in,
And find a shelter, wets us to the skin.
Sin of Infirmity.
Is like the falling of an April-show'r:
It Is often rain, and sunshine in an hour.
Sin of Custom,
Is a long shower beginning withthe light;
Oft-times continuing till the dead of night.
Sin of Ignorance,
It is a hideous mist, that wets amain,
Though it appears not in the form of rain.
Crying sin.
It is a sudden shower that tears in sunder,
The cope of Heaven, and always comes with thunder.
Sin of Delight.
Is like a feathered shower of snow, not felt,
But soaks to the very skin when e're it melt.
Sin of Presumption,
Does like a shower of hail, both wet and wound
With sudden death, or strikes us to the ground.
The sin of Sins.
It is a sulfurous shower, like that which fell.
On Sodom, strikes, and strikes to the pit of Hell.
Lord, let thy saving Grace thy servants shrowed,
Till we arrive where is neither shower nor cloud.
Repentance. F. Q.
It Is not to cry God mercy, or to sit
And droop; or to confess that thou have failed:
It Is to bewail the sins thou did commit,
And not commit those sins thou have bewailed.
He that bewails, and not forsakes them too,
Confesses rather what he means to do.
Praise. G. H.
King of Glory, King of Peace!
I will love thee:
And that love may never cease,
I will move thee.
Thou have granted my request,
Thou have heard me:
Thou did note my working breast;
Thou have spared me.
Therefore with my utmost art,
I will sing thee:
And the cream of all my heart
I will bring thee.
Though my sins against me cried,
Thou did clear me:
And alone, when they replied,
Thou did hear me.
The Offering.
Since my sadness
Into Gladness
Lord thou do convert,
O accept
What thou have kept
As thy due desert.
Had I many,
Had I my,
(For this heart is none)
All were thine,
And none of mine,
Surely thine alone.
Yet thy favor
May give savor
To this poor Oblation;
And it raise
To be thy praise,
And be my Salvation.
Light. A. C.
Hail active nature's watchful life and health!
Her joy, her ornament and wealth!
Hail to thy Husband heat, and thee!
Thou the world's beauteous Bride, the lustry Bridegroom he.
Say from what Golden quivers of the Sky,
Do all thy winged arrows fly?
Swiftness and Power by Birth are thine:
From thy great Sire they came, thy Sire the word Divine.
It Is I believe, thine archery to show,
That so much cost in colors thou,
And skill in painting do bestow
Upon thine ancient arms, the gaudy Heavenly bow.
Swift as winged thoughts their light carrier do run
Thy race is finished when begun:
Let a Post-Angel start with thee,
And thou the Goal of earth shall reach as soon as he,
Thou in the Moons bright chariot proud and gay,
Do thy bright world of Stars survey;
And all the year does with thee bring
A thousand flowery lights, thine own Nocturnal spring
Thou Scythian like do round thy lands above
The Suns gilt tent for ever move;
And still as thou in pomp do go,
The shining Pageants of the world attend thy show.
Nor amidst all these triumphs do thou scorn
The humble glowworms to adorn,
And with those living spangles gild
(O greatness without pride) the bushes of the field.
Night, and her ugly subjects thou do fright;
And sleep, the lazy Owl of night:
Ashamed, and fearful to appear
They skreen their horrid shapes with the black Hemisphere.
At thy appearance fear it self grows bold;
Thy sunshine melts away his cold:
Enconrag'd at the sight of thee,
To the Cheek color comes, and firmness to the Knee.
Even lust, the master of a hardened face,
Blushes, if thou be'st in the place;
To darkness Curtains he retires,
In sympathising night he rowls his smoaky fires.
When Queen of Beauties, thou list'st up thy head,
Out of the Mornings purple bed,
The quire of birds about thee play,
And all the joyful world salutes the rising day.
All the worlds brav'ry that delights our eyes,
Is but thy several liveries;
Thou the rich dye on them bestow'st,
Thy nimble pencil paints this landshape as thou go.
A crimson garment in the rose thou wear'st:
A Crown of studded Gold thou bear;
The Virgin-lillies in their white,
Are clad but with the lawn of almost naked light.
The Violet like a little Infant stands,
Girt in thy purple swaddling bands:
On the fair Tulip thou do dote:
Thou cloth'st it in a gay, and party colored coat.
But when firm bodies thy free course oppose,
Gently thy source the Land over flows;
Takes there possession, and does make
Of colors mingled, light, a thick and standing lake.
But the vast Ocean of unbounded day,
In the Empyraean Heaven does stay:
Thy Rivers, Lakes and Springs below
From thence took first their rise, thither at last must flow.
Success. G. S. Psalm. 127.
Unless the Lord the house sustain,
They build in vain,
In vain they watch unless the Lord,
The City Guard.
In vain ye rise before the light,
And break the slumbers of the night:
In vain the bread of sorrows eat,
Got by your sweat;
Unless the Lord with good success
Your labors bless:
For he all good on his bestows.
And crowns their eyes with sweet repose.
Hope. A. C.
Hope of all ills that men endure,
The only cheap and universal cure!
Thou captives freedom, and thou sick man's health!
Thou loosers victory, and thou beggars wealth!
Thou Manna, which from Heaven we eat,
To every taste a several Meat!
Thou strong retreat! thou sure entailed Estate,
Which naught has power to alienate!
Thou pleasant, honest flatterer! For none
Flatter unhappy men but thou alone.
Hope, thou first fruits of happiness!
Thou gentle dawning of a bright success!
Thou good preparative, without which our joy
Does work too strong and whilst it cures destroy;
Who out of tortures reach do stand,
And art a Blessing still in hand!
Whilst thee, her Earnest-money we retain,
We certain are to gain,
Whether she her bargain break, or else fulfill,
Thou only good, not worse for ending ill.
Brother of Faith, 'twixt whom and thee
The joys of Heaven and Earth divided be!
Though faith be Heir, and have the first Estate,
Thy portion yet in movables is great.
Happiness it self's all one
In thee, or in Possession:
Only the future's thine, and present his:
Thine's the more hard and noble bliss.
Best Apprehender of our joys which have
So long a reach, and yet can hold so fast.
Good Conscience. Q.
A Conscience pure, unstained by sin,
Is Brass without, and Gold within.
The Holy Heart. F. Q.
The Royal Offspring of a second Birth,
Sets open to Heaven, and shuts the doors to Earth.
If Earth (Heavens Rival) dart her idle Ray,
To Heaven it is wax, and to the world it is Clay.
If earth present delights, it scorns to draw;
But, like the Jet unrubb'd, disdains that straw.
No hope deceives it, and no doubt divides it;
No grief disturbs it, and no error guides it.
No fear distracts it, and no rage inflames it;
No guilt condemns it, and no folly shames it.
No sloth besots it, and no lust inthrals it;
No scorn afflicts it, and no passion galls it.
It is a Carknet of immortal Life;
An Ark of Peace; the lists of sacred strise;
A purer piece of endless transitory;
A shrine of Grace, a little Throne of Glory.
A Heaven born Offspring of a new born Birth;
An earthly Heaven, an ounce of Heavenly earth.
Man's Life. F. Q.
Our life is nothing but a winters day:
Some only break their fast, and so away:
Others stay dinner, and depart full sed;
The deepest age but sups, and goes to bed.
He Is most in debt that lingers out the day:
Who dies betime has less, and less to pay.
Man's Folly. I. C.
Lord, what a foolish thing is man!
How fond is he of toys!
How does he spend that little span
Of his in empty joys!
But for that precious soul of his,
He takes no further care
To fit it for immortal bliss
Such thoughts too serious are.
Himself to every pleasure gives,
And drowns his soul in lust:
In all destructive sins he lives;
'Till levelled with the dust.
Give me, O Lord, that pious care,
And that obsequious love;
That all my actions may declare,
I seek that place above.
Where we from sin exempt shall be;
From sorrow and from tears:
And where no trouble we shall see,
Nor be disturbed with sears.
Christ Crucified. R. F.
Behold and see, if ever any pain
Did match his sorrow who for us was slain!
Lo, God bleeds on the Cross! high Heaven descends
In blood to make man and his Maker friends.
When guilty man lay doomed Eternally
To Death and Hell, even God himself could dye,
And smile upon those wounds, that spear, that grave,
Which our Rebellion merited and gave.
This love exceeds all height: yet I confess
'Twas God that did it, how could it be less?
Death. J. D.
Death, be nor proud, though some have called thee
Mighty and dreadful: for thou art not so.
For those, whom thou think thou do overthrow,
Die not, poor death; nor yet can thou kill me.
From rest and sleep, which but thy picture be,
Much pleasure, then from thee much more must flow:
And soonest our best men with thee do go,
Rest of their bones, and souls delivery;
The art slave to fate, chance, Kings and desperate men;
And do with poison, war and sickness dwell:
Hard pains or poppy make us sleep as well,
And better then thy stroke: why swell'st thou then
One short sleep past, we wake Eternally;
And death shall be no more, death, thou shall dye.
The Resurrection. I. D.
At the round earth's imagined corners blow
Your trumpets, Angels: men arise, arise
From death; you numberless infinities
Of souls unto your scattered bodies go;
All whom one flood did, and fire shall or'ethrow;
All whom war, death, age, agues, tyrannies,
Despair, law, chance has slain, and you whose eyes
Shall behold God, and never taste death's woe.
But let them sleep, Lord, and me mourn a space,
For if above all these my sins abound,
It Is late to ask abundance of thy Grace,
When we are there. Here on this lowly ground
Teach me how to repent: for that is as good
As if the 'adst sealed my pardon with thy blood.
The Judgment-Day. R. C.
Hear'st thou my Soul, what serious things,
The Prophets say, the Psalmist sings
Of a strict Judge from whose sharp ray,
The world in flames shall fly away.
O that fire! before whose face
Heaven and Earth shall find no place.
O those eyes! whose angry light
Must be the day of that dread night.
O that trump! whose blast shall run,
An even round with the circling sun,
And urge the murmuring graves to bring
Pale Mankind forth to meet their King.
Horror of nature, Hell and Death!
When a deep groan shall from beneath
Cry out, We come, we come; and all
The caves of night answer one call.
O that book! whose leaves so bright
Will set the world in severe light:
O the Judge! whose Hand, whose Eye,
None can endure, yet none can fly.
Yet thou giv'st leave, dread Lord, that we
Take shelter from thy self in thee;
And with the wings of thine own Dove
Fly to thy Scepter of soft love.
Mercy, my Judge, mercy I cry,
With blushing cheek, and bleeding eye:
The conscious colors of my sin
Are red without, and pale within.
O let thine own soft bowels pay
Thy self, and so discharge that day.
If sin can sigh, love can forgive:
O say the word, my soul shall live.
O when thy last frown shall proclaim
The flocks of goats to folds of flame;
And all thy lost sheep found shall be,
Let come ye blessed then call me.
Heaven. G. F.
Behold this house where man does now reside.
The flowers pour out their odours in his way:
To serve him all the creatures take a pride:
The winds do sweep his chambers every day,
And clouds do wash his rooms: the ceiling gay
Starred alost the gilded knobs imbrave.
If such a house God to another gave,
How shine those glittering Courts he for himself will have?
And if a sullen cloud, as sad as night,
In which the Sun may seem imbodied,
Depur'd of all his dross we see so white,
Burning in melted Gold his watery head.
Or round with Ivory edges silvered,
What Luster super-excellent will he
Lighten on those that shall his sunshine see,
In that all glorious Court, in which all glories be.
If but one Sun with his diffusive fires,
Can paint the Stars, and the whole world with light;
And joy and life into each heart inspires;
And every Saint shall shine in Heaven as bright
As does the Sun in his transcendent might,
(As says may well believe what truth once says)
What shall so many Suns united Rays
But dazzle all the eyes, that now in Heaven we praise?
Here that bright band, that now in triumph shines,
And that (before they were invested thus)
In earthly bodies carried Heavenly minds,
Pitch, round about a Throne most glorious,
Their sunny tents, and houses luminous;
All their Eternal day in Songs employing,
Joying their end, without end of their joying,
While their Almighty Prince, destruction is destroying.
Full, but yet never cloyed with what might whet
And dull the keenest craving Appetite:
Where never Sun did rise, nor ever set;
But one Eternal day, and endless light
Gives time to those, whose time is infinite:
Speaking with thought, obtaining without see;
Beholding him whom never eye could see,
And magnifying him, that cannot greater be:
How can such joy as this want words to speak?
And yet what words can speak such joy as this?
Far from the world that might their quiet break,
Here the glad souls the face of beauty kiss,
Poured out in pleasure on their beds of bliss:
And drunk with Nectar-Torrents, ever hold
Their eyes on him, whose Graces manifold,
The more they do behold, the more they would behold.
Happiness. F. Q.
I love, and have some cause to love the earth:
She is my Makers creature; therefore good:
She is my Mother; for she gave me birth:
She is my tender Nurse; she gives me food.
But what is a creature, Lord, compared with thee?
Or what is my Mother, or my Nurse to me?
I love the Air; her dainty sweets refresh
My drooping soul, and to new sweets invite me:
Her shrill-mouth'd quire sustain me with their flesh,
And with their Polyphonian notes delight me.
But what is the air, or all the sweets that she
Can bless my Soul withal, compared to thee?
I love the Sea; she is my fellow creature,
My careful Purveyor; she provides me store;
She walls me round; she makes my diet greater;
She wastes my treasure from a foreign shore.
But Lord of Oceans, when compared with thee,
What is the Ocean, or her wealth to me?
To Heaven's high City I direct my Journey,
Whose spangled Suburbs entertain mine eye;
Mine eye, by contemplations great attorney,
Transcends the Crystal pavement of the Sky.
But what is Heaven great God, compared to thee?
Without thy presence Heaven's no Heaven to me.
Without thy presence earth gives no refection;
Without thy presence sea affords no treasure;
Without thy presence air's a rank infection;
Without thy presence Heaven it self's no pleasure.
If nor possessed, if not enjoyed in thee,
What Is earth, or sea, or air, or Heaven to me?
The highest honors that the world can boast,
Are Subjects far too low for my desire:.
The brightest beams of Glory are (at most)
But dying sparkles of thy living fire.
The proudest flames that earth can kindle, be
But nightly Glowworms, if compared to thee.
Without thy presence, wealth are bags of cares;
Wisdom, but folly; joy, disquiet sadness:
Friendship is treason, and delights are snares;
Pleasures but pain, and mirth, but pleasant madness.
Without thee, Lord, things be not what they be;
Nor have they being when compared with thee.
In having all things, and not thee, what have I?
Not having thee, what have my labors got?
Let me enjoy but thee, what farther crave I?
And having thee alone, what have I not?
I wish nor Sea, nor Land, nor would I be
Possessed of Heaven, Heaven unpossest of thee.
FINIS.

