We the Inhabitants of the Isle of Anglisey, whose names are hereunto
subscribed, after mature consideration had, and hearty invocation on the Name
of God for direction and assistance, do Remonstrate and Declare to our
Fellow Subjects and Neighbors whom it may concern,
THat we having according to our bounden duty and Allegiance preserved the said
Island in due obedience to our most dread Sovereign Lord King CHARLES, during
the time of this intestine War and Rebellion: and by Gods blessing on out
careful endeavors defended the same, until the Enemy had over-mastered the
whole Kingdom, (a few strong Holds only excepted) This being the only County
of England or Wales for two months kept entire under His Majesty's Authority
and Command: And being then, through the vast number of Men and Horse threatened
to be powered in upon us, and finding no possible expectance of Relief,
enforced to submit to the then prevailing power: do now, out of Conscience
toward God, and Loyalty toward his Anointed, with all humbleness prostrate
our selves, our lives and fortunes at His Majesty's fect: Resolving with the
utmost exposall of all we are or have, to preserve the said Island, together
with the Castle and Houlds therein, in due obedience to His Sacred Majesty, His
Heirs and lawful Successors, against all Rebellious Opposers and Invaders
whatsoever. And do also with sincerity of heart profess, That we will,
according to our several degrees, places, and callings, maintain the true
Protestant Religion by Law established, His Majesty's Royal Prerogative, the
known Laws of the Land, the just Privileges of Parliament, together with our
own and Fellow Subjects Legal Properties and Liberties. And we also further
Declare and Protest, That we shall and will account all those that do or shall
stand in opposition hereunto to be Enemies and Traitors to their King and
Country, and accordingly to be proceeded against, being most ready to
contribute our best Abilities for their Reducement, and the re-establishing of
our Gracious Sovereign, who has long endured the Tyranny and Oppression of
his barbarous and bloody Enemies, in His Rights, Dominion and Dignity,
according to the splendour of His most Illustrious Progenitors.

Given under our hands the 14. day of July, 1648. Buikeley. Rich: Bulkeley.
Will: Griffith. Jo: Bodvile. Hen: Owen. Owen Holland. Rich: Mirick. Hen: Lloyd.
Rich: Roberts. Hu: Owen. Will: Owen. Jo: Turbidge. Owen Gryffith. Owen Arthur.
Jo: Young. Jo: Price. William Lewis. Row: White. Owen Lewis. Geoffery
Prytherch. John Lloyd. Rowland Bulkeley. Tho: Symkis. Hen: Wynn. Row: Jones.
Will: Lloyd. Will: Owen. Richard Bodychin. John Wynn. Hen: Jones. John
Robinson. Will: Bulkley. Hrn: Owen. Hen: Lloyd. Richard Williams. Richard Wynn.



