The true DECLARATION OF Colonel Anthony Welden, To the Honorable HOUSE of
COMMONS Of those services he has done them, the ill encouragements he has
had by the unjust Oppressions of some Potent Adversaries for their own private
ends, has caused his infinite sufferings, all which humbly Represents to
them, craving relief from them as Fathers of their Country to relieve the
Oppressed.

London Imprinted 1645.

The true Declaration of Colonel Anthony VVeldon, to the Honorable House of
Commons, of those services he has done them, etc.
BEing by the Earl of L^icester sent to relieve the Fort of Duncannon in
Ireland, at the present besieged by the Rebels, and in such distress, that at
my entry I found the Lord Esmond Governor, had sent to Treat with their
General at Kilkemy, but our unexpected succor, broke off the Treaty; our
provision decreasing, made us consult to prevent the danger might ensue, so
that my return to the Parliament, was commanded by the Governor, his Letters
and instructions given me to the General, and both the Honorable Houses; The
Contents was a demonstration of the dangers and wants already past, the defect
of provisions and other necessaries present the particular service Our new
forces had done; A Narration of his own former sufferings by the Earl of
Strafford, and la^ely suing for a Regiment for his present subsistence; having
lost his Estate, and had hereto^ore been Major General in Ireland; he
requested I might be his Leivtenant Colonel; after my Arrival here, and
delivery of his letters, I solicited for my dispatch, received a thousand
pound for the relief of the Fort, disburst it, according to the Generals
instructions at Bristoll) in which I found both loss and trouble; being
unaccustomed to such employments, yet I hasted, so that in seven weeks I came
and returned, we having as yet no news in the Fort of the Kings Standard set
up.

My Lord Esmond (in outward appearance) seemed fierce against the Rebels, yet
his private correspondency with his Son in Rebellion and other Rebels, (his
Lady always amon^st them) breed no small suspicion in us; more especially when
he detained Pap^sts at his ow^e Table in the Fort^ All which I had compl^ined
of at my being in England, and had he not promised me i^ should be remedyed ere
my re^urn^: but finding all contrary to my expectation, and the Papists still
remaining, though I oftentimes complained that by this intercourse with the
Rebels they gave them sp^cial notice of all our actions in the Fort, which
occasioned that we seldom or never undertook any enterprise, but were betrayed
in it, I informed him of his own Officers, which since had like to have
betrayed the Fort, (as I was credibly informed) which actions infinitely
discouraged our Officers and Soldiers.

Not long after entered Sir Henry Stradling, the Vice Admiral into our Harbor,
who advertised us first of the Kings Levyes, and expressed much uncivil l^nguage
against the proceedings of the Parliament at the Governors Table, persuading
also the Governor to take away the Ordnance and quit the Fort, telling him the
Parliament could not be able to relieve him.

Sir Henry Perceiving me to be averse to his inclination, he councelled the
Governor against me, and although he had pub^ikly professed he loved me, as
his Child, yet on the sudden I found him quite contrary, in giving me
uncivil language, and cavelling with me on the l^ast occasion, inciting both
his own and my Soldiers to Mutiny against mee^ I endured al^ his Aff^onts
with much patience, as Captain Iourdaine, and Captain Brook can testify,
their ships b^ing then in the Harbor, and both of them now in the service of
the Parliament.

After a while Sir Jews Kirk entered the Harbor, having been already (as
himself confessed) in most of the Garrisons or S^a Ports, and amongst the
Reb^lls, to sound how Commanders affections stood toward his Majesty, he
demanded of My L. for whom he held the Fort, who answered for his Majes^y who
gave him his Commissio^s.

I r^quested the Governor to detain him as a spy, but could not prevail,
and he wrote to his Majesty by Sir Jews who returned with S^r Henry Stradling
for England.

These Passages gave me occasion to advertise the Gen^ and the Committee, and
drew up Articles which I sent by Captain Brooks; My Lord having notice of it
would not permit him to go forth the Harbor, until by a Wile he got clear
which my Governor perceiving, made a Complai^t against me to the Earl of
Ormond, hoping thereby to suppress the Articles I had sent hither against him,
but he after desiring me if I would recall mine, he would not prosecute his
Complaint of my di^obedi^nc^ (as he termed it) for th^se proceedings.

But knowing my self clear from all aspe^sions or transgressions whatsoever,
requested (according to the tenor of Ormonds letter) I might be sent to Dubline
which he refused, until such time as he heard that Captain Brooks had not
delive^ed my Articles, by reason my Lord of Leicester was not in Town.

After which he sent me to Dubline, with an Intention to have me detained,
until he had made his complaint unto the Committe^ ^here against me, by Bunbery
his Soliciter, seizing on a^l my goods, not permitting me to take mine own Man
with me to Dubline, detayning likewise three Months of my Pay, pe^swading
himself his Power with my Lord of Ormond, could crush me, when I came to
Dubline I found the Officers so generally set against the Honorable Parliament
that I expected no redress, notwi^^standing my often Petitioning My Lord
Ormond, the Council board, and Martialls Court, and all in vain, for a trial,
having sp^nt six weeks time, without any hopes of a hearing, or expectation of
justice.

Then I addressed my self to the Parliaments Committee Mr. Reynolls, and Mr.
Goodwine, making known my grievances unto them, they being sensible of my
oppressions, wished me to repair to the Parliament, being I could not expect
any relief there, I followd their advice, and coming to Chester, I
encountered with the Earl of Leicester, to whom I complained, and resigned my
Commission.

His answer was that at present he could not right me, I then repaird to the
Committee of Safety, and also to the Committee for Irish affairs, whereof Mr.
Goodwine was Chaire-man, but they having business of greater consequence in
hand, I could not have redress, although I fully acquainted them in what
danger the Fort stood through my Lords disaffection to the Parliament, so not
only my own desires, but my extreme wants, being nine months pay behind
hand, besides two. hundred pounds disburst for the Parliaments use in the
relief of my Soldiers with clothing and other provisions, all my other goods
seized on, for all which to this hour, I have not received the least
satisfaction.

These with my present wants forced me to seek employment, notwithstanding this
and the Fort which I saved endured all this misery for, was disposed to Sir
Arthur Lo^tus, my sufferings no ways thought on.

The Officers which since deserted my Lord know these particulars for truth,
which I shall sufficiently prove when it comes to questioning.

His usage to Captain Austen, made him in discontent, since to procure his
company to be sent for into England, and are now against the Parliament, (whom
I am sure were formerly all firm for them at my departure, as under their own
hands will appear, and which I have to produce, together with their joint
Petition to be delivered from his Cruelty, which might have been prevented,
could I have been but heard on my complaints.

I shall be brief in my Relation of the Lincolnshire Employment, having
formerly printed a Manifestation touching the injuries were there done unto me.

The Committee of safety were pleased to employ me as Mojor to the Earl of
Lincolnes horse Regiment, but at my arrival at Lincoln, I perceived the
Commitee were not pleased, that any Officer should be put on them, but of their
own choosing. This they showed by the denial of my Order from the Committee of
the safety; for my mounting money, out of the Proposition money then remaining
in their hands, and they to raise my Troop forthwith: But the Earl of
Linco^ne knowing their drift being to put on him an O^^icer of their own
choosing, told them he would have none but my self, unless they showed cause
to the contrary, and that if they denied me his Major, he would leave them, so
to please him, they accepted of me at the present, yet Sir Christopher Wray
told my Lord (to put him out of conceit) that although I had done good service
in Ireland, yet since my Feather had been lately plu^kt out of my Hat in
Westminster Hall, but he enjoynd him not to tell me of it, the words were
hardly spoken, but ^e came, and complementally embracing me, said, rather then
they would part with me, I should have my own desires, When the Country
refused Mayor General Ballards Command, the Committee were pleased to send
their two Regiments of Horse, under my Command, and all their Dragoones to
quarter as near New^rke as I could to hinder their incursions.

But I soon perceived the Mutiny of the Troops for want of pay, the
Committees several odd Warrants, and the want of Discipline in the
Commanders, made me rather desire to be Commanded, then Command such forces
with these defects.

And my good hap was, that the Commit^ee for fear of any loss, on the
miscariage of Major Griffins Troop, ^e^c^ld all their forces back to the City.

I refer my carriage to the report of their Commanders then under my Charge,
who confessed they had not seen any form of the least Discipline in any
Commander formerly there, It chanced at our return there was a Mutiny amongst
the Gari^on of foot Soldiers for want of pay, insomuch they were laying down
their Arms, and abandoning the Cit^.

The Committee then requested me to accept of the Government, which to pleasure
them I did, and got in the Tax, which they had imposed, yet knew not how to
levy i^.

I paid the Garrison of foot their Ar^e^res, and they neither did, nor can
tax me with the least misbehaviour, however they were pleased to call in
Captain Hotham, I ^earing what disservice his disobedience did in Yorkshire,
knowing he could never Command well, that knew not how to obey, besides hearing
from some of the Committee that letters were intercepted of his going to the
Queen, or her^ coming to him, which manifested his falcity.

These with other Affronts which I have received from some of the Committee,
gave me Just occasion to lay down my Commission (knowing by their first usage,
they made but use of me to serve their own turns) which I did the sooner, for
that the Earl of Lincoln, whose Regiment I first commanded, had on Hothams
coming (for the reasons before mentioned,) ^eft the Committee, and retired to
his own Cas^le, they could not impute the least misbehaviour ere my departure,
yet a while after I was gone, scandal swear raised on me, of which ^nowing my
self no ways guilty, set forth that Manifesto, which this Hononrable House of
Commons were pleased to refer to an express Committee, Sir Hen. Colmy being
Chair man.

I made good the contents, and did much press Sir Henry to finish and make
report to the House, which seeing, I could by no means effect, and that with
waiting I had spent the moneys my employment yielding me in Lincolnshir^, Sir
Michael Lucy at that time requesting me to be his Major which I took as a
favor, in friendship to deem me worthy of. But I soon found his
disposition, to be timorous and treacherous to his friend, which made me more
circumspect, then to enter into too much fami^iarity, yet observed that respect
as was fit for me toward him.

It was the Generals pleasure, at our first coming into the Army, to command
his whole Regiment on service^ wherein my self, and most part of the Regiment
perceiving a backwardness in Sir Michael, which gave the Army an occasion to
speak, and that indeed to the disparagement of the Regiment. They reporting I
would have fallen on, but tha^ he would not give way. This news was carried
also into Kent, which whither it troubl^d him, or he suspected me, I know not,
but I was so far from accusing, that I excused him, laying the fault on the
guide, though indeed my Colonells fault. This the General may testify, but
after this I found his neglect and slighting, yet I ever temporized (though
against my nature) so that no public discourtesies past, only once I told him,
in the presence of Captain Westrow and Captain Kenr^ke, that I discovered his
hollow^ heartedness, which made me keep the greater distance.

I heard of his often repinings, yet can he never say, I ^ither neglected my
duty or his command in the least, and it much troubled him.

The General commanded me on the Pass at P^lbery^ and it troubled him yet
more when the Deputy Leivtenants commanded my Troop home^ and not his, which
when I saw I offered to stay in his Room, for which he and Capt. W^estrow used
me so discourteously, that they wrote to have my Troop put under Sir Richard
^reenfields Regiment, which the Deputy Leivtenan^s rese^ted as an affront to
me, themselves.

To this purpose I have the answer of their Letter, and I perceived he would
take the advice of the younger Captains, and not mine in the least, yet for all
this and many discourteous carriages, I never complained to the Deputy
Leivt^nants or any other.

Not long after, I was again summoned with my Troop to go forth; I being in a
readiness with 80. Horse, and a Months pay, which each Rider brought in, at
the instant of our March. My Leivtenant being at the Committee heard Sir Henry
Heyman say at the Committee he knew no reason why Sir Michaell L^cy should not
have the disposal of the moneys of my Troop, (so I should have been his
Clerk) this I conceived to entrench either on my honor or honesty, or both,
which indust me to write a Letter not naming any particular person, but dated
it to Sir Henry Heyman.

The Contents were, I wonder any should put such a question, when as I was
never taxed, nor did I fear any public questioning me of the least
misdemeanour; I resented it so much, that I requested if they suspected me,
they should choose another Major, for that I desired not to serve where my
actions should breed the least suspicion, And I perceived I was not likely to
please all their Pallates. But I expected some satisfactory an^wer for so
unreasonable a question.

I wrote indeed the sharper style, imagining the Colonels intimacy with Sir
Henry Heyman, had put this plot on foot, to give me discontent, which since I
have found to be true; for I knew before the Colonel endeavored to shuf^^e
me out. This was the answer I received of my Letter, that though any thing had
been spoken to my disadvantage, yet was it no mann^rs in me, to tax those who
were my pay master^, and Commanders, and if I liked not the employment, I might
leave it when I would.

Truly a man would conc^ive this to be no sufficient answer to quench my
resolution or passion. I returned answer, I would hold it, but until they
could provide another, Nevertheless advanst to Kingstone by their Order, and
repaird to the Gen: ^or his Order, (expecting some present design) who
forthwith gave it to m^tch with 3. troops to Okingham, and receive there
further order from Sir W. Bal^f^rd, I dispatched my Quarter Master forthwith,
and willed him to show the Generals order to my Colonel if he were at
Kingstone; the Colonel told him I had nothing to do with the Regiment.

Now the Deputy Leivtenants had sent my Col. and Captain S^inner, to know if my
resolution were still the same. But by my Colonells answer to my
Quartermaster, he himself taken contrary to their Order, the autho^ity to
Cashier me; And for fear I should repent of my ^ormer resolution, had by his
own and some other Officers invited the Officers and Soldiers (on his request)
to V^te me out, a^ his Troop did at his own lodging.

I took no notice to hinder the pre^ent Mutiny, but charged my Tr^ope to be
quie^, whilst I repaird to my General th^n at Moor^on, and info^med him of all
passages, withal demanding ju^^ice: But I found him not willing to b^e^ke of^
with Sir Michael L^vesy, (for which he had a good requi^all afterward) but put
me to go to the Deputy Leivtenants of Kent.

Hereupon I delivered up my Commission and went to the Deputy Leivtenants, who
g^ve me this slight answer, it was my jelousie only, notwithstanding I offer^d
proof? and ^^eing my complaint thus refuted, I resolved to right my self, and
presented my self as a Voluntier to Sir William Waller, with 6. hor^^s and
four men in A^mes, on mine own charge.

And as soon as I understood where Sir Mich^^ll L^^y was, I sent a Letter of
that nature, that I knew it must needs vex h^^, if he had ^he least spirit in
him, but perceiving him nothing moved at it, least he should smother it, I
sent a Copy of it to them at Knowle, to let them know I resented it so far as
that I had ques^iou^d him.

After this I sent him another Letter, the latter end thereof was a Challenge,
wherein he had that liberty to choo^e his Champion, if he durst not fight
himself, and I would make good what I writ him by Du^ll, a Council of War,
or before the Parliament. But the only course he took was by complaint to the
Deputy Leiutenants at Knowle; whom he knew could no ways question m^e, I
having quite cleard my self from them, yet it seemed he had got a Party
before hand, as is clear in the sequel of their proceedings.

I hearing of his complaint went voluntarily down to let my Countrymen see,
that not the least action past from me, which I durst not justify, or refer
my self to them; but I found, ere I began almost to utter my self, a party of
his friends, and only those whom were his former professed friends, to fall on
me in that bitter language, as telling me I wan^ed manners, I was insolent,
and should be clapped by the heels, and all for nothing but denying to refer^^
my self to them, who had not the patience to contain themselves until I had
put it to them.

My resolution being ^ixt so to do at first coming, but I returned too much
unsatisfied, with that language that I wrote a Letter to Major Sidasku, in
which I mentiond such language as I received from them, retorting the same on
themselves, Sir Michaell Lucy getting the Letter, (though he durst not show his
own) yet sent this to Henry Heyman, who (was pleased by an Order from the
Committee to get me committed to Ely House) without hearing the g^ound, in my
own defenc^.

The Depu^ie Lieutenants in the intrim preferred these Articles against me, or at
least they were preferred in their Names, which were never seen or known to the
Major part of them.

I thought necessary to insert them here with my Answer.

1. That what in me lay, I endeavored to provoke the Colonel to a Du^ll,
endangering thereby a Muteny in the Army, and in the disturbance of the Union
and Peace of the County.

To this I answear^.

That though all such Actions as appertain to hononr or Martial Discipline,
ought to be tried by a Council of War, more especially this Acted abroad, and
in all Wars o^ Chri^stendome, a Commander may challenge (and that Justly)
that Privilege (though not granted me hereupon my earnest request, yet doubt I
not but my Answer will give good satisfaction to the honorable House of
Commons, as for any fact concerning Honor (Justice being delayed or denied)
gives a Commander liberty to right himself.

I first repaird to my General, and made my complaint to him, next to the
Deputy Leiutenants as I have formerly related.

Then they forct on me this Way for my Vindication, yet it cold no way^s
en^anger Mutiny in the Army, I bearing no command therein, nor disturbance in
the County, the quarrel there not being begun, prosecuted nor ended in the
same County.

I shall willingly submit to any punishment, if it shall appear I endeavored
to raise any Party, either in the Army or County, to the nourishing of this
quarrel.

2. The second Article was, that I had sent letters of factious nature to the
Committee in Sussex, as their conceit was, to engage a party here in my
private quarrel, to the hazard, and division of the two Associate Counties.

To this I Answer.

Though conceit be no true ground for an accusation, (they in Kent not having
any reason to accus^ me, when those in Sussex to whom the letter was written,
were no ways sencible, nor ever taxt me for the same.

Besides to accuse me when some of them annimated me to Vind^cate my self was
not fair.

But to the contents of the Article.

I being commanded by the General to guard a maine pass, Commanding most of
the Country that was to furnish the Army, with provi^ions and Workmen.

The Generals several orders commanding me to send several horse Parties
abroad for Provisions, which was the Provant Masters duty, yet in obedience to
his commands I executed his Warrants, also to take Horses, All which said
Warrants are produceable.

This cannot (...) be conceived, but to be a painful and thanklesse Office.
Notwithstanding it showed in mean endeavor to negl^ct no means or opport^nity
for the public good^ for which the Malignants were pleased to lay the Title
of a Plunderer on me, which soon flew to Knowle in Kent, and was there
increast and nourisht, by my Adversaries, so that this ^owle Aspersio^ being
cast on m^, I could not but in honor vindicate my self, which was by giving
no^ice to all the Committees, that before, I went out of their Coun^ry, if they
could fix any unjust action on me, I would make satisfaction.

I showed them the General several Warrants, and particular in Bellingshurst
at a Grand meeting in the face of the whole Country, I delivered my self to
them, as formerly demanding no favor, I remained there a Month after, and
certified the Committee, whose answer is extant, viz, that they never knew or
heard of any complaint as then.

However hearing the Scandal still to continue after my departure, (and
divulg^ by some of them) of the Committee I sent them a letter in my own
Vindication, which is termed factious.

I thought good to insert her^ the contents of a letter from my General sent
me there, which was that of all the Officers under his Command, not on^ applyd
himself more seriously to the Parliaments service, then my self, he not
doubting but in the issue I should reap the honor, but I am sure I am not now
in the way to it, my Gen^rall heard as bad a report (until he saw my Act^ons)
and that by some of my Lincolnshire back-friends, I thank them. And after he
acknowledged they did me Injury.

For the close of the Article I end as with the first.

Touching the last Art^cle, it was but my opinion, and that not only mine, but
Mr. Franklines and Mr. James, two of the Deputy Lieutenants, heard (men of
better quality then my self) confessed mine to be true in Westminster Hall, and
whether it be well in them, to tax me for a Relation their own Curiosities
desired of me at my return, Judge.

When I expressed it, I protest I neither knew, saw, nor heard, of any order for
thanksgiving, nor could I divert any, staying but a day in Kent, and that with
themselves at Knowle.

But upon my second going to Knowle, I confess Captain Blunt to affront me,
telling of the Ordnance: My Answer to him was, what I said I could justify,
though not in contempt of any Ordinance.

And if any can prove, that in the least manner, either in word or action I
ever strove to divert any, or that I have done the least thing prejuditiall to
the State; I desire no favor but the extremest of their rigor.

I trust these answers will prove satisfactory till any object the contrary.

I shall give now the grounds how these Articles were drawn against me.

It was for that I denied to submit to the Deputy Lieutenants censure, as was
reason for these Causes.

1. In that they denied me right on my former Complaints. 2. That the other
Party discovered themselves more then indifferent. 3. That they Professed
themselves Parties, my Accusers therefore not fit to be my Judges, and it was
more for their own private revenge then the public good that they preferred
them.
My reason is, because they had the two former Articles in their knowledge and
custody two Months, and they took my Accounts and paid my arreares, yet
questioned not me in the least, which if they had conceived them any way
prejuditiall to themselves, they had then just reason to detain my pay, until
I had given dew satisfaction.

If they were preiuditiall to the State, how can they answer the Covenant
which binds them Immediately to discover any thing preiuditiall to the State.

As they pretend these to be Preiuditiall to the P^rliament, why did they not
charge me before this difference, Nay I am confident they had never taxed me,
but for the difference, nor can they nor any of them deny this.

All this while I suffered imprisonment, though I offered any submission or
satisfaction for that letter which their own uncivil language urgd me to.

The Committee of Examinations would not release me until I had brought a
Certificat from the Deputy Lieutenants, neither would the Deputy Lieutenants
grant me that unless I would refer Sir Michaell Lucy^s business to them
which was an unreasonable demand of them being they professed themselves
parties in the afront I did him, and besides the matter I accused him of, were
crimes against the State, which they were not to judge without Order, yet thus
much for all their language I offered to refer all to them, if they would
promise me reparation if one just proofs they found I had been injured by
Mas^^r Michaell Lucy, but in Lieu thereof they answered, I should not
capitulate with them, so that I did ac^knowledge both by word of mouth, and
often times by writing, that I was sorry for any injury they could conceive I
had done them, but neither would they t^ke this, nor propose any other I should
give them.

Now I openly accused Sir Michaell Levecy for a Coward, an abuser of his
County, and a Mutiner, this was not for them to hear or Judge of, but the
Parliament or Council of War.

Thus his friends below used me, whilst his friends above used me no better,
^or I could not know these Articles were preferred against me, or referd to any
Committee, in five or six Months, so that by this means, I could not clear
my self, nor get my self discharged from the Committee of Examinations, ^ay
although, Sir William Waller offered me employment, and past his Honor to Mr.
Corbet for me, that I should not meddle any further with Sir Michaell Levesy or
do no dishonorable Act against the Parliament, all which showed his
confidence in me neither wou^d I have proceeded (had his word been taken) (...)

But in Leiu of this the Committee we^e pleased to offer ^e to go beyond Seas
on condition I should not return without the Parliaments consent and that in
the inte^im I should not go into Kent, but that I should keep the Peace.

I had no reason to accept of this banishment b^ing proved no Delinquent or
ever did the least action against the Par^iament, I said first I desired to
repair my self of the injuries I had ^eceived, and to go Honorably, on
which answer they confind me within the line of Communication, binding me to
keep the Peace.

A while after, I was summoned to appear before the Committee at Queens
Court, to answer to the former Articles, (which some of the other Committee
knew of before) yet would never give me notice.

I de^^ered them to set me a day of Answering, and that as speedily as might
be, for that with the continual great waiting, I was already undon^ and could
not any longer subsist.

They appointed me many days, but would ^ot receive my Answer, which seeing, I
requested I might deliver it in writing, being I saw others enjoy the same
Privilege after long waiting that was a so denied me, but in the end they were
pleased ^o hear me, then Sir Henry H^yman asked me several questions (on
purpose to put me out in my answer) and produced there the letter, for which I
was Committed and detained Prisoner by the Committee of Examinations. And when
I offered to make good my letter against S^eve^y, he would not permit me that
liberty until the Major part granted it.

He would have had me to aknowledge, my self faulty, in what I knew, I ^ad
suff^cient proof to justify; A day was then appointed to give in my
Witnesses, but Master Tate sat not with the Committee, and they would not
receive them unless he were present but wild me to give them to him which
accordingly I did^ But finding my se^fe thus still delaid undone, and deluded
by this attendance, told them they would enforce me to take some ^^her course,
as by Posting or Printing.

All this trouble, Imprisonment, loss of employment, wasting my fortune gave
me noe small Reason but to be justly discontented.

Sir H^nry Vane and Sir William W^ller, can both witness, I often times
desir^^ ^^pl^yment, but finding my adversary supported, and self disp^sed I
be^eeve it shall be proved I have done more for the State then he besides the
Irish business, I have once served with four horses Voluntarily, at another
time with six, I have given on the public faith, ten pounds at another time,
sixteen pounds, and a Horse to the service freely, and have no estate at all^
whereas he has been well paid, redeemed his morgag'd estate having had
infinite store of Horses, and he has not been mustered, but has had his own
Accounts for a long time.

For my part I am 300l. worse in fortune since I undertook employment.

To conclude, the reason of my last action, was not for any private revenge of
mine, which I have already had, but hearing him chosen by that Committee, who
knew I accused him so highly, and offered to justify it on my life, with
evident proof, and he being no ways called, neither offering to appear
himself, in his own vindication.

I knowing how much this might redound to the public prejudice, and being tied
by Covenant to reveal any thing prejudicial, and to further what in me lay
to bring to condign punishment, having formerly as you heard declared it to
the three several Committees and openly for so many months in all places, to
so many particular members, and yet he never called to his trial, but I
contrary still suffering.

Besides some of the Members can witness I have had these Articles following,
or most of them eight months, and were told by them that to present them to
the House, were Recrimination before mine were cleared, and having heretofore
as at this time diverse Petitions in the House of Commons unheard; I thought
the speediest course to give them notice was, by posting him, in which action I
protest my self innocent in any intention to give the least distaste to the
Honorable House of Commons^ who however were pleased to commit me.

And sent me to the Committee of Examinations to have it heard, but they
without hearing me, past their censure, viz. That it was a false and scandalous
Libell, notwithstanding a^ before, I always referred my self to proof, yet
sent me to Newgate there to remain until I should give Sir Michaell Levesy
satisfaction; Least the world might Judge this was done by me out of malice,
to clear which, I challenged him^ told him I would Cudgel him, and published
it, which s^tisfied me, for my private aff^onts I received by him.

And since I suffer for accusing, and my accusation not heard^ nor my witnesses
accepted, I leave to the world to judge the measure I have received. And ^ hope
this will satisfy all men, I am not the least sufferer, for the Public, but
the greatest for this particular.

Were this proved an offense, yet I deserve not this rigor as I suppose, for a
slander. And la^tly, whereas it is an Argument of Sir H^^ry H^ymans, that my
Father has declind me, my self and diverse of the Committee has heard him
expres^e, he took a Vow when he left the Court, that if any Child of his fell
under His Majesty's or Parliaments Power, he would never be beholding to them
for fa^our, nor beg it of them; Truly I intend not that he should break
his Vow for me, besides it would argue my gui^tin^s, to seek for friends in a
just cause.

A^^ I beg is, but the libe^ty of a Subject Justice, to be heard and a
Trial; where if it can be proved that I have done Sir Michaell Levesy the
least injury, I shall willingly submit to any punishment.

More besides 10. months imprisonment, the expense of 500l. the loss of
imployment^ the several disgraces, if he conceive himself clear, why does he
not desire I should bring my proofs for what I accuse him.

Then will it appear suddenly, whether I have done him injury, or he the
State.

These following are the Articles I both have, do, and will accuse him of, and
will with my life and Honor maintain.
1. HE showed much ^^wardnesse in the service at Sutton i^ H^^sh^^e. 2. He
converted the moneys sent to pay his Regim^nt, ^o his own use contrary to
Ord^r by this prejudicing the State. 3. He rais^d a Muti^y against mee^ sending
his Officers and S^uldiers to Vote me but, when I had received the Generals
special Order to ma^ch on a present design for the publ^ke good. 4. He
behaved himself Cowardly, and very dishonourably, at the Battle near
Als^ord. 5. He sold and imb^seld diverse Horses took for the service,
favoring Papists, in restoring back theirs privately, and commanding his
Officers not to meddle with an^ other Papists Horse. 6. He either counterfeited
the Generals Warrant or sent his own without Order, and took ma^y H^rses in
Sussex, the County charging me with it. 7. That he took free Quarter there,
forcing his whole Regiment to do the like, because he detained their moneys,
this was like to breed a Mutiny in the ^rmy.

That our Regiment should have the best quarters, and Pay, which the rest of
the Army ^ad not.

8. He seizd and detained Master Mynshall close Prisoner for a former debt of
his own, contrary to Martial or other Law. 9. He sent Cattle home to his
dwelling in Shepway, his men forcing free Quarter, through their own County.
10. That he behaved himself dishonourably at Croperedge-Bridge. 11. That he
had pay of the Country for his Quartermaster, nine shillings per diem, yet
permitted him to stay at home, forcing his Corporalls to do the duty. 12. That
he has been the breeder, fomenter, and nourisher of the diff^rence between
the Deputy Leivtenants of Kent, and Sir William Waller, which have been very
prejudicial to the Public. 13. That he has diverse times been disobedient,
refusing his command. 14. That he received diverse Orders from the Deputy
Leiutenants, contrary to my Lord Generals Orders, which if not remedyed will
be distructive to all Martial Discipline, and will breed continual Mutinies
in the Armies. 15. That he labored to entice my old Leivtenant to complain
against me. 16. That in a most unworthy manner he would have murdered
Captain May, either because he had been the Gen: witness^ to the Articles he
had against him, or because he knew he was my witness to most of these
Articles against him. 17. He reported he had lent Sir Henry Heyman two
hundred pounds without Bill or Bond, saying, he well deserved it for the many
good Offices he did him.
By these relations, it may be perceived both whom, and of what power my
adversaries are I never yet sought the favor otherwise of any friends, then
for a legal trial, which neither by their or my own endeavors, I could ever
yet attain to; nor have the privilege of a Commander to be referred to a
Council of War, yet I did imagine the Generals Orders were made to try all
Commanders; who as a Council of War is the severest, so the speediest court
of judicature and so far to the benefit of a Commander, that they shall be kept
like Rogues to starve in Prison, if they^l not crouch to their adversaries, or
at least to some in authority but such base eccophancy should not suit with a
Soldiers spirit, for my part as I yet never sued for favor, and should I do
any unlawful act I should rather suffer punishment then beg favor; and as
hitherto, I have never done that which I dare not publikly answer in the
severest Court, if I may have a fair trial and not in a private manner my
Adversaries to incence the Honorable House of Committees against me, as they
hitherto have ever done, so I would not be thought so mean a spirit to be
quaild with power, my actions being justificable my resolution is rather like
Bajazet to dash my B^aines out against this Iron Cage I am now Cooped up in,
rather then submit to Arbritrary power or censure, by this means to encleare
my self that I posted Sir Michael Levicy a coward an abuser of his Country, a
Mutiner, and such a one as naught but power could shroud from punishment;
Example, Sir William Wallers accusation, which being the same as mine, yet
could not bring him to justice, yet this no wise daunted me from prosecuting
what I had long before accused him of, especially when I was bound to it by
Covenant, the Articles may make it sufficiently evident, it concerned the
public not my private interest, yet I both have and do with forfeit of my life
offer to make them good, so that I am made the president of power only, and I
have dearly bought by experience, the effect of taking the Covenant, to
conclude I shall defy any that can disprove the ^ea^t of these passages, and
if some find themselves touched with them, in discovery of their malice or
partiality, they must give so great a looser as my self (both of fortun
liberty) leave to tell the truth, this I hope will satisfy the Honorable
House of Commons, who I hope after such heavy oppressions will cause me to be
heard and relieve me, and though I was not the least guilty of any offense yet
least my adversaries should take advantage to possess any that my obstinacy
keep me now in Prison these Petitions I have sent both to the Honorable House
of Commons and the Committee of Examinations shall convince any of such
conceits, but I immagine the important affairs of the House of Commons would
not permit my Petition to be read or answered, yet at my necessities and
suffering so infinite that they may sufficiently excuse me for publishing this
Declaration, I am certain the Committee of Examinations might both have heard
me and redressed me, but though I sent the chief of them word I was ready to
starve, that deafnes to my complaints forced from me, my vindication in this
manner, I thought good to publish these several Petitions sent both to the
honorable house of Commons and the Committee of Examinations, with a letter
sent to Master Corbet, which will excuse me both from any manner of insolency
or obstinacy, which my adversaries strive to possess others who are
indifferent to cover their own inju^tice and malice.

This Petition following sent both to the Honorable House and the Committee of
Examinations.

Humbly shows that for posting of Sir Michaell Levesy, your Petitioner is now
Committed to Newgate, he is very ^ory any action in this particular; should
give any d^sta^t to the Honorable House of Commons.

MAY it therefore please them to grant your Petitioner his release, he having
already suffered ten Months restraint with loss of employment for the
premises, your Petitioner not doubting but as formerly he shall render
himself capable to serve the state.

An other Petition sent as the former.

Humbly shows that whereas your Petitioner (as by Covenant bound^ has
assayed all lawful means to bring to trial Sir Michall Levesy for th^se
heinous crims against the State committed by him your Petitioner many Petitions
neither being heard or redressed forced him to post up the several crimes
against him, to give this honorable House the speedier notice but not with any
intent or desire to incence them against your Petition^r as he perceives they
are^y his commitment to Newgat, for which he is sorry and craveth pardon for
his offense.

May it therefore please this Honorable House to grant your Petitioner, his
enlargement, he having already suffered ten Months imprisonment, loss of
employment, and other disgraces for the premises he also humbly praying that
his accusation hereto anexed, may be heard and your Petitioner redressed, that
he as formerly may render himself serviceable to the S^at^.

Another Petition.

Humbly shows, that he is sorry he has given any offense to the Honorable
Ho^se^ or this Committee for this last manner of proceeding in Posting of Sir
Michaell Levesy for which they have pleased to Commit him to Newgate^

May it therefore pleas them to grant your Petitioner his release he having
lost his employment with the expense of five hundred pounds and ten Months
imprisonment for the premises, and that your Petitioner be called to make good
his accusation against Sir Levecy, or if this Committee please, otherwise to
grant your Petitioner his Pass to go beyond, Seas.

The last Petition

Humbly shows your Petitioner is not more a^flicted for this his restraint,
or the place, then your displeasures.

Therefore ^rayeth that in these times of Action, wherein he may endeavor to
ser^^ his Country, he may be released^ his imprisonment, being his ruin as^ a
Souldier^ the place a disgrace ^o his birth and honor.

These petitions with ^he Articles I have these te^ne moneth^ accused him of,
were by me sent to Master Speaker, Master Glym, Master Whitaker, Master Co^b^t,
Sir A^thony Erby, and Sir William Waller, I have in all freely in way of
submission to them acknowldeged a sorrow, though as I hope for mercy, I am not
any ways guilty, and since these have been rejected, I shall never acknowledge
the like again, though I perish, nor should I accept my enlargement unless I
might have a Trial, I shall submit to all the Laws of this Kingdom, either
marshiall or other, but protest against any arbitrary power; as to be censured
and punishd, and can in no Court of Justice be heard, though I the accuser,
this to give that freedom away (for which I have so long fought for) and
willingly submit to the Yoke of slavery which I shall never do.

The Coppie of a Letter sent Master Co^bet.
NOble Sir, I bese^ch you inform the Committee that I must starve if they keep
^e in Newgate, were my fact a scandal, and fals^ (as you have already
censured, denying my answer or proof; I have already sufficiently suffered;
besides what satisfaction can he have more than this you censure, or my
sufferings; with which I must be content because compelled to it^ but Sir^ I
have not wherewithal to subsist, and must starve, for you have already made me
spend all to my very clothes (...) my back, and th^s^ ^^t poor and if this
cannot satisfy believe it these remorselesse actions neither are, can, or
shall be kept from the worlds public vi^^, therefore I bese^ch you I may not
be tempted abov^ my strength, and if all these disgraces the Committee has put
on me will not satisfy, let them take my life, but were I to perish this next
hour, I shall never acknowledge against my Conscience and (...), wh^^ wi^h the
forfeit of my life, I have so ^^ng offer^ by all mea^^s to j^stif^^^ Sir, I
shall ^ither give the Honorable H^use, or the Committee s^^isfaction for any
offense they shall conceive done them, but let me not starv^^ and perish,
perpetually when Sir Le^e^y has the least satisfaction otherwise th^n he
already has unless I ^ee legally convinced by any Court of Judi^^^^^^ ^ach
b^^^g brought to trial.

My Cens^re of the Committee was as follows, I being sent by the Honorable
House to be heard by them.
THat the sense of them was that it was a (...) scandalous Libill, that I
should be committed to Newgate, there to lie till I gave him satisfaction, if
ever there were such a censure passed either in the Star Chamber or High
Commission Court for such a fact, and when I offered my life for justification,
they may as well take my life on any complaint without a trial, using me thus
on mine, and it being for the pub^ike; for I here protest this action was not
in the least wise for mine own private revenge, but for the public; in the
discharge of my Covenant I am sorry my lo^ has fallen out to be (...)
^^warded to be comm^tted with so stric^ a Warrant, that the worst Malefactor
can have more liberty the Keeper ackno^ledging he has a^ no time had a Warrant
of that strict nature, and when I sued to be removed to Ely-House, I had a
Warrant sent to go to Winchester-H^use, worse, if worse could be then New-Ga^^
I ^ave here p^blished my Generals disc^arge, though Sir Heyman before the
Committee at Queens Count laid an imputation on that to, then may it be
gathered whether he prosecute me for his privace grudge or for the public good.

My Gene^a^ls d^scharge.
THis is to certify that no offic^r under my command, did with more
seriousness and diligence apply himself faithfully to the service of King and
P^rlia^ent^ ^hen Col^ Anthony Welden, then Major of the Ke^tis^ horse, he
^ehav^d himself civilly also forwards, on all Commands, as a^ experienced
Commander, I being sorry any difference between him and Sir Michael Levecy
should give h^^ occasion to quit his Command, which I desired so much he would
continue for the adva^cement of the public servic^, approving his ability
every (...) f^^ to do the^ service given under my hand and Sea^e the 16th. of
August.

The contents of this Sir Henry Heyman has himself here^ Sir William ^ay at
Arundell^ and saw lette^^ of the Generals to that effect; his inv^^^rain^sse
in persuing and hindering my release gave me just reason to tell him (he wa^
both unjust and ^^^^iall) before all the Dep^ty Lieutenants of K^nt, who
answered I should Petition the House but I could not fi^d mea^^s to have any
delivered therefore I hope this Honorable House be please^ to relieve me, for
I shall make it appear his parsecution of ^e has solely and o^ my (...) and
ruined me and if the Honorable Horse shall find me ^anity in any thing I shall
(...) to their further se^sure^ or that I shall fail in the making good this
Declaration^ or any p^rt the^eof, and I shall (...) as I am in duty bound ever
pray for their happy success (...) doub^ing but their justice to in^ocence
(...) gi^^ (...) speedy redress.

FINIS.

