DIALOGUES BETWEEN Philerene and Philalethe, A Lover of PEACE, and a Lover of
TRUTH; Concerning the POPE's SUPREMACY.

PART I.

IMPRIMATUR, Liber cui Titulus, [ Dialogues between Philerene and Philalethe.

March 27. 1688. GVIL. NEEDHAM, R.R. in Christo P. ac D.D. Wilhelmo Archiep.
Cant. a Sacr. Domest.



LONDON. Printed for Joseph Watts, at the Angel in St. Paul's Churchyard.
MDCLXXXVIII.

ADVICE TO THE READER.
IT is above a year since this little Treatise has been fit for the Press; and
if the Author had pleased he needed not have delayed the Publishing of it so
long; but as he did not undertake it with that design, so he did not consent to
it, but at the solicitation of a judicious and learned Friend, for whose
Advice he had the same regard, as for his Commands.

You will not find in these Discourses that delicacy of Expression, and that
justness of Speech which are the ornament and beauty of the greatest part of
the works of this Age: For besides that the style of Dialogues ought to be
plain and easy, the Author never made any account of that high-raised and
lofty Eloquence, which, as a Learned Man of our Age says, Monsieur Nicole dans
l'art de penser.
seduces men into error by its counterfeit splendour. He always thought that
solid Eloquence consisted in Matter, and not in Words; and that it were
incomparably better for a Man to say a great deal in few words, Vid. Plutar. in
Phoc.
than little or nothing at all in a great many. He ever esteemed the
Conciseness of Cicero before the Copiousness of Demosthenes; and always held
this maxim of the Fathers concerning Eloquence in Holy things, That the
Eloquence of those who make Religion their Subject, ought to consist in the
weight of their Matter, and of their Reason; and that they ought to explain
themselves after an easy manner, that all sorts of people might understand
them. When we speak of God, says St. Cyprian, Cypr. ad Donatum.
the Discourse we make use of to prove the Faith, ought not to depend upon the
strength of Eloquence, but of Matter. The Church, says St. Athanasius, Atha.
Orat. de semente.
is not a School of Sophisters nor of Orators. And the famous St. Augustine,
Aug. lib. 4. de doc. Christ. c. 15. etc.
tho he were one of the most eloquent of his time, freely declares, That a Man
were better be reproved by the Gramarians, than not understood of the people;
and that a Preacher of the Gospel ought chiefly to endeavor to make himself to
be understood and heard with desire, and with a spirit of submission, of his
Auditory; which he may better arrive to by the Piety of his Prayers, than by
the Artifice of his Discourse. If you take good heed, you shall find that false
Teachers have always hid themselves under the vail of false Eloquence Vid. 1
Cor. 2. 1 Cor. 11.6, etc.
, and that it is out of this Golden Cup that they have made men drink the
mortal Poison of Error; whereas the Apostles and all Orthodox Teachers Vid.
Irenae. lib. 1. Advers Haeres. Valent. Orig. lib. 11. de principiis, and lib.
4.5. contra Celsum.
taking a contrary way, made it their glory to use a great simplicity of
speech, wanting that which St. Paul calls the enticing words of men's wisdom.
The Author has followed these noble and glorious methods, and without putting
himself to the trouble of ending his Periods in their just measure (keeping
however to the purity of the language, as much as possibly he could) he has
applied himself chiefly to the weight and force of his Reasons. You will find
in him, I hope, sufficient to persuade and to convince you, provided you bring
with you an easy, peaceable, and wholly unprejudiced mind: This is the spirit
that runs throughout this whole work; and it was this spirit that began and
finished the design, the Author having not proposed to himself any other aim
than that of animating Christians to the searching out of Peace and Truth, two
the greatest happinesses that ever men can arrive to.

Furthermore, If this little Treatise has the good fortune to please, we may
furnish you with some others which the Author has composed at more leisure,
and which he has enriched with some particular observations which he has
made, by Reading the most Ancient and the most Learned Fathers of the Church.
Accept however of this, with the same mind that he offers it to you.

Quod Gloriosus fratres quam subjici and vinci a veritate: superet te veritas
volentem nam and invitum ipsa superabit. Aug. in Psalm 57.

DIALOGUES BETWEEN PHILERENE and PHILALETHE.
PART I.
The First Dialogue.
NOtwithstanding the Difference between Philalethe and Philerene as to their
Age, they were both of them persons of so great Worth, and their Inclinations
were so much alike, that scarce had they seen one another three or four times,
but they contracted a very strict Friendship.

As they never were better pleased than when they were together, they
oftentimes left their ordinary Employments, for the Satisfaction of seeing one
another; and conferring together, as well concerning things which they had
Read, as those they had Heard of. In this Design they often went to walk upon a
Riverside, from whence they could discover one of the finest and richest
Countries of all France. And as they were both of them men of great Learning,
and of a clear Apprehension, they went always home greatly satisfied with their
Conversation.

They made use of the first fine days which the Spring afforded, to renew their
desirable Conversation, which the severity of the Winter had interrupted: And
the first time they met, having given Assurances of their mutual Affection, and
showed how glad they were to meet in a place where they might freely discover
their most secret. Thoughts to each other, Philerene spoke thus to his Friend;

Have you not heard talk, my dear Philalethe, of the present Affairs? I mean,
of the Deliberation which the Assembly of the Clergy has taken? I have,
answered Philalethe, heard something of it, but I cannot give you a full
Account o'nt; if you know it, you will oblige me to tell it me.

Philerene. I need not tell you, my dear Friend, that my Lords the Bishops of
Tournay, of Meaux, of St. Maloes, of Vaur, of Chaalons, and of Aleth, had been
named by the Assembly of the Clergy, to examine the Six Propositions of the
Sorhonne, presented to the King in 1663. because you know it already. But what
perhaps you do not know, is, That the Clergy did Assemble the 17th. of the last
Month, after the usual manner, and took the Report of these Prelates. My Lord
Bishop of Tournay, who was Head of the Commission, began the Report, and
delivered himself very Learnedly upon this Occasion. The next day in the
Evening the other Commissioners were heard; and they discoursed upon this
Subject with great Learning. The 19th. in the Morning they spoke every man in
this turn upon the Subject of their Commission; and at Night, the Company being
re-assembled, they, by a general Consent, approved of a Declaration, which
contains these following Propositions.

The First is, That neither the Pope, nor the Church it self, has any Power,
directly nor indirectly, over the Temporality of Kings; That they cannot be
deposed; and that their Subjects cannot be absolved from their Oaths of
Allegiance to them upon any account whatsoever.

The Second is, That the Council is above the Pope, according to the Doctrine
established in the 14th. Session of the Council of Constance; which the
Assembly declares to have had the full Power and Approbation of the Church.

The Third is, That the Use of the Pope's Power ought to be limited by the
Canons, and that he can do nothing to the Prejudice of the Ancient Customs and
Liberties of the Gallicane Church.

The Fourth is, That the Pope has the Chief or Principal Authority in things
which concern the Faith; but so, that his Decisions are not certain without the
Churches Consent.

The Assembly ordered at the same time, That this Declaration should be written
in Latin, and sent to all the Prelates of France, to be Signed by them; and
that the King should be petitioned to make an Edict for the Execution of it
throughout the whole Kingdom.


Philalethe. This is Brave, and looks like the Apostolical Vigor and Heroic
Courage of our Ancient Prelates.


Philer. This is not all. These Lords Commissioners were dispatched away to the
King; and having given an exact Account of the Behavior of the Clergy, they
demanded an Edict in the Kings Name, for the Execution of their Declaration.
His Majesty granted them the Edict, which was made as follows.

And by this Edict the King ordains, That this Declaration shall be Registered
in all the Courts of Parliament of the Kingdom, and in all the Faculties of
Divinity and of the Canon Law: And his Majesty does Prohibit, under grievous
Penalties, even Foreigners within his own Kingdom, and all, as well Seculars as
Regulars, to teach any thing contrary to what is contained in this Declaration.

This Edict has been executed. The Parliament of Paris has Registered this
Declaration of the Clergy with that Zeal and Readiness that cannot be too much
commended, and which all other Parliaments of the Kingdom ought to imitate.


Phila. It cannot be denied but that our Prince is incomparable in all his
Actions; that France never saw upon the Throne a Monarch of so High a
Character, and of so great a Power; that he maintains most worthily upon all
occasions, the Glorious Title of Lewis the Great, which his Heroic Actions
have acquired him. And that the Parliament of Paris has done well to express
the great Zeal which they have always had for the Rights of the Crown, and for
the Liberty of the Gallican Church, against the Enterprises of the Court of
Rome. You may have read in our Histories what heretofore Philip the August,
Philip the Fair, Charles the 6th, 7th, and 8th, Lewis the 9th, 11th, and 12th
did: You know also the Conduct of the same Parliament under all these Great
Princes, to maintain according to their Will and Pleasure the Rights of the
Crown, and the Privileges of the Gallican Church. And I believe also, that you
have heard of the Decrees which this Honorable House has sent forth under
Lewis the 13th. against the Scandalous Books of Sa^terel and of Bellarmin: But
we may say without excess, That Lewis the Great in this Conjuncture, has
showed more stedfastness and greatness of Mind, in the Opposition which he has
made against the Attempts of the Court of Rome, than all his Illustrious
Predecessors ever did. And it cannot also be denied, but that the Parliament of
Paris has gone on worthily in the Footsteps of their Glorious Ancestors.


Philer. It is not in this single Affair only, that this Honorable House of
Parliament have showed their Zeal to Second the Intentions of his Majesty, and
to maintain the Rights of the Crown, and the Privileges of the Gallican Church:
They have also given notable Proofs of it in the Affair of Father Buhi the
Carmelite.


Phila. I have also heard of a Thesis which this Father had maintained the 4th.
of December last; and it was said, that they had caused him some Trouble about
it at Rome; but I do not precisely know, what were the Propositions which this
Father did maintain.


Philer. If my Memory does not fail me, I think there were Six: The First of
them is, That there are some Ecclesiastical Laws to which the Pope himself is
subject. The Second is, That he cannot upon all occasions dispense with the
Canons of General Councils. The Third is, That he cannot Depose Kings, nor
impose Tributes upon their Estates without their Consent. The Fourth, That
Bishops hold their Jurisdiction from God. The Fifth, That the Faculty of
Divinity at Paris, does not esteem the Pope to be Infallible. And the Sixth,
That the Right of the Regale is neither a Fancy nor an Usurpation. These
Propositions greatly stirred up the Pope against this Father, he ordered the
Commissary General of the Carmelites to declare him deprived of the privileges
of his Order, and incapable of performing any function, either Administration
of the Sacraments, or Preaching. This Command was sent to the Superior of the
Carmelites of the place Maubert A Street in Paris so called.
to whom this Commissary General had given advice of the Noise that this Thesis
of Father Buhi had made at Rome, and of the misfortune wherewith the whole
Order was threatened. This Father demanded a Copy of the Letter of his Superior,
that he might consult his Friends about it, which was granted him; The Affair
coming at length to the King's ear, there came forth a Letter under the Seal,
to the Superior, forbidding him to execute any Order from Rome against Father
Buhi, without the King's knowledge and consent: Yet notwithstanding this, the
Superior caused the Order to be Registered, which he had received from the
Commissary General of the Carmelites the 18th of February last. But the
Parliament showed the same vigor in this Affair as in that of the Declaration
of the Clergy; for after many proceedings made at the instance of the Attorney
General, the Parliament ordered that the Superior of the Carmelites should be
admonished for his Disobedience, and expressly forbad the execution of the Order
against Father Foelix Buhi; to which they added, That he should continue in his
Function of Divinity Reader, expressly forbidding any person to molest him; and
at length they Order that the Commissary General's Letter should be razed out
of the Register, and laid aside: And this by order of Parliament, the 14th day
of April 1682.


Phila. The Parliament did very bravely in this Affair, and showed that the
same spirit of Zeal and Courage still reigns in that Honorable Assembly.


Thiler. But ought not we to fear that this should cause some rupture with the
Pope? Into what confusion and disorder might not so unfortunate an accident
cast us? Greg. Naz. Orat. 12.
Were we not better to Sacrifice somewhat to the good of our peace, which is
the greatest Legacy that our Savior left to his Apostles, Joh. 14.27.
Pacem meam do vobis? What is there more precious than Union and Concord, since
that Jesus Christ gave so great a Character of it to his Disciples? Joh. 13.35.
In hoc cognoscent omnes quia mei Discipuli estis si dilectionem habueritis ad
invicem. What is there more prejudicial than disunion and discord which destroy
the most flourishing States? Omne regnum divisum contra se desolabitur and
domus divisa contra se non stabit. Matt. 12.25.


Phila. I agree with you, that we ought to do our utmost to obtain Peace; that
we ought to sacrifice our own Interests; nay, that for so great a good we ought
to relinquish things that seem to us of importance. Ipsum enim nomen pacis
amabille, says St. Austin; but you must own too, that we ought to do nothing
for Peace to the prejudice of Truth; St. Paul joins these one with the other,
Ephesians. 4.15.
Veritatem facientes in Charitate. And God, who calls himself Charity, calls
himself also Truth; I know also that the Fathers of the Church exhort us
greatly to avoid Schism as a mortal poison; but a Peace made against the
interest of Truth, is not a real Peace; and when we cannot make it, and
maintain it, but at the prejudice of this Trurh, it were better that a Scandal
should arise, than that Truth should be abandoned. Satius est, says St.
Bernard, ut scandalum oriatur quam ut veritas disceratur.


Philer. How! My dear Philal. Do you think that the Propositions of the
Clergies Declaration, and of Father Buhi's Thesis, contain such essential and
such important Truths, that it would be a crime not to defend them, tho it were
to the disturbance of the Public Peace?


Phila. Yes, Dear Sir, I am very well persuaded that all these Propositions are
founded upon Texts of Scripture, upon the Canons of Councils, and upon the
perpetual and constant Tradition of the Church, principally of the Gallican
Church; and by consequence, I believe that we ought not to depart from them any
ways, and that we cannot do it without danger: But because it will be a matter
of long Discourse, I shall defer the examining of it to another walk.


The Second Dialogue.
PHilalethe and Philerene, who were no less desirous to entertain each other
upon the subject whereon they had begun, than to enjoy the fine weather of the
Spring, came the next day to the place appointed for their Conversation.

Scarce had they walked a turn or two, talking of indifferent matters, but
Philalethe, to make good the promise he had made the day before to his dear
Friend, began thus: I told you yesterday, says he, that the Propositions
contained in the Declaration of my Lords the Bishops, and in the Thesis
maintained by Father Buhi, are of greater importance than you thought of; and
that they contained in them, Truths too evident, and too necessary to be let go
for the motives of a deluding Peace. To convince you of it, we will make it the
subject of our present Discourse: I believe that the first and chief of these
Questions, and which ought to serve as a foundation to all the rest, is that
which concerns the Authority of Councils, which has ever been most venerable
among Christians, and which I believe to be of Divine Right, and above the
Authority of the Pope: And in this I rely upon the Scripture, and the perpetual
and constant Tradition of the Church.

I believe, answered Philerene, as you do, That the Authority of Councils is of
Divine Right; and no Christian that ever I heard of has yet disputed it: But I
know not whether you can so clearly prove as you hope for, that this Authority
of Councils is above that of the Pope, for that many Learned men hold the
contrary, and there seems to be nothing in Antiquity decisive upon this matter.
The Council of Constance was the first that in this case pronounced in favor
of Councils; and what that Council declared about it, was not in an absolute
sense, but in some certain respects, and for some certain occasions.

Phila. I acknowledge that there are some famous Doctors who are of this
opinion, That the Pope is above the Council; but it cannot also be denied, but
that the number of Learned men who hold the contrary Opinion is much the
greater; and you shall scarce find a Man of Learning in all France, but he
adheres to their Party.


Philer. I am not for entering upon this particular discourse, but you will
oblige me, to show me by good Reasons, that the Authority of Councils is the
supreme Authority in the Church; and that Believers ought not to acknowledge any
other upon Earth in things which relate to Faith and Discipline.


Phila. To be as good as my word to you then, in what I promised you, I suppose
you know the Original of Councils. A Man of your reading in the Divine History,
cannot be ignorant that God himself established them, when he commanded Moses
to take to him Seventy Elders for the Government and Conduct of his Ancient
people; and you know without doubt that the Jews had not only their Council of
Twenty three, which they called the Lesser House of Judgment, but also their
Council of Seventy, wherein presided their Anaci, which Council was composed of
Sacrificers, Priests and Scribes of the Law, and was called the Greater House
of Judgmen. Our Councils have been formed after this Model, and the Apostles
began them at Jerusalem. But to remove all difficulty, our Question seems to be
clearly decided by our Savior in the 18th of St. Matthew, when he refers
them who had any difference, to the Church, if they could not decide it by
another way, Dic Ecclesiae, you see our Savior refers his Disciples to the
Church, without excepting St. Peter himself; for which reason St. Augustine says
very pertinently, Ep. 112. Tra. 118. in don. lib. 1. pebapt. con. Donat. cap.
51.
That the Church is the last and supreme Judgment; that St. Peter signified the
Church, when our Savior said to him, That whatsoever he should bind on Earth,
should be bound in Heaven; and whatsoever he should loose on Earth, should be
loosed in Heaven; that it is the Church which received the power of the Keys,
and that if any one despises her when she corrects, he ought to be looked
upon as a Publican and a Sinner.

It is furthermore the Church which is called the Support and Pillar of Truth.
1 Timothy 3.15.
Columna and firmamentum veritatis. If you take good heed to this expression of
St. Paul, and to the Reasons whereon he grounds it, you will agree that the
Church is the depositary of Truth, and that she has the supreme jurisdiction
over her Children for their behavior; for it is certain in this Text, that St.
Paul alludes either to the Pillars which were erected in the Heathen Temples,
upon which were fixed the Statues and the Deities which were there worshipped;
or to the Two Pillars of Solomon's Temple, one of which was called Jakin, and
the other Bohas; and that he would have us understand by it, that it is the
Churches Office to declare, to establish, and to maintain the Truth.


Philer. I see very well that the Church being the Spouse of Jesus Christ, she
is made partaker of the advantages and privileges which Marriage endoweth her
with; and that she being his Body, is as it were clothed with his Majesty: But
St. Peter, Was not he made the Head of this Church? Did not Jesus Christ make
him his Lieutenant and Vicar, when he said to him, that upon him he would build
his Church? Matt. 16.18, 19.
Tu es Petrus and super hanc Petram, etc. Was it not to St. Peter that he gave
the Sovereign Authority, when he said to him, Dabo tibi claves Regni Coelorum
and quodcunq, ligaveris super Petram, etc.?


Phila. It is true, that all Catholic Divines do acknowledge St. Peter as the
Ministerial head of the Church, and Prince of the Society of the Apostles; but
this was not a principality of Dominion, which our Savior expressly forbids
his Apostles: Matt. 16.18, 19. Luke 22.25. Item. Matt. 20.25.
Reges gentium Dominantur eorum vos autem non sic. For which reason St. Bernard
says, in the 3d Book of his Considerations to Eugenius, Imperium interdicitur,
Ministerium indicitur. But this is only a Primacy of Order, Lib. de unit. Eccl.
Propter bonum unitatis, says St. Cyprian; who assures us furthermore, that all
the Apostles, Erant pari consortio Honoris and Authoritatis praediti. Besides,
Was not St. Peter a Member of the Church? St. Augustine and St. Cyprian says he
was, and that with a great deal of reason; since that all Believers compose but
one body, to whom Jesus Christ, as the Head, does communicate the spirit of
Life. It is then manifest, that the Member depends upon the Body, and not the
Body upon the Member. Also St. Ambrose says upon this Subject, in his
Commentary upon St. Luke, That the Church is above St. Peter, Ecclesia est
super Petrum. This evidently appears by what St. Luke says in the 15th of the
Acts, concerning the first Council that was held among Christians, in which
Assembly of the Apostles and Ministers of the Church at Jerusalem, the question
which St. Paul and St. Barnabas related to them on the behalf of the Church of
Antioch was decided; but they decide it not by the Authority of St. Peter, but
by that of the Holy Ghost, and of themselves, Visum est spiritui sancto and
nobis, etc. Also in the 21st of the same Book, St. James and St. Paul say, that
they had made this Ordinance. St. Jude and St. Silas are sent, not on the
behalf of St. Peter, but of the whole College of the Apostles. Add to this,
That St. Peter himself was sent with St. John, by the Apostles, to those of
Samaria, after they had received the Word of God, as it is related in the 8th
Chapter of the same Book, which proves invincibly, that St. Peter was not the
Sovereign Master of the Society of the Apostles, but that he was in some degree
their inferior, whatsoever the place were that he held amongst them; (not
unlike the first Senator in the Body of a Senate) it being the right of a
Superior to send an Envoy.


Philer. I apprehend very well what you say; But can it be denied, but that
Jesus Christ promised somewhat particularly to St. Peter, in the 16th of St.
Matthew, when he said to him in particular, Ego vero dico tibi, etc.


Phila. I could tell you as a great many Catholic Divines do, That St. Peter
having answered in the name of all the Apostles, Jesus Christ gave him nothing
in particular; but what he received, he received in the name of all the
Apostles, and of the whole Church of which he was then the Type, as St. Austin
says, in the 1st Book of his Retractations, Cap. 21. speaking of St. Peter,
Typum gerebat Ecclesiae cui sunt traditae claves, which is founded upon the
Text of the 20th of St. John, where Jesus Christ gives equally to all his
Apostles, the power of forgiving and of retaining Sins. I could say with St.
Chrysostom upon this passage, and with De Verb. Dom. Sermon. 13. Tract. in Joh.
12.4. Sermon. de diverse. 118. in Psalm. 86.97, etc.
St. Augustine, That this Rock whereon Christ promises to build his Church,
was that firm and solid Confession of Faith which St. Peter had just then made;
or else Jesus Christ himself, who was this Cornerstone whereon was placed the
mystical building of the Church. Et super hanc Petram quam cognovisti, says St.
Augustine, dicens tu es Christus Filius Dei viventis, edificabo Ecclesiam meam,
id est, super me, ipsum Filium Dei edificabo Ecclesiam meam, super me edificabo
te, non me super te. Cyril. lib. 4. de Trinit.
St. Cyril, Hill. lib. 2. and 6. de Trin.
St. Hilary, Amb. in c. 2. de Episto.
St. Ambrose, and Hiero. lib. cont Jov. c. 19.
St. Hierom are of this opinion; but to deal freely with you, it is none of
mine: For I had rather take this Text, as Tert. lib. 1. de pud. cap. 21.
Tertullian and St. Cyprian, and say with these other Doctors, That Jesus
Christ spoke in particular to St. Peter, and promised him some Prerogatives
above his Colleagues. And to justify my Opinion, I observe first, That St.
Peter answers in particular concerning his Faith. Now Faith is so internal a
thing, that nothing but the Conscience of each particular person can answer for
it; and by consequence we cannot say that this Apostle answered in the name of
the whole Society of the Apostles. When it concerned some outward thing which
was obvious to the senses, this Apostle might answer in the name of all his
Brethren, as when he says to our Savior, We have left all to follow thee.
Omnia, etc. But when the question was concerning a motion of the heart, he
could not answer for any but himself.

Secondly, You must observe that our Savior promises a particular recompense
to the Faith of Peter; for which, after that the Apostle had said, Tu es
Christus Filius Dei vivi, He Answers him, Ego vero dico tibi quia tu es Petrus
beatus es Simon Barjona, to make him know, that he would reward particularly
the strength of his Faith, and the fervency of his Zeal. For this reason he
puts him in mind of the new name he had given him, Tu es Petrus, says he, and
furthermore, and super hanc Petram edificabo Ecclesiam meam. He makes him
understand by this, That he shall not bear the name of Peter in vain, since he
intended to build his Church upon this Foundationstone; and tho the Evangelist
St. Matthew changes the Term, yet it cannot be inferred from thence that he
changes the Subject; because that Cephas, the Syriack term, which our Savior
used, when he said to Simon the Son of Jona, Thou art Peter, signifies a Rock;
so that to translate the Syriack letter which Jesus Christ made use of, we must
say, that our Savior said to Simon the Son of Jona, Thou art a Rock, and upon
this Rock will I build my Church. And it cannot be denied, but that St. Peter
was a fundamental stone whereon Jesus Christ did build his Church, since that
in the 21st of the Revelations, the Apostles are called, V. 14.
Fundamenta coelestis Jerusalem. You will be fully confirmed in this opinion,
if you observe that the Church is oftentimes compared in Scripture to a Temple,
to a House, Believers are the living Stones of it. Jesus Christ is the
Cornerstone, and the Apostles the Foundation-stones: And of these St. Peter is
to be accounted the first, because he laid the first foundation of this
mystical building. To these two Observations I would add a third, drawn from
the Hebrew Language, amongst whom those who beget Children are called the
Foundations of Houses. Who then can doubt in either sense, but that St. Peter
is one of these Foundation-stones; nay, the very Foundation-stone it self,
since that by his Preaching, full of Faith and of Zeal, he laid the first
Foundation of the Christian Church, and begat Children unto God, as well of the
Jewish People as of the Gentiles?

I say the same thing of what our Savior added, That he would give him the
Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven: These Keys are Keys of an Authority; not of
Dominion and of Empire, but of Jurisdiction and of Direction, such as belong to
a Steward, and such as God promised to lay upon the Shoulders of Eliakim in the
22d of Isaiah: We may also say, that Jesus Christ alluded to the Custom of the
Jews, who invested their Doctors by the ceremony of delivering to them the
Keys; or to the Custom of the Pharisees, who attributed to themselves the power
of binding; who called every thing bound which was prohibited; and that loosed
which was allowed of. No Man therefore can deny but that St. Peter was
established the principal Doctor of the Christian Church, and that the Keys of
Heavenly Knowledge, whereof he just then gave an admirable proof, were committed
to him. He loosed both the Jews and the Gentiles: Those from the Observation of
the Ceremonies of the Law, and the Traditions of their forefathers, which was a
grievous burden; these from the false Opinions and false Worships wherein they
had been bred: And he confirmed both the one and the other in the belief of the
Mysteries of Salvation, and in the practice of the Maxims of the Gospel. In all
these respects, who can doubt but that St. Peter received in a particular
manner the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven?


Philer. All that you have said seems to me to be very good, and very solid;
but what had St. Peter to his own particular in all this? Are not the other
Apostles, as well as St. Peter, these Foundation-stones of the Church, in the
sense which you have observed? Were not the other Apostles, as well as St.
Peter, established the Infallible Doctors of the Church? Did not they all make
use of the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven in binding and loosing upon Earth the
sins of Men?


Phila. I agree with you in all you say: But though these Privileges were
common to all the Apostles, that does not at all hinder St. Peter's having them
after an Eminent manner; and in this respect he had certainly some Prerogatives
above his Brethren. They were all of them Foundation-Stones whereon Jesus
Christ built his Church: But it may be said, that St. Peter laid the Foundation
of this mystical building after a most singular manner, not only because he set
the first hand to it, but also because he built this House all the World over,
by the means of those, who having been taught immediately from his mouth, and
dispersed at length throughout the World, Preached the Gospel every where. They
all received the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, but St. Peter was the first
that with his Keys opened the Doors of this Kingdom, and made a larger use of
it than the others. You see also that he was the first called to the
Apostleship; That he showed also a particular zeal and love for his Master, who
distinguished him from the others by his favors, and by the name of Peter
which he gave him; But all these Prerogatives give him only a Primacy of Order,
and not of Dominion; an Authority, not of Empire and of Monarchy, but of
Precedence and of Direction, such as that of a first President in a Senate, or
of a famous Philosopher among those of his Profession; for which reason, Dial.
^. cap. 4.
St. Jerome says of St. Peter, that he was the first of the Apostles, as Plato
was the Prince of the Philosophers.


Philer. I am convinced of the truth of what you say; But does it not appear in
the 21st of St. John, that Jesus Christ gives, even an Authority of Dominion to
St. Peter above his Brethren, whom he distinguishes by the name of Sheep, as
other common believers by the name of Lambs?


Phila. You can conclude nothing from that Text in favor of the Monarchical
authority of St. Peter; for in this place, according to the opinion of Cyril.
Alex. lib. 12. in Joh. cap. 64.
St. Cyril of Alexandria, and of Cyril. Hieros. Catech. 2.
St. Cyril of Jerusalem, Jesus Christ did only renew to St. Peter the dignity
of his Apostleship, which he enjoyed but as the other Apostles did, that he
might not think he had lost it by his three times denying his Master; and for
this reason it is, that he bids him three times to feed his Sheep. It is to no
purpose to seek after a Mystery in the terms of (...) and (...), and of (...)
and (...), since that the two first signify at the bottom the same thing, and
the two last are given indifferently to Believers in the Scripture. The holy
Fathers do also hold, that the Apostles received the same right, and the same
power as St. Peter, when our Savior said to him, Pasce oves meas, according to
Basil. de vit. solit. cap. 23. consti. cap. 42.
St. Basil, Greg. Naz. in Test. Epist.
St. Greg. Nazianzen, Ambrose. in pass.
St. Ambrose, and Aug. de Agon. Chr. cap. 30. lib. quest. vet. No. Test. quest.
57. and Tract. 47. in Joh.
St. Augustine. We might add to this what Tertull. Carm.
Tertullian says, That all the Apostles had an equal power, and that they were
all the same as St. Peter was, as Cypr. lib. de unitat. Ecclesiae.
St. Cyprian explains it; and that they had all the same dignity, as Pope
Append. com. Theod. Ep. 8.
Gelasius says.


Philer. I am very well satisfied as to your first proof, and I think you have
showed sufficiently by the Holy Scripture, that the supreme Authority is in the
Church, and in the Council which represents it; That St. Peter himself, tho he
were the Prince of the Apostles, was subject to it; and that he was not looked
upon as the supreme Judge in things that concerned Religion, but as the first
Minister in the College of the Apostles. I desire you now to pass on to your
second proof, and to show me by the perpetual and constant Tradition of the
Church, that the Popes who have succeeded St. Peter, were never considered as
the supreme arbitrators of things concerning Religion, but that the Sovereign
Authority to which the Popes themselves ought to be subject, was esteemed ever
to be in the Council.


Phila. I will readily perform the promise I made to you; but I would have you
observe by the by, That the Bishops of Rome have not succeeded St. Peter in the
charge of his Apostleship, which was a personal employment, and particular to
those whom Jesus Christ had immediately called, whom he had Bapized by his Holy
Spirit, and enriched with extraordinary gifts, by which means these blessed
people were Infallible, and possessed a sovereign and Independent Authority in
the Church, and a Ministry which was not restrained to a certain place, but
which was dispersed throughout the whole World. I would also have you observe,
That the succession of the Bishops of Rome to St. Peter, was but in the charge
of a Bishop, whereof St. Peter, and the rest of the Apostles did communicate
the Rights or Prerogatives to their successors; and that this Charge has this
common Right with the Apostleship, that it confers the power of Preaching the
Word, of administering the Sacraments, and of using the power of the Keys; but
it gives no infallibility or power of exercising the Ecclesiastical Ministry
all the World over. After this Observation, which is not amiss to our purpose,
I come to what I promised you.

And I observe in the first place, that in the most Ancient Monuments of
Christian Antiquity, I find no traces of this Supreme Power which the Roman
Bishops of the last Ages would attribute to themselves. We have the Epistles of
St. Ignatius, which are of an Apostolic Character; but there is not so much as
the least foot-step of this supreme Authority attributed to the Sea of Rome;
This Holy Prelate speaks of the Church of Rome as of other Churches; He calls
it the Church sanctified and illuminated by the will of God, without giving it
the least authority over any other; and in his 7th Epistle to those of Smyrna,
he directs it to the Bishop in the name of the Church, and acknowledges
nothing above him, which he would never have done, had he believed the Bishop
of Rome to have been not only above other Bishops, but also above a Council.
St. Justin Martyr, in his Apology for the Christians, gives an account to the
Emperor Antoninus, of the behavior of Believers in his time, but there is not
one word of a superior and supreme Master that resided at Rome, and made his
Sovereign decision concerning matters of Religion. St. Polycarp, the Disciple
of St. John, as Eusebius relates it, in his Book of Ecclesiastical History,
came to Rome to confer with Anicetus, who was there Bishop, concerning the day
whereon he was to keep Easter; but yet he followed not this Bishops Opinion,
which without doubt he would have done, if it had been true, that the Bishop of
Rome had been at that time held the supreme Judge of the Church. St. Irenaeus,
Bishop of Lions, in his Epistle to Victor Bishop of Rome, as Lib. 5. cap. 2,
and 24.
Eusebius says, sharply reproves him for separating from his Communion the
Eastern Church, because they would not keep Easter upon the same day that he
did. How could this Bishop have reproved things of this nature, if he had
believed that Victor had been in this conjuncture the absolute judge, to whose
Decisions, and to whose Tribunal the Church was obliged to submit? There were
several Synods held both in the East and West; There was one in the East, where
Policrares Bishop of Ephesus presided, wherein far from acknowledging the
Bishop of Rome for the Arbitrator of the whole Church, they condemn his
opinion, as Eusebius witnesses. Was not there a Council also held in France,
our own Country, wherein the Bishop of Rome had no share? But St. Irenaeus
presided and wrote a very pressing letter to Victor, to oblige him to retain
Communion with the Eastern Churches? Do you think now seriously, that things
would have been carried thus, if they had believed that the Bishop of Rome had
held a Sovereign authority in the Church?

Some time afterward, the Heretic Novatians, whose Picture Cornelius Bishop
of Rome has drawn in his Epistle to Fabian Bishop of Antioch, being deprived
of the Roman Chair, which he had usurped, and where he had published this
Error, That they ought not to be admitted to Repentance who had fallen into
grievous sins; Cornelius did not undertake of himself to condemn this Error,
which he would have done without all question, if he had thought himself to
have been the sovereign Arbitrator of the Church, but he assembled at Rome a
Council of Sixty Bishops. There were also held without any order of Cornelius,
many Councils in diverse places, namely at Antioch, which had been an horrible
attempt had Cornelius been the absolute Magistrate of the Christian
Commonwealth. Matthew, Bishop of Arles, having joined himself to Novatian,
Faustinus Bishop of Lions did not address himself to Cornelius, but to St.
Cyprian Bishop of Carthage, who wrote to the neighboring Bishops of France,
and to the Bishop of Rome, to exhort them to do their Duty; and in this Letter
he says, That he held in his own hand the balance of the Church Government:
Does not all this then demonstratively prove, that the Bishop of Rome was not
at that time looked upon as the Monarch of the Church? I add to these Examples
that of the famous Council of Antioch, held in the year 265. against Paulus
Samosatenus, wherein assisted more than 270. Bishops. This sworn enemy of our
Savior's Divinity being relapsed into the Heresy which he had formerly abjured
in an Assembly held in the same City, and because he could not be brought back
to his Duty, by the Letters and Remonstrances of the neighboring Bishops, it
was their Opinion to call a Council; and to this purpose Helenus Bishop of
Tharsus, and Theoctistus Bishop of Caesarea in Palestine, invited Dyonisius of
Alexandria, chief of the Diocese of Egypt, and Firmilian of Caesaria in
Cappadocia, chief of the Diocese of Pontus, to the Convocation of a Council,
which was at length holden at Antioch, without the order of Faelix Bishop of
Rome; and they did proceed against Paulus Samosatenus, tho it does not appear
that any body, I will not say, presided, but so much as assisted on the behalf of
that Bishop; and at length they ended the Assembly by a Synodal Letter which
they sent to Dionysius, whom they thought yet in possession of the Roman Chair
(tho he were dead in the Month of September the year before) to Maternus Bishop
of Alexandria, and to all their fellow Bishops, Priests and Deacons, throughout
the whole Earth, and to the whole Catholic Church under Heaven. This had been
a very irregular proceeding, if the Bishop of Rome had been the supreme
Magistrate of the Church. We may add to this, what the Council of Alexandria
did in regard of Origin under Demetrius, for they condemned this Doctor whilst
he was yet living; and also under Theodosius, in whose Reign they Anathematized
his Doctrine and his Memory, and all this without the Order, Intention, or
Authority of the Bishop of Rome, which they had not dared to have undertaken,
had they believed that this Bisop had had the supreme Authority in the Church.
From all this Truth, which I have told you thus at large, may be gathered. That
in these Primitive Ages of Christianity, the Sea of Rome was really considered
as the first in place, as the Chair of St. Peter, and the Center of Priestly
Unity, as St. Cyprian calls it, in his Epistle to Cornelius; but that it was
not looked upon as the supreme Tribunal of things that concerned Religion.


Philer. I gather from this Discourse, that you have now made, that in these
Primitive Ages, wherein the Holy Bishops of Rome aspired to no other Crown than
that of Martyrdom, and shared nothing amongst them but the Cross; before the
Spirit of Ambition and of Dominion had entered into the heads of any of these
Prelates, That the Spirit of Charity and of Humility, which is the spirit of
the Gospel, did perfectly animate them, and that all the Bishops living in this
good understanding, and in this union which Jesus Christ recommends so strictly
to his Disciples; they did communicate from one to the other the exigencies and
necessities of their Churches; that to heal the evils which molested them, they
chose out themselves the remedies which they judged most convenient; and the
most effectual means, and that which they oftenest made use of, was the
Convocation of Synods, to whom the Grace of the Holy Spirit as St. Cyprian
says, was never wanting for the good and edification of their Flocks. And this
which you have now related, brings into my memory many such like methods of our
Ancient Bishops of France, which I think I have read in St. Gregory of Tours;
But can you show me in the following Ages this same method of acting, and this
Tradition of the Church which you have called perpetual and constant?


Phila. I hope I shall make good my Promise; I own that the Heathen Emperors
having embraced Christianity, the Church having been enriched by their
liberality, and her Ministers raised to a degree of Honor more considerable in
the World by the effects of these Princes Piety, things began to put on another
face, and the Bishops to take place according to the dignity of the Cities
wherein they exercised their Ministry, and to change that deference and honor
that was given them before, into a sort of jurisdiction, as many people have
owned, and among others In Anno 39.
Cardinal Baronius, and as may be gathered out of the 17th Canon of the Council
of Calcedon; But whatever alteration the Conversion of Emperors and of Kings,
might have caused in the condition of the Prelates, and in the Government of
the Church, it cannot be denied but that the Church Government remained still
the same in substance, and in what was essenrial to it, and that they were
always vigorously opposed, who endeavored to innovate and to introduce in the
Church a Monarchical Government; so that the Sovereign Authority remained
always in the Councils, who in these latter Ages have openly declared
themselves against those who would have robbed them of this privilege.

The first example that I remember, which justifies the Sovereign Authority of
the Church, and which proves that the Bishops of Rome were dependants on it, is
that of the Council of Arles, assembled, if I am not mistaken, by the Emperor
Constantine, in the year 314, and composed of 200 Bishops, called together from
diverse Provinces of the Empire. You know that the Causes of this Councils being
called, were the differences that happened between Donatus of Casanigra, and
Cecilian Bishop of Carthage, who had been deposed by an Assembly of Bishops
(wherein Secundus the Bishop of Tigifis, and Primate of Numidia presided) these
differences having divided Africa, some Synodal Assemblies having established
Cecilian, and others Donatus. I will not pretend to give an account of this
History, which you may have read in diverse Authors, Eusebius. lib. 15. Optat. Mil.
cont. advers. Parin. lib. 1.
and particularly in St. Austin in his Epistles 68. and 162, where you may see
how Constantine commanded the Proconsul Aelius to hear all Parties, and to give
judgment, and that the Donatists were were there condemned by the Sentance of
the Proconsul. The Schismatics then applied themselves to the Emperor, who, to
put an end to their differences, named first of all Matronus Bishop of Cologne,
Delicius Bishop of Autun, and Marinus Bishop of Arles, and to these three he at
length joined Melciades Bishop of Rome, and Fifteen other Italian Bishops, of
which number was the Bishop of Milan; these Nineteen Bishops gave their
judgments in favor of Cecilian; the Donatists being condemned, Appealed from
this judgment, and accused their Judges of being too precipitate. What now did
the Emperor Constantine? He did not tell these Sectaries, that the judgment
that had condemned them had been given by the Sovereign Judge of the Church;
but he called a General Council in the City of Arles, to examine the matter over
again, which had been judged by the Bishop of Rome, and the other Eighteen
Bishops, which was done in the presence of two Priests, and two Deacons whom
Sylvester, that succeeded Melciades, had sent thither, who sat also no higher
than in the 5th place. The condemnation of the Donatists was confirmed in this
Assembly; they also decided the question concerning the Baptism of Heretics,
and gave it otherwise rhan the Bishop of Rome had adjudged it, or St. Cyprian
explained it; which decision held the just medium between these two Opinions.
From hence it appears clearly enough, That the Bishop of Rome did not believe
himself above the Council, since that he suffered what he had already adjudged
to be examined in the Council: It appears also, that both the Bishops of
those days, and the Emperor Constantine, believed the Authority of Councils to
be Sovereign, and that in matters of Faith a Council may decide otherwise than
the Pope, since that the Council of Arles did pronounce concerning Baptism of
Heretics otherwise than the Pope did. You may see also notable proofs of this
same spirit which animated the Bishops of those times in the famous Council of
Nice, composed of 318 Bishops, Assembled in the 325. year of our Lord, under
the same Constantine. The reason why this Council was called, was, as you know,
the Heresy of Arrius, which set all the East in confusion, and the difference
among the Churches concerning the day whereon they should keep Easter. You know
without doubt, that this Heresiarck having appeared in the year 315, Alexander
his Bishop endeavored to reduce him from his Error. He called together two
Councils of all the Bishops of Egypt, of Lybia and of Pentapolis, who depended
upon his See, and in these Councils Arrius was Deposed and Excommunicated
without the mediate or immediate intervention of the Bishop of Rome, to whom
Alexander thought it sufficient to gie advice of all that passed in the
Councils; but the Emperor seeing to his great regret that all the care of
Alexander could not hinder the great progress of this Heresy, he made the
famous Hosius to come from Corduba, and sent him to Alexander to endeavor to
end the difference. All the endeavors of this famous Prelate proving
fruitless, he joined his Prayers to those of Alexander, and they both of them
humbly entreated his Imperial Majesty to apply a speedy and an effectual remedy
to this evil, by the Convocation of an Ecumenical Council. This Great Prince,
who had nothing more at heart than the Glory of God, and the good of his
Church, gave a favorable answer to the intentions of Alexander and of Hosius.
He Assembled a Council at Nice, a City of Bithynia, which was opened the 22. of
May, in the year 325, and ended the 25th. of August in the same year. Never was
there in any Assembly so much Learning and Piety; whatever there was either
Learned or Holy in the whole Earth you had in that blessed Assembly, which has
been and ever will be a Rampart to the true Christian Faith. St. Sylvester
Bishop of Rome not being able to be there himself, assisted by his Envoys, who
were Vitus and Vincentius, Presbyters of his Church. The Admirable Hosius there
presided, and they there solemnly condemned Arrius and his Doctrine. They there
regulated the difference about Easter, and Ordained that it should be
Celebrated the Sunday after the Full Moon of March. They made in all Twenty
five Canons, whereof the Fifth does prohibit Bishops to receive to their
Communion those who should have been Excommunicated by others; and because
those who were Excommunicated might complain that they had been unjustly
proceeded against, it was Ordained, that the justice of their Excommunication
should be examined in the Council of Bishops of each Province. And the Sixth
Canon gave bounds and limits to the Diocesses of Metropolitans, according to
the Ancient Customs, that those who were subject to their inspection might so
remain, but also that no greater extent should be given them; and that
accordingly the Bishop of Alexandria should have power in Egypt, in Lybia, and
in Pentapolis, and the Bishop of Rome in the Diocese which was under him: Quia
(says the Council) Episc. Romans pariter Mos est.

A man must wilfully shut his eyes not, to see in all this proceeding, that in
those days it was a vain thing to doubt of the Supreme Authorities being in the
Council, and that all Bishops, he of Rome not excepted, were subject to it. For
first of all, you see that when Arrius would have taught against the purity of
the Faith, Alexander having used the way of giving him particular admonishment,
had no recourse to the Bishop of Rome for the condemnation of this Heretic,
but himself assembled the Council of the Great Diocese whereof he was Head;
which certainly he would not have done, had he thought that the Supreme
Authority belonged absolutely to the Bishop of Rome. Secondly, Hosius and
Alexander having conferred together, and found that the only remedy for this
Heresy was the Convocation of a General Synod, addressed themselves to the
Emperor Constantine, to desire him to call it: If they had believed that the
Sovereign Tribunal of the Church had been the Sea of Rome, why did not they
cite Arrius thither? Why did they take the way of a Council, which is the
longest and the most difficult? or at least why did they not apply themselves
to the Bishop of Rome to call it, as has been done since the Popes have raised
themselves above these Ancient Rules? Thirdly, If the Bishops of the Council
had believed that the Bishops of Rome had had the Supreme Authority, why did
they place Hosius Bishop of Corduba in the Chair of President, rather than
Vitus and Vincentius the Popes Envoys and Deputies, as has been practiced in
the late Councils of the Latin Church? Fourthly, If these Fathers had believed
that the last Decision of Ecclesiastical Affairs belonged to the Pope, how
would they have dared to start the question upon what day they should keep
Easter, since that the Bishop of Rome had explained himself long since upon
this matter. Fifthly, If the Fathers of this Council had looked upon the Pope
as a Superior Judge over the Council, how could they have Ordained that those
who had been Excommunicated by one Bishop, could not be received by another?
And how could they have committed to Provincial Synods the Examination of the
validity or invalidity of Excommunications? Might not they rather have
permitted those who were grieved by the sentence of Excommunication, to appeal
to the Sea of Rome to quash or to confirm it as they should think fit? Lastly,
Since they regulate the power of the Bishop of Alexandria, after the example of
the Bishop of Rome, within the limits of the Ancient Usage, does not this show
that the Bishop of Rome should not extend his power over other Churches than
those which had been under him by the Ancient Customs; and that he should
govern these Churches after the same manner as the Bishop of Alexandria did
govern those of Egypt, of Lybia, and of Pentapolis, which depended upon him,
and that so his Authority was restrained within certain bounds, and subject, as
well as that of the Bishop of Alexandria and other Metropolitans, to the
Authority of the Council?


Philer. You have, methinks, sufficiently showed by all that passed in this
Holy and famous Council of Nice, whose conduct and form ought for ever to be a
Pattern and Model to the Church, that there is no other Sovereign Authority in
the Church, than that of Ecumenical Councils; but to confirm me the more in
this opinion, do me the favor to show me, that in all other Councils of this
nature, they acted after the same manner.


Phila. As I have already promised you, it is just that I keep my word to you;
but it shall be, if you please, in very few words, and touching only upon what
concerns our subject; for should I make a relation of all, it would be
impossible for us to end it in this Discourse. The second Ecumenical Council
held against the Heretic Macedonius, who disputed the Divinity of the Holy
Ghost, was called by the Emperor Theodosius, in the City of Constantinople,
Anno 383.
though the Pope Damasus desired that it might be held at Rome, as you may see
in the Synodal Epistle of this Council written to Damasus, to Ambrose, and to
many others assembled at Rome, and related by Theod. lib. 5. cap. 9.
Theodoret, Soc. lib. 5. cap. 8.
Socrat. Soz. lib. 7. cap. 7.
Sozomen, Nicephor. lib. 12. cap. 1.
and Nicephorus. This Council wherein the Pope Damasus neither assisted in
person, nor by his Deputies, Established Nectarius Patriarch of Constantinople,
and Flavian Patriarch of Antioch. It made two Canons which are for our subject,
namely the Sixth and the Third, the Third imports, that after the Bishop of
Rome, the Bishop of Constantinople ought to have the same Privileges of
Honors, etc. And the Sixth says, that the Bishop shall be judged by the other
Bishops of his Province; and that in case of Appeal the matter shall be ended
by the other Bishops of the Diocese; and lastly by a General Council. You see
then, my dear Philerene, that it was the Council which created Patriarchs;
which is an act of Supreme Authority, and which clearly shows that the
Authority of Patriarchs is subalterne and dependant. You see that the Councils
regulate the place of Patriarchs, giving the second to him of Constantinople,
because that this City was the new Rome, and placing after him the Patriarch of
Alexandria. This shows that they followed the same order in Ecclesiastical
Sees, as in Body; Politic; and that their addition of Honor and Glory was
attributed to the Rank and to the Magnificence of the Cities where they were
Established. You see that the Council does not at last send Appeals from the
Judgments of the Bishops to the Sea of Rome to be there finally determined, but
to an Ecumenical Council; which shows evidently that this Council did not
believe any thing above an Ecumenical Council, and that every thing ought to
be subject to it.


Philer. But do not you know, my dear Philalethe, that Baronius, and after him
Binius, have showed by many reasons, that the third Canon of this Council is
counterfeit; and that they have affirmed that the Sixth is not to be found in
the Roman Code, nor in the Abridgements of Caranza, and of Sagittarius?


Phila. I know very well what the Cardinal Baronius has said to make the Third
Canon of this Council be suspected; and I know the attempts of the Latin
Collectors; but you must consult the Originals in Greek, which is sufficient to
defeat entirely the reasons of Baronius. We see in the Greek Originals the
Seven Canons that this Council made, among which are the Third and Sixth in the
order and in the terms which we have them. Add to this the Evidence of 630
Bishops, who assisted in the Council of Chalcedon, and who in the 20th Canon of
this Council, make mention of the 3d Canon made by the Fathers of
Constantinople.


Philer. This gives me some sort of satisfaction; but I have one scruple more
upon this Subject, which is, that it is not likely that the Council of
Constantinople, that was composed of 150 Fathers, would pronounce, upon this
matter, quite otherwise than the Council of Sardica had done, which was
composed of Three hundred Bishops, and held in the year 347, who in their 3d
and 7th Canons reserve last Appeals to the Sea of Rome.


Phila. I agree with you in what you say concerning the Council of Sardica; But
first of all, this Council was not received as Ecumenical, tho it were called
for that intention. It was added to the Roman Code in the year 527. and it was
afterward received in the year 591. to the second Canon of the 6th Council, but
as a particular Council, and it was placed after the Councils of Constantinople
and of Ephesus. St. Gregory Greg. lib. Ep. 24.
himself does not reckon it among the Ecumenical Councils. Besides, you must
observe what was the cause of the making of these Canons, and in what terms
they were expressed. The Cause was the evil dealing which the famous St.
Athanasius met with at the hand of the Eastern Bishops, who were all Arrians,
or Demi- Arrians. By the 12th Canon of the Council of Antioch, which was held
in the year 341. it was carried, That a Bishop being deposed by the Synod of
his Province, ought to address himself to a greater Synod, and undergo their
judgment, and by this greater was understood the Patriarchal Synod, from which
there was no Appeal, as may be seen, Nov. Just. 123. cap. 22. In the 15th Canon
of the same Council it is said, That when all the Bishops of a Province were of
one Opinion, there was no Appeal. Now St. Athanasius had been condemned by the
Synod of his Diocese, where he suspected almost all his Judges, since they were
his Enemies; as had plainly appeared in their Cabal at the Councils of Tire and
of Antioch, where the Eusebians were the Masters. What could this Holy Bishop
do less than have recourse to Julius Bishop of Rome, who was Orthodox, and to
his Council composed of Fifty Western Bishops, to save himself from their
oppression? Was not Julius and his Council now obliged to maintain, in this
conjuncture, the Interest of this Man's Injured Innocence, and likewise of the
Son of God, who was himself persecuted in the person of his Servant? This they
did with a great deal of Zeal and Prudence. They declared this Holy persecuted
Man Innocent, and admitted him to the Communion of the Bishop of Rome, who
wrote to his passionate Judges, exhorting them to appear, not before himself,
but before a Synod composed of lawful Judges, according to the decisions of the
Council of Nice, which orders, that what has been treated of in one Council,
shall be examined before another. These unjust Judges made a very ill return to
the Kindness and Charity of Julius; they sent him back a most injurious Answer;
and besides, being broken up from Sardica, where they had been Assembled by
order of the Emperors, Constance and Constantius, to hold a General Council
according to the advice that Hosius had given to Constance, and retiring to
Philipopolis, they there held a Factious Cabal, wherein these unworthy Prelates
Excommunicate Julius, Hosius, and all those who had received St. Athanasius to
their Communion. What now did the true and lawful Council of Sardica in this
Case? On one hand they excommunicated these wretched men who had bee^ so rash
as to excommunicate him, and confirmed the Sentence given by Julius, and by his
Council, in favor of St. Athanasius; and on the other, that the Catholic
Bishops who should be agrieved by the Sentence of the Eastern Bishops, who were
the most part of them Arrians or Semi-Arrians, might find a means to free
themselves from their oppression, they declared by the 3d and 4th Canons, That
if any person should find himself agrieved by the Sentence of any Synod of his
Province, he might have recourse from their judgment; in which Case the Bishops
of the Province who had judged, should write to Julius the Reasons of their
Judgment; That if these Reasons were approved of by Julius, the Judgment should
hold; but if on the contrary, the Reasons were not found pertinent, the Bishop
of Rome should write to the Bishops of the neighboring Province to examine the
matter over anew, and to judge of it according to the Canons: Wherein you see,
that the design of the Council was only to justify the conduct of St.
Athanasius, who had had recourse to Julius Bishop of Rome, and likewise the
behavior of Julius and of his Council, and to provide an effectual remedy for
the misfortune of Schism, to preserve Innocence from being oppressed in an evil
conjuncture. But you cannot conclude, from the behavior of this Council, that
the Pope was looked upon as their Superior; on the contrary, it appears
plainly, that it was the Council that did acts of Superiority; be it for that
they examined anew the affair of St. Athanasius, which the Pope and his
Council had judged, or for that the Council wrote to the Pope to publish his
Decrees in Sicily, Sardinia and Italy; or because they accepted the excuse
which the Pope made them for his absence; all which things are acts of
Superiority: To which we must not forget to add, that the Fathers of this
Council calling the Pope in the Letter which they wrote to him, their Brother
and their fellow Minister, makes it very apparent, that they did not acknowledge
him for their Superior. Besides, let me advertise you, as we proceed, that this
Council was not composed of 300 Bishops, as you have said, they were but about
100. and they all Western except Macarius and Asterius, who were of the East.
It is true, that the Emperors Constance and Constantius had called together
this Council of Bishops out of these two Empires, and that there came to Sardis
to the number of 150. as St. Athanasius witnesses; but all the Eastern
Bishops, who were for the most part Arrians, retired to Philipopolis. And although
St. Athanasius says in some places, that the Council was composed of 300
Bishops, it is because it was subscribed by a great number of Prelates that did
not assist at it.


Philer. Can you show me that the same Spirit reigned in the two other great
Councils, namely in the Council of Ephesus, and in that of Chalcedon?


Phila. The thing is not difficult; you know the History of these two Councils,
and are not ignorant that the first was called by the Emperor Theodosius in the
year 431. as may be seen in Socrat. lib. 1. cap. 33.
Socrates, and in Evag. lib. 1. cap. 3.
Evagrius, and that it was Assembled against the Heresy of Nestorius Bishop of
Constantinople, who divided Jesus Christ into two persons. Celestin Bishop of
Rome, being advertised of this Heresy, by Cyrill Bishop of Alexandria, called
together at Rome his Synod, which condemned it, and excommunicated Nestorius.
Cyrill, who, for his part, had done all that he could to convince and bring
back this wandering Sheep, Assembled also his Synod, who did no less than that
of Rome had done; but as these particular Councils were not a sufficient
remedy, there was called an Ecumenical one in the City of Ephesus, whither
Celestin sent his Legates, namely two Bishops and one Priest, and wherein
presided Cyrill Bishop of Alexandria, after whom the first of Celestines
Legates was seated. Here were made Eight Canons, of which the eighth makes
chiefly for our purpose: For to restrain the attempts of the Patriarch of
Antioch upon the liberties of the Churches of Cyprus, it ordains, that not
only in Cyprus, but in all other Diocesses and Provinces of the World, no
Bishop should usurp any Province, which from the beginning had not been of his
dependence; and that every Province should preserve inviolably the Rights which
she has had from the beginning, and according to the Ancient Custom. Who can
say but that this Council does all the acts of a Supreme Authority? And that
the Bishop of Rome does none at all? If he had had any, after that he and his
Council had condemned Nestorius, it had not been necessary to call a General
Council for it; the first of his Legates would, without question, have presided
in this Council, and this Holy Assembly would not have undertaken to make
General Decrees, which limit the Power of all Bishops, without excepting even
him of Rome.

You have also read, without doubt, what the same Socrates says of the Council
of Chalcedon, called by the Emperor Martianus in the year 451. to stifle the
Heresy of Eutiches, who confounded the two Natures in Jesus Christ; you may
thence have learned, that a General Council having been called by Theodosius
the second, in the City of Ephesus, Eutiches, by the intrigues and artifices of
Dioscorus, Patriarch of Alexandria, set himself in this Factious Cabal, against
Flavian, Patriarch of Constantinople, who was there deposed, because he had
deposed and condemned this Heretic; for which Reason this unhappy Assembly was
called Latrocinium, or the Robbery, that at length the Orthodox Bishops, as
namely Leo the great, Bishop of Rome, as may be seen in the 23, 25, and 26 of
his Letters, entreated the Emperor to call an Ecumenical Council, which
because Theodosius either could not or would not do, Martianus, who succeeded
him, did it, having Assembled this Council, not at Rome, as Leo would have had
it, but first at Nice, and then at Chalcedon, as is to be seen in the 43, 44,
49, 50, and 51 of this Popes Epistles. This Council composed of 630 Bishops,
restored the memory of Flavian, by condemning and deposing Dioscore and
Eutiches. They made many Canons; in their 17th it is ordained, that the order
of Parishes in the Church should be according to the Politic and Civil form.
In the 29th. they Decree, that a Clergyman, having a difference with his
Bishop, shall be judged by the Synod of his Province; and if a Bishop has a
difference with the Metropolitan of the Province, let him address himself to
the Exarch of the Diocese, or to the Bishop of the Royal City of
Constantinople. And in the 28th they do ordain, That according to the decision
of 150 Fathers of Constantinople, Privileges equal to those of old Rome, should
be given to the most Holy See of New Rome, because she was honored with the
seat of the Empire and of the Senate; and that in things Ecclesiastical she
ought not to be held in lesser dignity, tho she took but the second place. A
Man must wilfully shut his eyes, not to see that this Council did not consider
the Bishop of Rome, as having in his hands the Supreme Authority, since that
they do not send the differences that might happen between Bishops and their
Metropolitans to him for their last determination, and that they make the
Bishop of Constantinople equal to him in Ecclesiastical Affairs, reserving to
him simply the primacy of Order, because his See was the City of Rome, where
the Emperors and the Senate formerly did reside: To which we ought to add, what
we read in the Letter of the Fathers of this Council to Leo Bishop of Rome;
where they say freely, That they had appointed and confirmed what had been
already ordained by the Council of Constantinople, tho Leo's Legates opposed
it, wherein they tell him, that he ought to acquiesce, not only for the
conservation of Order, but also out of Deference to the Emperors, who had given
them so absolute an Authority, that their Judgments passed for a Law,
reflecting without doubt, upon the Ordinance of Valentinian the third, made in
favor of the Sea of Rome. Lastly, We ought to observe, That the Fathers who
composed this Council, founded not the Privilege of Episcopal Sees, but upon
the Civil and Politic Prerogatives of the Cities where they were; which
shows, That the Eminence of that of Rome, was not founded upon the Primacy of
St. Peter, who had been the first Bishop of it, so much as upon the dignity of
the City. I could add to the Authority of these four great Councils, that of
the second Council of Constantinople, which is the Fifth Ecumenical one,
called by the Emperor Justin, in the year 553. to condemn the writings of
Theodorus Mopsuestia, those of Theodoret, and the Epistles of Ibas to Maris;
for this Council solicited Vigilius, Bishop of Rome, to judge the Question
which they were handling, not separately from them, but conjointly with them:
And the Emperor Justinian, in his Letters to Eutichius of Constantinople, and
to Apollinarius of Alexandria, declares, That the care of Emperors has always
been to extirpate Heresies, and to preserve the purity of the Faith by the
means of Councils; which shows clear enough, what superior Judge was
acknowledged in the Church: I might join to the Authority of this 5th
Ecumenical Council, that of the 6th and 7th, which make but one, this last
having only added some Canons to the decisions of the sixth, which was held
under Constantine Pogonatus, in the Palace called T^ullum; since that, in the
36th Canon of this last Council, were confirmed the Canons of Constantinople
and of Chalcedon, which made the Bishops of Rome and of Constantinople equal in
Ecclesiastical Affairs; and condemned Honorius, Bishop of Rome, with many
others, as tainted with the Heresy of the Monotholites; but our Discourse has
already been so long, that I ought not to tire out your patience any further.


Philer. I am not at all wearied with your Discourse; but it is not fit to
exact too much upon your kindness, but to refer the other reflections which you
can make upon this Subject, to another conversation.


The Third Dialogue.
PHiler. You were so kind, my dear Philalethe, in our last walk, to make me
hope for some more of your reflections upon the subject whereon we were
discoursing. I Will be obliged to you if you will impart them to me now.


Phila. I will pursue this matter since you desire it; but you will not take it
amiss if I abridg it as much as I can. After the Authority and Judgment of
Ecumenical Councils, I see nothing of greater force than what passed in the
African Councils, and namely in the Milevitan Council held in the Month of
August of the year 402, wherein St. Austin assisted, as appears in his 117th.
Epistle: In this Council they confirmed what had been decreed against the
Donatists by a former Council of Carthage; and in the Sixth Council of
Carthage, which was the Univesal of Africa, begun in the year 418, and
continued to the year 423. In the first of these Councils they made a Canon,
which is the 22, or the 31 according to Balzamon, by which it was Ordained that
Priests, Deacons, and other Clergymen should appeal from the Judgment of their
Bishops to the other Neighboring Bishops, and from them to the Council of
Africa, or to the Primate, and to no other upon pain of Excommunication, as it
has been Ordained heretofore concerning Bishops. You may see it thus expressed
in the Greek Copies in Zonaras, and in some Latin Copies, and in the Council of
Rheims held under Hugh Capet where this Milevitan Council is alleged. It is
true that 1 Cans. 2. qu. 6.
Gratian excepts Appeals to the Sea of Rome; but that was added of his own
head, since it was Appeals themselves which these Fathers did design wholly to
prohibit. In the second of these Councils, which is the Sixth of Carthage,
composed of 207 Bishops, of whose number was St. Augustine, and wherein presided
Aurelius Bishop of Carthage, they again had reason to renew this Decree against
Appeals beyond Sea; and see here the occasion: Apiarius Presbyter of Sicca in
Numidia, was Deposed and Excommunicated for his Crimes by some Bishops; he
Appealed from their Sentences before the Pope Zosimus, who by the judgment that
he gave declared him innocent, and delivered him from the Penalties to which he
had been condemned. This Apiarius having acknowledged his fault before the
Council, and there asked pardon for it, was restored to the Exercise of his
Charge, but not in the Church of Sicca, by reason of the Scandal he had there
given. This wretched fellow falling again into his Disorders, was Deposed by
Sylvanus his Bishop. He Appealed again from this Judgment to Celestin, who then
held the Sea of Rome. The Pope sent the Bishop Faustinus to the Council, with
two Presbyters, to maintain these the Rights of his See. Faustinus acquitted
himself very well in his Commission: He represented that by virtue of the
Canons of the Council of Nice, it was allowable to Appeal to the Sea of Rome,
and demanded that the Milevitan Canon should be annulled, which prohibited
Appeals beyond the Seas. The Bishops being surprised upon what Faustinus had
said, because he cited a Canon wholly unknown to them, consulted the Copy of
the Acts of the Council of Nice. The procedure in the Affair of Apiarius having
been lawfully done, they confirmed the condemnation from which he had Appealed,
and wrote a Synodical Letter to Celestin, which was Superscribed in these
Terms, To our most Dear and Honorable Brother Celestin. And in this Letter
they desire him not to receive to his Communion those whom they should
Excommunicate, according to the Decrees of the Council of Nice, which have
sub^ected as well inferior Clergymen as Bishops to their Metropolitans, willing
that Affairs should be determined where they began; assuring themselves that
the Grace of the Holy Spirit would never be wanting to every Province; and
after having showed him the inconveniences that would follow these sorts of
Appeals, they give him to understand that they had not found in the Acts of the
Council of Nice which had been sent them from Constantinople, and from Antioch,
this Canon which Faustinus had alleged. Not satisfied with this Letter which
contained their Opinions, they make a Canon which renewed that of the Milevitan
Council, signifying that Priests, Deacons, and other inferior Clergymen should
not Appeal beyond the Seas, but to the Primate of their Provinces, as has been
often resolved concerning Bishops. Who is there now but sees that the Fathers
of this Council did not believe that the Bishop of Rome had the Supreme
Authority in the Church, since that not only his Legate Faustinus did not
preside in it, but was seated after Valentinus Bishop of the first See of
Numidia; that they examine over again the Affair of Apiarius, as though it had
not been judged by the Bishop of Rome; that they give him only the name of
Brother, and will not at all permit that any Clergyman of Africa should appeal
to Rome?


Philer. This indeed appears very strong; but do not you know that it is
generally agreed, that in the Milevitan Canon, there is nothing said of the
Bishops? and that the clause that concerns them has been since added? that
besides the Canon produced by Faustinus to his Colleagues, was in some respects
a Canon of the Council of Nice, since that it was of the Council of Sardica,
which is but an Addition, a Supplement, and as it were the Seal of the Council
of Nice?


Phila. These Interpretations appear to me but weak; for the Milevitan Canon in
the Greek, and in some Latin Copies, does comprehend the Clause concerning
Bishops. Besides, the Fathers of this Council of Africa, in the Epistle which
they wrote to Celestin, make it known sufficiently that they did not understand
that Bishops could appeal beyond the Seas, no more than other inferior Clerks,
seeing that at the same time which they wrote this Epistle, they had before
them not only the Appeal of Apiarius, but also that which Anthony Bishop of
Fossat had brought against the Sentence of his Provincial Synod before the Pope
Boniface who restored him; for which reason Epist. 162.
St. Augustine wrote a Letter to Celestin, this Popes Successor, concerning
these pretended Additions to the Council of Nice; for that of Sardica was
called by different Emperors, in a far distant place, and after a considerable
Interval of time; for Motives and Reasons also different, as every body knows
that has any knowledge of History. If this Council had been a Supplement of the
Council of Nice, as they pretend, why is it not placed in the order of
Ecumenical Councils? Whence comes it that the Fathers of the Council of
Carthage, amongst whom were St. Augustine, Aurelius, and Alipandus, the most
famous Bishops of their time, were ignorant of this Canon? And why did not
Faustinus say plainly, that this Canon was truly of the Council of Sardica,
rather than that it was of equal authority to the Council of Nice, to which it
was but the Supplement and the Seal?

I will not enlarge to you upon what passed in the year 397, in the Council of
Turin, where they judged the difference that was between Proclus Bishop of
Marseilles, and Metropolitan of the first Province of Narbonne, and the Bishops
of the second Province, who would not depend upon him; and the contest that
there was between the Bishops of Arles and of Vienne, concerning the honor of
Primacy, and the right of Ordination; which the Fathers of this Council would
not have dared to undertake, had they believed that the Sovereign Authority had
belonged to the Bishop of Rome. You may learn the same thing from what passed
in the Council of Toledo, against the Priscilianists, and of the conjunction
which these Fathers make of Ambrose Bishop of Milan, and of Siricus Bishop of
Rome. Nor will I entertain you with the Council of Francfort, called by the
Emperor Charlemagne in the year 794, wherein assisted the Bishops of France, of
Germany, and of Italy, wither the Pope Adrian sent his Legates, and wherein the
Canon of the second Council of Nice concerning the Religious Worship of Images
was annulled, though this Council had been approved of by Adrian. I will not
speak to you neither of the Councils which were held in France our own Country,
which vigorously opposed this immoderate Worship which the second Council of
Nice would have established, and which the Popes maintained to their utmost. In
good faith now, if the Fathers of the Council of Francfort, or if the Prelates
of France had believed the Sea of Rome to be Sovereign, would they have spoken,
would they have acted as they did?

I come now to the Council of Constance held in the year 1414. whose Authority
and Decision my Lords the Bishops make use of to support their opinion. He that
will penetrate well into the spirit of this Council, must take the thing in its
original, and observe that a lamentable Schism had raged near 30 years, and
produced a great many evil effects during the Pontificate of Peter de Luna,
called Benedict the 13th. and under that of Angelus Corrarius, called Gregory
the 12th, Anti-popes; the Cardinals of either party being Assembled, agreed for
the putting an end to these Schisms, to call a Council at Pisa: This Council
being Assembled in the year 1409. declares, That this Affair belonged to them,
as they represented the Universal Church, and they condemned Peter de Luna, and
Angelus Corrarius, as notorious Schismatics, defenders and favorers of
Schism, Heretics, and as having deviated from the Faith, etc. After the
deposing of these two Anti-popes by the Council, the Cardinals who there
assisted, chose Peter de Candia Pope, who was called Alexander the 5th, and who
lived but about Ten months: After his death the same Cardinals elected the
Cardinal Balthazar of St. Eustace, who called himself John the 23. or 24. Thus
there were three Anti-popes who condemned one another. To find out a remedy for
this disorder, the Emperor Sigismond advised Pope John, to order that the
Council of Pisa should be continued in the City of Constance, whereupon this
Pope called thither all those that had a deliberative voice, the Emperor, and
all Christian Princes. Pope John opened the Assembly in the Emperors presence;
and in the second Session he would have renounced the Papacy, provided his
competitors would do the same; but they refusing, they were all three judged
and condemned by the Council; Pope John for many crimes whereof he was accused
and convicted, and the others for the same reasons that they had been condemned
at Pisa; and they chose Odo Colomna Pope, who called himself Martin the 3d or
the 5th; And to the end that no man might doubt of the power which the Council
had of Judging Soveraignly in all Ecclesiastical Affairs, they, in their 4th
Session, made this following Canon:

The General Council lawfully Assembled in the name of the Holy Ghost, and
representing the Catholic Church militant, holds immediately its power from
Jesus Christ; to which Council, all manner of Persons of what estate or quality
soever, nay the Pope himself, is bound to obey in things which concern the
Faith, the extirpation of Schisms, and the General Reformation of the Head and
Members.

And for as much as in the 39th Session this Council did ordain, that for time
to come there should be held a General Council at the end of every Ten years,
and that the next Council should be called in Five years, and the following one
in Seven, the Council accordingly was called together at Pavia, where it began,
and was afterward continued at Siena, and finally in 1431. it was transferred
to Basil, where it was decided according to the Council of Constance, that it
was a most Catholic truth, that Councils were above Popes, and that Popes
could not by their own wills either dissolve, or prorogue Councils from place
to place.


P. Have you no other proof which justifies this Opinion? And have not there
been Popes who have acknowledged the superiority of Councils?


Phil. There are many other proofs which might be made use of, which are even
of the same kind as those whereof we have already spoken; for we might remember
several examples of the Ancient Bishops of Rome, who have suffered their
judgments to be examined in General Councils; and have submitted themselves to
their Decrees; nay there are some who have desired that the Decrees which they
had made might be examined in Council; and amongst others, Leo the Great, who
demanded of Theodosius, that what he had decreed, as well as what had been
decreed in the pretended Council of Ephesus, should be examined in a Genesis
Council. There have been also many other Popes that have acknowledged the
Tribunal of particular Councils, and amongst others the Pope Damasus, who
disputing with Vrsicinus concerning the Pontificate, submits himself to the
judgment of a Synod, which decided this Affair; and when this Pope was accused
of Adultery by two Deacons, Concordius and Castorius, he justified himself
before a Council of 44 Bps. Assembled at Rome, in the year 378. I could add the
evidence of several Popes upon this subject, and amongst others, that of
Zozimus, who in his 1st Ep. says, That the Authority of his See cannot add nor
change any thing against the Ordinances of the Holy Fathers, which is a mark of
subjection, and of dependence. And also that of Gregory the Great, who, in some
place protested that he reverenced the Authority of the four Great Councils,
like that of the four Gospels.


Philer. Were I not afraid of trespassing upon your patience, I would desire
you to give me some particular account of our Gadican Church, and to let me
know, whether she always believed the Superiority of the Councils above the
Popes?


Phila. I will do it, my dear Philerene; but it shall be but very short, that I
may not tire you. It cannot be doubted but that in the first Centuries, our
Churches of France acknowledged the Authority of Councils as superior to all
others, since that in the question concerning the day of Celebrating Easter,
our Prelates without the knowledge and participation of the Pope, called a
Synod, wherein St. Irenae^s presided, who by order of the Synod wrote a Letter,
extremely pressing, to Pope Victor about this Affair, as may be seen in
Eusebius; which this Bishop would never dare to have done if the Pope had been
considered in the Gallican Church as the Supreme Magistrate of the Church; and
the Decretal Epistles attributed to the first Bishops of Rome, cannot be
objected to the contrary, because that these Epistles have such visible
characters of being counterfeited, that it is beyond all doubt. And in the
Council of Arles, above mentioned, our Bishops of France showed sufficiently
that the Pope was subject to the Authority of Councils, since that they
examined an Appeal brought before them from the Popes Sentence. Since that time
diverse Synods have been held in France by the order and permission of our
Kings, to treat of things concerning the Faith or Discipline of the Church,
wherein they judged of ^aith by the Oracles; of the Scripture, and by
Tradition; and of Discipline by the Canons of the Church, that is to say of
Councils. Such was, for example, that which, was held in the reign of our K
Clovis at Orleance, etc.

Also the second Council of Mascon Ordained, that Provincial Councils should be
called by the Metropolitans, and that of the whole Kingdom by the Bishop of
Lions, with the Kings permission. It is true, that the Gallican Church received
a great abridgment of its Liberties in the year 445, by the Ordinance of
Valentinian the 3d, who made the judgments of all the French Prelates subject
to the Pope But this Ordinance of Valentinian received diverse oppositions in
France, as it were easy to justify by many famous examples. In the 8. Century
the Churches of France received another blow, by introducing the Code of the
Roman Canons, which Charlemaign obliged himself to receive in France, as well
as the Roman Office, in acknowledgment of the good turns which Po. Adrian had
done him, who in an Assembly of 15 Bishops, and many Abbots declared
Charlemaign Patrician, or a Nobleman of Rome, and acknowledged that it was in
his power to Elect Popes, to regulate the Apostolic See, to institute through
all the Provinces Archbishops and Bishops; in a word he invested him with all
the Rights which the Roman Emperors enjoyed: Nevertheless this great Prince
found in the exceution of his promise great opposition from the Clergy whom he
forced to receive the Code of these aforesaid Canons by constraint, Minis and
Suppliciis, says the Original; nor were these Canons received but by the
Authority of our Kings, having been published but under the name of
Charlemaign, and as Ordinances made by him His Successors have trod in the same
footsteps, always ordering that the Laws which they made by the advice of the
Prelates of their Kingdoms, and which are to be read in their Capitulars should
be published under their Majesty's Names, and that the Popes themselves should
be subject to them C. de Capi, and destin. 10. and C. nos de Compet 2. Quest.
7. But whatever increase the Authority of the Pope had gained in France by this
Ordinance of Valentinian, and by this Introduction of Charlemaign, this did not
hinder our Bishops from showing upon all occasions a great deal of vigor in
maintaining their Privileges, and the Authority of the Church. It is manifest
by diverse Examples which History affords, and chiefly by that of Hincmare B.
of Laon; this Prelate was censured and condemned for his ill actions by a Synod
held at Vervins; he would have appealed to Rome, but far from having any regard
to his appeal he was forthwith condemned for his disobedience, in a Synod of
ten Provinces held at Attini. We may add to this example of Hincmare, that of
Arnulph A B. of Rheims, who was condemned and deposed for several crimes in an
Assembly of many Bishops held at Rheims, who declared that they acted by the
Authority which had been given to the Apostles, and which had been left to
them. This sufficiently shows that an Apostolic spirit reigned in the souls
of our Prelates, and that in spite of the enterprises and attempts of the
Court of Rome, they maintained this general opinion of their worthy
Predecessors, That they held their charges and the authority which belongs to
them from God, and not from the Sea of Rome. They showed the same zeal in the A
B. of Sens his Affair at the Synod of Pontignon, and in that of Saire,
concerning a Church in the Diocese of Tours, held by a Cardinal sent by John
the 20. Which they call a Sacriledg and a contradiction to the Holy Canons,
which ordain that a Bishop can do nothing in another Diocese without his
consent. And in that of Geofry Bishop of Chartres, in whose place one Ivo had
been surrogated by Pope Urban 2d, whom Richarius A B. of Sens, Mertropolitan of
Chartres, together with the Bishops of Paris, Troys, and Meaux opposed. They
also showed this same spirit in the advice they gave to Philip the August, to
appeal to the next Council from the Sentence of Innocent 3, as from an abuse,
in the Pragmatick Sanction which St. Lewis made by their advice; and in the
Council which they gave together with others assembled at Paris in the year
1209 to Philip the Fair against the enterprises of Boniface 8, not to mention
the famous Book called Somnium Viridarii, writ and published by the order of
Charles the Fifth, called the Wise; no^ of the Laws and Rules which Charles the
6. his Son made against the Usurpations of the Court of Rome, which shows
sufficiently that the Authority of the Sea of Rome was not looked upon as the
superior Authority in France.

But after that the Council of Constance had formally explained it self upon
this matter, men spoke bolder in France than they had done in former times.
Charles 7th. forbad the French Prelates to go to the Council called at Ferrara
in the year 1427. And he himself called in the City of Bourges a great and
famous Assembly of the Princes of his Blood, Officers of his Crown, Prelates
and Ecclesiastical persons, members of his great Council, Doctors in Law, as
well Divine as Humane, and Professors of the Universities, together with the
Legates of Eugenius 4th. After that the Doctors of the Universities had
represented in the name of the whole Gallican Church, her former state, her
Rights, and the attempts which had been made upon her Liberties; they besought
his Majesty to remedy this disorder, that he would be pleased to Authorize some
Decrees and Canons of the General Councils of Constance and of Basil; such as
that is which declares, that General Councils lawfully assembled, and
representing the Church militant, have their power immediately from Jes.
Christ, and are above the Pope, which Councils they themselves had judged ought
to be observed. Whereupon the King approved and confirmed the aforesaid decrees
and ordered all people to observe and keep them inviolaby. This is that which
was called the pragmatick Sanction. 32 years afterward Lewis 11. being won by
the flatteries of Pius 2d, and through evil suggestions, as may be seen in the
Book of the three Estates of the year 1483, revoked the Pragmatick Sanction
without any consultation of the States before hand, or of the Gallican Church.
The Kings Attorney General, and the Rector of the University of Paris formally
opposed the Registring the Kings Letters concerning these his Decrees. The
Court of Parliament it self represented in writing the great evils that would
happen upon the abolishing of so just a Sanction, to so good effect, that Lewis
11th. far from abolishing it, gave orders for its confirmation, as amongst
others that of the 16 of August 1478, whereby it is forbidden to go the Rome to
seek after any Benefice, or to pay in any money, upon pain of Confiscation of
Body and Goods; and to prevent Anathema's from Rome, he caused his Parliament
of Paris at the request of his Attorny-General to pass an Act, that in case the
Pope should undertake any thing to the prejudice of his Ordinances, he should
appeal to the next Council.

The Estates of the Kingdom, whereof the Clergy is the first Order, being
Assembled at Tours, present a Petition to King Charles the 8th, in the first
Article of which, they desire His Majesty to keep, and maintain inviolably the
Pragmatick Sanction of Bourges, founded upon the Decrees of the Councils of
Constance and of Basil. And in the National Council, which Lewis the 12th
Assembled in the same City of Tours, in the year 1510, the observation of the
Pragmatick Sanction was fully resolved upon. Observe how our venerable Prelates
have ever maintained the Interest and the Privileges of the Church, against the
attempts of the Court of Rome, and how they make appear to the whole World,
that they do Religiously keep in their hearts the Sentiments which they had
received from their Ancestors, and that they believed that the supreme
Authority resided in General Councils; and that how eminent soever that of the Sea of Rome might be, it was still dependant upon theirs. This is the Doctrine
which has been taught and maintained by the University of Paris, as may be
seen in the Writings of her most famous Doctors, such as are the Chancellor
Tract. de potest. Eccles.
Gerson, James Almain, etc. to which to may add a great many more, as Ni^. Cus.
de concord. can. lib. 2. cap. 2.
the Cardinal of Cambray, Nicho, Cusan, Pan. in cap. signif. extrav. de elect.
the Abbot Panormitan, Abulensis in cap. 18. Matt. quaest. 108.
Abulensis, Fran. vict. T. de potes. Eccles.
Franciscus de Victoria, Alph. a Cast. lib. 7. de just. pun. haer.
Alphonsus a Castro, and all the Divnes of the Council of Trent, which is
spoken of in the 7th Book of the History of this Council, who maintained with
our Bishops of France, and those of Spain, that the jurisdiction of Bishops,
and their residence was of Divine Right.


Philer. All that you have said, persuades me sufficiently, that the Authority
of Councils is above that of the Popes; but there are some scruples that I
desire to be resolved in, before that I can cordially embrace your Opinion;
These scruples arise from two things wherein you will agree with me. The one
is, That the Popes have been ever desired to confirm Councils, which without
doubt had never been, if their Authority had not depended on that of the Popes.
And the other is, That the Title of Head of the Council is given to the Pope,
and namely in the second Councils of Ephesus and of Chalcedon.


Phila. What you say cannot be disproved, but I think that the consequences
that you draw from these Principles are not right; for you must in the first
place acknowledge that the consent to, an confirmation of General Councils, was
desired of all great Sees, which did not regard the Decrees of Councils as
Obligatory, till after they had themselves consented to them. Thus the Decree
of the Council of Ephesus against Nestorius, was of no force in the East, till
that John of Antioch, and all the Metropolitans depending upon his Diocese had
agreed to it; And the judgment of the 5th General Council against the Tria
Capitula, was without force till the Diocesses of Africa, France, Spain, and of
Illyricum had confirmed it; not that the confirmation and consent demanded by
General Councils of Great Sees, besides that of Rome, did infer that the
Councils did depend upon these Sees, as all men do agree. Nor can you infer,
That the Councils did depend upon the Pope, upon pretense that they demanded
his consent and confirmation to their Decrees.

You may add to this, That Superiors have many times desired their Inferiors to
confirm their Acts; The Council of Sardica desired all the Churches to whom
they send their Synodal Epistle, That they would confirm what they had Decreed.
The 15th Council of Toledo confirmed the Decrees of the 6th General Council, at
the request of Leo Conc. Toled. cap. 2. lib. 1.
the 2d. Pelagius the first desired his Clergy to confirm his demand concerning
Ordinations. Julian, Bishop of Cales, the Popes Legate at the Council of
Chalcedon, says, in his Letters to the Emperor Leon, That this Prince had
commanded all Bps that they should confirm the Doctrine; of the Holy Apostles;
and in the year 465, the Prelates of the 3d Province of Lions, being Assembled
at Rennes, under Perpetuus Merropolitan of Tours, sent their Decrets to
Victorius and Thalassius of Angiers, who were not present, that by their
Authorites they might confirm them; which clearly proves, that the confirmation
of the Decrees of Councils by the Popes, is not a mark of the Popes superiority
over Councils. Now for the quality of Head, which was given to the Pope in the
Councils of Ephesus and of Chalcedon, as you have observed, besides that they
were his own Legates that gave him this Title in the Council of Ephesus, Act 2.
and that St. Cyril of Alexandria, and Juvenal of Jerusalem presiding, the
Council sufficiently showed that they did not own the Pope as the Sovereign
Head of the Church; I say, that this quality of Head carried with it no
pre-eminence of Magistracy and of Dominion, but only a pre-eminence of Order,
of Direction, and of Excellence. And it is in this sense that Gregory Nyssen
said in the second General Council, That by the death of Meletius, the Council
had lost its Head; and there is nothing more ordinary among Authors, whether
they treat of Politic or Ecclesiastical Affairs, than to give the Title of
Head and Chief to them who preside in Societies. It is in this sense that the
Fathers of the Council of Chalcedon give Pope Leo, who there presided in the
person of his Legates, the name of Head of this Council, according to the Order
of the Emperor Martianus. Besides, if the Title of Head, in matters of Faith
and of Religion, has been given to some Prelates, as to Nicephorus Bishop of
Constantinople, to the Patriarch of Alexandria, to St. Athanasius, to St.
Basi^, to Nicetius Bp of Treves, to Gregory of Tours, and some others, by
reason of the Eminence of their Sees, or because of their Learning, of their
Piety, and of their good Conduct; With how much more justice may the Bp of Rome
have been honored with it, he who was, not only the Metropolitan of some Bps,
or the Exarch of a Diocese composed of Ten Provinces, but who, to speak with
Epist. 52.
Theodorus Studita, was the first of the whole Body of the Church, and who
occupied the first See of all Christendom, and the Sea which was esteemed the
most eminent, either because it had been occupied by St. Peter and St. Paul,
two the most famous of the Apostles, the first of which is called, even by the
Holy Fathers, the Prince of the Society of the Apostles; or because it was
established in a City, wherein resided the Majesty of the whole Roman Empire,
and which was the Capital City of the World?


Phil^r. I am fully satisfied, and thank you for the kindne^s you have showed
in discoursing with me so long upon this matter, I now perceive the Truth and
the importance of it; and I profess my self, without more ado, to be of your
opinion; but it is time for us to think of retiring.


FINIS.

