IMPRIMATUR.

Sept. 14. 1678. GEORG. THORP Reverend. in Christo Patri, and D. Dom. GULIELMO
Archiep. CANT. a Sacris Domesticis.

THE Godly man's delight or A Family Guide to PIETY Containing Directions to a
Holy Life with certain Christian Dialogues Also Prayers and Meditations upon
several occasions.

heavily and crudely illustrated border featuring Biblical scenes Josua Amalek
Aaron Moses Christ Hur
Josua and his Family
John in ye Isle of Patmos
Paul
Hezekiah.
J^^^^^^




The meaning of the Frontispiece.
REader this Emblem darkly does foretell,
The way preserves us from the jaws of Hell.
Piety's that narrow way that leads to Heaven,
Prayer's the conduct plains, and makes it even.
And though the one side's Water the other Flames,
Yea, though the Hill is steep, yet Prayer sustains,
And helps us to endure Gibbets and Fire,
And from that Ga^^ of Death help us to aspire.
Prayer is that mark distinguishes a Paul,
And makes him known from Persecuting Saul.
St. John (...) Patmos Isle,
Was at Heavens Council Table all the while.
Good Hezekiah expatiates his breath,
By Prayer that mand^^^'d the hands of death.
Prayer (...) the Sun and Moon, till Joshua
Destroys his armies and wins the day.
Though Hur and Aaron did support the hand
Of wear'd Moses: Prayer we understand
Procured help from Christ, that living stone.
Whereupon Moses sat; 'twas it alone
That made and cau^^'d the same nay shall I tell,
Prayer was the cause Joshua succeeded well,
Against proud Amalek and all his Train,
There put to flight, discomfited and slain.
And thus we see, Prayer is the conduct sure
Supports, directs, and helps us to endure;
Makes plain that narrow way of Holiness,
That leads unto Canaans Happiness.
London, Printed by Tho. James for Richard Jones at the White Horse in Little
Britain. 1679.

To the Right Virtuous Mrs. JANE ALINGTON, The Widow of WILLIAM ALINGTON Esquire
Together with her FAMILY.
Madam,
HAd not the invitation of a worthy friend (that first gave life and being to
this so small a Treatise) invited me (though unknown) to present the same unto
your so Virtuous a Personage and Family; it might have been a free will
offering from my self. If I should give my Pen leave to launch into the Ocean
of your Virtues Praise, doubtless it would be emerged. And what can be more to
the augmenting of True Virtue than Piety and Prayer, the proper medicaments for
that Epidemieal Distemper of this later Age (viz.) Ignorance, the implacable
Enemy of all Virtue. Ignorance said I? yes: Ignorance in the midst of
Knowledge, and Darkness, in the midst of Light. Ah! alas, too too evident it
is, that many poor Creatures (notwithstanding the propagation of the Gospel) do
go to Hell for want of Direction to Piety and Prayer; the right practice and
performance of which, is the only way to make us happy. Piety is that narrow
way that leads to the Celestial Canaan and New Jerusalem. Prayer is as it were
the Helm whereby we should steer our course; nay, it is as it were, the
Conduit-pipe wherein is conveyed all our supplies It can fetch Water out of a
hard Rock to a thirsty Israel; it can divide the Red Sea; it can deliver an
Host, etc. And what so necessary as Prayer and Piety now, even in this very
day, which is the only way to keep us out of the Paw of the Lion that would
swallow us up; I mean those Hellish Crew, whose work it is to study darkness.
And where should Piety together with Prayer shroud it self, but under the wings
of them who are its proclaimed friends. Let it find entertainment by you and
your Family, and if it shall any way conduce to the crowning of your Virtues,
be directing you to the New Jerusalem, it will be your profit and advantage;
and the greatly rejoicing

Of him, who is your Souls Well-wisher at the Throne of Grace; T. W.

To the READER Upon the ensuing TREATISE.
WHo ever thou art, to whose judicious eye
This Book shall open lie,
Sprung from a serious thought,
To public use now to perfection brought.
I will not praise it, it will tell
Its own worth, if considered well.
Do thou want pleasure? so a Bed of flowers,
Pluck, smell, and spare not. Have thou idle hours?
Read over this, here thou may find
Blessed Recreation for thy mind.
Hours are not idle, if thus spent,
To deck the Soul is its intent.
To help Devotion, and the Soul to raise
To heavenly thoughts, and better life; give praise
To God if it attain its end, then he
That wrote, and you that read, shall happy be.
But pass the porch, go in,
You Will find the best within;
To read the Book begin.
A Preface to the Christian Warfare, or Encouragement to the Christian in his
Warfare.
CHristian, thy work is great, thy foes are strong,
Thy way it is rough, thy journey it is long;
Thy days are few; thy strength is weak, thou wilt say;
And poor thou art: But hold, perhaps I may
Facilitate thy work, and tell thee how
Thou may compel thine enemy to bow;
And plain thy way, abbreviate thy race,
And lengthen out thy days, or help thy pace:
Nay, make thee rich, if poor thou art, if not,
To make thee well contented with thy lot.
Here is a Magazine, here is a store,
Left by thy Captain that is gone before.
He led the van, he under-went what may
Occur, or meet thee in that self-same way.
His Armor he has left; take up and fight,
He Will vindicate thee; it is not power or might
Can once thee wrong ^ most righteous is thy Cause,
And he is true Author of the Martial Laws;
Nay farther, to increase thy courage, see
What Potentates now captivated be:
Death is unsting'd, the Grave is conquered;
And they were Captains once, are Captives led
But why do I detain thee, take a view,
And thou shall plainly see, all this is true.
Invest thy self, haste, make thou no delay,
God grant thou may succeed, I daily pray.
depiction of a Christian soldier Prayer Meditation Co^^olation The Christian
Soldier. ye Devil Resisted. The Flesh Mortified ye World Crucified. O
Crocodilian World whose Shining gloss
Is gilded Emptyness, and painted dross:
Thy Fawns, or frowns I matter not, not I;
Crucify the I must. Thy Sister Flesh must die.
And Soul destroying Devil whose malice it is,
T'accuse the Brethren that seek to bliss:
Thy Roaring rage is naught; Stand off or I
Will make thee th 'Worlds Captain, captively.


THE CHRISTIANS WARFARE.
THe whole life of a Christian is a continued Hostility or Open War; his grand
Antagonist is the Devil, that great Abbaddon, the professed Enemy and
Destroyer; Rev. 9.11. whose grand design is to enlarge the terrotories of his
destructive Kingdom, by the spoil and ruin of poor souls. This is evident from
Genesis 3.1. where we have an account of his tyrannical assaulting of Adam in
Paradise: No sooner is Adam settled in Paradise, in that glorious state wherein
God set him, but this implacable enemy assaults him; and alas! prevails. Now
having got such an interest by the Foil and Fall of poor Adam, he continues his
tyranny, as we find manifested all along in the Scripture. He carries on his
design in the Old World, in the incestuous Sodom; by Pharaoh toward the
Children of Israel, nay even by the Patriarks, David and Solomon as far as he
can: and thus he assaults and prevails in a great measure. Nay no wonder if he
assaults these poor Creatures, when he attempts to set upon Christ himself.
Having prevailed so against the first Adam, he will see what he can do to the
second; but blessed be God, The Seed of the Woman has bruised the Serpents Head.

Thus we see how this Roaring Lion goes about seeking whom he may devour; what
Souls he can ensnare and entrap: He environs and surrounds the Earth, to the
intent he may devour.

Moreover, He has two Attendants, (viz.) 1. The World. 2. The Flesh; to carry
on his hellish designs and plots against poor Saints; and the destruction of
every Christian that endeavors to build up the Kingdom of Christ. And first he
makes use of the World, that is, 1. The World it self, the love whereof chokes
that vigor and liveliness that is or ought to be in a Christian. 2. Wicked Men
in the World, in whom he acts and soments all the venom he can, both for the
hindrance of the Gospels propagation, and the destruction of those that seek to
be enlightened by it; to bring them to the true knowledge of God and his way.
Dismal is it to think, how far he has, and at this very day does, prevail by
them. But blessed be God that has set his King upon his Holy Hill of Sion;
Psalm. 2.6.

Secondly, Our inbred Corruptions, that is that, that is called the Flesh; out
of which proceeds an innumerable multitud^ of destructive lusts, that keep a
constan^ hostility against a poor Soul; 1 Pet. 2.11. and these he makes his
baits to catch Souls. He suits his baits, 1. According to our constitutions and
natural inclinations, 2. To our conditions. First, To our constitutions, If
they be inclining to Melancholy, he tempts to Despair, if to Sanguine, he
tempts to Anger: If our Constitutions be Cheerful, he tempts to Lasciviousness:
And so look what our Constitutions and Natural Inclinations are, accordingly he
suits his Baits and Temptations. Secondly, To our Conditions, If a ^ans Estate
increase, so that he has a competent portion of the things of this World; he
tempts him either to that destructive sin (viz.) Covetousness, which is t^^
root of Evils; and this he shrowds und^^ the Name of Good-husbandry; or t^
Luxurious Prodigality and Pride, and this he covers with the Name of
Good-fellow-ship.

Nay, in a word, No Time, Place, Degree, Age, Constitution, Condition, wherein,
and against, and according to whom, he does not suit his poisonous baits, and
exercises his utmost policy, and endeavors to ruin poor Souls.

Blessed be God that he has not left us ignorant of his Devices; but thrice
blessed be his Name that he has not left us Naked, but has left us his own
Armory; Ephesians. 6. and that of proof, which is able to defend us from all the
siery darts of this so potent an enemy. The parts whereof are, 1. The Helmet of
Salvation. 2. The Breast Plate of Righteousness. 3. The Shield of Faith. 4. The
Girdle of Truth. 5. The Sword of the Spirit, which is the Word. 6. The Shoes of
the Preparation of the Gospel of Peace. 7. And lastly, The Engine of Prayer.

Now let us see of what use all the^ are to a Christian.

1. The Helmet of Salvation, That i^, a constant expectation and desire of
^ernal Happiness. This is of great ^se unto us to support us, and bea^ up our
fainting Spirits under all Trial and Temptations; without the hope of which, a
Christian would utterly despond. This is that that made so many Martyrs endure
the most exquisite Torments from the hands of Bloody Tyrants; Heb. 11.

2. The Breast Plate of Righteousness. This is walking in Holiness and
Blamelesness; this is that Proof-piece that bears a Christian out, and keeps
off all the false Imputations and Slanders, that the Devil and Wicked Men (his
Agents) can forge or invent against a Christian.

4. The Shield of Faith, That is, A firm believing and trusting of God for the
accomplishment of his Promises. This keeps off the Fireballs and Darts of
Satan, (viz.) Carnal Confidence, Presumption, Security, Insidelity and
Despair, etc.

5. The Sword of the Spirit, which is the Word of God. This wounds Satan, and
cuts in sunder the concatenating knots of his various Temptations, by which he
seeks to entangle Souls. This discovers all his Devices. With this Sword our
Savior ^oil'd this Champion; he opposed him with a Scriptum est, It is written.

6. The Shoes of the Preparation of the Go^pel of Peace. This is assurance of
Acceptance and Peace with God, through Jesus Christ; according to that Holy
Doctrine held forth in the Gospel. He that is shod with these Shoes, is sit for
his Journey to Canaan, through all his Oppugnants; knowing that God who is at
peace with him, is both able and willing to be his conduct and deliverer from
them all.

7. Prayer. This is that brings success to, and a blessing upon, all the rest;
and enables a Christian, through Gods Free Grace and Mercy, to make use of all
other the pieces of the Armory.

Thus we see how Christ our Captain has fortified us; he has not left us to
fight without Weapons, without Armor, and that of Proof; nay, he himself has
led the Van: he underwent all the hardship in this Warfare, and has as it were,
given the Devil his deaths wound: He has conquered Hell also and the Grave;
he is the Triumphant King and Captain: He has unstinged Death, he has only left
us some small work to do, and that he has promised to help us in. Christian,
therefore be of good courage; let non^ make thee afraid; thy foes may environ
thee, and enemies rage against the^, yet be not dismayed, thy Cause is good,
thy Captain is Victorious, and what thou art not able to do, he will do i^ for
thee.

But it may be thou wilt say, Thou can not tell whether Christ will be willing
to accept thee for his Soldier or not?

Willing, yes, if thou art willing; but it is rather to be feared thou art not
willing, because thou make this objection: If he were not willing, to what
end would he call and invite thee? O Christian do not doubt, but come; make no
delay. Go to this Magazine, and invest thy self herewith, and thy Captain will
maintain thee; if thou art willing, though thou art weak, he will fight for thee;
only take notice, that if ever thou look backward, thou art but a dead man.
Press forward toward the Mark, for thou have no Armor to defend thy
back-parts. O Christian be valiant, and take notice of this, that if thou
resist the Devil he is not able to with-stand thee, he will flee from thee. Be
upon thy watch, for thy enemy is subtle, and will watch his opportunity, if
thou keep'st not strict watch. Be much in the exercise of thy Weapons.
especially the Sword of the Spirit (viz.) the Word, and learn to imitate thy
Captain; he repels Satan's blows with a Scriptum est, It Is written. O
Christian, quit thy ^lf like a man. Nay, in a word, Be in the exercise of all
thy Armor, least by disuse and disaccustom'dness thereunto, thou be to seek
when thou should be upon thy Guard. Let nothing offend thee, neither
Prosperity nor Adversity, Strength nor Weakness: Let not Insidelity prevail
over thee. He that has sent thy Captain, and given him, how shall he not with
him freely give thee all things? O blessed King and Captain, that has left
poor Christians such a Storehouse, such a Magazine! O Christian, set upon thy
Warfare; make use much of that powerful Javelin Prayer. Get the art of casting
it, that in case at any time thou stand in need and be in a strait, thou
may make use of the same. And let me caution thee against two things, that
thou be not too secure in time of thy Peace and Prosperity, nor too much
careful in time of Trouble and Adversity. And now for thy Prosperity and
Success, thou need'st not be afraid, for thy King and Captain will be all in
all to thee and for thee. So sight on.

EZEKIEL. chap. 37. v. 3. Son of man can these dry Bones
Lord Soul

depiction of a man praying The Prayers of a Righteous Man avails much.
A broken Heart Merc^nt^ Mori Far well Vain World

A Direction to an Holy Life.
THough it is true that never any Man was or can be saved by the Merits of his
own Righteousness or Holiness; yet it is as great and as infallible a truth,
that never any was or can be saved without Holiness. Shall I instance, The most
Righteous Abel, the Meekest Moses, the most patient Job, the Holiest David, the
Wisest Solomon, the Strongest Sampson; nay, the most Evangelical Prophets and
Apostles, were they saved by their own Righteousness? Nay, neither were they
saved without their own Righteousness; which is palpably evident in Scripture.
But a little to demonstrate the nature of Holiness, It is that that makes us
resemble God our Creator and Maker; its Nature also is such, as that it always
aims at God its Center. As it is of and from God, so it always draws the Soul
to God. It is a sure guiding Thread to direct the Soul through the Nocturnal
Labyrinth of a crooked World, to the Celestial Canaan of splendid Glory and
permanent Happiness. Moreover, It is Diametrically oppugnant to all Evils; in a
word, It differs ^^om all Sin and Evil, as Light does from ^arkness. What
communion has God with Belial. And know (O Man or Woman, whosoever thou art)
Holiness is indispensably necessary, if thou desire to be Happy. Would thou
be Happy, or would thou not? Would thou enjoy God, or would thou not? If
thou would not, shut and lay by, for I do not desire to aggravate thy
Torments; for know that the Word read or preached, will be the savor of Life
unto Life, or the savor of Death unto Death. If thou would be directed in
that Narrow Way that leads to Happiness, here is a few Directions for thee: But
methinks I hear thee say, How comes it to be of such indispensable necessity to
be so holy?

Answer, Of the many Reasons, together with Arguments, that might be drawn from
both Sacred and Profane Writings, I shall prefix only two, with some
Scriptures:

1. The first is, Because otherwise there is no appearing before God, it ^eing
the ordinary way God has appointed, Heb. 12.14. Follow Peace with all Men, ^^d
Holiness, without which no Man shall ^ee the Lord. Without Holiness there can
undoubtedly) be no Happiness; without Piety, there can be no Purity; and
without Purity no coming to God; for God is one that can behold no unclean
thing; and without coming to God nothing but misery. Moreover, he loses all
the advantages in respect of this life, in particular, that honor that God
does dignifie his people with. It is Moses's great Title, God gives him (viz.)
My Servant. It is in Scripture accounted by the Evangelist John, an honor to
bear Christ's Shoes, much more an honor to suffer for Christ: They that
honor me I will honor. 2. The comforts of this life, the pleasures and
delights that otherwise he might enjoy; I mean not outward but inward pleasures
and comforts, which are the true. Nay, in a word, Godliness is profitable for
all things, having the promise of this life, and that which is to come.

2. So long as a man remains going on in a way of impiety, and unholiness, he
is not only kept from the beholding of God's face or countenance in any of
God's Ordinances; but also he does more and more every day incur God's wrath,
displeasure, and anger against him; Psalm. 1.11. God is angry with the wicked
every day. Nay, further, he ingages himself more, and confirms himself to be a
Servant of the Devil; and so instead of listing himself under the Banner of
Christ, he lists himself under the Banner of Satan, and consequently becomes
Col. 1.21. the enemy of God and his ways; and not only an enemy, but enmity it
self, Romans 8.7. and can a man or woman be supposed to be in a good condition,
whilst at variance with God; who is but as chaff before the wind, and as
stubble before the fire.

As I said before, many Reasons and Arguments to prove the necessity of an holy
Life, might be drawn from Sacred and Profane Writings and Arguments, even from
a Principle of Morality or humane Reason; but seeing it is not our design at
this time to produce them, since so many Worthies have so palpably
demonstrated, and proved it with invinceable Arguments, even as a Cloud of
Witnesses; we shall only note some few Scriptures, which will stop the mouths
of the most bloody Noro's, tyrannizing Pharaoh's, subtle Ahitophel's, and
persecuting Readiness, Heb. 12.14 forecited, Psalm. 93.5. Holiness becomes thine
house for ever. Romans 6.19, 22. 2 Cor. 7.1. 1 These. 3.13. and 4.13. Lev. 5.15,
etc. But indeed the best Motive to an holy Life, is the consideration of the
effects of Death, of which in its place.

The first thing that I shall do, shall be to give some few Directions in order
to an holy Life, whereby to get a better and nearer intimacy with God, and to
engage the Heart more to love God, and God more to love again; or rather indeed
God to love first, and then the heart to love again; for God must first love,
or else we cannot love him; God must first work, both to will and to do, of his
own good pleasure.

After acquaintance with God, to keep up holy communion with him; the first and
best way will be to improve this acquaintance, as much as in us hes; for sure I
am, that though a man have attained to a competent knowledge of the things of
God, and has found some Beams of God's radient love breaking out and breathing
upon his Soul; if not improved, will not only damp the heart, and make it cold;
but will cause God to withdraw himself from that Soul. He so soon as he finds
his love and kindness slighted, cannot but withdraw coming into that Soul, and
hide himself.

This very cause we find amongst men, where one has done a kindness for
another, it may be voluntarily, out of love, if he finds that he be slighted,
and kindness be slighted and disregarded, how can such an one but take it ill,
and repent him of both the kindness done, and hinder him from giving, or doing
any thing more, and that not without good ground of Reason. Ingratum est qui
been merenti non reponit. Unthankful is he that does not either reward a
kindness received, at one time or another (if able) or at least express a
willing mind, by a continued acknowledgment thereof.

Obj. But you will say, How? or what shall a man do to improve this
acquaintance with God? that thereby he may obtain a fuller fruition of, and
have more communion with God?

Ans. The best and safest way will be, First of all to be careful to speak,
think, or do nothing that tends to the dishonor of God, or his ways. God
cannot but take it very unkindly from any one, for whom he has done so much,
and toward whom his tender Bowels has been expatiated and enlarged, to whom he
has unspeably demonstrated his infinite care and tenderness of affection from
time to time; to be either badly or malignantly spoke of, or hardly thought on,
or injuriously wronged any way.

For indeed, how can it otherwise be expected, whom should God have to be his
friends, but they to whom he has extended a multiplicity of kindness; of whom
should God be honored, but by them whom he has honored; and indeed there is
none that has done any thing for God, but he will reward it, and that
infinitely, an hundredfold, and there is a finite number for an infinite,
Matthew. 19.29. For we have his Word and Promise for it, and he is one that
cannot Lie. 1 Samuel 2.30. Them that honor me, I will honor. And indeed they
that do not care for honoring God, may expect that God will not care for
honoring them; but adds immediately, and that palpably, But they that despise
me, shall be lightly esteemed.

Secondly, Be sure always in all your affairs to set the Lord always before
your eyes, questioning with your selves, how you shall answer any thing you do,
when called before the great Tribunal of the most high God, whether it be
neither the cause to incur his displeasure, or wound your Soul and Conscience;
and this we find holy David in the practice of, Psalm. 26 8. I have set the Lord
always before me: We find Job in this same practice, Job 31.14. What shall I do
when God rises up, or when he visits, what shall I answer him? We find
Joseph making use of this Engine to resist the Devil in the temptation of his
Mistress, How shall I do this great evil, and sin against God? Genesis 39.9. We
find these three Worthies always upon their watch with this Javelin; and indeed
it is the reason many times why men run into so many wicked and diabolical
practices, and so help forward the Devils designs and temptations, and
congratulate the lusts of the flesh, because they do not either rightly
conceive what God is, or else not set him before their eyes.

3. Let Morning and Evening Sacrifice of Prayer and Praise be offered up unto
God; To which purpose we have composed a few short Prayers for every day in the
week, and also for other occasions.
Ps. 92.1, 2. Beware to be found prayerless Families, that call not on Gods
Name; for why should there be wrath upon your Families, Jer. 10.25. O miserable
Families that are without God in the world, that are without Family Prayer!
What have you so many Family wants, Family sins, Family mercies, every day,
every moment, and no Family Prayers? What is it to pray with all prayer and
supplication, to have no prayer? Beware to say, I have no time; what have thou
all thy time for? have thou it on purpose to serve thy God, and art careful for
nothing less than to serve and glorify him in it: O beware of this, has God
commanded to pray continually, or without ceasing, that is always to be in a
praying frame, and art thou no more solicitous to obey Gods command? In a word,
Prayer is the procurer of all our Mercies, Jer. 29.12. 2 Samuel 7.2, 9. It will
be very requisite that some preparation be made. 1. It will be of great use to
examine how you have spent your time, if at Night how you have walked with God;
if in the Morning how kind God has been unto you in keeping you from all
spiritual and corporal enemies; and consider farther how God might have thrown
you into Hell. I remember I have read concerning a Heathen, that used every
night to set an hours time apart to examine himself how he had spent the
anteceding day, and to beg of the gods to pardon both his misspent time, and
entreat for a supply of his wants. And shall an Heathen shame those that
profess to be the Soldiers of Christ?

Consider what Mercies you have received, or what you stand in need of most,
and let the Vitals of your Soul be most for that, only let it be with an holy
submission to the will of God, in and for all things, especially in Temporals,
or in things conducing to the Body.

4. When thou appear'st before God, let it be with an elated esteem of the
Greatness, Holiness, and Purity of God, and with a regardless esteem of thy
self; the best way to come unto God is by a self-debasement, seeing by a
self-ambition, of being as god's, knowing good and evil, all mankind lost
Heaven, and so involved themselves into a delapsed condition; and indeed we can
imitate Christ no more than in an humble deportment to Godward in all our
Supplications. Moreover, so long as we come in the humility of our heart to
God, we have Gods engagement that he will not turn us off, he will accept us:
The first step to Exaltation is by Humility, and Self-abasement, and abandoning
all self-ishness; and the best and chiefest way to the attainment of this is,
by the admiring thoughts of God, not only in respect of his creating and
providential Power, in first creating all things of nothing, of no Being to
make a Being, of a confused Chaos to form a fair and splendid Fabric, as the
Greek word signifies; I say not only in respect of that great and magnificent
Power by which all things were made, and also that providential Power by which
all things are preserved and kept; but also in respect of the more magnificent
and powerful and infinite wise contrivance of the second and new Creation, I
mean of that procuring a possibility, whereby man might be restored and
redeemed from that lapsed and unspeakably miserable condition into which he is
fallen, and that he might be brought into a nearer union and communion with
God, by that Hypostatical Union in Jesus Christ; and is there not matter of
admiring both the infinite Wisdom and Power of God, in his great Work and
Contrivance? Yea, that, that might carry a Soul out of it self, as it were, by
admiring him in this very work.

5. Never come unto God but upon the account of the precious death and
sufferings of a crucified Savior, laying aside all thine own righteousness as
a menstruous cloth, and as ^ilthy rags, considering that he that comes unto
Christ (that is, believingly) what he asks he will do it; witness that gracious
promise in John 14.13. and John 15.16. and Joh. 16.23, 24, 26. do all in the
Name of Christ, Col. 3.17. And indeed it is a great pity that so many Promises
as are made and laid down for the support of poor drooping and desponding ones,
should be no more regarded and made use of; it is as it were a slighting of
Christ's kindness; as if one should say, What are these Promises to me, I matter
them not, I do not stand in need of them; but know thou whoever, if any such an
one, that there is a day a coming when thou would be glad to embrace such a
proffer. I say never come in, and upon any account, but in and upon the account
of the dear Redeemer Jesus Christ, this must needs be the safest, surest, best,
and prevailing way, for he says, I am the Way, and the Truth, and the Life,
John 14.6.

It must needs be the safest and surest way, to come in the Name and Strength
of Christ.

1. Because he is able, Heb. 7.15. If he take thy cause in hand, and thou
committest it to him with an holy dependence, undoubtedly he will carry it on,
and crown it with perfection; all other means may fail, all other Agents may
miscarry, but he will, nay, he can never miscarry; He shall see of the travel
of his Soul, he shall and will bring judgment unto victory. He is able to
resist the most invincible temptation, and evade the most intricate Stratagems
the Devil can make; he has conquered Death and Hell, and given the Devil such a
weakening blow, as that he can never be able to encounter one Battle more with
him. All Power is in his hand in Heaven and Earth, Matthew. 28.18. And if he be
so able, as that all Power both in Heaven and Earth is in his hand, what safer
and surer way, than coming to God by him; none shall be able to pluck thee nor
thy cause out of his hand; the Devil may assault thee, he may in many shapes
and forms, but he shall never prevail against thee. When thou prayest, it may
be he will endeavor to distract thee, when thou come before God, he will
accuse thee, as he did righteous Job; for he is called, The Accuser of his
Brethren, Revel. 12.10. The Power of Christ has, and shall cast him down; He
has overcome him by his precious blood.

2. It must needs be the safest; because he is one with the Father, and the
Father cannot deny him any request; He hears him always, John 11.42. I know
that thou hear me always.

3. There is no other way: Let others pretend to what they will, and to abolish
the Priestly Office of Christ, and so rob him of his Right and Honor, yet it
is most plain, He is the way, the Truth, and the Life, and none other; he is
the only beloved, in whom God is abundantly well-pleased; and he it is that
must take our imperfect desires, and offer them unto God in his own perfection;
our weakness must be supplied in his strength, our emptiness in his fullness,
our unrighteous Prayers must be perfumed with the odoriferous smell of his
spotless and blameless Righteousness.

It is most certain, That Man by the Fall lost all his Righteousness, and
therefore imperfection can never appear before God, who is infinitely perfect;
all fullness dwells in himself; and how can he look upon mere emptiness, unless
it be in the fullness of his own Son.

6. Dare not to appear before God with any sin unrepented of knowing that like
an Adder that a poor man found, though almost dead, as soon as it recovered
strength and life by the heat of the fire, began to hiss at him. Sin will
(being cherished) revive, and consequently will prove a fatal Enemy. Let no sin
be delighted in, though it be the nearest delight, and that that would procure
the greatest temporal benefit and profit: one sin is enough to condemn a world,
as appears by the eating the forbidden Fruit, it procured a curse, an eternal
curse, had it not been prevented by a compassionate Savior.

And would thou be blessed, countenance no sin, but resolve against all sin
in the strength of Christ; all sin in general, and every sin in particular,
both in respect of God and Man. If I regard iniquity in my heart, God will not
hear my prayer, Psalm. 66.8. says David; and let it be said of thee, as it was
said concerning Athanasius by Nazianzen, Se esse Magnetem and Adamantem dicit,
in respect of his sweet drawing and winning nature; and yet an Adamant in
respect of his stout courage against sin; and in an especial manner, these
three empoysoning sins, 1 Malice and Anger. 2. Infidelility. 3. Self-esteem.

7. With Christian courage in all thy deportments repel all the blaspemous
injections of Satan, with heart-rising, loathing and abhorrence; and be sure
always to set a watchful eye over the two great Instruments Satan makes use
of, the World, and Flesh; of which more hereafter.

8. With all diligence in the heat of Heart affection press after things prayed
for, and this will be a testimony unto God, that thou art sensible of thy
wants, and will it acknowledge thy self infinitely engaged, for the supply of
those things thou stand'st in need of.

9. Let no opportunity slip, be ready to catch at the fore-lock of time.

Let no occasion slip that fits thy mind.
Time has a lock before, but bald behind.
It was a Custom amongst the Romans to pourtray Time with a Lock before, but
bald behind, to which Cato accords: -- Post est occasio calva.

Intimating that Time being once past; can never be recalled. O! What a
necessity is there of the improving the precious Diadem of Time! how many poor
miserable Souls that are now languishing in Hell, bewailing the loss of misspent
time, with repentance never to be repented of. Oh! What would they give for one
year, one day, nay one hour of that precious time, of which they once were so
lavish? Who more free of time than they? Yea, some have said, that they have
had so much time they could not tell how to spend it; never once bethinking
themselves what a great work they had to do. O! therefore make use of this
present time; time that is past you cannot make use of, time to come is very
uncertain; for how long thou shall live, thou can not tell: therefore make
use of the first occasion, whilst time and strength do last, whilst thy
Senses are quick, thy Nerves limber, thy Understanding good, thy Judgment
sound, thy Sight clear, and all thy Faculties in a fit posture to serve thy
Captain and Master: See what an Heathen says to this purpose: Ovid. Dum vires
annique sinunt tolerate labores;
Jam veniet taceto curva senecta pede.


Which may be thus Englished: Take pains to grow in Grace, whilst young and
strong,
For age will numb thy Joints e're it be long.


Abandon all idleness, that canker and rust of the Soul, the Devil's pillow,
and chief repose, his very Tide-time of temptation. Beware that it be not said
by you, when you come to look death in the face, as it was by a Cardinal that
(being sensible of death's approach) cried out in the horror of his
Conscience, He had a long Journey to go, but had been so idle and negligent,
that he knew not one foot of the way. What more hateful to God than this
destroyer of Souls? See what God says to that Servant that had the one Talent,
Matthew. 25.26, 30. Tertullian well says, Quid prodest esse? quod esse non
prodest: What does it profit that a man be, and being does not profit. He that
is slothful is brother to a great waster, Prove. 18.9. as Mr. Flavell well
says; -- Besides all this, it must be understood,
That of an idle hand, there comes no good.
And well it may be so said, if we look but what befell David, for want of
Employment, 2 Samuel 11.2. And it came to pass in the evening-tide, when he arose
from off his bed, and walked upon the Kings house, and looked from the roof, he
saw a woman, etc. So that we see, that idleness may well be called the Mother
of Lust; and on the contrary, how does diligence keep all the Affections from
idle and vain thoughts? and is very profitable for both Body and Soul: It puts
the Devil out of his pathway of temptation, and as it were puts him beside
himself. O therefore be sure to put away all idleness: And to stir thee up to
this duty, Consider what is like to be the portion of those lazy drones whose
sloth the very Insects condemn. The little Ant, and the Be, how do they busy
themselves to lay up against Winter, against a Storm, only being led by the
Instinct of Nature: Well then may these careless Sots be termed to that
slothful Butter-fly, that takes care for nothing but painting her wings, so
that when winter comes, puts her head into a hole and dies. The sluggard will
not plow by reason of the cold, therefore he shall beg in harvest, and have
nothing: When others come with their shocks rejoicing, he shall starve for
want. Keep thy Spirits, and all the Faculties of thy Soul, at work in thy
solitary Cessations, lest that like two Millstones, wanting Grift, they grind
one another to pieces: and the best thing to keep thy self employed in, will be
to be much in the heart-searching work; to see how thy heart stands affected
with God, for that either sweetens or empoysons all the rest; the heart is the
Inlet of Virtues and Vices: An Host it is that entertains all sorts of Guests,
and needs to be eyed. Moreover, Purity in the inward parts is the most unerring
and infallible testimony and evidence of a good and sound state; therefore
search it, try it by the Word of Light and Life, that true Touchstone. 2. See
how thy Will stands for God, the Will being the Seat of the Graces, it is very
requisite that it be purified: See how its Pulse beats, question it, What art
thou willing to do, to suffer, to under-go, to forsake for God? Art thou
willing to stand to Gods Cause in all trials? and endure all tempests and
storms? Art thou willing to be employed in what Office Christ shall put upon
thee? and that to the hazard of thy Estate, thy Houses, thy Lands, Goods, Wife,
Children, Life and all? I say if thy Will be brought to this height, thy state
is good; then thou art fit for communion with God. Try therefore thy Will, and
'twill be a good employment in times of cessation.

Shun evil company (as much as in thee lie) when occurred with. In all
company have a care of thy tongue: For Cato does say, -- that in old and young,
The first step to Virtue, is to bridle thy tongue.


Have a care of thy tongue in all company; wicked men will be ready to carp,
and reach, and good men will be also censorious when they hear evil, idle, and
frothy discourse; because the Word says, Out of the abundance of the heart the
mouth speaks, Matthew. 12.34. Moreover, Evil communication corrupts good
manners: such as the heart is, such is the discourse; a worldly man will be
talking of the world; an ambitious man of honor; a debauched man's discourse
will be frothy and light; but a pious man's of the things that appertain to
God: None can gather grapes of thorns, nor figs of thistles; such as the tree
is, such is its fruit.

Be sure therefore to avoid lewd persons company; for familiarity with such,
steal away the Affections with sensuality, and flesh-pleasing delights; by
little and little stealing away thy heart from God, and so entangle it in the
contagious and destructive Labyrinth of Phantasie-pleasing delights; by
becoming remiss first in one duty, and than in another, and so instead of
becoming graduate in the School of Christ, becomes graduate in the School of
Satan; till at length commenses Master of Arts, and a debauched life becomes
habituate: O beware of this! How many, even a cloud of Witnesses have we every
day, that assume these diabolica practices ( Tyburn testifying) which to
relate, time it self would be almost too arct and narrow. Survey accurately,
and circumspectly, every action thou undertakest, with the Candle of the Word
of Light and Life. Lay to the Line and Plummet, see whether it be consonant to
the Will and Word of God or no. Many Trees at a distance seem to be straight,
until the Line be applied to them, and then how crooked do they appear.
Wherewithal shall a young man cleanse his way, but by taking heed thereunto?
Take heed and poize all your actions, and that with serious consideration
before enacted.

13. Have a care of being lulled asleep on the lap of sensual delights and
pleasures. O how many split upon this Rock? How many are drowned in the sleep
of carnal security, and are settled upon their Lees? O! how direful a mistake
will this be, to be carried from a Bed of Down to a Bed of scorching hot Iron?
To be bound in everlasting chains, down the stream of the delights of these
last days of ours? And that hoise up their sail before the fair gale of
Prosperity, Pleasure and Delights, against the secret blasts of a reclaiming
Conscience; that would stand as a mark to warn them, lest they should split
their Ship, and lose both Ship, Treasure, and themselves, and all.

O! what obnublating darkness will they find themselves in, and understandings
overshadowed with; that cannot see how many have sunk and perished in this Gulf?
And that will not know their day of peace before it be hid from their eyes? And
that like the rich man in the Gospel, spend their portion of good things in
this life, upon their pleasures, and in gratifying their own lusts; which
procures nothing but fuel to their fire, miseries to their torments; yea death
it self? Which, what, and how great and intolerable, if they did but conceive
once, and understand; surely they would not do for a thousand worlds?

What will those Sons of pleasure say and do, when all their joys shall be
turned into sorrow, their pleasure into pain, their mirth into mourning, their
pride into indigency and poverty, their gold into brass, their songs into
sighs, their riches into rust? Then they that thought themselves to be full,
and rich, and increased with goods, and stand in need of nothing, will be found
blind and naked, wretched and miserable; Rev. 3.17.

Mistake not, Treasures, Lands, and large Possessions, without a right
improvement, will be but as a World of Lead to press thee into the lowest Hell:
And what profit shall a man have to gain the whole world and lose his own soul?
They will not only not profit, but greatly disprofit; they will not only flee
away, but when they do hetake themselves to flight, they will leave (like the
Worms) such a suffocating slime behind them, that is like to choke the soul;
unless washed in that Fountain that is set open for sin and for uncleanness.

Honors and an Arm of Flesh will stand thee in no stead, God has put a weak
and frail nature in all terrestrial things: What! and trust to any of them?
Trust in Broken Reeds, that like Jonas's Gourd wither away, and leave thy soul
to wind and weather. Thrice blessed and sweet is our Lord's Advice, who would
have us turn the Eye of our Delight from the staining glass and dying glory of
all Terrestrial Treasures; which mostly gender mischief, at least harbors an
inbred corruption; gilded over, to entice a carnal eye: upon which many times
an evil conscience is an attendant. The one like a Worm eats out the Heart,
when the Harvest is expected; the other seizes upon the Soul, in time of
sorrow. And as for Friends and Acquaintance, they may environ thee, so long as
thy sails flee before a fair and prosperous gale; but as soon as the clouds of
indigency and poverty appear, where are they then? Have they not left thee and
fled like a shadow?

It Is true, it is good to be seeking, and to employ all thy time and strength
for Riches and Treasures, and a Magazine; but be sure it be one that is not
corruptible: Not one, that will stand in no stead. If thou be employed, be
employed in the best Trade. If thou get, get the best things. If thou dig, dig
for the Pearl of price. If thou play the Merchant, trade in the best
Merchandise: Not in temporary things, not in gold and silver, that rusts and
cankers, but in the durable r^^^^s of Jesus, that has all durable ri^^^^ and
fullness in himself. Not in Indian Treasures, but Canaans Treasures: Not in
Egypts Treasure, but in Treasure that bears price at the New Jerusalem. The one
thou may carry with thee, the other thou can not; thou must leave it to
others: therefore if thou be wise, be wise for thy self. Moreover, if thou
trade in merchandise for these Countries, for Canaan and the New Jerusalem,
I Will tell thee that a sound faith, a fixed hope, and a spotless conscience, are
the inestimable Jewels in these parts. If thou sell all to buy these, and
obtain them, it will be better than a thousand worlds to thee. Thou shall be
crowned King, thou shall be Joint Heir in Heaven with Christ thy Victorious
King and Captain.

That which Worldlings make and embrace as gain, count thou as loss: That which
they count as Pearls, count thou as Dung; That which they esteem above all,
count thou lighter than vanity; and more contemptible than dirt under thy feet.
Instead of being wise for this World, be wise for Eternity; lest, after thou
should heap up Treasures, and say; Soul take thine ease, thou have goods laid
up for many years; thou should^st be stripped of all and counted a fool for thy
pains.

Instead of riches hoard up a stock of Grace, in this plenteous Harvest of the
Gospel. Instead of worldly pleasures, hoard up that that will procure
everlasting pleasures for evermore. Instead of a world of cares, which always
attend wealth and honors, accumulate to thy self an undisturbed peace: Peace
with God, peace with Conscience, and peace with all men. And with all thy
getting get understanding. I say, instead of delighting thy self in vain
pleasures, which are the accommodations of an empty world; (of which afterward)
delight thy self in the Lord thy God, and thou shall be much wiser.

14. Be content in and amidst all the vicissitudes of a fickle and unconstant
world, let it be thy chief study, to learn that excellent Lesson of
Contentment; to know how to carry it as well toward a frowning, as a
flattering and fawning world; when it frowns, not to be troubled, and when it
fawns, not to regard it: to be so wise a Pilot as to steer thy course, neither
to split on Sylla, on thy right hand, nor Charybdis on thy left; neither to
soar so high on the wings of ambition in time of prosperity as to scorch thy
wings; nor sink so low in times of adversity as to be drowned in that Ocean of
despair: What an excellent proficiency had St. Paul made in this excellent
Lesson? he could say as very few else could say the like, I have learned (says
he) in what state I am, therewith to be content; Philip. 4.11. And indeed it
was not in word, but indeed, which plainly appears by that 11th of 2
Corinthians; He had learned how to abound, and how to suffer need. If the World
hold out a Scepter, he can tell how to use it; if a Shovel he can dig with it;
if a Crown he can wear it, if a Cross he can bear it. If a storm he can endure
it, if a calm he can enure it. So that in the use of all things, he lives as
though he had them not, amidst them. What a rare frame is this, to be able to
turn ones hand to any Tune: To which purpose he gives an excellent dictate in
Heb. 12.5. Be content with such things as you have; and he adds the Reason, For
he has said, I Will never leave thee, nor forsake thee: As if he should have
said, I tell you from mine own experience, it is the best thing in the world to
be content; for my Master that learned me this Lesson, laid an entail upon it,
that can never be cut off: he has promised me and all others that will be
Students in this Art, that he will maintain them, whatever it cost him; and he
as a President, has left a Pattern, his own act and deed. Was he content to do
so great things? to suffer great things? to undergo so hard things? Was he
content to suffer hunger? Was he content to be weary? and to show himself
submissive to whatsoever his Fathers will was; and shall not we follow our
Captain, that have listed our selves under his Banner, to be his Soldiers? We
listed our selves at our Baptismal Covenant, and renewed it again at the Lords
Table, and shall we be treacherous to him? No, no.

This Jewel of Contentment is to be much esteemed and valued, and that above
any thing in this lower Orb; it is an inestimable Pearl of great price, it is
of excellent Virtue, and that of diverse kinds.

It is of a healing, or of a drawing virtue; it is applicable to any sore: it
will make one in a frame for any condition. Art thou rich? it will be thy
Steward, and that a faithful one too, for the improving of thy Estate: Art thou
poor? it will supply thy wants for thee: In both these we find it useful to Job
in both the time of prosperity and adversity; and in both these it was useful
to St. Paul also, I know both how to abound, and how to suffer need; compared
with that forecited place, Phil. 4.11. Art thou sick? it will be Physic to
thee; it will teach thee to submit to God's will, and that will bear up thy
Spirits in, and amidst thy greatest pain: Art thou dejected? this will lift
thee up: Art thou in prison? this will visit thee: Art thou hungry? this will
fill thee: Art thou naked? this will cloth thee: Art thou friendless? this
will make God thy friend, which is better than all the friends in the world
besides. Art thou in straits? it will redeem thee and deliver thee out of them:
Nay, Let thy condition be what it will, it is of great use to thee: Therefore
learn this Lesson above all, and that because it will sweeten all conditions to
thee, and teach thee to trust God in all conditions, and be as a Sovereign
Antidote against that poisonous and destructive sin of despair.

And to the attaining of this rare Art of Contentment, take these few
Considerations as Directions to the attaining of this Christian Accomplishment.

1. Consider, That it was in the Omnipotents hand, when he framed thee in the
Womb; to have composed thee after another fashion than thou art: he might have
framed thee an irrational Animal, or if not, he might have made thee despicable
in every ones sight. 2. Consider, That (it may be) thy case (whatever it is or
may be) it is not so bad, but some others have been in as bad or worse: and then
what cause have thou to be disquieted. 3. Consider, That whatever thy condition
is or may be, sin is the instrumental cause of it; for sin is the procurer of
all our miseries. 4. Consider, That when God afflicts any one of his children,
it is in love to their souls; as many as I love, I rebuke and chasten; Rev. 3.
5. Consider, That God has promised all shall work together for good unto them
that love him. 6. Consider, That whatsoever God inflicts upon any of us, it is
less than our sins deserve. 7. Consider, That God is a merciful God, and will
inflict no more upon thee than thou art able to bear. 8. Consider, That
afflictions or crosses, are but for a time, they are not, nor cannot be
permanent. 9. Consider, These are but light afflictions to what God might
afflict thee with. 10. Consider, That when God afflicts thee or any of his
people, it is but to fit us for himself, and to fit us for a better state. 11.
Consider, That God (many times) makes this his sign to his people that they are
his; and that he designs nothing less for them, than to make them his heirs. If
we were without chastisement, then we were bastards and not sons. 12. Consider,
What Christ has suffered for us, and what all the Apostles and Prophets
(witness that short Martyrology, Heb. 11.) and all the Martyrs since; and then
surely thou will not have much cause to complain.
I say consider these few things, amongst many, and then complain if thou
can, or be discontent if thou dare. David says, Why art thou cast down, O
my soul, and why art thou disquieted within me? Hope thou in God, for I shall
yet praise him. He cries out three times in the 42. Psalm and the 43. as if he
should have said, Thou have no reason to be discontent, nor discouraged at all;
for in so doing thou distrusts God.

O thou Son of hope, whosoever thou art, therefore learn to be accumulating a
stock of this Sovereign Antidote, to apply to such wounds as tend to despair.

Be careful to bear in mind always, the four great and last things: 1. The day
of Death. 2. The day of Judgment. 3. Heaven. 4. Hell: And this may be a means
to keep up thy heart toward God, and whereby thou may be kept free from
that direful wrath and inextinguishable fire of Hell, kindled by an angry and
implacable enemy of all sin, even the Lord Almighty, which can nener be defined
by humane nature, nor by the best and most acute Philospher, that ever moved in
this lower Orb, nor a dimension given by the best Student in the Mathematics:
Nay, it can never be decribed by any, because none knows it but God alone: As
touching the profundity thereof, it is bottomless, Revel. 9.1. as to the
dimensity of, it can never be full, it is insatiable, Prove. 2.7, 10. As
touching the duration of it, it is for ever inextinguishable, that when as many
years are expired as there are Atoms in the Sun, Sands on the Seashore, Grass
piles on the Earth, and Stars in the Firmament, it will be no nearer an end,
than before, and who is he that can, or dare undertake to express it. This
wrath to come cannot be expressed, untll it most furiously express it self in
Hell, when the Devil as God's Executioner shall be loosed to inflict the most
exquisite torments on those beastly sluggards that have neglected the day of
their grace, offered by Jesus Christ in the Gospel; that would not know their
peace before it was hid from their eyes; and before they were everlastingly
separated from Christ's Lambs, whom the Lamb of God redeemed with his precious
Blood.

O! Where shall they appear that would not give the Lord Jesus any residence in
the closets of their hearts? They shall be straightened and c^ouded into Hell,
that were so far berest of their sight and understanding, and so far blinded,
that they disowned God, that should have been their hope, and their Redeemer;
that should have been the strength of their salvation. O! what direful horror
will then perplex their Souls? What trembling their Joints? What horror their
Conscience? What distractions their Minds? What fear their Hearts? What
deadness their Understanding at the Great Assize? Then they will say, what
madness and distractedness did possess us, that we should be so foolish, as
list our selves under his Banner, that now will be our tormentor? and that like
so many Esau's, sold our Birthright for a mess of Pottage, for a few merry
hours, and a little ease and delight? When they see the Heavens pass away as a
scroll, and the Earth melt with fervent heat, they shall see the resemblance of
their approaching misery pourtrayed.

Then they shall feel the punishment both of sense and loss; then they shall
have God's Vials of wrath and indignation poured upon them; then they shall be
sensible of that devouring fire that God so many times, by his faithful
Ministers, has pressed upon them; that fire that either consumes or refines
the world, shall burn the sinner to all Eternity, and yet shall neither be
consumed nor refined; always a dying, but never dead, And then how will his
merry days be vanished as a dream, and his jovial life will be as a tale that
is told, and his Repartees, pleasant Sports, and wanton Dalliances, his Cups
and Queans, his vain hopes of Heaven, and confident Conceits, all, all
deceased, all will be passed away together.

This is the time that sinners, that the wretched world shall be discriminated
from the happy Saints; whose misery and property is to be wise too late. The
Vizard of the World will then be taken off, it will be then unvailed, and then
the seeming holiness of the Hypocrite will be conspicuous, and will be exposed
to the face and view of all the world, and then shall he see his own folly, not
only in reference to his own Soul, but also in slighting Christ, offered to him
in the Gospel; then he shall see how nigh he came to the Kingdom of Heaven, and
yet came shert of it; and how shall he expect or imagine to be hid in the day
of the Lords anger, that knew that his Judge every day was looking on when he
so dissembled and cheated the world, himself, and God, as he supposed. O ye
Hypocrites! God one day will force your Consciences to witness against you, and
your tongues to consess the accusation, Christ's Ministers must be brought in
to ^^^est for God; and if God be against you, who shall then be for you? If
Christ that would have saved thee, be against thee, and condemn thee, who shall
be able to justify thee? All that feared God will attest against thee.

What a deplorable condition will it be, to think, how the Master shall
evidence against his own Servant, the Husband against the Wife, and the Wife
against the Husband, the Parents against their own Children, and the Children
against their own Parents: Sinful Compotators, or Pot-Companions little
conjecture they must bear witness of, and concerning, those sins that they have
helped forward in others, and they themselves heard and did; swearing and
execrating, and mocking those that feared God, and scoffing at an holy Life.
The Fornicators little think, that their lustful and wanton Mates must bear
witness against them; that thought they had been concealed in secret places:
and that that secrecy shall be laid open to the view of the world, and that
those that encouraged them to sin shall accuse them of sin. O! the cold comfort
that such will have in the reflection of all their pleasures, at that day, when
the very devils that tempted them to such and such sins, will stand at their
elbows to accuse and witness against them, and tell them, that they were no
readier to tempt, than they were ready to assent to every temptation. Where, on
the contrary, they slighted Gods Ministers, and strivings of God's Spirit
within them. The very Angels will witness against them at that day, and
Conscience will produce its black Bill of his secret reclamings, and of all the
Examples that have ever been, to demonstrate the displeasure and hatred God has
against such sins, as they have been Assenters to, and Agents in. In turning
the Grace of God into wantonness, and in gaming and squandring away precious
time; in which time, instead of working out their own salvation, they have
wrought out their damnation. God's Book of Record will be produced, concerning
all the thoughts, words, and actions, against sinners. Nothing shall have been
done in secret, that shall not be revealed; Luke 8.17.

Nay, every man shall be his own Accuser at that day. The painted Hypocrite
will then cry out of his outside profession, fair without but foul within; a
mere painted Sepulcher.

The covetous Usurers Conscience will accuse and condemn him, for cozening and
cheating others, for griping and grinding the faces of others.

The rich Man's wealth will so cry out against him, and the Canker of his Gold
and Silver will witness against him, that he shall be forced to say, Lord, I am
in thy hand, do as it seems good in thy sight with me. His Riches will be
corrupted, and his Garments moth-eaten. And the profane Sabbath-breaker, that
notwithstanding all the rebukes by evident Judgments from God, did profane the
Sabbath, and instead of communicoting divine Truths, as for spiritual Food and
Manna for his Soul to feed upon, from Sabbath to Sabbath, shall be forced to
cry out, Lord, I have neglected the day of Grace, do as it pleases thee
toward me. I have, instead of learning those things that would have instructed
me in the way of life, learned that that has brought me to destruction, and
this is the fruits of my Labor; instead of keeping and subjugating my self to
Divine Laws, I have rebelled both against Divine and Humane Laws; even the very
Laws. of Nature and Humanity have I broken: Instead of attending thy
Ordinances, I have attended the Invitations of my own Lusts.

O you that are yet on this side Hell, this side Eternity, have a care of
stifling a good Conscience, and know that if you will not hear it now, you
shall be constrained to hear, when all your political excuses shall be
debarred; your mouths stopped, you shall stand speechless; and Conscience,
God's Witness, set up in every Man's breast shall be heard.

There were four sorts of Hearers specified in Christ's Parable, but one sort
good; the rest were Sabbath Breakers, such as there are many now adays, that
instead of getting their hearts prepared, according to the preparation of the
Sanctuary, to meet with God, and hear what he will dispense to them from his
Word, they trim, paint, and pin away a good Conscience, in trimming, and
painting, and pinning their Bodies. Where is that that the Scripture commands?
I say, the time that should be spent in preparation for meeting with God, is
spent in dressing and trimming these crasie and rotten houses of clay, that is
like to fall at the blast of every Distemper, and e're long shall be turned
into earthy dross and clay; as trees that cumber the ground, and are useless in
their Generation: They have leaves without fruit, show without substance; and
if Christless and graceless, Devils will e're long be their Associates, the
worms to destroy their Bodies, and the worm Conscience that [never dies to gnaw
upon their Souls to all Eternity.

Every Creature that has been abused, that now groans under sin, will that day
come in as a witness, to attest against those unmerciful Creatures.

All things that have been abused, that ought to have been used to the Glory of
God (as the Apostle speaks) will testify the just Judgment of God; the Meat,
Drink, Apparel that have been so vainly spent and consumed; the very Time,
Place, and Room, shall witness against the Whore-monger and Adulterer, whom God
will judge. All these things God will make use of, as Evidences against those
that shall have consumed and spent them upon their own lusts.

16. Endeavor still after an higher Attainment of Perfection. The Soul that
grows in Grace, is the Soul that God will delight in, and love. Mercies
improved, is the way to engage God to love, and to grant a further supply of
Mercy. As none can be (impossible it is) so holy as God, and perfect as God;
for so we must understand, when he says, Be ye holy, as I am holy: not that any
man can be as holy as God; but he must be understood, in respect of perfectio
partium, non graduum; so none is to rest in any Attainment, until they come to
the Center, until they enjoy all that the precious Blood of Christ can purchase
for them.

I have read a notable Story, wherein we have (by way of discourse) betwixt a
Beggar and a Divine, a notable Example of Self-resignation, and an high
Attainment of Perfection (I mean) as I said before, perfectio partium non
graduum, of parts not of degrees; for it can be no otherwise, it is impossible
to be as perfect as God. Which is as follows:

There was a certain Divine, famous in Learning and Piety, that did earnestly
importune God by prayer, for some time together, conceiving that he had not the
true knowledge of the ways of God, notwithstanding his much Learning attained
belong Studies; begging that God would give him to know more of him, and
himself, and that God would direct him to some that would teach him the way of
Truth; and being in^lamed at a certain time, with vehemence of desire, a Voice,
as was supposed, spoke thus to him, Go forth to the Church yard, and there thou
may find a man that can teach thee the way. And going forth, he found there
a certain Beggar, with patched and torn Apparel, and filthy dirty feet, whose
clothes were not worth three halfpence, whom he spoke thus unto: Divine. God
give thee a good morning. Beggar. Sir, I do not remember that ever I had an
evil one. Div. God make thee fortunate and prosperous: Why speak thou on
this manner? Beg. Neither was I unprosperous, neither was I ever unhappy. Div.
God save thee, speak now plainly. Beg. Truly, Sir, I will do it willingly. Sir,
Thou did wish me a prosperous and good Motning, and I answered, I never had
an evil one; for when I am pinched with hunger, I praise God; if I suffer cold,
if it snow, if it hail or rain, if the weather be fair or foul, I praise God;
and therefore there never happened any sad or evil Morning to me. Thou did
likewise wish that I might be fortunate, I said I was never unfortunate,
because whatever God gave me, I suffered, or whatever happened to me, whether it
were agreeable to me, or otherwise; were it sweet or bitter to me, I gladly
received it at his hands, as the best; and therefore I was never unfortunate.
Thou said moreover, that God would be eased to make me happy, whereunto I
likewise answered, That I never had been unhappy; for I am fully resolved
(through his Grace) to adhere and cleave to the will of God (abandoning mine
own will) into which I have so wholly poured out my will, that whatsoever he
will, I may will the same; and for this cause (as I said) I was never unhappy,
being that I will cleave to his will only, and have wholly resigned mine own
proper will. Div. This is very strange; but what (I pray thee) would thou
do, if the Lord of Majesty should cast thee into the bottomless pit, could
thou be content with his will? Beg. Drown me in the bottomless pit? Why
certainly if he should, I have two arms by which I would still embrace him; the
one is true Humility, and that I lay under him, and by him I am united to his
sacred Humanity: The other, and that is the right one, which is Love, which is
united to his Divinity; and also by this Love from himself, I hold him so fast,
that he would go down to Hell with me; and it is much better for me to be in
Hell with God, than in Heaven without him.

By this the Divine learned, That the most compendious way to God is a true
Resignation, with profound Humility.

Hereupon the Divine spoke again to the Beggar, and asked him. Div. Whence
come thou? Beg. From God. Div. Where foundest thou God? Beg. Even there where
I left all the Creatures. Div. I pray thee friend, Who art thou? Beg. Who am I?
Truly I am a King, and Jesus himself crowned me, with Peace, Power, and Rest:
Div. A King! Where is thy Kingdom? Beg. Sir, the Kingdom of Heaven is within
me, that is in my Soul, and I can now, and and do by his power (not mine own)
in me, so govern, and command all my inward Parts, and Senses, that all the
Assections and Powers of the Old Man, in my Soul, are conquered, and are in
subjection to me; which Kingdom no man can doubt, but is better than all the
Kingdoms and Glories in the World. Divine. What brought thee to this
Perfection? Beg. My sublime Meditations, and union with that great God of
Peace, and improvement of Mercies to his Glory, and by growing in Grace, adding
one Grace to another; and I could rest in nothing less than an assurance of
God's Love, and this I have found. I have forsaken the unquiet World, and in
him I have peace of Conscience, and therein I rest.

And thus we see to what an excellency of Perfection may be attained.

But to conclude our Discourse, I shall give thee in five words, though very
comprehensively, the whole duty of a Christian.

1. Be much in the Mortification work. Get thy Corruptions subdued, and
mortify all sin in thee, otherwise thou shall, nay can not, have a communion
with God. 2. Be sure (above all things) to get thy self in favor with Christ;
for (withal thou must understand) of and from him thy Salvation is and does
proceed; he it is that has purchased both thy Salvation it self, the way also,
and the means thereunto; and without him thou can do nothing. 3. Bear much in
mind the great day of account, that thou may give up thy account with joy;
otherwise thou will never be regular in thy course; and withal be mindful who
it is that must be thy Judge. 4. Be much in the attendance of the Word read and
preached, for that is the only way that God has appointed for himself to be
found in; moreover it is that that will discover unto thee what is thy Duty. 5.
And lastly, Be much in Prayer, for this is that that will give success to all
other; this is the Conduit-pipe to convay or discover all our wants to God, and
mercies from God to us.
FORMS OF PRAYERS For Particular Persons For every Day in the Week.
A Prayer for the Sabbath Day Morning.
MOst Holy, and Glorious Lord God, I sinful dust and ashes, presuming to
approach thy presence, desire that thou will please to fit my heart for the
approaching so holy a Presence as thine is, that on this day I may be so sitted
according to the preparations of thy Sanctuary, as that I may meet with thy
self; that thou may communicate something that may be of refreshment unto my
Soul by thy Word and Spirit; yea, that I may be found in the Spirit on the
Lord's day. O Lord pardon my sins, that I have been guilty of this week past,
and all my life past; and let them not stand as a flood to stop my Prayers from
ascending unto thee, or to keep back the influences of thy holy Spirit from my
Soul. O Lord, looking upon them, and upon my nature polluted by them, it makes
me afraid to look up unto Heaven. Nay, indeed I durst not, only thou have
commanded me to come unto thee by the virtue of the precious Blood of thy Son
Christ, that is my strong consolation, hope, and comfort: Moreover, Lord, thou
have prescribed a comfortable promise, that thou will pardon the sins of thy
People for thy own Names sake. O therefore for thy own Names sake, do away all
my sins in the Blood of Jesus Christ, that I may appear before thee in the
Robes of Christ's Righteousness, and and not in mine own; seeing all mine is
but as menstruous cloth, and filthy rags. Lord, prepare me for this thy days
work, help me in it, and keep me after it, that thy Spirit may seal up Divine
Truths in the closet of my heart, that laying them up in my heart, I may
practice them in my life, and bring forth fruit with patience, meet for
repentance. Lord, let neither the cares of the World, nor the deceitful
thoughts of riches choke thy Seed sown, nor let Satan steal it out of my heart;
but let it be as good seed sown in a good and honest heart, that taking root
downward, it may bring forth fruit upward, being watered with the bedewings of
thy Spirit. O come in this day with fresh reviving Grace, that thereby I may be
so quickened and qualified, as that I may meet with thy self. Let this day be so
sanctified to me, as that I may say in the close thereof, it is not in vain, but
good to draw nigh to thy self, and that I am drawn a step nigher this day to
thy self, by the Blood of Christ. Lord, pardon the want of a reverent frame of
spirit, and the unworthy obtrusion into thy presence at this time, and look
upon my unworthiness, in the worthiness of Christ; my imperfection, in his
perfection; my sinfulness in his righteousness; and my weakness in his
strength; that I may appear righteous in thy sight, in his righteousness; and
that for his own sake. Amen.

A Prayer for the Sabbath Day Evening.
GRacious God, notwithstanding the much imperfection my Soul has been clogged
with this day, thou have given me cause this day to say from a grounded
experience, that it is not in vain to draw nigh unto thee. Lord, I heartily
thank thee for the refreshing smiles of thy countenance, this day in thy
Ordinances. O how good is it to draw nigh to God in his own way. Blessed be thy
Name, holy God, That never said to the Seed of Jacob, seek ye my face in
vain. Lord, thou have been so good in communicating thy self unto me, by thy
Word and Spirit, that I may say (with thy Servant David) What shall I render
unto the Lord for all his Mercies? Lord, it is matter of wonder and admiration
to me, that thou should deal so with me, seeing thou have been provoked by
my coldness and deadness in such a manner. I beseech thee, O Lord, pass by all
my miscarriages, that I have been guilty of this day, let not them be a
prevention of a future supply of my wants and necessities; Nay, let not them be
the cause of thy withdrawing thy self in future attendances on thee, nor the
cause of removing thy Ordinances, thy Gospel, thy faithful Ministers and
Messengers. O Lord, thou have declared thy self a God of mercy, and indeed, I
may, as it were, set to my Seal, seeing my provocations have been so many and
so great. Lord, thou have not dealt after the manner of men with me. Let thy
manifold Mercies be an engagement to stir me up to a more watchful frame of
spirit, that by my negligence I incur not thy displeasure. Lord, pardon sins
past, and humble me for sins present, and keep me from sins ^o come, that
thereby I may be rendered meet for every good word and work. Accept my willing
ness, and overlook my weakness in thy only Son Jesus Christ, in whom thou art
well pleased. In whose Name I thank thee for all my enjoyments, and through
whose Blood, I desire to receive all my Mercies, and for whom I desire to bless
thee: To him, and thee, the only wise God, be praise for ever, Amen.

A Prayer for Monday Morning.
BLessed God, all thy dealings with the Sons of men, attest thy liberality ^y
and bounty, thou renewest thy mer^ies every morning. Lord, renew my ^eart, that
I may be capacitated to serve thee, and to sing new Songs of praises ^o thee
every morning. Blessed God, thank thee that thou have made my life ^recious in
thy sight; that thou have chained up Satan, that roaring Lion that goes about
night and day, seeking whom be may devour; that would have devoured me Soul and
B^dy, unless prevented by thy power and goodness. O help me, so long as I have
a being, to praise thee. Lord, how might thou have made my ^ed my grave, my
sleep my death, and have cut me off from the Land of the living; yet thou have
been pleased to preserve me, and keep me from the rage of cruel Enemies both
spiritual and corporal. Seeing, Lord, thou have dealt thus with me, let this
day be of great use to to me, that I may learn some things in it, that may be
of special use for my Souls advantage, and that seeing all time was given for
the Service of God, that I may in my employment, meditate either on the word
that I have heard thy day past, or thy works, in which are many wonderful and
mysterious things to be seen, worthy taking notice of, and contemplating upon.
Help me so to begin the week, as that I may engage thee to prosper all my
undertakings in the remaining part of it; undertaking nothing but what may be
pleasing to thy self, and consonant to thy Will and Word. Let my labors be
sweetened by thy blessing, and support me under all. Help me to be useful in the
place and station where thou have set me, that I may not be branded with the
name of a cumber-ground. All this, and what thou the only wise God, know
necessary for me, I humbly beg for Jesus Christ's sake. Amen.

A Prayer for Monday Evening.
GRacious Lord, I humbly thank thee, that thou have been pleased this day to
preserve me, and to support me under all my undertakings and concerns, and that
thou have given me health and strength, and liberty, and life, all which are in
thy hand, and at thy disposal. Lord let the consideration of these things
instigate my dull heart to praise thee: O Lord, in all thy dealings with the
Sons of Men there is matter both of praises and rejoicing. Lord, thou never
dealest with thy People but in a way of love; not in a way of Judgment, but
Mercy. If thou should have marked strictly what I have done amiss, I have
done more amiss, and against thee, than ever I can, or have done, for thee in
the course of my whole life. I beseech thee, O Lord, pass by all my offenses,
and let them all be washed away in the Blood of that immaculate Lamb Christ
Jesus.

O Lord, I bless thee for thy watchful Eye of Providence; how much of thy
goodness has been manifested this day to me ward. In the Morning thou affordest
Mercies, and in the Evening thou withhold^st not thy hand. O let Morning and
Evening Mercies be of use to bring my Soul into a nearer communion with thy
self. Let all the bedewings of both right hand and left hand Mercies, the
blessing of the upper and nether Springs of spiritual Mercies and temporal
Mercies, be continued and sanctified to me, that I may being forth fruit
anserable to the pains, God the great Husbandman, has taken with me, and cost
he has laid out upon me; Lord, that I may not be as a fruitless Vine, that
bears either no grapes, or else wild grapes; but O that I may bring forth
grapes in clusters; fruit, much fruit, and good fruit. Lord, now will thou be
pleased to pass by the negligence of this day, and let my defects be made up in
him that is fullness it self, Jesus Christ; and as I am about to betake me to my
repose, Lord, let me acquiesce in thee; and grant that lying down I may
sanctify thee in my heart, and lying down in peace, and rising again, I may
know, and say the Lord sustains me; and that for Christ Jesus sake. Amen.

A Prayer for Tuesday Morning.
GRacious Lord God, who fillest Heaven and Earth with thy Goodness, and make
the hearts of thy people glad thereby: O who is a God like unto thy self, a God
glorious in Holiness fearful in Praises, doing wonders. The Heavens declare thy
Glor^ and the Firmament shows the work of thine hands, day unto day shows
thy wisdom, and night unto night utters knowledge, that thy Name may be
exalted above all the gods. O Lord, let thy wisdom be manifested in and upon
me, and let a powerful operation of thy Spirit be manifested in the renewing of
my heart, and mortifying the corruptions of the Old Man; that my will may be
changed, and that the spirit of the Prince of the Power of the Air that works
in the children of disobedience, may be dispossessed. Extinguish all the
revivings of mortified Iusts. O Lord, thou know that this work is a very
hard work, such a work as none can do but thy self; therefore grant thy
assistance. And as thou art pleased to renew my strength night by night, by
moderate sleep and rest, Lord, renew my spiritual strength, that I may be more
than a Conqueror over all my carnal corruptions, through Jesus Christ. O Lord,
will thou pardon all my vain thoughts this night past, whatsoever has been
disconsonant to the Will and Word of thy Sacred M^iesty. O Lord, these things
thou know arise from the Principles of a corrupt nature; mortify them, I
pray thee, for me, seeing the work of the new Creation is by, and of, thy self,
the heart-work is to be done by a more potent hand than man's. Subdue my
corruptions, renew my will, streng then my judgment, illuminate my
understanding, and capacitate me for every good word and work. Thou Lord, have
preserved me this night past, preserve me this day, and undertake for me, and
let all my undertakings be blessed by thee, in and through thy Son Christ
Jesus. Amen.

A Prayer for Tuesday Evening.
INfinitely wise God, thou have manifested abundantly thy loving kindness unto
me, though I sinful dust and ashes have provoked thee by my many miscarriages,
not only this day, but every day. Lord, I bless thee for thy Providential care
over me this day, and for that ability under all my Undertakings, by which thou
have sustained me, and kept me by thy free Grace and Mercy; not that there was
any thing in me that might move thee so to do. Lord, let all these Mercies be
so remembered by me, as that they may be a means to stir me up to a more active
and lively frame of Spirit, to act more in those things that may conduce to thy
Honor. O Lord, I have lived, but not to thy self; O pardon all my
unprositableness, my barrenness, and leanness; let the bedewings of thy Spirit
so water my parched Soul, that I may be more fertile under the same. I confess,
I have been a very Truant in Christ's School, yet Lord, thou have not dealt
with me according to my failings, but according to the riches of thy free
streams of Grace and Love? O let not my sins stop that Fountain running toward
me: but let the Fountain that is set open for sin and uncleanness, wash my sins
all away: O Lord, let me be washed white in the Blood of the Lamb; and let the
searlet and crimson stains that sin has made in my poor Soul, be washed out.
Let not my unworthiness this day, prevent my night Mercies; let not thy
Providential care desist to me-ward; but rather forgive my sins and offenses,
and let my miserable failings move thee to pity me: O do it for thy Names sake.
Thou, Lord, have said, thou will blot out the sins of thy people for thy Names
sake; O accomplish this rich Promise to me-ward, that I being sensible of thy
great forgiveness, I may be greatly moved to love thee. It Is said, Mary loved
much, because she had been forgiven much. Lord, let my rest be sweet unto me,
that being refreshed thereby, I may the next morning be caused to rejoice in
thee, and praise thy Name. Let this nights rest put me in mind to seek Christ,
that I may have everlasting rest through him. All which I beg for his sake
alone, the purchaser and procurer of all my enjoyment; for whom I bless thee,
and to whom with thy Holy Self and blessed Spirit, be praises for evermore.
Amen.

A Prayer for Wednesday Morning.
HOly God, grant me a pardon of all my sins, and in particular the sins of this
night past; all my vain thoughts and cogitations. Lord, I cannot express them
unto thee in particular, yet thou know them all: I pray thee, Lord, blot
them out of the Book of thy remembrance, cast them behind thy back, let them
never be seen any more, either in this life, or in the world to come, to my
condemnation. Lord, as thou art pleased every Morning to renew thy Mercies to
me, renew my heart within me, that I may be occasioned to renew my thankfulness
to thy self, for thy bounty and benignity to me: let the improvement of
left hand Mercies engage thee to a further supply of right hand Mercies; the
improvement of temporal Mercies engage thee to a further supply of spiritual
Mercies; and let both be so improved by me, that thou may have the Glory,
and I may have comfort in and through thy dear Son Jesus Christ. Help me this
day in all my transactions to remember thee, and that I may set the Lord always
before mine eyes; that I may thereby resist every temptation, as thy Servants,
Job, Joseph, and David did. Let the soundness of my state be demonstrated by
the regularity of my course. Regulate and rectify what thou see irregular in
my life, that all my designs and purposes may be for thy Honor: let Piety be
my delight; let sin be the object of my hatred; accept what is good in me. Be
my counsel in my enterprises and undertakings, and direct my will, that I may
do nothing but what tends to thy Glory, for Christ's sake. Amen.

A Prayer for Wednesday Evening.
O Eternal God, who art glorious in Holiness, fearful in thy Praises, doing
Wonders. Blessed by thy holy Name, thou give poor C eatures, such as I,
occasion to rejoice in thee, and to seek unto thee through the mediation of thy
dear and well-beloved Son Jesus Christ. Lord, let all Mercies be of great use
to me, for the drawing out of my heart after thy self. Pardon me, that I have
been no more enamored with thy Son, that he has been no more amiable to my
Soul, even the fountain of all my Mercies, the wellspring of all Goodness, the
Author of all my Enjoyments, and by whom all my sins must be pardoned, if they
be pardoned. O Lord, look upon his satisfaction and intercession for me: O
divest me of the rags of my sin, and invest me with the Robes of Christ's
Righteousness; let the stream of his precious Blood obliterate those crimson
and scarlet stains that sin has made in my poor Soul. O Lord, what time might
I have redeem d, wherein I might have had more communion with thy self, and thy
Son Christ, and done more for thy Honor, if I had been wiser, Lord, help me
this night to experience more of thy love to my Soul, by coming in with fresh
supplies of Grace; received Grace is not sufficient for me, my nature is very
much declining, and therefore grant me fresh streams of Love and Grace, that
thereby I may acquiesce in and upon thee, knowing thou art a God sufficient for
all these things I stand in need of. I bless thee for my preservation and
sustentation, thou have preserved and sustained me with. O sustain my Soul with
fresh influences of thy Countenance, and as I am about to betake my self to my
rest draw thou the Curtain of thy Fatherly Protection about me. Help me to
sanctify thee in my heart, laying my head to my pillow. And that for Christ's
sake. Amen.

A Prayer for Thursday Morning.
MOst Holy God, before whose presence the Angels themselves, who are such
spotless Creatures, vail their faces, even them thou chargest with folly; and
if them, what may thou charge such a sinful wretch as I with. Nay, Lord, the
best of my actions they are full of impurity. Help me, Lord, to lay my face in
the dust, and to confess my uncleanness, one of an uncircumcised Heart and
Ears, that since I could do any thing, could sin; and since I could sin, I
could almost do nothing but sin O Lord, pardon me, for the greatness of my sins
is intolerable, they are more than I am able to bear. Help me to lay them on
him who is mighty ^o save. No sin, O Lord, is so great, but thy Mercy is
greater. No sin is too great for thee to pardon. Pardon sins of omission and
commission, actual and original, do all away in the Blood of Christ. O Lord,
let not the sinning away of received Mercies, prevent future Mercies. Pardon my
vain and sinful thoughts this night, or whatsoever thou have seen amiss in me,
and accept my requests, O Lord, as a Sacrifice in Jesus Christ; renew that
league my very Dreams have broke; and accept my thankfulness for thy
prottecting Providence; thou might est have made my bed my grave, my sleep my
death, and cut me off from the land of the living; but blessed be thy Name,
thou have yet made me praise thee in the land of the living, praises to thy
holy Name: Let the Mercies of this night stir me to an holy and close walking
with thee all this day: let me be actuated by thy Spirit, they being only in a
right frame, to whom thy Sprit is leader and guider. Bless my undertakings, and
let them be for thy Glory, through thy Son the Mediator of the New Covenant,
Jesus Christ the Righteous; to him, and to thy self, for him be praises. Amen.

A Prayer for Thursday Evening.
MOst Holy Lord, and in thy Son our most merciful Father, speak to my Soul,
that I may hear and live; that I, though but a wild Olive Branch, may be
grafted into the true Vine: let me no longer be a stranger to the Covenant of
Grace. O Lord, I have been very sinful and rebellious against thy self, in all
my deportment; I have many times sinned against my own knowledge, I have sinned
against light, and against love. Pardon all my miscarriages, not only this day,
but all my days. O do all away in the blood of Jesus Christ, and let me appear
in my Elder Brother's Carments; invest me with his Righteousness, but first of
all divest me of my own: let thy Grace increase in me, but let sin decrease;
let me grow in Grace as I grow in years, and that no day may pass over my head,
wherein I have not learned something that tends to my Souls health. Help me
every day to learn something that may tend to the mortifying of some lust, for
my establishment in the truth, and for the direction of my feet in the paths
everlasting. Pardon me that I have done no more for thee this day, that I have
redeemed no more time. O Lord, I might have redeemed more time if I had been
wise, wherein I might have had more Communion with thy self; and might have
engaged thee more to have blessed me in all my Enterprises. Lord help me to
redeem time, because the days are evil. I thank thee for thy care and
preserving providence this day. As touching those things that have been done
amiss in any way or manner this day by me, let them not prevent night mercies:
O deal in Mercy and not in Judgment, with me; let thy love conceal all my
offenses. As touching this night, Let my rest in it be sweet unto me. Let every
night be as it were a memento of the silent night in the Grave, a remembrance
of death, to put me in mind of my later end: Make my rest sweet unto me, that
being refreshed with moderate rest, I may the next morning bless thy name, and
be engaged to a more lively activity for God the next day, and that for Christ's
sake. Amen.

A Prayer for Friday Morning.
GLorious Lord, it is thy great condescension, that thou do after such a
manner afford the privilege of the means of Grace unto me; and that thou do
give me fresh occasions every morning to praise thee, and to pray unto thee; to
thank thee for Mercies received, and to beg further supplies of future Mercies.
O Lord, let not my unthankfulness prevent what further blessings thou may
design for me. O I have been very ungrateful, unthankful, and unkind, in that I
have expressed my thankfulness no more, by an holy, humble, and a regular
walking before thee. Pardon that black sin of ingratitude, of which I have been
too too much guilty, by walking contrary to thy Prescriptions, and contrary to
the Canons and Constitutions of Heaven. Pardon that I have done so little for
God, that I have loved so little, whereas God has loved me so much; evidenced
by his gracious dealings to me-wards. O help me to believe, and that strongly;
hope for Heaven more confidently, and love thee more servently; and bear the
Cross more patiently and submissively; that thereby I might steer my course
more evenly to the New Jerusalem. Lord thou have been very kind unto me, thou
have dealt with me in love this night, in my preservation and protection in
Soul and Body; from Spiritual and Corporal Enemies; thou have guarded me by thy
special Providence. Accept of my thankfulness, and grant that my humility and
thankfulness, may engage thee to extend more of thy benignity, prosperity, and
ability, in the affairs of this life. Sanctify my heart, that this day I may
act for God, as in the presence of God. Direct me in the courses, not only of
this day, but all my days; that all may be to thy Glory; and the comfort of my
Soul, through Christ. Amen.

A Prayer for Friday Evening.
BLessed God, it is the great comfort of thy People, that at any time thou art
pleased in such a condescending manner, to let them spread their cases before
thee. O Lord, sure I am, Thou never said to the Seed of Jacob, seek ye my
face in vain; for so thy word manifests unto us. Whereas, Lord, I, dust and
clay, have rebelled against thee from time to time, yet thou art pleased to
admit me to come into thy presence, and to tell what my wants are; and blessed
be thy Name, thou have granted a supply, and have encouraged me to come again,
and have not dealt with me after the manner of men; but have been pleased many
times to grant me the same Mercies that I formerly abused. How many days have I
spent vainly, and yet thou have given me the enjoyment of more. I pray thee,
pass by my many miscarriages in this very days course. O how little have I done
for thee? how little honor have I brought to thy Name? How selfish have I
been? How unmindful of God have I been? How little have I done in order to the
making of my Calling and Election sure? Lord, how shall I escape in the
neglecting so many precious opportunities. Instead of doing thy will, I have
followed the dictates of mine own carnal heart and corruption. Instead of doing
thy will, I have done mine own. Pardon what is amiss this day; and sanctify
this nights Mercy unto me. Let thy good Angels keep me, let thy Spirit preserve
me, let my very thoughts be toward thee; keep me from vanity, from sin that
foul destructive enemy; and keep me from the Paw of that roaring Lion. Let me
acquiesce and rest in thee, through thy Son Jesus Christ: Amen.

A Prayer for Saturday Morning.
LOrd God, Merciful and Gracious, and abundant in Goodness and Truth; thou have
been pleased to preserve me with thy special Providence from time to time, from
day to day, and night to night: and to keep me under, and in, all straits, in
and amidst the vicissitudes of this World of Encumbrances. O thou have dealt
bountifully with me. Grant that I may not be barren under all, that thy
Providence may not be silent to me. Thou have said, Day unto Day utters
Wisdom, and Night unto Night shows Knowledge. O teach me by all. Let every
Mornings Mercy, and every Evenings Mercy, and every Days Mercy, be of much use
unto me; yea let all Seasons be advantageous to me. Let time be improved by me
for God, for which end all Time was given to Man. Lord direct me in all my
Affairs this day, counsel me in all my Concerns, prosper me in all my Designs;
strengthen me in all my undertakings: and grant that as thou renewest my
strength, by rest and sleep, thou also may renew me in the spirit of my
mind: let not my heart be set upon the world, as to draw my assections from
thee; nor let the cares of the world prevent me in the care for my Soul.
Mortify all my corruptions in me, for me; rectify my Judgment; mortify my
Will, change my Nature, illuminate my Understanding, and transform me to the
Image of God. Grant these, and what thou in thy wisdom know necessary for
me, through Christ Jesus. Amen.

A Prayer for Saturday Evening.
HOly Lord, what great cause have I to bless thee, that thou have pleased to
preserve me all this week, and keep me in the midst of all the vicissitudes of
this sickle and unconstant world; and admittest me yet again to come before
thee by way of duty. Grant that I may not look upon it as a Duty only, but as a
Privilege, and that a great one, a Privilege that many enjoy not. And what am
I more than they? I have been guilty of sins both for quantity and quality, it
may be, that they were never guilty of: Opardon me, that I can be no more
thankful for, nor profitable in the enjoyment of the same. Work in me, Lord, a
more active frame of spirit, that I may bring more honor to thy Name: let the
fruits of Grace, spring more apparently in my life. Let thy Word teach me, thy
Spirit guide and sanctify me, thy Son redeem me, thy Power preserve me, and
thy Providence sustain me: Yea, let all work together for the best for me.
Pardon the sins of this week past, and grant that they may not interrupt the
benefit of thy day to come, if it shall please thee to bring me to the
opportunity of it. Qualify me and prepare me for such a work as thy Sabbath
expects from me, according to the preparation of thy Sanctuary; and being
prepared I may meet with thy Self: let thy Word be sweet to my Soul, let it
descend as rain upon the new-mown Grass; let it water my dry and parched Soul;
and let the influences of thy Spirit accompany it, that it may be effectual to
the saving of my Soul. Pardon the sins of this day, of this present duty, and
all my life, and accept my imperfection in the perfection of Christ. Amen.

Of the SABBATH.
1. WHat the Sabbath is? and how many-fold it is? 2. Of what use it is to us
Christians? 3. Why it was appointed? 4. What are the Works to be done, or
omitted?
1. As to the first, What the Sabbath is?

The Sabbath amongst the Hebrews is called Schabbat, Schebbet, or Schabbathon,
that is, a Cessation, vacation from labor, or rest. Moreover, it is called a
Day, by God devoted for his Worship, and that for four Reasons: 1. Because God
on that day rested from his work of Creation, although not from his Work of
Providence. 2. Because that the Sabbath is the Image or Representative of that
spiritual and future Rest from sin. 3. Because on this day we ought to rest
from our Oeconomicks, from our Household Affairs, that God might employ us in
his Work. 4. Because that our Servants, and laboring Beasts might rest on that
Day.

2. Duplex enim est Sabbathum, the Sabbath is twofold: 1. Moral and Internal,
or 2. Ceremonial, or External. First, Moral and Internal, or Spiritual, and
that is the desire of the knowledge of God and his Works, to the end that we
may avoid sin, and serve God both in word and deed. In a word, It is an
abstaining from sin, and exercising the Works of God, and worshipping him,
Isai. 66.23.

Secondly, Ceremonial, or External, and that is an appointed, and set time;
separate in the Church, for the ministration of the Sacraments, and dispensing
the Word, and other things appointed of God himself; and this is either
Mediately or Immediately from God himself, appointed and laid down to the
Church in the Old Testament; which also is diverse.

1. A Sabbath of days, which is every Seventh day of the Week, peculiarly so
called, because of God's resting from his Creation work, and for his people to
rest on. Thence by the Hebrews by a Synecdoche, the whole week was called
Sabbathum, or Sabbatha, etc.

2. A Sabbath of Months, Neomeniae (viz.) (...), nova Luna, the time of the New
Moon.

3. A Sabbath of Years (viz.) every Seventh year, in which the Jewish people
were not to sow their ground, Lev. 2.3, 4, 26, 35. Lev. 25.8.

2. More Mediate, or external, which God appointed by his Church in the New
Testament, which is the first day of the week, namely, the Lords Day; which was
observed by the Christian Church from the time of the Apostles, instead of the
seventh day, and that in respect of the Resurrection of Christ.

2. As to the second (viz.) of what use the Sabbath is to Christians?

The Sabbath from the beginning was appointed by God, to the end that Man by
God's Example, might rest from all his Works, especially from sin; and
afterward was renewed in the Mosaical Law, to the end God might show, that yet
he would honor the Sabbath more, in sanctifying it to his Church; namely, that
he would forgive their sins, and receive them into his favor, by the Messiah
promised to their Fathers, and that to be exhibited or held forth in his time;
and this may serve for a Reason, why the Ceremonial Sabbath ( viz. the Seventh
day is abolished; wherein is represented the bounty of the Messiah, and also
puts us in mind of his Offices; upon which acccount all the rest of the
Sacraments, Sacrifices, and Ceremonies instituted before and after the Law,
were abolished by the coming of Christ; notwithstanding this Sabbath's
abrogation in the New Testament, yet the Moral Sabbath is permanent, and is of
great use to us; namely, that we might have a certain time appointed for the
work and service of God: it being no less necessary that a certain day be
instituted now, in the Christian, as well as formerly in the Jewish Church, for
the dispensing of the Word, and administering, publicly, the Sacraments of God.

Moreover, we are not limited to any day of the week strictly, as some will
have it, as the third, fourth, or fifth, or any other; and therefore the
Apostolical Church being free by the gift of, or if you will, by that liberty
freely bestowed by Christ, for distinction sake, to wit, between them and the
Jewish Synagogue, they used the First day for the Seventh; for this probable
Reason, that on that day of Christ's Resurrection, our spiritual and internal
Sabbath was begun in us. In a word, we are bound to a Ceremonial Sabbath, in
genere, sed non in specie; that is, that we ought to have a day wherein the
Church may be taught, and the Sacraments administered, yet limited to no certain
day.

Obj. 1. The Decalogue is a perpetual Law (may some say) The Command concerning
the Sabbath is of the Decalogue, therefore the Law is perpetual.

Resp. True. The Decalogue is perpetual as it is Moral, but the Appendices or
Determinations of Moral Commands, in respect of signification, were only to be
kept till the coming of Christ.

Obj. 2. The Precepts of the Decalogue belong to all: This is a Precept of the
Decalogue, therefore this belongs to all.

Resp. Granted, as touching its Morality; but it is also Ceremonial in part,
and so it does not belong to us nisi quo ad genus. The Reasons are evident. 1.
Sr. Paul says, Col. 2.16. Let none judge you in meat or in drink, or in
respect of an holy day, or of the New Moon, or of the Sabhath. 2. The Apostles
themselves changed the Seventhdays Sabbath. 3. From the end of the Law, it was
a Type of things to be fulfilled by Christ (to wit) of Sanctification, etc. the
Type must needs be abrogated, the thing typified being produced.

Obj. 3. The Lord says of the Sabbath, That it is a sign for ever between him
and the children of Israel. Therefore the Sabbath is not to be abolished.

Resp. The Ceremonial Sabbath is perpetual, until Christ, which is the end of
Ceremonies. 2. The Sabbath is eternal quo ad rem significatam, which is a
cessation from sin, and rest in God; and so of all other Types in the Old
Testament; yea, the Kingdom of David, which was destroyed at the coming of the
Messiah.

Obj. 4. The Laws given before Moses 's time, were immutable: The Seventh-days
Sabbath was instituted before Moses 's: Therefore the Sevenths-days Sabbath is
immutable, provided that we assent that Moses 's Laws were mutable.

Resp. It Is only true in the Moral Law; it is denied in the Ceremonial. These
Types before Moses showing the bounty of the Messiah, were abolisht at his
coming; as Circumcision given to Abraham. In like manner, the Sacrifices
either commanded to our first Parents, or practiced by them.

Object. 5. The Laws given by God before the Fall, were not Types of the
Bounties of Christ, all grant; the promise of the Messiah being not as then
given: although the condition of the whole humane race was one and the same.
The Seventh days Sabbath was instituted before the Fall of Mankind: therefore
it is universal and perpetual.

Resp. Per distinctionem materiis, which is true concerning the Moral Law;
whose natural knowledge was imprinted in the mind of man in the Creation; but
not concerning the Seventh day Sabbaths Ceremony; which after the fall, in the
Mosaical Law, is made a type of the benefits of the Messiah. And besides all
this, other Ceremonies, whether instituted before or after, by the Messiah were
made obnoctious to change; for God will not let them remain under the shaddows,
the things themselves being exhibited.

3. What are the causes of the institution of the Sabbath?

1. For the Public Worship of God in his Church. 2. For the preservation of
the Ecclesiastical Ministry, which teaches what we are to believe, concerning
God, and what duty God requires of us. 3. That the type in the Old, might
denote, or represent, the spiritual in the New, Testament; Ezekiel. 20.12. 4. That
there might be an ordinary exercise of Prayer, of Confession, and of Obedience
toward God. 5. By reason of the Seventh days circumstance, to wit, that it
might put us in mind both of our great Creation and Redemption Work. 6. That on
that day the greatest Works of Liberality and Benignity might be exercised
toward our Neighbor. 7. Because of that Corporal Rest of both Man and Beast,
of Bruits indeed, because of Man. 8. That the Israelites might be known by this
mark from other Countries.
4. What are the Works of the Sabbath, commanded or forbidden? Or how the
Sabbath is kept or violated?

1. The Sabbath is sanctified, when Works are done, and holily observed, which
God has commanded. 2. The Sabbath is profaned, when Works are either neglected
or abused in the use of them; or hindered by a profane violence.
The Works whereby the Sabbath is either sanctified or profaned, are these:

1. First, Rightly to instruct the Church concerning God (viz.) What he is,
and, What his Will is; (viz.) What Duties, either Negative or Affirmative, he
requires of man.

On the contrary, 1. Neglect of Public or Private Instruction; Isa. 56.10. 2.
Depravation, or Diminution of the Doctrine that ought to be taught; Ezekiel. 34.2.
2 Cor. 2.17.

3. Secondly, Administering the Sacraments according to Divine Institution.
Unto, which we ought to come, being lawfully called, by the Ministers of the
Church, as the Vicegerents of God; and that especially on the Lords Day.

On the contrary, Omitting, or neglecting instructing the Church, to use the
Sacraments, and an illegal Administration of the same; viz. By a detracting
from, or adding to, the Essentials of Worship, appointed of God; or any thing
in them: or excluding any that ought to come to receive, or partake, or to
encourage those that ought not; or not to teach the lawful use of them.

3. Thirdly, Diligently to learn the True Doctrine: That is to attend on, and
hear, the Doctrine of God; 1 Timothy 4.16. and daily to meditate in the same.

The Contraries, 1. Contempt or neglect of the Doctrine, by either being absent
at Assemblies, or not regarding the Ministers, or not meditating on, or
inquiring into the Doctrine of Christ. 2. Neglect of knowing the Doctrine,
either by Ministers or people. 3. Curiosities, either by prying into Gods
secrets, or unnecessary things, or novelties; Luke 12 48. Prove. 25.27. 1 Timothy
4.7. 2 Timothy 4.3. Tit. 3.9.

4. Fourthly, To use the Sacraments according to Divine instruction; Acts 20.7.

Repugnants to this. 1. The omission or contempt of the Sacraments. 2.
Profanation of the Sacraments; when they are either used not after the same
way, or not by them whom God has instituted. 3. Asuperstitious use of them.

5. Fifthly. Invocation of God publicly: Wherein we adjoyn confession, or
giving of thanks, and our desires with the Church.

Repugnants. 1. Neglect of Prayers of the Church. 2. Hypocrisy in Prayers of
the Church, without attention or affection. 3. A recitation of Prayers that
edify not; 1 Cor. 14.17.

6. Sixthly, Charity and Bounty toward the Poor, that is giving Alms, or doing
works of Mercy toward the Needy, with delight and singleness of heart.

Repugnants. 1. Neglect or contempt of the Poor. 2. Ostentation and show in
giving, which Christ condemns.

7. Seventhly, Honor of the Ecclesiastical Ministry, which comprehends, 1.
Reverence. 2. Love. 3. Obediencee. 4. Gratitude. 5. (...), or Equity in bearing
with the infirmities of Ministers.

Family Prayers For every day in the WEEK.
A Prayer for the Sabbath.
Omost holy, great, and glorious God; thou that art the rest of thy poor
Creatures; the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, whom thou have instituted Lord
of the Sabbath; in whose strength we desire to approach thy holy presence, this
thy holy Sabbath Day, a day of thy own appointment, wherein thou will be found
in an especial manner: and as it is to be a day of rest for all flesh, after
thine own institution, Lord help us not only to rest from our ordinary Labors
and Employments, but from any thing that may be disconsonant to thy Will and
Word; not doing our own actions, nor speaking our own words, nor thinking our
own thoughts; that thereby we (being prepared according to the preparation of
thy Sanctuary) may be in the Spirit on the Lords Day, to meet with thee, and by
meeting with thee, we may hear thee communicate some sweet truth to us, whereby
we may be drawn nigher to thy self, by the blood of Christ. And seeing thou
wast pleased, Lord, to honor this day, by the Resurrection of our blessed
Redeemer; let us have more evidence from thy self this day, that we are risen
with him, having conquered by him Death, Grave, Hell, and Sin.

O let us see him whom our sins have pierced, that we by faith may mortify
that that crucified him, and let us have a glimpse of our beloved in his glory;
and let us this day hearken to his voice, that we may know to love what he
loves, and hate what he hates; to be in love with sanctity and holiness, and to
be at enmity with every similitude of sin, which will hinder our services, this
day, in his name, to be as a sweet smell in Gods Nostrils. Help us to hold fast
our hope and confidence in God unto the end; and let that considence be a
perfect assurance that we have an interest in Jesus. Let the word preached be
mixed with says, let it be quick and powerful, and piercing, that it may
accomplish that end for which it was sent. Let not Satan come and catch away
the Seed; but O that it may be as seed sown in good and honest hearts, bringing
forth fruit with patience, meet for repentance; and let it be for the weakening
of sin, but for the strengthening of faith and grace. Let thy Word be as Manna
for our poor Souls to feed upon, for the week to come, that thereby we may grow
up in grace as we grow in years. Let thy word be a suitable word unto every one
of our conditions; and come thou into our Souls with it, with the freest
influence of thy Spirit, that we may of a truth meet with God, communicating of
himself unto us, by his Word and Spirit.

And as the Soul is separated from the Body by Death, so let sin be separated
from our Souls by thy Word and Spirit. O let it be separate from our Souls, or
else it will separate the Souls of us poor Creatures from God. Let thy
Minister, who is thy Messenger, be strengthened, and touch his tongue with a
coal from thine Altar, that he may preach experimental truth, to the hearts of
us poor Creatures, that desire to attend on thine Ordinances. O let us taste
and see how gracious the Lord is; and let us have cause to say, It is good to
draw nigh to God in his own Ordinances, on his own Day. And let this day of
rest be a certain pledge of an eternal rest, purchased by our great high
Priest, who is preparing a place for his select ones: O that this thy day may
be spent in the performances of holy duties, in praise and thanksgiving, the
work of thine appointment. Unvail some secret this day; let us be drawn nigher
every day unto thy self. Let us be so enlightened, that sin may decay, and
grace may be renewed in us. Let us come hungering and thursting after Spiritual
Food, for our Souls; so that in the close of this day, we by a grounded
experience may say, that God has satisfied our hungring Souls, with refreshing
influences from Heaven, through the Blood of Jesus Christ: in whose words we
conclude our imperfect requests, as he himself has taught us; saying, Our
Father, etc.

An Evening Prayer for the Sabbath.
MOst Holy, and ever Blessed Lord God, who fillest Heaven and Earth with thy
presence; fill the Souls of thy poor empty Creatures, with the presence of thy
Grace, and let thy good Spirit bring to our remembrance the truths that we by
thy providence have heard this thy day, that we may lay it up in our hearts,
and practice it in our lives; that we may be of those blessed ones, that hear
thy word and keep it, and bring forth fruit in abundance; and let it take root
in our hearts downward, and bring forth fruit upward. Establish our Souls in
the practice of Holiness, without which we can never come to see thy self: and
let the power of sin be weakened, but let Grace be strengthened every day.
Pardon that unpreparedness that we have intruded into thy presence with, and
that irreverence whilst under thy Ordinances; and that carelessness after, that
we all have been guilty of. Pardon our forgetfulness, and pardon our
imperfection, in the perfection of Christ; our weakness in the strength of
Christ; that thereby we may find acceptance with thee, who art all fullness, and
in whose hands is all perfection. Fill our Souls with the fullness of God, and
let the bedewings of thy Spirit and Word, cause us to grow in our spiritual
stature. Help us to prize the privilege of the Gospel at an inestimable rate,
and give us repentance from dead works, that we may be changed from darkness
unto light, and from the power of sin unto God.

And help us to manifest in our lives and conversation what is the hope of our
calling, that we may be in Heaven whilst on Earth. Pardon the sins of our holy
things, sins of omission and commission; sins against thy Law, and sins against
thy Gospel. Give us Wisdom to direct and teach us, Righteousness to establish
us; Redemption to deliver us from the jaws of Sin and Hell. Strengthen our weak
Faith, enlarge our shallow Capacities, quiet our disturbed Consciences, tread
down Satan under our feet, and subjugate our Necks under thy Yoke; and help us
to resign our selves to thy Will, and fit us for Eternity at last, that after
these Sabbaths be ended here, we may begin an everlasting Sabbath with the God
of Sabbaths, where we shall admire thy self in Christ; in whose Name we
conclude our imperfect requests, in his own words, as he has taught us;
saying, Our Father, etc.

A Prayer for Monday Morning.
BLessed Lord, thou renewest thy mercies every Morning, it is of thy mercy that
one day more is added to us poor Creatures: Thou art he on whom depends our
being, rest, life, and all thou has been pleased to cause us to acquiesce in,
and under thy protection for our refreshment. O Lord preserve us this day under
the shadow of thy wing, and keep us in thy ways; and let thy watchful
providence be an instigation to an holy walking, and to redeem the time, seeing
the days are evil; and to live as ever before the Eye of thy Allseeing
Providence. Keep us from sin, and enable us to live with thankful hearts,
bearing in mind the acts of thy Spirit, and the daily Mercies we enjoy; help us
to show a thankfulness for Mercies received, and humility for and under
Afflictions. Let the bitterness of Sin, and the loveliness of Holiness make
deep impression on the hearts of thy poor Creatures. Let the great work of
Salvation be much meditated upon, that that work daily may be propagated by us,
with fear and trembling. Let union and communion with Christ be our great
design. Let our Natures be changed. Deliver us from a dark understanding and
hardness of heart, stupid consciences, together with unmortisied wills. Help us
to be wise for the future, wherein we have done foolishly, and help us wisely
to improve our Talents in every opportunity. Let thy mercies constrain us to
love, fear, and obey thee. Subdue us wholly to thy self, that our affections
may be elevated from the Earth, and transplanted into Heaven. Help us in every
transaction in our lives, to consider that with thee every action is poised,
and thoughts, words, and works reviewed and taken notice of. O that the affairs
of this day, and all the week to come, may be no obstruction to the work of our
immortal Souls. And grant that every day that passes over our heads, we may be
a step nearer to thy self. Preserve us by thy Grace and Spirit, until it shall
be thy will to translate us into that Glory, that is prepared for them that
wait for the coming of Jesus Christ. Amen.

A Prayer for Monday Evening.
MOst Holy, Eternal, and ever Blessed Lord God, in whom all our springs are; it
is good to draw nigh to thy self: Thou that never slumberest nor sleep,
suffer us not to sleep the sleep of Death. The Day thou have appointed for Man
to Labor in, and the Night for Man to Rest; into thy hands we commit our
selves, and desire to acquiesce in thee. Let us be put in mind of the
everlasting rest, by every nights rest we enjoy. Help us to make it our
business to do our great work we have to do, before the night of Death and the
Grave overtake us. O let not opportunities neglected and misspent, be hindrances
of the present and future enjoyments and opportunities. Let not the abuse of
time extinguish, diminish, or shorten our time. Let not sin prevent our
mercies; neither let the guilt of sin, nor punishment for the same, overtake us
at the same time. Let not the sins of the day past mercies, prevent us in night
mercies, but let them all be pardoned in the Blood of Jesus. Preserve us this
night; and let the mercies of the night fit us for an humble walking with thee
the day following: that nights mercies and days mercies may be of such use unto
us, that we by both may be fitted for an enjoyment of thy self, both here and
hereafter. Keep us from the vanity of our minds. Keep us from all our Enemies,
Spiritual and Corporal; let the roaring Lion be chained up, that goes about
seeking whom he may devour, and let us acquiesce under the shadow of thy wings,
that we may both lie down and rise again in peace; knowing the Lord sustains
us, for the sake of him that procures us all our happiness, our mercies, and
blessings. Amen.

A Prayer for Tuesday Morning.
HOly God, it is not the least of thy mercies, that thou command us to seek
thee; let us not think it a burden but a privilege, that we are admited in way
of duty to call on thee, not only to beg mercies of thee, but to give thee
thanks for mercies received: We thank thee, that thou out of thy Benignity have
been pleased to afford us thy providential protection this night past, wherein
we are brought to a farther experience of thy love. Let every mercy be farther
engagements to praise thee. Thou, our Lord, have made us to sleep in safety,
and have made us to experience, that unless thou keep the City, the Watchmen
watch in vain; and that it is the blessing of thee our God, that has preserved
us this night past. O Lord, Let us in all our undertakings this day, know, that
it is not rising up early, and sitting up late, and eating the Bread of
carefulness, that will do, only the Lord that blesses what we undertake. O
Lord, Act for us this day, and help us in all that we do, that it may be to thy
praise. O that our hearts and lives might speak forth thy praise, for the
renovation of mercies every morning; and that our eyes may be toward thy self
for all our strength, in all our affairs this day; that whatsoever we do, all
may be to the praise of our God. Let our work prosper in our hands, and let us
find that God acts for us. Help us to observe all the passages of thy
providence, that every day we may experience more of thy power, that thereby
we may be drawn out to fear thee, and say, surely the Lord is God, and that he
has made us, and not we our selves; and that he makes all work together for the
best, to them that love him. O bless us in the beginning, and in the close of
this day; bless us in our goings out and comings in; bless us in our labors.
Let our pains and diligence, put us in mind of our great work; our industry for
terrestrial put us in mind of celestial gain; and help us with all our gettings
to get understanding; that we may be wise for our selves. Deliver us from the
infection of sin, and enable us to keep our selves spotless from covetousness,
or any thing that is disconsonant to thy will in Christ. Amen.

A Prayer for Tuesday Evening.
MOst gracious Lord, thou art he, and there is none else. Thou hear the
Prayers of poor Creatures, at all times, and upon all occasions, thou art near
and ready to incline thine ear, and to have mercy, and forgive all the sinful
miscarriages of thy poor Creatures. Truly thou art good and do good, our
Souls experience it every day; thou art slow to anger, and of great kindness,
and repentest thee of the evil, O that we could walk so closely with thee as
never to offend thee. To whom Lord belongs praises, but to thine own self, who
have in all our concerts been our Agent for us. O Lord, let our Souls delight
in thy self. Let it be our recreation to do thy will. And now, O Lord, we would
commit our selves into thy hand, desiring thy Providence to keep us, thy Spirit
to bless us, that whether sleeping or waking, we may be thine. Refresh these
frail Bodies of ours with quiet rest; that our Bodies being refreshed, we may
both with Soul and Body, which are thine, sing forth thy praises. Help us to
meditate upon thy truths, even on our Beds; that we may spend many watchful
hours, about the great concerns of our everlasting Souls. And help us, laying
our Heads to our Pillows, to sanctify thee in our hearts; and when we awake
the next morning, we may awake in the same manner; knowing that Satan is ready
to suggest some temptation, and thereby steal away our hearts; making the
World, or the Flesh, our objects. Help us always to study most to please God,
and displease Satan; and to give Satan no ground, knowing that so long as we
resist him, he, thou Lord, have said, shall sly from us. Let us rest in thy
self, seeing thy Name is a strong Tower, and they that flee into it are safe
from sins dominion, keep us from Satan's temptations, defend us from our evil
hearts, secure us, and sanctify our hearts and send a bedewing of thy holy
Spirit upon us, to sweeten our troubles, and sanctify our mercies in Christ
Jesus. Amen.

A Prayer for Wednesday Morning.
HEavenly Father, by whom, and from whom, all our strong consolations, through
Grace, are enjoyed by us worthless Creatures; sleeping and waking, we are
secured from the terrors of the night, and those amazements, wherewith thou
sometimes have amazed, them that were better than our selves are. O save us by
thy Grace and prepare us for Glory; deliver us from the sinners cursed
questions, What is the Almighty that we should serve him? Or, What profit shall
we have if we pray unto him? How often are their Candles put out. Give us grace
to live to thee, showing the truth of Grace, by dealing righteously toward all
men, that so (keeping the faith in purity of conscience, having our hope and
heart fixed on thy self) we may rejoice in, and call upon thy Name, who only
art a present help in time of trouble. Preserve us in this wilderness the
World, until we shall attain to the Heavenly Canaan. O let our Souls be more
and more in love with Holiness, to live the Life of Christ, and the Life of the
Righteous, that we may die the Death of the Righteous. Deliver us from a vain
and darkened Understanding, and from working Uncleanness with greediness. Enable
us to put off, as touching our Conversation, the Old man, and put on the New
Man, being renewed in the spirit of our Minds, that we may be created after the
Image of God, in Righteousness and true Holiness. Prepare us for another Life,
and let not one day pass over our heads without some serious meditations of
Eternity; how soon it may be we cannot tell ere we may launch into its Ocean,
that bankless Sea; and then woe unto us if our Ship be unsound. Let these
thoughts make us careful about our Souls. Help us to use the things of this
transitory World, but as journey necessaries to a permanent and lasting World;
but let us be truly desirous of the permanent Riches, with an insatiable
desire. Make us wise Merchants for that durable riches that none can rob us of.
Now, Lord, pardon our sins, and accept our services in Chrst; to whom with
thee, and thy Eternal Spirit, be praises. Amen.

A Prayer for Wednesday Evening.
GLorious and most Righteous Lord, for ever to be admired of all thy Saints;
thy ways are ways of love and mercy, thy daily care to thy people do attest it:
we are wonderfully engaged to offer thee praise, both with hearts and voices.
Accept of our thanks and praises, as well as prayers, for an Evening Sacrifice;
and take charge of us we beseech thee. Let us not be disappointed of our hopes.
Let not Sin nor Satan molest us in the comforts of this night. Let not the
sins of the day past provoke thee, or prevent us in thy favors to usward. Let
us rest in the assurance of thy favor, sealed by thy good Spirit upon our
hearts; that we be not left comfortless: and grant, that though our Bodily Eyes
be closed with sleep, yet let our Spiritual Eyes (to wit) the Eyes of Faith,
continually watch. Let thy work of Grace begun in us, be daily strengthened.
Let the power of sin decay, but the power of Grace revive. Enable us to rise
with Christ, and to seek those things that are above, that we may glorify thee
here, by finishing the race that is set before us. Keep us from abusing or
slighting thy Mercies and Judgemnts, and watch over us for good. Let not our
self-flattery prove to us soul-mockery. Make us faithful rather than formal, in
all our duties toward thee. Deliver us from worldly mindedness, the great
enemy to real holiness. Give us the grace of humiliation for sin, and the
spirit of reformation from sin. O suffer us not to sin against Mercy, lest we
lose our best friend. O let the service of God, which is perfect freedom, free
us from the service of sin. Now unto him that is able to keep us, be Glory for
ever. Amen.

A Prayer for Thursday Morning.
HOly, and Eternal, Glorious, Lord God, infinite are thy Mercies to us ward,
thy patience and long suffering are exceeding great, in regard of our continued
provocations, even in our thoughts, which are only evil, and that continually;
our words also have been stout against thee, nothing but infinite mercy could
forbear such wretches: blessed be our God that has laid help, yea, our help,
upon one that is mighty to save all those that come unto God by him. O whither
should such sinners go, but to him that has the Keys of Heli and Death; that
calls to the weary and heavy laden, to come to him and accept of ease and rest.
O Lord draw us, that we may run after thee; that we may run the way
everlasting, the way of thy commands, and be followers of that which is good;
hating the Garments spotted by the Flesh: building up our selves in the most
holy faith. Enable us, O our God, with all diligence to make our Calling and
Election sure, adding to our Faith Virtue, and to Virtue Knowledge, and to
Knowledge Temperance, and to Temperance Patience, and to Patience Godliness,
and to Godliness Brotherly Kindness, and to Brotherly Kindness Charity: O let
these Graces shine and abound in us, that we may neither be barren nor
unfruitful. Give us precious faith in our Lord Jesus, who has washed and
quickened us. Make us the complete Workman-ship of Christ Jesus, created unto
good works. Sanctify us through thy Truth; thy Word is Truth: and give us that
Spirit that may guide us into all Truth. Lead us this day and all the rest of
our lives, by thy Grace; and at last bring us to Glory; through Christ Jesus
our Lord. Amen.

A Prayer for Thursday Evening.
MOst gracious Lord, thou art the great preserver of those that trust in thy
Promises, and observe thy Precepts. Blessed be thy holy Name for this day past,
that thou have kept us from the dangers of this day, incident to us. Blessed be
thou Lord, for all thy Providence and Provision; for Health and Strength, Food
and Raiment, for the present Comforts of this Life, and the hopes of a future.
Let all our sins be pardoned, for the sake of our Lord, who only is worthy. O
vouchsafe to continue thy goodness this night, that we may receive that
refreshment that is for tried ones. Watch over us for good, and let a quiet and
peaceable rest fit us for our Calling, according to thy will. Help us to live
by Faith, and to walk by Faith, that we may have that Peace that none can take
away. Let us die daily to sin: and be strengthened daily with all might in the
inward man. Help us to consider the effects of sin is shame, and the wages of
sin is death. Give us the comforts of our being in Christ, that we may
beassured that we are freed from condemnation, by our christian conversation,
who walk not after the Flesh but after the Spirit. O let thy Spirit so lead us,
that it may be our testimony that we are thine. Let all that we suffer here, be
an evidence of that Glory to be revealed in us. Let all things work together
for the best. Let neither tribulation, or distress, or persecution, or famine,
or nakedness, or peril, or sword, be able to prevail against us, so as to
separate us from the love of God, which is in Christ, for whom we bless thee,
and to whom be praises for ever- Amen.

A Prayer for Friday Morning.
MOst Holy, and most gracious Lord, thou art near unto all that call upon thee
in truth, and fulfillest the desires of those that fear thee. Thou art good and
do good, thy mercies are over all thy works. Blessed be the Lord for his
refreshing mercies of the last night. Day unto day, and night unto night, show
forth thy tenderness over us by thy providence and provision. O deliver us
from all sins and evil; for thine is the Kingdom, the Power, and the Glory.
Help us to live blameless, with those with whom we have to deal. O give us
wisdom to remember our later end. Let us remember the approaching of Eternity,
on which felicity, or eternal misery, attends. O Lord increase our Faith, and
settle us in that Faith that is precious and pure; that by it we may be able to
resist the Devil, and overcome and conquer the World and the Flesh, that it may
be the substance of things not seen; and that thereby we may be like Noah, to
prepare an Ark against a Deluge, condemning the World. O give us the trying
Faith of Abraham, the living Faith of dying Jacob, and the living Faith of
Moses, to choose affliction rather than sin, that we may esteem the reproach of
Christ the greatest riches; that we may by that Faith obtain Promises, work
Righteousness. Now the God of Peace, that brought again our Lord Jesus Christ,
the great Shepherd, through the everlasting Covenant, keep us. Amen.

A Prayer for Friday Evening.
GReat and glorious Lord, in Jesus Christ a tender Father to humble and
penitent sinners; let conscience of duty and not custom, attend our approaches
unto thee the Lord of Life and Glory, thy mercies of this day are more than we
can conceive, but the requitals we have made, how inequivolent are they. How
seldom did we look up to thee, that always see us; at what a low ebb are our
thoughts of thee. O lay our hearts as low, and much lower in reference to our
selves. Let us not, O our God, find our return of mercies according to our
miscarriages: let us not thereby be disappointed of our rest and refreshment,
this approaching night. Blessed be thy Name, that thou have laid help on one
that is able to save. O save us by him; let his Blood plead, and his Person
satisfy, and let him prevail for us, and his offering up of himself clear us.
Lord we believe, help our unbelief, O that our hearts were more heavenly and
more removed from this drossie earth, that we might in nothing be careful. O
help us to be good and do good, in our Generation. Help us to choose affliction
rather than sin, that we may follow the great high Priest of our Profession, by
the Cross to the Crown, and by the Grave to Glory. Mind us of our end, and give
us wisdom to consider in this day of ours, the things that belong to our peace,
before they be hid from our eyes; and seeing our time is but short, let our
zeal be the greater. Let the blessing pronounced in the Mount, be our portion.
Let us both be pure and poor in spirit. Give us to mourn for sin, that we may
be comforted. Let us be armed with meekness, and hungering, and thirsting after
righteousness; and satisfy us. Let mercifulness, peace, and sufferings for
righteousness sake, comfort us here and hereafter, in and through Jesus Christ;
in whose Name we farther call on thee, in his own words: Our Father, etc.

A Prayer for Saturday Morning.
MOst holy, most glorious Lord, the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ,
for whose sake alone we beg pardon for all our sins, secret and known, of
ignorance or knowledge, of youth or riper years, against thy Law or Gospel.
Deliver thy poor Creatures from all those curses denounced against sin and
sinners. None ever confessed and forsook sin, but found mercy. O sanctify us
throughout with thy holy Spirit, that we may live the life of faith, and not of
sin, being assured that it shall go well with the righteous; they shall eat the
fruit of their doings. Blessed Lord, give us grace to walk worthy the mercies
of the last nights refreshments. Let thy good providence be over us this day;
preserve us in our concerns; Deliver us both Souls and Bodies, that desire to
fear thy holy Name that we may be praising the riches of thy free grace. Let us
be blessed in our goings out and comings in. Let thy glory be our greatest
design in whatsoever we undertake. Prepare us for our later end. and our great
account; and let Eternity be always eyed by us. Let our thoughts. words and
actions, be considered and poised. Let every day put us in mind of the great
day, that in every day we may be drawn a step nigher unto Christ our Redeemer,
in whom, and for whom, we bless thee for ever. Amen.

A Prayer for Saturday Evening.
O Most blessed Lord, thou art acquainted with our down-lying and uprising, and
art near to all them that call on thee in truth and sincerity. Let not iniquity
prevail over us. Let thy grace be sufficient for us, against sin, and Satan's
wiles; and help us to be thankful both in heart and life, for what thou art
pleased to bestow upon us, by way of providence. Help us in time of health to
prepare for sickness and death; in time of plenty to prepare for want, and to
lay up a store of never sading treasure. Sanctify both days labor and nights
rest; and pardon the sins of the whole week past, and help us in thy day
following, to be so sitted and qualified, that we may be as diligent for thee
as we have been for our selves; that it may be a day of rejoicing. Let it be
such a Sabbath, as that it may be an earnest of an eternal Sabbath, where we
shall rejoice and praise thee for ever. Grant that by practicing holiness, we
may enjoy happiness; seeing that it must and shall go well with the Godly;
their great evils shall be removed, and sin pardoned, the mercy of mercies: he
cannot be miserable, who has a God so merciful, as to pardon his sin. O grant
us this mercy, what ever else thou deny; thy will be done for outward comforts,
so that we by the riches of this thy free grace, have such pardon of sin, as we
be not disturbed in inward comforts. Grant that by living to thee here we may
enjoy thee hereafter. Let us be content with tossings, so that we may enjoy the
desired Haven; nay, though our Ship ( viz.) this Body breaks, let us, that is
our Souls, be secured in the Lord Ch^^^^ Let our crosses end in comforts, our
miseries in matchless joys, our tears in true tunes for Heaven; and let our
conquest over all end in the praise of our great Captain. All these, and what
thou know may better fit us for thy self, grant, for thy promise, and for
thy Sons sake; to whom be Eternal Glory. Amen.

A Prayer for a Woman with-child, before her time of Delivery.
MOst Holy Lord, Blessed be thy great Name, for thy mercy showed to thine
Handmaid; thou have given her good hopes, through grace, to become a joyful
Mother; thou art Righteous in all thy ways; thy threat for sin is just, that in
sorrow the Woman should bring forth: yet thou of thy great mercy have taken off
from me the reproach of Woman, and have given me strength to conceive, and to
nourish it hitherto: O preserve both me and it at the time of Travel. Let me
bring forth, and let the work be completed by thee, by whom Creatures are
wonderfully made. Prepare thy poor Creature by Faith and Prayer for that hour,
that thy Servant and Handmaid, may find help in time of trouble and need. Let
the Midwives Skill and Care be blessed by thee, when she shall be called to do
her Office; thou that art the God of all Grace and Consolation, strengthen the
faith of thine Handmaid, in the hope of thy mercy: Show thy Servant a token
for good, for his sake alone who is worthy, Jesus Christ the Righteous; to whom
be Glory for ever. Amen.

The Midwives Prayer before Delivery.
GRacious Lord, look in mercy upon thine Handmaid, now in extreme pain;
strengthen her faith against all her fears, and bless me thine unworthy
Servant, and make me an instrument of help and comfort to thine Handmaid, in
the hour of trial, in thine hand are the issues of Life and Death, preserve
both Mother and Child; let it be a time of joy, that a Child is Born, and a
Woman Delivered, through thy great mercy; so shall we thy poor Creatures
rejoice in thy Salvation showed to thy Handmaid, and the fruit of her Womb.
Hear and help, for the sake of our Lord Jesus; to whom be praises for ever.
Amen.

The Midwives Prayer after Delivery.
MOst Holy, and most Gracious Lord, praises wait for thee, for those exceeding
abundant favors vouchsafed to thine Handmaid in the hour of her Distress; for
ever blessed be thy glorious Name, thou alone wast a present help: O perfect
thine own work in her weakness. Blessed be the Lord, for the fruit of the Womb,
that no Member was left out of thy Book, that in all parts it is perfected
without blemish or deformity. Make thine Handmaid a joyful Mother, and
continue her, in her place, and enable her to discharge her duty, to the
comfort of her Relations, and the glory of thy great Name, and the everlasting
joy of her own Soul, when she shall have finished her course; and that alone,
upon the account of Jesus Christ; to whom be Glory for ever. Amen.

The Pained Woman's Prayer in the time of her Travail.
O Righteous Lord, thou art just in all thy ways, thy righteous sentence is
past, the time of sin was the time of punishment; the Woman to bring forth in
sorrow, and the Man to cat his Bread in the sweat of his Brow. Have mercy,
Lord, upon thy distressed Handmaid, in great Pain and Anguish, Fears and
Sorrows; as thou have blessed me with the fruit of the Womb, to conceive and
nourish, until the time of birth; O Lord, now give strength to bring forth, and
let this fruit of my Womb be to thy praise. Thou art a present help in time of
trouble. O blessed Lord, let my life be precious in thy sight, and the fruit of
my Womb, let it live before thee, and let both be vessels of mercy through the
sanctification of thy Spirit; so shall thine Handmaid devote her self to thy
fear, and the fruit of her Womb to thy service. Let me find thy love in Jesus
Christ to support me; for whom, O my Soul, praise his Holy Name. Amen.

The Woman's Prayer after her Delivery.
O Most glorious Lord, thou art good and do good, thou have remembered mercy
to thy Handmaid in the time of her distress; to thy Name be praise for
strength given to bring forth; my life was and is in thine hand, yet thou have
spared it: in the depth of my anguish thy help was at hand. Thou also have
given life to the fruit of my Womb, to thy Name be praises. Give me wisdom to
dispose of thy mercy to thy glory, that I may be useful to thy service; and as
touching the fruit of my Womb, sanctify it, and let it be for the bearing up
of the Name of God in its Generation; let it grow in grace as in years. These
and what things thou know convenient, grant, in the Name of Christ, to whom
be praise for ever. Amen.

Graces Before and After Meat.
Grace before Meat.
MOst Holy Lord, the staff of Bread is in thine hand, it is of thy bounty that
we are daily provided for; let these thy Creatures, ordained for our
nourishment, be received by us with thankful hearts, expressing it in our
lives, that we receiving strength, may return praises to thy self for all;
through Christ Jesus our Lord. Amen.

Grace After Meat.
HOly and blessed Lord, let thy continued mercies and refreshments, from time
to time, engage us to return to thy blessed Majesty, the glory due to thy self,
for them and all other creature comforts wherewith we are supplied; help us to
express our thankfulness in discharging our Callings and Consciences, through
our Lord Jesus Christ. Amen.

An other Grace Before Meat.
HOly and gracious Lord, blessed be thy gracious good providence for all thy
favors daily renewed. O give thy blessing on these thy good Creatures, at this
time, that we are about to receive; that they may nourish and strengthen us,
that we may be bettered by them, and that we may return praise to thy Name;
through Christ Jesus our Lord Amen.

An other Grace After Meat.
HOly Lord, let thy refreshing mercies be an obligation to engage us to a more
holy life, to live to thee who art the fountain of all our enjoyments; thou
give and refreshest us with the blessings of the upper and nether springs,
both spiritual and temporal; help us to improve all, so that thou may have
glory and we may have comfort, in and through Jesus Christ, the purchaser of
all. Amen.

A Prayer in time of Affliction.
HOly and for ever blessed Lord God, thou alone art acquainted with the
condition of thy poor sinful weak Creature, thou that art the Father of
Spirits, and their great Creator; who alone art a present help in time of
trouble, and the God of all consolation; thy poor sinful dust and ashes desires
to look to thee, even to thee alone, seeing thou art alone able to deliver from
trouble; sanctify my trouble and affliction, and support me in and under
affliction; and make all work together for the best: Thou can bring comfort
out of trouble, joy out of sorrow, mirth out of malady, and can make thy Sion
Saints to wait, and to look for help, even from the most improbable means. O
let thy grace be sufficient for me, and help me to trust thy promises, when I
cannot have thy providence. I have sinned greatly, which is the cause of all
my misery; if it were not for sin, I need fear nothing. O let sin die in me,
that grace may abound; and let this chastisement, which at present is grievous,
be, and work for good unto me, that I may say with thy Servant David, It is
good that I have been afflicted. Give me a patient and submissive frame of
Spirit, that I may say with my blessed Savior, Not as I will, but thy will, O
Father of mercy, be done. Let pains temporal, prevent pains eternal. Let the
inner man be strengthened by the weakness of the outward man. Help me in
patience to possess my Soul, with the thoughts of that endless and unspeakable
Glory; and with a sense of the victory over Death and Hell, and all the
encumbrances this side Heaven: with a sanctified expectation after him who is
the procurer of all my happiness, in whom my Soul desires to acquisece, both
here and hereafter. O help me Lord, to sing a new song of praise to that
spotless Lamb, that has not spared to pour out that precious Blood, to
reconcile an angry God to despicable Dust and Clay; to make known an invisible
God, to poor, blind, stupid Creatures: and that mortality might be swallowed up
of life, he was holy, harmless, and undefiled, separate from sinners, to the
end he might fulfill all righteousness; that he might be a meet high Priest, a
sufficient Savior of sinners; who by his own example, left us a pattern of
humility to be submissive to the will of our Father, and to contemn the World,
and to subjugate our selves to his Cross. Oh! holy Father, thou that have said,
them that come unto thee in thy Sons Name, thou will not cast out; that gave
life to poor worthless dying Creatures, ready to drop into Hell; and that life
is thine own Son, that is able to save to the uttermost all that come to him. O
give ability to a poor drooping Creature, that he may recover his strength,
before he go hence and be no more; that I may yet praise thee in the Land of
the living; and that I may regain that precious time that I have been so lavish
of. Redeem my strength, that I may work out my Salvation with fear and
trembling. O sanctify me throughout, and change me, and let me have the New
Creation wrought upon me and in me; that I may yet acknowledge thy great power
in and through thy Son; in whose Name I farther call on thee, in the words of
his own institution, saying, Our Father which art in Heaven, etc.

A Prayer in time of War.
O Holy, Great and Glorious Lord God of Hosts, thou that have of old appeared
for thy Churches and Servants, and that art for ever worthy to be praised; that
have wrought great deliverances for the relieving of them that were in straits,
to the admiration of thy very enemies; by whose power thy Servants have run
through Troops, having thy shield of Salvation: by thy power one has chased a
thousand, and thine enemies hearts have melted away: yea even of the most
valiant: If thou appear for us, Lord, we shall prevail. O be gracious unto us,
and show thy self for us. Give courage and wisdom to all our Commanders and
Soldiers. Gird them with strength, and teach their hands to fight: Direct
their Consultations, prosper their Enterprises; suffer not deserved vengeance
to break out upon us; deliver us not to a merciless enemy: Say unto our Armies,
Let no man's heart fail for fear of neither number nor power of the enemy. Let
all our trust of Victory be in the Lord of Hosts; thou that art Lord of Lords,
and King of Kings. Get thy self Honor in the Destruction of those that are
Peace-Disturbers; let thy hand become glorious, to dash in pieces the most
potent enemies; and in the greatness of thine excellency, overthrow those that
are instigated against us: and let it be known that there is none like unto
thee, that art glorious in Holiness, fearful in Praises; doing Wonders: so
shall we record thy righteous Acts. O help and deliver us, that we may tell thy
Deeds among the Nations, and let not our enemy escape, least they say our own
hands has saved us. Thou the God of Peace grant us Peace here, and everlasting
Peace hereafter; through Jesus Christ. Amen.

A Prayer for Children.
O Most glorious Lord God, insinite in Wisdom and Goodness; thou art the great
Creator, Redeemer, and Preserver of Man; I thy poor Servant bewail my Youth and
time of Vanity: Notwithstanding my Parents care in Education, Instruction, and
Correction, I have sinned greatly against thy self. O pardon also, Lord, my
unthankfulness toward them, for all their Care, Cost, Pains, Cries and Tears,
with respect to my everlasting welfare. O cause me with thankfulness to fear,
love, honor, and obey them, in order to the obedience due to thy self. Lord
keep me from snares of evil company and temptations of the same; and from
youthful lust: and let me be a delight to those that fear thee. Let me be
furnished with treasures of Wisdom and Holiness, and pardon all the sins of my
corrupt heart and life; and be a reconciled Father unto me, and let me be able
to know thee as a God in Covenant; and renew me in the inner Man, in the Spirit
of my Mind. Enlighten my dark understanding, quicken my dead heart, purify my
impure conscience, mortify and rectify my will. Let all my sinful carnal
Love, or rather Lust, be quenched, and vain Pleasures turned into sweet
Delights for God. Hear me in every respect as thou know m^ condition
requires, in the Name of thy dear Son; in whose words I farther call on thee,
Our Father, etc.

A Prayer for Servants.
O Most gracious Lord God, thou art the great preserver of those that truly
trust in thy mercy; deliver us from sin and the bondage of Satan; help us to
obey our Master according to the flesh, with fear and trembling, in singleness
of heart, as unto Christ; not with eye-service, as men pleasers, but as the
servants of Christ, doing the will of our God, with good will from the heart.
Make us submissive and obedient to our Governors; keep us from Self-will and
Pride, from Murmurings and unreverent Speeches, from Falshod, Slothfulness, and
all Deceit, and help us cheerfully and willinglly to do our Duty; as believing
that thou, O Lord, art the avenger of all unfaithful Dealers. O pardon the
neglect of our immortal Souls, and of the great work for which we were Created
and Redeemed. Help us with all our hearts and strength, that we may attain to
the reward of that Glory, prepared for all those that look and long for the
appearance of Christ, and to enjoy his presence with the Angels and Saints in
Glory: and all this we humbly beg and hope for, on the account and merits of
Jesus, in whose own words we farther call on thee, as he has taught us,
saying, Our Father, etc.

A Prayer for a Virgin.
BLessed and Holy Lord, preserve me thy Servant, and give me grace with those
Wise Virgins, to make ready my Lamp and Oil in my Vessel, that at what hour the
Bridegroom shall come, I may be found ready prepared, with those undefiled
Virgins that follow the Lamb. Deliver me from the sins of Pride, that common
sin, far different from that Plainness, Simplicity and Modesty of old. O help
me, thy Servant, to walk circumspectly. O cleanse and purge me, keep me
blameless; cause me to hate the Garment spotted by the Flesh: let the Pride of
the Daughters of Jerusalem, so severely threatened, awake those that tread in
their steps, they were haughty, and walked with stretched-out Necks, and
wandering Eyes, and mincing as they went; whose punishment was greater than the
punishment of Sodom. O holy Lord, open mine Eyes, that I may see the evil of
that sin, for whom Young Men and Virgins were slain with the Sword; the Virgins
were trodden down as in a Wine Press. O give me chastity of mind and purity of
heart, and let the inward man have the chief adorning. Let me be adorned with
that modesty and shamefastness that becomes those that profess the Gospel of
Christ; not with embroidred Garments and costly Apparels. Help me to consider
that there is no communion betwixt Light and Darkness, Sin and Holiness. Help
me to live to that end for which I was created. Help me always to bear in mind
my Creator in the days of my Virginity, that I may mark thy Law to do it. O
preserve me from the ways of sin, and let death and judgment put me in mind of
the great work I have to do; that I may so act in this life, as that I may live
for ever hereafter, with thee in Heaven in eternal bliss, purchased by the
precious Blood of Christ; to whom be glory for ever. Amen.

The Sea-mans Prayer.
MOst great and powerful Lord God, whose ways are in the deep Seas, and paths
in the deep Waters, and whose Footsteps are not known, yet sets the bounds and
limits of the raging Sea, and say, Hitherto shall thou go and no farther;
and raises a storm and allayeth it: let thy good providence keep me in the
midst thereof: and though the Sea rages and roareth, yet let thy everlasting
strength environ and surround me, so that I may be hid and be safe; and being
safe, I may both with heart and soul sing forth his praise, that has been
graciously pleased to preserve me amidst the tempests of the raging Seas: but
most of all I earnestly desire thee that thou would keep me from the roaring
rage of Sin and Satan: and as thou boundest the Sea, so bind up Satan, that
he may not be able to do me any harm, that he may not tempt me to do any thing
that may bring dishonor to thy Name, either by distrust or otherwise. O let me
discern much of thy self, O Lord, in the Depths, that I may bless thee in thee
Land of the Living. When Man's Wisdom and Power fails, stand thou up and
deliver thy Servant; when the Billows and Storms are raging, do thou quell
them; so shall thou rejoice the Soul of thy Servant: and at last bring me to
the desired Haven, for thy Sons sake; to whom be everlasting strength ascribed
for ever. Amen.

The Sea-mans Prayer after a safe Voyage.
MOst powerful Lord God, thou art the powerful preserver of thy Creatures, thy
power is not limited, and thou art the same yesterday, to day and for ever; thy
hand is not shortened, thou savest both by Sea and Land; thou that savedst
Israel of old, by bringing them through the Red Sea, thou have preserved me
amidst all the Billows of raging Waves of the immense Ocean; thou never failest
those that trust in thee, O let thy mercies engage me to praise thee; that I
may cry out, Come, and I will tell you what the Lord has done for my Soul: and
let this great deliverance, enjoin me to trust God for the future, in the
greatest of straits. O help me to praise thee whilst I have any being, O Let my
Soul praise thee for this experienced mercy: Open my mouth, Lord, and fill it
with praises, that I may sing unto the mighty God of Jacob, the Redeemer of
Israel. O give me the Spirit of praises, that I may extol the name Jehovah. O
Lord help me to love thee more every day, and admire that Love that thou have
shown, and do show unto me every day. O govern my affections, words, and
actions; and help me so to stear my course, as that I may at length, be brought
to the Haven in Canaan, for Christ's sake alone, the Strength of my Salvation,
and Hope. Amen.

The Widows Prayer.
MOst holy Lord, thou art the fountain of all Comfort, and God of all
Consolation, and changest not; all the comfort of thy sorrowful Handmaid is in
thy self, thou art able to make up all the losses and breaches thy providence
has made. O supply all that comfort thou have taken away: and thou that have
promised to be a Father to the Fatherless, and an Husband to the Widow, be a
Father to my Fatherless Children, and an Husband to me a poor destitute Widow:
Make up all my wants in thy self; and pardon that sin contracted between us;
and pardon that negligence of seeking after better comforts, than any this life
affords; pardon that inordinate care that was used by me in reference to the
World: and guide and support thy poor distressed Servant by thy Spirit. O help
me to sit silently under thy chastizing Rod, and that because it is the dictate
of thine own will; and say, thou Lord have done it; and say with thy Servant
Job, that emblem of patience, The Lord gave and the Lord has taken away,
blessed be the name of the Lord. Let this last be an instigation to put me in
mind of my last end, and to consider the brevity of this frail life; that
thereby I may be taught to number my Days; that I may both know how frail I am,
and may apply my heart unto Wisdom; that I may bear in mind the great concerns
of Eternity, strengthen my Faith, enlarge my Desire, raise and elevate my
Affections; inflame my Love; let Sin be most loathsome, Grace most beautiful,
the World less desirable. These and what thou know to be more necessary for
me, grant for Christ's sake. Amen.

The Orphans Prayer.
RIghteous Lord, take thou charge of thy desolate Creature; be thou a Father to
the Fatherless; thou art Righteous but I have sinned, and therefore this sorrow
has taken hold on me; my neglect of Duty has removed away this Mercy. O
pardon and remove my Guilt, and remember thy Promise to the Fatherless. O save
me, for I am thine; I desire none but thee; be thou my Comfort and Guide unto
Death. Help me to be more an obedient Child, to honor thee in my Generation.
Supply my wants and necessities, and make up all in thy self; and help me to
eye thee as a God in Covenant, and let me know that I am reconciled unto thy
self, by the precious Blood of Jesus Christ, the Mediator of the New Covenant;
and let Mortality be swallowed up of Life: and Lord help me (though little in
respect of Stature) that I may be tall in respect of Grace; and knowing that I
have a great journey to take, that I may set out be-times to enquire-the way,
and that when my Glass is run, I may have finished my Masters Work, and my
Course with Joy: and O that I may never cease Laboring until I have finished
my Work, knowing that they that run in a Race, run all, but one gets the Prize:
O let, O Lord, Integrity and Sincerity preserve me, and that for Christ's sake.
Amen.

The unconverted Sinners Prayer, for a full Conviction of the dangerous state
he is in.
GReat, Gracious, and most Righteous Lord God, blessed for ever be thine
unspeakable mercy, that desire not the Death of the worst of Sinners, that
turn unto thee to live for ever. Oh thou that of Persecutors made glorious
Martyrs, of an Adultress made an humble Penitent. O show forth thy
Longsuffering, Patience, and Forbearance upon me. Deliver me from all my Sins,
from thy Wrath to come, and that Eternal Judgment that ends in Hell, with
Devils and damned Impenitents. Leave me not in the state of Devils, without
hope of pardon. O pardon that great sin of setting more by Meat and Drink and
beastly Pleasures than by thee, the God that made me a rational Creature, that
slighted endless Glory, that took more care of an Earthly Tabernacle than an
Immortal Soul; that took more care to avoid Shame, Poverty and Sickness, than
to avoid everlasting Shame, Pain and Horror in Hell. Blessed be the Lord, that
will not leave such sinners as my self to die in their sins, but pluck such
sire-brands out of the jaws of Hell, and gives them to know the evil of sin. O
that I were once fit to taste and see how gracious the Lord is to believers; to
them alone he is precious, the fairest of Ten thousands. O guide my feet into
those untrodden paths, that lead to the Fountain of Living Waters, set open for
sinners to wash in, and be purged from their filthiness. O give me faith to see
him whom my sins have pierced. Give me the grace and spirit of supplication to
mourn after him; without which grace I have not, nor can have, no hope of
pardon. For what communion has darkness with light? O possess my Soul with
this belief, That without holiness there can be no happiness, without fanctity
no salvation, nor without heavenly-mindedness no Heaven: O be it so unto thy
servant, for his sake that suffered for great, nay the greatest of sinners, of
whom I am the chief; that I may live to praise thee and admire the riches of
thy immense and boundless love to Eternity. Amen.

A Prayer for power to believe.
O Glorious and Merciful Lord God, whose abundant and unspeakable goodness has
been extended to poor man, before he had a being in the World: Let the beams of
thy loving kindness environ me, and as thou have been pleased to convince me of
sin, righteousness, and judgment; O help me to believe in him whose mercy
extends to the ends of the Earth; and that I may take i^^^^ on him by the hand
of faith, that it may be the substance of things not seen; to take hol^ on the
rich promise laid down in thy word concerning thy Son, who is mighty to save
all them that come unto God by him, and to accept him in all his Offices, as
King and Lawgiver, to rule and defend me, as P^ie^t to sacrifice for me, as
Prophet to reveal the will of God unto me. Help me to trust in thy holy Spirit,
to mortify and kill my sin in me, and to illuminate, and sanctify, and
quicken me, that thereby I may be rendered meet for serving thee here, and
enjoy thee hereafter. O help me to demonstrare, out of my Conversation, what is
the hope of my Calling, and establish me in a constant belief of Salvation, by
the apprehension of a renewed mind, from fleshly and transitory joys, to an
heavenly and permanent happiness, where there are pleasures for evermore. Help
thy poor Creature to be Conqueror, yea, more than Conqueror through Jesus
Christ, over Devil, World, and Flesh; that I may be renewed in the spirit of my
mind. Possess me with the New Birth, strengthen all my inward Faculties, my
Faith, my Love and Zeal; and whereas my desire was to run from God, it may now
be to run unto him, and cast my self upon him for all in Christ Jesus. Amen.

The Converts Prayer.
MOst powerful Lord God, thine is the Kingdom, the Power, and the Glory; thy
ways are perfect and pure: Let God be true and every one a liar. Blessed be thy
Name for thy unspeakable kindness and love to me, who am less than the least of
all thy mercies: Thou have been pleased to bring me out of darkness and shadow
of death, and lead me into the way of peace, and out of darkness into thy
mervellous light, and to bring me into the Kingdom of thy dear Son. O the
immensity, the breadth and length, depth, and height of the loving kindness of
God in the Lord Jesus Christ; that wast pleased of a Bond-slave to make a
Free-denizon of Heaven; of a Prisoner of Hell and Death, one at Liberty; and
delivered me from that Eternal Wrath to come. Oh! the free mercy of God, that
has withholden death from seizing upon me, the which if it had; where had I
been. Oh happy and blessed was it, that thou should put out thine hand, and
touch me with the rod of thine affliction; so that I may say, It is good for me
that I was afflicted. O blessed Redeemer, give me thy Spirit, without which I
am undone, to apply the precious Blood of the New Covenant to my Soul, without
which I can do nothing; that thy good Spirit may direct me into the way
everlasting, to know God and Jesus Christ, which is Life Eternal. Inflame me
with love to thy self, thy Laws and Commandments, Preserve me from the sin of
Presumption; let the love of Holiness in me express it self, in the abandoning
all and every similitude of sin from my heart, that I may abhor that (viz.)
Sin, that once was so amiable to me. Let thy strength appear in my weakness,
and let thy grace be sufficient for me. Accommodate me with a resolvedness to
follow thee. Let Christ, Heaven, and Glory, be my Object and my Mark to aim at.
Let Christ be my Center, upon whose account I conclude my imperfect requests,
in his own words, Our Father, etc.

Considerations of Death.
1. COnsider, That all the Pleasures, Treasures, and Comforts, of this Life, as
Wife, Children, Goods, Gold, Friends, Lands, Livings, large Possessions,
Dignity, Honors, sumptuous Fare and pleasant Prospects, spacious Walks,
delicate Gardens, nay, even the World it self, in its luster and all that is
therein, on which thou have doted so much, and squandered so much time in,
shall and must all at the stroke of Death, be extinguished; the which, Heaven
it self, or any created Power, cannot prevent, but will quite be obliterated
and for ever lost, never more to be minded or meddled with or enjoyed, either
in this World or the World to come; but in as much as we must give an account
of our using and abusing of them: When our breath goes forth out of our
Bodies, our thoughts perish, and therefore make it thy business, and think it
thy chiefest prudence to wean thy affections from this fading World, by little
and little, with a resolute and holy violence, least thou find it harder to
part with all at once.

2. Consid. To die, is but once to be done, and if we miscarry in that, we
miscarry and are undone for ever: therefore make it thy chief business to learn
to die. It would be better never to have lived, than to be ignorant to die.
Many will, nay doubtless, the prophanest wretch, will desire the death of the
righteous, but unless it be learnt before, by living the life of the righteous,
you shall never learn nor know how to die. O learn this lesson, seeing there is
no working in the Grave, whither we go.

3. Consid. That if thou make the best preparation for Death thou can, thou will find it hard enough to die; if thy evidences be never so firm and good,
thou will find that all will be little enough: if they be fair the Devil will
blur them; if he cannot blot them, he will do what he can to accuse thee; he is
the accuser of the Brethren; he is the roaring Lion that will devour thee if he
can.

4. Consid. That Death, if not prepared for, will look mighty ghastly and grim;
he is called, The King of Terrors and Fears; he will surprise thee, for he comes
suddenly, as a thief in the night: it is true, if he come, thou being prepared,
it will put an end to all thy fears, and dispossess thee of terrestrial
substance, and possess thee of a celestial and permanent substance.

5. Consid. That after Death, that is, after the Souls separation from the
Body, the Body will be but a loathsome spectacle, all thy friends will as it
were, abhor it. Abraham says, Let me bury my dead out of sight.

6. Consid. That nothing will avail the Soul, but Grace and a good Conscience,
when it shall (after separation from the crasie House of Clay) be brought
before the great Tribunal of the most high God, to give an account of all the
deeds, whether good or bad, done in the Body.

7. Consid. That Christ, who offers Salvation now, by his Word and Mercies,
shall then appear in slaming Fire, taking Vengeance on them that know him not,
nor obey not his Gospel.

8. Consid. That having past once his Sentence, whether of Life or Death, it
will be absolute and irrevocable. O therefore, be not slothful in this work,
lest the bubble of thy life be extinguished before thy work be done.

9. Consid. That after Death, Gods Messenger, has executed his office (viz.)
cut the thread of thy life, thou must presently appear before God, the great
Judge, to receive either the sentence of life, or the sentence of everlasting
death.

Considerations of Judgment.
O Thou impenitent sinner that wilt die in thy sins. 1. Consider, What a
dreadful sight the coming of the Son of Man in the Clouds will be; he whom thou
have so often by thy sins pierced, whom thou have rejected, scorned, and
vilified; and the blood thou have so often trod under foot, must then be thy
Judge, from whose righteous sentence there will be no appeal; now he stands to
invite thee and woo thee, with the fairest terms of love; but then he will
pronounce thy dreadful doom; and his poor redeemed ones, which now thou
think not worthy to live, but do scorn, mock, revile, persecute, and
kill, will then sit on the Throne on the right hand of the Lamb, as thy Judges
too. How then would thou wish Rocks to fall upon thee, and be beholding to
Mountains to cover thee, nay, how sain would thou change natures with Toads,
or Serpents, Owls, or Batts, the worst of Creatures; or that thou could be
annihilated, and that thy immortal Soul should become mortal.

2. Consid. Also, That then all Relations will cease. and so all Love, and
worldly Friendship. Then the loving Husband must rejoice in the Damnation of
the wicked Wise: and the tender and indulgent Mother must stand, not only with
dry and cheerful Checks, and assent to the just Doom of her impenitent
Children, but glorifying God for executing his Justice and Vengeance upon them.
Therefore, O sinner, if thou would have Christ, Friends, and Relations,
be-friend thee at that day, be an unreconcileable enemy now unto thy sins; and
be at peace with God through thy Redeemer.

O miserable sinner, Consider where will thou appear at that day, when God will
make a separation between good and bad; when thou must give an account for all
things done in the flesh; for every thought of thine heart, every word of thy
mouth, every moment of time, every omission of any holy duty, every commission,
all company thou came in, every Sermon thou hear, every Sabbath thou have
misspent; and then all thy sins and villainy, whether committed secretly or
openly, will be viewed by the whole World. To prevent this, try now thy heart,
life, calling, thoughts, words, and deeds; and arraign, accuse, and condemn thy
self at the bar of thy Conscience, that thou may be acquitted at Gods
Judgment Bar at the last day.

If thou be a Saint, consider, that then thy Soul and Body must make make a
second, but a more happy, and Blessed marriage jointly: and together to enjoy
and be drowned, as it were, in that glory, that God prepared for his Elect from
before the Foundation of the World: then thy innocence and righteousness shall
be clear, and made conspicuous to the whole World; when Christ sets thee at his
right hand, when thy Friend, thy eldest Brother, and thy Husband, will be thy
Judge; then thy Pains, Losses, Crosses, and Sufferings, will be fully rewarded.
Thy Persecutors, Troublers, and Opposers, will be avenged upon; and all thy
good Deeds reckoned up to thy comfort, but all sin done away. Then thou shall
sit on a throne crowned with Immortality and Glory, with those judging the
Twelve Tribes of Israel, and shall hear that blessed, that wonderfully
acceptable, and heart-ravishing invitation, Come ye Blessed of my Father, and
inherit the Kingdom that was prepared for you from the foundation of the World.
When your Enemies and Troublers shall be packed to Hell, with this dreadful and
fatal doom, Depart from me ye cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the
Devil and his Angels. Depart from Glory, that is Hell enough; depart with a
curse into fire, and that everlasting.

Considerations of Hell.
COnsider first, The pain of loss, privation of Gods glorious presence, and
eternal separation from those everlasting felicities, joys, and bliss above; is
the more horrible part of Hell: The Torments and Miseries of many Hells, in the
judgment of the Learned, are nothing to the shutting out everlastingly, from
the Kingdom of Heaven, and an unhappy Banishment, from the beatifical Vision of
the most Sovereign, only, and chiefest good, the thrice glorious Jehovah,
blessed for ever: I say, the loss of any of these will be a far greater loss
than Ten thousand Worlds, were they all composed of purest Gold, and brimful
with richest Jewels, Let therefore, every one in the Name and Fear of God, as
we would not for a few bitter-sweets, or a vile lust, in this World, for an
inch of time, lose an inconceivable delight to all Eternity in another World,
with St. Chrysostom, choose rather the punishments of Hell than offend Christ.

Of the pains of Sense.
1. COnsider the horror, anxiousness, heart-corroding, and too late vain
repentance, that will torment thy Soul, for thy so sinful transacted life: when
thou think how many precious opportunities thou might have improved for
thy Souls eternal good, but have wilfully cast them away; how many a good
Sermon, and Soul-market thou did negligently go through? How many dreadful
things thou have committed? How many necessary duties thou have omitted? How
thou have dishonored God, grieved Friends and Relations, and when thou wast
called upon to repent, thou would not turn and live? Ah! I say, such
considerations as these, will then tear thy Soul to pieces; and be a great part
of thy Hell.

2. And as to the things thou do at present feel, they will be
unexpressible: There is no tongue can express, or heart conceive, the extremity
and exquisiteness of it; all that the angry Arm of an Almighty power can
inflict upon thee, O sinner, shall be inflicted upon thee to the full.

In a word, If the several pains of Discases and Maladies, incident to our
Nature; nay, and add to it all the most exquisite and unheard of Tortures, etc.
be collected all into one extreme anguish, yet it will be nothing to the
Torment which shall ever possess and plague the least part of a damned Body.

And as for the Soul, let all the griefs, horrors, and dispairs, that ever rent
in pieces any heavy heart, and vexed consciences, etc. be heapt together into
one extreme Terror, it would all fall infinitely short of that desperate rage
and restless anguish, which shall eternally torture the least and lowest
faculty of the Soul. Oh what rational man that has Understanding, Affections
and Senses, would not tremble at such thoughts as these, and seriously project
how to evade all this?

3. As to the everlastingness of these Tortures, consider that that will be
another Hell to thee. O Eternity, Eternity, upon which depends the height,
length, breadth, and depth of immortality in the World to come, even two
Eternities, the one infinitely Blessed, and the other infinitely Cursed; the
loss of everlasting joys, and lying in eternal flames, and never ending
pleasures or pains follow the well or mispending this moment upon Earth.

With what unwearied Care and Watchfulness ought we to watch all the days of
our appointed time, to make our Calling and Election sure? With what industry
and diligence to ply this Moment, to fit us for that Eternity.

Of the Joys of Heaven.
THe excellency of Heaven, no mortal Heart, no finite Head, can possibly
Conceive or Comprehend.

The Eye of Man has seen Wonderful Things, and the Ear heard most Delicious
and Ravishing Melody; the Heart can Conceive and Imagine strange Felicities,
yet cannot Apprehend this. Our Gracious God in his Holy and unsearchable Wisdom
does detain from the Eye of our Understanding, a full comprehension of the most
Glorious state above: to Exercise in the mean time, our Faith, Love, Obedience,
Patience, etc. Heaven is caled a great City, a Place most Glorious above all
Comparison, and Conceit. Wherein many Mansions are Prepared, for many thousands
of glorified bodies; after the last day, besides the numberless numbers of
blessed Angels.

Oh with what infinite sweet Delight may glorious Souls be Drowned, in the
Imaginations of these Felicities, whilst in this vale of Tears.

Heaven is called the Kingdom of God, of his own making; who does all things
like himself.

It is called an Inheritance, a rich and glorious Inheritance; an Inheritance
of the Saints in Light, an Inheritance incorruptible; a Crown of Righteousness;
a Crown of Life; a Crown of Glory; an exceeding Eternal weight of Glory;
fullness of Joys; Everlasting Pleasures.

Who would not be ravished with the very thoughts of this eternal and matchless
Glory, to which all other things are but as loss and dung; and in comparison of
whom are not worthy mentioning.

Of the Beauty and Blessedness of Glorfied Bodies.
THey shall be made like the Glorious Body of Christ, and that is Honor
enough, and Happiness; too besides their freedom from all Defects and
Imperfections, they shall be like the Angels of God in Heaven. Pains, Miseries,
and all Evils, they shall have an Everlasting Redemption from: and shall be
Crowned Gloriously with many possitive Prerogatives, etc.

1. Imortality; Glorified bodies cannot possibly die. 2. Incorruptibleness;
never more to be obnoxious to the least Corruption, or Putrefaction, or
Dissolution. They shall be Spiritual and Heavenly as the Angels in Heaven; and
in all things subject to the Spirit of God.
Of the Happiness of the Soul.
WE shall know as we are known, our Memory shall be perfected, we shall be
beatifically enlightened with a clear and glorious sight of God himself; which
Divines call a Beatifical Vision.

It is sufficient that in Heaven we shall see him face to face, whose very
Countenance to behold is the life of the Soul. It ravisheth the Soul and fills
it; yea, as full as ever it can hold or contain; insomuch, as some that have
had but a glimpse of it, whilst in this lower Orb, have cried out, Enough,
enough, Lord, I can hold no more. And if so full by one glance here, what shall
it be when immerg'd in the midst of that boundless Ocean of Immortality and
Glory, that for its Immensity can never be defined. Paul (when taken up in the
Third Heaven) saw things unutterable, not to be expressed by any mortal man: as
if he should have said, If any one should ask me what I saw, I saw things a
thousand times beyond what I or any montal man can express or imagine. O the
height, breadth, length, and depth, of that glory that is prepared for the
Saints before the foundation of the the World; Eye has not seen, Ear has not
heard, neither has it entered into the heart of man to conceive, what great
things are laid up for them that love God. O happy Soul that shall be drowned
in this boundless happiness. No wonder if the sense of this makes Martyrs to
rejoice in their sufferings: Paul desired to be dissolved.

A Consolatary Discourse, OR A DIALOGUE between CHRIST and a Disquiet SOUL.
Christ. MY Beloved, why fear thou, and art so disquieted within thy self?
do thou well to be angry with my Chastisement? And why art thou offended
that I should make thee like unto my self, causing thee to walk in that way, of
inward and outward griefs; which I did tread before thee? Why refusest thou to
take up my Cross and follow me, and to taste of that Cup that I drank before
thee?


Soul. O Lord, give me of that Spirit of thine, and that trouble with thee, and
for thee, shall be sweet unto me. Whatsoever thou did bear, it was for me:
and if I were so disposed, as I should; then would I be content to bear all
that thou my God, should lay upon me. But ah alas it is my cursed
Corruption, that makes me think thy Cross my Burden, Lord therefore uphold me
by thy Grace, that I may count thy Yoke easy, and find Joy in those Sufferings
with thee.


Christ. I know the cause of thy Grief and Terror to be the Consideration of
thy Sin: but I pray thee why look thou so to thy Sins, that thou look not
also to my Mercies? Why would thou so extol thy evil deeds, that thou
should so extenuate my rich Mercies? or in any way compare the one with the
other? Was it for thy good deeds that I first entered into friendship with thee?
and think thou now that for thine evil deeds, I will forsake thee? Seeing it
is among my praises, that the work that I begin I will perfect? I like it well
indeed, to see thee grieved for the Sins thou have committed against me; but I
would have thee also be comforted in the Mercies I have showed thee. Call to
mind my works of Old, and what I have done to thee, and for thee, since thou
can Remember: How cared I for thee in thy tender years? look back now and
see, did not the Angel of my presence lead thee: when thou had no wisdom, no
strength to Govern thee? Did I not then begin to acquaint thee with the
Knowledge and Fear of my Name? Can thou deny now that my Mercy preserved thee
from thy Sins, whereunto thy Nature was prone, and ready to have declined? And
when thou sinnedst, with what long patience have I waited thy turning, and how
lovingly have I winked at thy transgressions? And when I had given thee Grace,
to repent of thy Sins, and to seek my Favor and Mercy for the Sins of thy
youth, with a melting Heart, and a mourning Eye, can thou deny, that I have
filled thy Heart with my Joys and made thy tongue burst out in Glorifying
Speeches: and why then wilt not thou trust in my Mercies to the end.


Soul. I were Lord most unthankful, if I should not confess, that many a time
in the multitude of my thoughts thy mercies have comforted me: but ah alas I
have not answered thy loving kindness; for after many mercies received I have
sinned against thee, contrary to my light; and my Sins are now before me,
witnessing that I am unworthy to taste any more of thy Mercies.


Christ. Is my mercies for a day, or for a year; or is it for ever and ever to
them whom I have made mine by my Sufferings? Will thou restra in my Mercies,
and limit them within so narrow Bounds, as to think they cannot be Extended
over all thy Transgressions? Will thou measure my mercies with so narrow a
Span, as to think I have no more to Give, than thou have an Heart to Receive?
Is it not among my praises, that I am able to give to my Children, more than
they are able to think or ask of me? Know thou not, that as the Heavens are
above the Earth, so my thoughts are above thine? Have thou not considered that
my Mercies is above all my Works; how much more than is it above thee, who art
nothing in Comparison of my Works? And if above thee, how much more above all
that thou can do? Why then will thou match thy Sins with my Mercies? If I
require such Mercies in my Children, as I will have one to forgive another, not
only Seven times, but Seventy times seven times: what pity, compassion, and
readiness to forgive is in my Self?

Therefore my beloved despair not, for the multitude of thy sins; but be
comforted with the promises of my Mercy. I have made them without any exception
of time, for at what time soever a sinner does repent him of his sins, I have
promised, to put away his wickedness out of my remembrance: I have made them
without exception of sins; for albeit your sins were as Scarlet, they shall be
made as white as Snow. I have made them without exception of Persons; for
whosoever shall depart from his wicked ways, I shall receive him. Let this
threefold universality of my promise sustain thee, that thy Infidelity contract
not my Mercies into narrower bounds, than I have extended them.


Soul. Be merciful, O Lord, to my Infidelity; I believe in Christ, Lord, help
my unbelief; Stablish and Confirm my unstable heart with thy good and holy
Spirit. My Conscience does in such sort condemn me, that I stand in fear of thy
Justice; for thou art greater than the Conscience, and wilt much more condemn
me; if thou do enter into Judgment with me.


Christ. O my beloved, consider that the cause of thy disquietness is, because
that with the one Eye thou look unto thy Sins, and unto thy Fathers Justice
with the other; and that is the reason of thy disquietness: but does not look
unto me in whom his Justice is satisfied, and thy Sins already punished. Tell
me (I pray thee) do thou think to get within thy self, and in the holiness of
thy Disposition, that which will Exempt thee from the fear of his Justice; or
art thou content to seek it of me? If in thy self thou seek it, remember
what thou art a doing: Will thou have the Lord bound and obliged to thee? Will thou be thine own Savior? or shall it be said his mercy saved thee not? If no
Misery were in thee, whereupon should his mercy be manifested? and if thy
Disposition in the Earth, were every way such as it should be, then what
remains but that the praise of his Mercy should less appear: turn thee
therefore unto me, and seek thy self in me. If thou will know what is thine,
thou art a sinner; let my praise be reserved to my self, I am thy Savior.
Esteemest thou that my wounds are ineffectual, or that there is no force in my
sufferings; countest thou this, as that my Virtue and Merit cannot cure them?
Will a Phisician pour out a rare Ointment, where no need is, or else where it
cannot profit? and think thou that my Father would have my Blood to be shed
in vain? If his Justice terrify thee, remember it was satisfied in me; and
that he pronounces this Sentence himself, This is my beloved Son in whom I am
well pleased. I came into the World, not to call the righteous, but sinners to
repentance. Tarry not from me because thou art a sinner, but for that cause
come to me and I will refresh thee.


Soul. O Lord, I know that there is a cleansing and reconciling Virtue in thy
Blood; that Life is in thy Death; but still I fear my sins deserve thou
should neither apply thy Virtue, nor thy Merit, to me: for ah! alas, I find
that yet the old Man is strong and lively in me; and that yet the motions of
sin have power in me to bring forth fruit unto death.


Christ. Be not, I pray thee, injurious to the work of my Grace in thee;
complain not so of thy Corruption, but that thou may give unto me mine own
Praise. Can thou deny but that thou have felt my Power working in thy Soul?
Have I not sprinkled thy Conscience with my pacifying Blood; from which has
flowed an attestation of good things; such a sense of mercy, as many times has
filled thy heart with Joy, and thy mouth with a song of Praise? Have not I
stirred thee up in great fervency to call on the Name of the Lord? Have I not
made thee to give my Name a public testimony, with thine own disadvantage; and
how often has thine heart been effectually moved at the hearing of my Word, in
such sort as it has wrought in thee an holy remorse and inward contrition for
thy sins, which has broken out into tears? Have I not made thee a wrestler
against thine inordinate lusts? Have I not given thee strength many a time to
stand against Satan's tentations, whereas if I had left thee to thy self, how
often had thou been made a prey to thine enemy?

Rememberest thou not that the Tempter has assaulted thee, but I have
withdrawn the occasion of thy sin, and when the occasion served did I not
restrain and hold back the Tempter? yea, when both the occasion and the Tempter
were present, have I not filled thy heart with the fear and love of my Name;
and so kept thee from sinning against me? And whereas many times thou of thy
weakness have offended, did I not with a melting Heart and a mourning Eye,
raise thee again, and renew my former familiarity with thee? so that thou can
never say from the first hour I began to renew thee, that I suffered thee to
lie in thy sins, as have done others, that are strangers to my Grace? And many
notable effects of my workings in thee, thou can not deny.

Are not these undoubted tokens of my Grace in thee? Will Nature do such
things? May not thou feel that by these I have begun to apply to thee my
merit for the remission of thy sins, and my virtue for quickening thee to a new
life? Therefore think of thy self as basely as thou will, but let the work of
my Grace be esteemed of thee, according to the excellency of it. Be humble and
cast down when thou look upon thine own corruption, I find no fault with
thee; but I rejoice at the new workmanship I have begun in thee. Indeed, if
there were nothing in thee, but that which thou have of Nature, thy estate were
miserable: but seeing thou see a new workmanship in thee, be comforted. Art
thou so in darkness that there is no light in thee? that besides it, there is
not in thee a will to do good also, and a love to righteousness? If thou say
thou have no sin in thee, thou art a liar; and think thou that I who have
begun to translate thee from darkness to light and to make thee a new creature;
will leave thee, until I have done my work in and upon thee? Therefore beloved,
give not ear to thine own Corruption and Satan, as to take their testimony
against thee, or to make thee think that my pledges that I have given thee, are
not worthy of credit; that by them thou should be assured of mercy.


Soul. I cannot deny (O Lord) but that many times I have felt the sweetness of
thy consolations; which have greatly rejoiced my Soul. But alas! my grief is so
much the greater, that by mine own default I should now be deprived of them;
for I have grieved thy holy Spirit; yea, I have done what I could to quench
him; and therefore it is that the Comforter, who was wont to refresh my Soul,
is away, nor can I feel his presence with me as before.


Christ. Because I am not changed, therefore is it that the Sons of Jacob are
not consumed. Many indeed are the changes whereunto ye are subject, but I
remain the same, and there is no shadow of alteration in me; James 1.17. Be not
afraid (O my well beloved) neither esteem thy self to be rejected of me; albeit
I sometimes hide my Face from thee; all my ways are mercy and truth to mine: It
is for thee that sometimes I go from thee, and it is for thee that again I turn
unto thee; for if I come it is for thy consolation, that continual heaviness
through manifold temptations should not oppress thee? How often have thou found
this, when thou wast sick of love I have strengthened thee with the Flaggons of
Wine, and comforted thee with my Apples; my fruit has been sweet in thy mouth,
and I have put my left hand under thy head, and with my right hand I have
embraced thee; Can. 2. But least the greatness of my consolations should exalt
thee to disdain thy Brother, and offend me, by imputing that to thine own
disposition, I have again drawn these glorious feelings from thee; give me the
praise, that I know best what is expedient for thee: Had my servant Paul need
to be humbled with the buffets of Satan; lest he should be exalted above
measure, by the greatness of his Revelations: and have not thou need that by my
inward exercises I should hold thee humble? If my comfort were always present
with thee, thou would think that thy Heaven, and permanent City, were on
Earth; and so cease to inquire for a better to come? Thou would take the
place of thy Banishment for thy home, and the Earnest for the Principal Sum
which I have promised thee Consider this wifely with thy self, that albeit I
smile not alike on thee at all times; and fill thee not always with my Joys,
yet I always love thee; if thou continue in my Love: for whom I love I love
unto the end. If I close my Chamber door upon thee; it is not to hold thee out:
it is to learn thee to knock. If I cover my self with many vails, that thou
can not see a glance of my loving Countenance; it is only to stir thee up to
seek me: and if sometimes I seem to go from thee, it is to provoke thee to
follow me; that thou may make haste from the Earth to Heaven, where thou
shall enjoy me without intermission. Was Joseph so wise as to conceal his
tender affection from his Brethren, till he brought them to an humble
acknowledgment of their sin? And was he again so loving, as when he saw them so
humbled, his affection was enflamed, and compelled him to reveal himself unto
them? And think thou that I am less wise and loving in dealing with mine? I
gave at first sharp answers to that Woman of Canaans Petitions; and so will I,
to deal roughly, seemingly, with those whom I love, and to be angry, even at
their Prayers; but in the end I will make my love manifest to them, and with
mine endless mercies embrace them


Soul. Suffer me yet once again (Lord) to speak unto thee, that thou may
answer me, and I shall complain no more. If we saw that such were our
Disposition, as thy holy Word does require in us, then should thy comforts
rejoice us: but alas, how far am I from that which I should be; my strength is
enfeebled, therefore do mine inordinate affections oft-times overcharge me. If
I turn me to pray, I cannot for the hardness of mine heart; the contrite
spirit, the melting heart, the mourning eye is gone from me. If I seek comfort
in thy Word I find it not: I am troubled also with doubtings; armies of fears
and sorrows are against me, and all through weakness of my faith; partly for
want of that light that should inform me; my infidelity abuses me to think
that thy visitations come from thine anger; and causes me to answer the
Reproofs of my conscience, as if they were just occasions; and partly for want
of that apprehending and applying Virtue that is in Faith. I am spoiled of the
comfort that thy Word has offered unto me. Therefore (O Lord) have pity on the
desolate state of my Soul.


Christ. Let not (my beloved) the considerations of thy wants, defects, and
imperfections discourage thee. Remember that the measure of Grace which I have
given to my Saints upon Earth; I have called it an Earnestpenny, and
First Fruits of the Spirit, to tell them that whatever grace they have gotten,
it is nothing in comparison of that which they will get. Seek not that
therefore in the Earth which I have resolved to give thee, no ways, till thou
come to Heaven; thy Blessedness in this Life stands not in a satiety and full
enjoying of that which thou would have, but in an hungring and thirsting for
it. If I had pronounced them Blessed, that are now satisfied with
Righteousness, then thy wants might most justly discourage thee: But I called
them Blessed that hunger: If therefore thou do follow after Sanctification,
and art weary with the servitude of thy sin, if thou do seek comfort in my
Word, and can find none of these at the first, as thou would, yet remember I
have promised to fulfill the desires of them that feer me. If it greive thee
that thou can not pray at all times alike; remember that my Children are
oftentimes evil judges of themselves; and that their Estate is not always to
be measured according to their feeling: for many Prayers may be made in them to
me, by my Spirit, with sighs and sobs, which they themselves are not able to
express, yet are known to me, and are like loud crying Voices, which I cannot
but answer.


Soul. O my Soul content thee with the Lords dispensations, and doubt not but
all thy wants and holy desires shall all be satisfied. Remember how careful thy
Savior was of those People that followed him. I have Compassion (says he) on
this People, because they have continued with me already three days, and have
nothing to eat. I will not let them depart fasting, lest they faint in the way:
O most sweet and comfortable Speeches, they seek not from him, and he is
careful to give them: if he was so careful to satisfy their Bodily
necessities, will he neglect the Spiritual necessities of his own. They
followed him three days, and he counted it a long time; they are to go from
him, and he feared lest they should faint. O my distrustful Soul, will thou
once learn to trust in the Mercy of thy God assuredly? Will he not satiate thee
who seeks him? Will he not answer thee who prays unto him? Will he not care for
thee who have waited upon him, not three days, but many years? And will he let
thee faint in following him, who would not let them faint who were to go from
him? O sweet Savior, happy are they that trust in thee. Lord, therefore
increase my Faith in thee, that nothing be able ever to separate me from thee.


Christ. As for the weakness of thy faith, which I see is the ground of all thy
trouble, it proceeds either from the want of knowledge, or else from the want
of Application: It Is indeed a special benefit, to have the mind enlightened with
true light: seek therefore my light to shine unto thee, by continual Prayer,
and seeking into the Scriptures, that thou be not troubled with the error of
conscience; as if it were a just accusation. I have indeed set conscience to be
a warner unto thee; but then shall thou take heed to her warnings, when they
are warranted by my Word. If the error of thy conscience terrify thee in any
thing, and make thee think that thy Crosses and Visitations do come from mine
anger; go and inform conscience better by the Word: Remember whom I chastise, I
love; and when I chastise thee, I am not seeking satisfaction to my justice:
What wonder such thoughts disquiet many? Consider (I pray thee) that notable
promise of mine, made to my Servant David, and in him to all the rest of my
Saints;} If they break my Statutes, I will visit their Transgressions with my
Rods; yet my loving kindness will I not take from them, nor alter my Covenant.


Soul. O Word full of comfort (my Soul) forget it never, that even when his
Rods are laid on thee; and though thy Transgressions be many, yet will he not
alter his Covenant with thee: Remember it (I say) that in thy trouble thou give
no more place to those mis-conceptions of Gods working with thee: as godly Job
though in his trouble, that the Lord was pursuing him for his sins, and making
him to possess the iniquity of his Youth; which as yet appears, by the course
of that History, was not the Lords intention: So have I thought many times that
the heavy hand of the Lord laid on me, had proceeded from his wrath; as if he
had shut up his tender Mercy from me in displeasure for ever. But Lord let thy
Light abide with me, that I sin no more with such distrustful motions against
thee; and now Lord speak on yet further to thy Servant, for thy comforts have
rejoiced my Soul.


Christ. Now concerning the weakness of thy faith, in the apprehension and
aplication of my Promises: Remember that I am he that will not break the
bruised Reed, nor quench the Smoking Flax. What smaller thing is there than a
Grain of Mustard Seed, albeit the measure of thy faith were no more, yet have I
not excluded it from the participations of my promise. A loving Father will
delight to be holden by the hand of his tender Child, and know thou not,
that as a Father spares his Son; so will the Lord spare him that fears him.
Have thou not read that although the faith of my Servant Jacob, was very weak,
as thou may perceive by the great fear he conceived of Esau; yet his weak
faith was able to hold me till I Blessed him: be not therefore discouraged; for
albeit, thou can not lay hold with the hand of strong faith, if thou can
but touch the Hem of my Garment with thy Finger, thou shall draw virtue out of
me. Consider also with thy self, that the faith of my Children is never
greater, than when their feeling is weakest, and least perceived. It Is easy
for every one to believe, in the midst of glorious feelings, and unspeakable
joys: but when a man can feel no comfort in me, and yet believes on me, and
waits on me for comfort, certainly the faith of that man is great. And such
was the faith of my servant, who in his greatest trouble gave me this answer,
Albeit thou slay me, yet will I trust in thee, O Lord, Yet both against sense
and feeling. And did not also that Woman of Canaan, with invinceable says
cleave unto my mercy, even then when she had no feeling of mercy. I gave her no
favorable answer, for which in the end I called her faith a great faith.


Soul. O Lord, thou art the strength whereby I stand in tentation; cursed be he
that would make my Soul conceive wrongfully of thee. Be merciful O Lord unto
me, and never let the malice of mine Enemies prevail over me. Sweet Jesus, keep
the heart, that through thine own Grace would fain keep thee. And now my Soul,
remember that this is but the time of fighting; the time of triumphing will
come: Why then shall the continuance of these restless thoughts disquiet thee?
If thou had never been victorious but once in all thy life rhyme, yet what
mercy had it been, that the Lord in the midst of the Battle, should make one to
triumph? But thou can not deny that many joyful Victories now and before has
the Lord given thee.

Therefore now, my Soul, rejoice and return unto thy former rest; for the Lord
has been beneficial to thee: and account every one of these temporal
victories, a pledge to thee of that full and final victory, that once thou
shall enjoy over all thine enemies; when the God of Peace shall tread down
Satan under thy feet.


The Soul rejoices in the Lord.
O Lord, if such comfort be in thy Cross, what is in thy Crown? And if thou
do give us such joy, when thou take us into thine hand to correct us with
thy rods; Lord what will thou make us to find, when thou shall embrace us in
thy Arms, to kiss us with the kisses of thy Mouth? O that these feelings might
for ever abide with me! What trouble would not be easy where thy comforts are
present? Surely (O Lord) all trouble vanishes, so soon as thou do begin to
glance upon my Soul. Therefore, O my Love, my Light, my Life, my Joy, my Crown,
my Glory, my Strength, help in the time of need; stand thou on my side, and I
will not fear what my Enemy can do unto me. O happy time that ever I knew thee!
Blessed be the Name of the Lord for evermore.

The Souls triumph over Satan.
O Enemy, Satan, albeit thine enmity be troublesome unto me; yet I thank my
God, through Jesus Christ, that thou art against me, and that he has put me in
his Warfare to fight against thee. When I consider that in Paradise the Lord
proclaimed irreconcilable enmity between thee and my blessed Savior, the Seed
of the Woman, Christ Jesus; I account my hope happy that thou art against me,
and that Grace is given to me to fight against thee; for thereby I know that I
am none of thine: but I do stand on that side whereof Christ is the Captain,
all his Saints are Soldiers, and the Victory is most certain.

O deceitful Serpent, if I have found such error arising from those sins which
foolishly I did by thy inticements; what should I have found if I had followed
thee in all the rest, from the which the Lords preventing mercy kept me. I have
learned by experience, that thou art a faithless Traitor; thou do tempt a man
to sin, and for the same sins that he did by thy instigation commit, thou art
he that does first accuse him.

The Lord confirm this good purpose of my heart, that I never hearken any more
to thy lying words; and suffer not my Soul to be circumvented with thy
deceitful snares: And as for the work of my Salvation, seeing it is a work that
my God will work in spite of thee; wherefore shall I regard thy testimony? Thou
did put it into question to my Savior, whether or no he was the Son of God;
and what wonder if thou dare say unto his Children, that they are none of
his? Is there any truth so undoubted that thou will not deny at any time? Why
shall I enter into disputing with thee any more? My Salvation stands neither
in thy questioning, nor in my answering, but upon the Lords unchangeable love
of Election.

If thou should speak for me, yet should I not be the better; neither if
thou speak against me am I the worse. When thou did confess that Jesus was
the Son of God, he rebuked thee, and thought it no honor to him to have thy
testimony. When thou did cry out, that Paul and Silas were the servants of
the most high God; albeit thou spakest the truth, yet did they not accept of
thy testimony: so although thou would say to me, that I were the elect Child
of God, shall I think my self the surer for that; and if on the contrary thou
do deny it, am I therefore the more unsure of Salvation? Speak what thou will, thou art always like thy self; thou have been a liar from the beginning;
cursed of the Lord art thou in all thy ways, and with all thy confederates:
Cursed are they that are in friendship with thee, and blessed for ever be the
Lord that has delivered me from thy deceit and tyranny.

The Conclusion of the Dialogue.
BLessed be thou (O Lord) for that it has pleased thee to visit the base
estate of thy servant, to succor me in my distress, and to comfort me with thy
mercies. Lord evermore feed me with this Manna, and refresh me with the springs
of the water of Life. Show at all times some sign of thy mercy unto me, that
mine enemy, Satan, who labors to disquiet me, may be ashamed, because thou
art with me to succor me.

A comfortable Meditation.
IF ye will mark and consider, ye shall find that the Children of God in all
their Temptations, are not so much doers with their will, as sufferers against
their will. This cogitation coming into my mind, suddenly comfort did spring in
the midst of trouble; God giving me grace to understand that these motions
wherewith I am troubled, were not so much actions done by me; for in truth,
neither do I like or allow of them, but as spiritual oppressions of mine enemy,
who still warreth against me; sometimes with armies of fears; sometimes with
armies of doubtings; sometimes with unclean hands of wandering motions; and
sometimes with troops of worldly cares; making invasion upon my Soul, and
laboring to quench the spark of Spiritual Life, which the Lord had begun in
me; therefore answer for me (O Lord) for I suffer violence: Mine Enemy would
oppress me, but (Lord) my hope for ever is in thee: Succor me with thy
strength and I shall live; and, Lord, impute not to me any of those sinful
motions, that mine enemy raises in me against my Soul.

Consider this wisely (O my Soul) and remember it: God that has entered thee
into his Warfare, and is thy spectator and helper, will never reckon up to thee
Satan's deeds for thine; and learn thou wisely how to distinguish them: but
comfort thy self as long as thou art able to stand to thy protestation, that
thou do suffer violence in them; and can say with the Apostle, This is not
I, but sin that dwells in me. O Lord deliver me from the rage of this Spiritual
Tyranny; many a time have I looked to have been swallowed up, but thou have
sustained me. Blessed be my God for ever, and the Lord be my God to the end.

Of the Lords Supper.
THE necessity of this will appear, if we consider what advantage does accrue
from hence to usward; and this appears, 1. From the admirable satisfaction it
yields unto a distressed Soul. 2. In that it instigates and stirs us up to
the study of Piety and Holiness. 3. In that it enlightneth our understanding.
4. In that it corroborates us, or adds strength to our weakness. 5. In that
it makes glad the conscience and heart. 6. In that it is as it were our
Viaticum, or Refreshment in our Journey to that Celestial Canaan.


Three things principally are necessary to a fruitful Reception of the Lords
Supper.

1. Purity and Holiness, Lev. 19.2. Be ye Holy, as I am Holy. And this may be
taken in two words: First, To be sorry and humble for past and present sins;
and resolve in the Strength of Christ against sins to come. Secondly, To
abandon all hatred and malice, because it is a Sacrament of Love. 2. A right
intention; in communicating, 1. Not Customarily. 2. Not Men-pleasingly. 3. Not
Appearing outwardly. 3. Actual Devotion; viz. 1. To endeavor to pray without
distraction. 2. To be Spiritually ellevated Christ-ward in Affection in his
Ordinance. 3. To come with Humility and devout Reverence.
After Receiving the Holy Sacrament, 1. Give thanks to Christ the Author, for
the vouchsafing it to thee. 2. Be careful for the future more and more to keep
up his Worship. 3. Entreat him to abide with thee to the end of the World, and
so to Eternity.

A Soliloquy concerning the Blessed Sacrament.

Quest. For what cause do I receive this Institution, or Ordinance of God?

Answ. 1. To the end I may regard and dutifully keep Christ's most Holy
Institution.

2. To demonstrate my self a Member of the same Body, whereof he is the Head.

3. That I may receive this Sovereign Repast, to the Corroborating of my Faith,
and the Health of my Soul.

Quest. What do I Receive?

Answ. The Body and Blood of Christ after a Divine and Celestial Manner.

Quest. What profit have I by the receiving of the same?

Answ. Increase of Grace, Assurance of Gods Love, as a Pledge of an Eternal
Inheritance purchased for me in Heaven.

Quest. Why do I often Communicate?

Answ. Because I hope I am one of Gods Children, and therefore desire to come
often unto him, as a God in Covenant and Father in Christ.

Quest. After what manner ought I to come?

Answ. By Faith and Repentance, with a fixed Resolution to serve and obey him
in Holiness and Righteousness, according to that Ability he shall beslow on me,
as long as I live.

Quest. What should I observe before I have access to the Lords Supper?

Answ. Doubtless I ought to examine my own Heart what sins I stand guilty of in
the sight of God; and earnestly to beg of God, both to discover them to me, and
mortify them in me, (being the sole Work of God) and humble me for them.

2. Steadfastly to confide in Christ for a Pardon of these things; judging him
only able to save to the uttermost all that come unto God by him (for so it is
in his Word) and to work in me what is promised in his Word.

3. To Consider, that I ought to come prepared to such an Holy Ordinance;
because it is Commanded in Gods Word, Let a Man examine himself, etc.

4. To Consider that Prayer is the best means whereby I can be sitted for the
receiving of such a Sacrament.

5. To be much in the Meditation of the Passion of Jesus Christ, his
Resurrection, and of my rising with him unto a newness of Life, a Life of
Holiness here, and in seeking life hereafter. If ye then be risen with him,
seek those things that are above.

6. To consider that these Elements (viz.) Bread and Water, that I am preparing
to receive, are so to be received as the Body and Blood of Christ by Faith,
whereby his Death is showed forth; and the worthy Receivers are not Corporally
and Carnally, but Spiritually partakers of the same Body and Blood, with all
his benefits, to their Spiritual Nourishment and growth in Grace.

In a word, I or any other that would worthily partake of this Lords Supper,
must examine our selves of our knowledge to discern the Lords Body, of our
Faith to feed upon him, of our Repentance, Love and New Obedience; least coming
unworthily, we eat and drink Judgment to our selves.

A Prayer before the Communion.
O Glorious and Omnipotent God, behold I, an unworthy wretch, am presuming to
draw nigh thy Table, a Banquet of thine appointment, I am approaching, I say,
but as the Patient to the Physician, as the Unclean to the fountain of Mercy,
as the Blind to the light of Eternal Brightness; as a poor Beggar to the King
of Mercy; as the Naked to the Lord of Heaven and Earth. I beseech thee out of
the abundance of thy Pity to heal my Infirmity, to wash my Foulness, to
enlighten my Darkness and Blindness, to enrich my Poverty, to cloth my
Nakedness, that I may receive the Bread of Angels. O thou the King of Kings and
Lord of Lords, grant that I may receive thee with such respect and reverence,
with such contrition and fear, with such faith and purity, with such a purpose
and humility, as is expedient for my Soul.

Lord notwithstanding mine unworthiness, give me not only the Sacrament but the
virtue of the Sacrament; and grant me so to receive the Body and Blood of thy
only Son, that I may be incorporated into the Mystical Body, and be accounted
as a Member of the same. Grant that whom I now receive, as it were covered with
a vail, I may one day behold in Glory; who lives and reigns with thee and
thy Holy Ghost, world without end. Amen.

A Thanks giving after the Communion.
BLessed Jesus, Praises is due to thy self, for that infallible love of thine,
that by thy death did redeem mankind; I beseech thee suffer not that precious
Body of thine to be broken, nor thy Blood to be shed for me in vain. O let thy
Blessed and Sacred Body feed my Soul, and precious Blood quicken my spirit; and
by increasing from one degree to another, I may become a fit member of thy
Church, which is thy Mystical Body; and grant that I may never depart from it,
nor break that league that I have been renewing at thy Table; but may continue
therein, serving thee in Holiness and Righteousness all the days of my life,
till I shall enjoy thy self fully to all Eternity in Heaven; where there shall
be an end of these things: and that for thy Names sake, Amen.

Short though sweet MEDITATIONS, Or sweet Cordials for the HEART.
1. IT is folly to think that we should have Physic and Health both at one
time; resolve therefore upon waiting his leisure: after a weary Week comes a
Sabbath; and after a Fight Victory.

2. Unkindness of others to us is but a correction of our unkindness to God.

3. He that cannot abound without Pride and High-mindedness, will never want
without too much dejectedness.

4. Let us not seek our selves abroad out of our selves, in the conceits of
other men: That man shall never lie quiet that has not learned to set light by
others causeless ill conceits.

5. Them that set too high a price upon themselves, where others will not come
up to their price, they are discontented.

6. Those whose condition is above their worth, and their pride above their
condition, shall never want forrow; yet we must maintain our Authority in our
places, for that is Gods and not ours; and we ought to carry our selves so as
that we may approve our selves to their consciences, though we cannot have their
good word.

7. One end why God suffers the Soul to tire and beat it self, is, that
finding no rest in it self, it might seek to God.

8. A man can be in no condition, wherein God is at a loss; if comfort be
wanting, he can create Comfort, not only out of nothing, but out of discomfort:
He made the Whale that swallowed Jonas, a means to bring him to Land.

9. The only way to have our will, is to bring it to Gods Will.

10. The way patiently to suffer Gods will, is, to enure our selves to do it;
they that have not enured themselves to the yoke of obedience, will never
endure the yoke of suffering.

11. When we can say to God, Will thou have me poor and disregarded, I am well
content? Thus a gedly Man says Amen to Gods Amen, and puts his Fiat to Gods
Fiat.

12. None feel more Experience of Gods Providence, than those that are most
resolute in their obedience.

13 After we have given Glory to God, by relying upon his Wisdom, Power,
Strength and Truth, we shall find him employing these for our Direction,
Assistance, and bringing things to our desired Issue; yea, above what we desire
or thought of.

14. The more Passion, the less Discretion; because Passion hinders the sight
of what is to be done.

15. It is good to observe the particular Becks of Providence, how things join
and meet together: Fit occasions, and suiting of things, are intimation of Gods
Will. Providence has a Languags, which is well understood by those that have
familiar acquaintance with God: They see a train of Providence leading one way
more then another.

16. Labor to fit a promise to every condition thou art in. There is no
condition but has a promise suitable to it.

17. He that loves too much, will grieve too much. It is the greatness of our
Affection that causes our Affliction.

18. All our noise proceeds from a Swelling Vapor of Pride: It is Air enclosed
in the Bowels of the Earth, that shakes it, which all the four Winds cannot do.

19. There is an Art of bearing troubles, if we can learn it without
over-troubling our selves; as in bearing a burden, there is a way to poize it
that it weigh not over heavy; if it hang on one side it poizeth the Body down:
the greater part we pull on our selves, by not imparting our Care, so as to
take upon us only the care of duty, and leave the rest to God.

20. We must not mingle our Passions with our Crosses; like foolish Patients,
chewing the Pills which they should swallow down.

21. He that sees not God every where, sees him no where.

22. He that loses himself in self denia I finds himself in Gods Bosom.

23. In Prosperity fear God, in Adversity love God.

24. Praying will make thee leave sinning, or sinning make thee leave praying.

25. Our weakness and inabilities break not the bond of our duties.

26. No sin but is easier kept out than cast out.

27. What we are afraid to do before men, we should be afraid to think before
God.

28. Nature vexed and Nature armed, soon discovers it self.

29. They that retain the memory of mercies, seldom lose the sight of mercies.

30. What unthankfulness is this, to think upon two or three crosses, so as to
forget an hundred blessings? What folly is it to darken our Spirits, and to
indispose our selves to the taking or doing of good.

31. A Limb out of joint, can do nothing without deformity and pain: Dejection
takes off the wheels of the Soul: Joy is as Oil to the Soul, it makes Duties
come off cheerfully from our selves, pleasing to others, and acceptable to God.

32. Let us go on to add Grace unto Grace; a growing Christian is always a
comsortable Christian: the Oil of Grace will bring forth the Oil of Gladness.

33. Melancholy Persons are things that seem black and dark to themselves;
their Souls are as it were dead-black: whatsoever comes to a Melancholy Person,
comes in a dark way to his Soul.

34. In all grievances, let us look to something that may comfort us as well as
discourage us; let us look as well to what we enjoy, as to what we want. As in
Prosperity God mingles some cross to diet us, so in all crosses there is some
thing to comsort us. As there is vanity lies hid in the best worldly good, so
there is a blessing lies hid in the greatest worldly evil.

35. We must neither bring sin to, nor mingle sin with, our sufferings; for
that will trouble the Soul more than the trouble it self: We are not hurt till
our Souls be hurt.

36. In sudden encounters some sin does many times discover it self, the seed
whereof lies hid in our hearts; which we think our selves free from: What
cause have we then to fear continually, that we are worse than we take our
selves to be? The force of Gunpowder is not known till some sparks lite in it.

37. What a sight were it to see the Feet where the Head is, and the Earth to
be where the Heaven is? To the Spiritual Eye it seems as great a deformity to
see the Soul to be under sinful passions.

38. A good heart, when any Corruption is discovered, by a searching Ministry,
is affected, as though it found out some deadly enemy. Techiness and Passion
argues Guilt.

39. The imaginary grievances of this life are more than the real.

40. The way to expel Wind out of the Body, is to take wholesome Nourishment;
so to expel Windy Fancies from the Soul, is to feed upon Serious Truths: Our
best way, therefore is, to propound three objects to the mind; as 1. To
consider the greatness and goodness of God. 2. The Joys of Heaven, and the
Torments of Hell: And 3. The last and strict day of account. 4. The vanity of
Earthly Things. 5. The uncertainty of our Lives.

41. A Man naturally is weaving Spiders Webbs, or hatching Cockatrice Eggs;
exercised either in mischief or vanity.

42. It would much avail, to the well-ordering of our thoughts, to set our
Souls in order every morning, and to streng-then and perfume every morning our
Spirits with some gracious Meditations, especially of the chief end and scope,
wherefore we live; and how every thing may be reduced and ordered, to farther
the main (that is to say) Gods Glory and our own Salvation.

43. Some will be content to embrace Truth without hatred of the World; and
Christ without a Cross, and a Godly Life without a Persecution: They will pull
a Rose without Pricks: Such empty conceits will be too weak to encounter with
such real Trials.

44. It is a course that will have a blessing attended, to join in a league,
one to watch over another, and to observe each others ways; It Is usual to join
in Prayer, why not in this.

45. Happy is he that in the way to Heaven meets with a cheerful and skilful
Guide and fellow Traveller, that carries Corbials against all faintings of
Spirit.

46. There is an heavy imputation on them that comforted not the weak; when men
will not own others in trouble, but as the herd of Deer, forsake and push away
the wounded from them.

47. God often suspends comforts from us, to make use of our Christian Friends,
by whom he purposes to do us good: Oftentimes the very opening of men's griefs
brings ease, without any farther workings upon them; the very opening of a Vein
cools the Blood.

48. A Christian, when he is beaten out of all other comforts, yet has a God
to turn unto; he can wrestle with him with his own Strength, and plead with him
with his own Arguments.

49. Labor to answer every relation wherein thou stand to God; 1. As a
Father, by trusting to his care. 2. A Teacher, by following his Direction. 3. A
Creator, by depending on him. 4. As an Husband, by an inseparable love to him.
5. And lastly, as a Lord, by obedience to him.

50. Despair is often ground of hope: when the darkness of the night is
thickest, then the morning begins to dawn.

51. We may safely expect God in his ways of mercy when we are in his ways of
obedience.

52. By trusting any thing more than God, we make it an Idol and a Curse: It
will prove a lying vanity and vexation, bringing that upon us we looked not for.

53. It Is a vain pretense to believe that God will give us Heaven, and yet to
leave our selves to shift in the way.

54. The way to have any thing taken away, and not blessed, is to set our hearts
too much upon it.

55. The greatest honor we can do to God, is when we see nothing for us, but
(...) things contrary to what we look for, then to shut our eyes to all
inferior things, and to look altogether to his suf^^^^^.

56. It is an (...) of true trust, when (...) a wait Gods leisure, and not make
ha^^.

57. ^^ith does not (especially at first) so ^^^y the Soul, as to take away all
suspicion and fears to the contrary, though the prevailing of mis-belief is
taken away: The Needle in the Compass will stand North, though with some
trembling; and the Ship that lies at Anchor, may sometimes be tossed, yet it
will remain so fastened that it cannot be carried away by wind or weather.

58. Look not so much on those miseries which our weak Natures are subject
unto, as upon God for strength and comfort in them; mitigation of them, and
grace to profit by them.

59. The time of sickness is the time of purging from the defilements of sin,
which we have gathered in our health; till we come purer out: which should make
us the rather willing to obey God and abide his time. Blessed is that sickness
that proves the health of the Soul; we are best for the most part when we are
weakest.

60. In all kind of troubles it is not the ingredients that God puts into the
Cup, that so much afflicts, as the ingredients of our distempered passion
mingled with them.

61. We are not much disquieted when we put off our Cloths and go to Bed,
because we trust Gods ordinary providence to raise us up again; and why should
we be disquieted when we put off our Bodies and sleep our last sleep,
considering that we are more sure to rise out of our Graves than our Beds; yea,
we are already raised up in our head Christ.

62. Let us do our own work, and leave God to do his: Diligence and Trust in
him is only ours, the rest of the burden is his. Let us think of Christ as our
duty, and God will think what is for our comfort.

63. In the worst times there is a presence of God with his Children. 1. By
moderating the measure. 2. The time. 3. In joining some comfort with it. And 4.
By supportation.

65. A good Christian has, 1. A God to go unto. 2. A Promise. 3. Former
Experience, besides some present Experience.

65. What is our Life but a Web, woven with some intermingling of Wants and
Favors, Crosses and Blessings, Risings and Fallings, Combats and Victories.

66. God deferrs, but his deferring is no empty space, wherein no good is done;
but there is in that space a fitting for the Promise.

67. Christ prays in the Garden before he enters into the Combat of his
resolved passion: whence we may learn, that Prayer is an Anchor to stay the
Soul being tossed; a support under a burden; a removal of a judgment, or an
affliction, or changes the nature of the affliction.

68. It is more comfort to receive strength in suffering, than to be delivered
from suffering.

69. Our sins were the cause of Christ's Agony, the Thorns that pricked him, the
Spear that pierced him, the Torments that afflicted him.

70. We should always abhor sin, more in regard it is hateful to God, than
because it is hurtful to us.

71. We had need to pray that the great change be wrought in us, before the
great change be wrought upon us.

72. As the Blood of Jesus only can free us from the guilt of sin, so his
Spirit alone can cleanse our hearts from the filth of sin.

73. Let us pray that God would show us what we are by Nature, and make us what
he would have us by Grace.

74. There is nothing terrible in death but what a wicked life has made so.

75. Let us choose to suffer rather than sin, seeing we may suffer without sin,
but we can never sin without suffering.

76. Shall Christ shed his Blood for those sins that were others, and shall not
we shed tears for sins that are our own?

78. A true Christian believes that good works cannot save him, and yet he
believes that he cannot be saved without them.

79. Let us repent us of the evils that we have committed, that God may repent
him of the evils that he has threatened.

80. It Is certain that wicked men sin if they pray not, and it is true, that
even their Prayers are sin; Prove. 15.8.

Evening Meditations and Ejaculations coming in from ones Employment.
O How good God has been to me this day, in preserving me; he might have struck
me dead, or have let me fall into some danger or other; and yet has kept me
from spiritual and temporal enemies, and from the accidents attending on the
trail nature of poor mortal Creatures. O bless the Lord, O my Soul, and all
that is within me bless his Holy Name.

Meditations in time of undressing ones self.
I am putting off my Cloths, O Lord, it may be the last time, O help me to put
off my sins, those rags that make me so deformed in thy sight. O strip me of
this depraved nature, that all men are guilty of and invested with.

Being undressed, a Meditation.
Lord I am naked and bare before thee, and so are the secrets of all men, and
before whom all secrets shall be disclosed. Lord disclose all the secrets of my
treacherous heart, that I may bewail what sins are not repented of.

Getting into Bed, a Meditation.
It may be the last time that I shall lie down, O put me in mind (Lord) of my
lying down in the dust, when the Worms shall be my Bed-fellows, my Grave my
Bed, and the Grass my Cloths to cover me.

Going to Sleep, a Meditation.
It may be I may sleep an everlasting sleep (Lord) let me whether sleeping or
waking, acquiesce in thee; and let me by this rest be mindful of that
everlasting rest for thy Saints. Guard me with Angels, that I may sleep secure.

Morning Meditations.
Awakened out of Sleep.
O God how might thou have made my Bed my Grave, my Sleep my Death, and yet I
am pres^rved by thy good hand of providen^^, blessed be the Name Lord. O Lord,
as thou have awaked me out of Tempered Sleep, O let my Spiritual Eyes be
opened, that I may be more awakened out of the sleep of Sin.

Arising.
O Lord, let my Arising put me in mind of the first Re^ion, to wi^, from Sin,
and of the se^^^nd, that is at the last day; that by (...) Arising of the one,
I may Arise with comfort a^ the other.

Putting on the Doublet.
Lord help me to put on the Breastplate of Righteousness, that I may be able to
resist all the ^iery darts of Satan.

Putting on the Breeches.
Help me, O Lord, to gird my Loins with Righteousness.

Putting on Stockings and Shoes.
O Lord help me to get my Feet shod with the preparation of the Gospel of Peace.

Putting on the Coat.
Draw out my heart Lord to praise thee for thy Clothing me; let me be clothed
with the Garments of Righteousness; cover me, O Lord, with the skirt of thy
loving kindness.

Washing.
Lord wash me from all my sins in that Fountain that is set open for sin and for
uncleanness, and help me to wash my hands in innocence.

Combing the Head and Brushing the Cloths.
Lord take away all that rust and dirt that sticks so close to my Soul, and
make me clean; and then I shall be clean indeed.

Putting on the Band.
Lord let thy wisdom be as a chain about my Neck.

A short Meditation before Prayer before one go to Work.
O what a reasonable thing is it, that I should (seeing God renews his Mercy
every Morning) renew my Acknowledgements in Prayer and Praises, both for
received Mercies, and an Engagement for future Mercies. O Lord, let my Desires
be as a Morning Sacrifice, and the early smoke of my incense renew those
leagues my sins this night may have broken.

Before Work.
Lord, seeing thou have dealt so kindly with me this night, as to preserve me
and keep me, and bring me to my Employment, let my Actions all be to thy Glory,
and whatsoever I do it may be according as thou requirest in thy Word; that
doing nothing but what is, or tends to thy Glory, in a lawful Employment, I may
be prospered in all my Deeds.

A Valediction to the World and its Inhabitants.
VAin World adieu, whose chanting charms entice,
And keep me from the things of better price:
I now am bent for new discoveries,
In Lands that are beyond the azure Skies:
My faith a City fair has in her eye,
Whose Subjects all are Saints; thither go I:
There shall this drossie Flesh, and Blood (refined)
Immortal grow, and free from ^ears of mind:
Where (whilst my Saviors presence my mind chears)
My heart shall vent no sighs, my eyes no tears;
But filled with joys, from age to age I Will sing
Sweet Allelujahs to my God and King.
2. To Servants.
Farewell my Servants! though my Covenant
Requires attendance from you, none I Will want:
Your Master, and mine, own I go to see,
He calls me home; but mourn you not for me:
I must confess, a truant I have been,
Yet he has sworn he will pay my wages in,
Serve I him but the twinkling of an eye,
I shall have wages paid eternally.
His Debtor deep and desperate was I,
Until he sent his Son for me to die.
O love, stronger than death! my Soul away,
Make speed, (...) thy d^ar Master for thee stay.
3. To Intimate Friends.
Farewell my mind's embese^'d darlings dear;
I highly price you, y^^ must needs forbear
From imaging your enj^^m^nt; for I am called
By the great Friend of Friends, to be installed,
With his triumph^^^ friends, that are above
In the great Principality of Love.
Detain me not, nor (...) this an offense,
The King of Kings commands me; I must hence.
4. To Brothers Sisters, and Kindred.
Farewell my Flesh and Blood, my Kindred dear,
Whose homogeni^^ p^rts at first one were.
Till Rib made Eve made two (who still one were)
Millions of millions now in number are.
I have attained new consanguinity,
Who sing sweet Requiems eternally
To the enthroned Souls; not to be cy'd
By Mortal Optics, they are glorisi'd:
Heaven's their Foot stool, their Seat the Glorious Flore
Of his great Throne, that reigns for evermore.
5. To Father.
Farewell my beings instrumental cause,
Assigned by the Author of Divine Laws;
Who my new Father is, and old one was,
Ere you were so! to whem I now do pass.
Methinks with sorrow sore oppress's my heart,
To think that from you I a^ last must part.
But O why do I grieve! To go to him,
That gave his Son a ransom for my sin:
And by whose wonderfully great affection,
Made Love sole ground of my poor Souls election.
Father! if you are loath I gone should be,
Come but to him, you will surely come to me.
6. To Mother.
Farewell dear Mold, wherein I mortal clay,
Framed was, that bar'st me nine ^on^ths, night and day;
And after grievous travel gav'st me pass.
When (by the eternal Potter I framed was)
Into this vail of tears! thy torments bind me
To boundless love, yet thee must leave behind me:
Oh let me flee, and haste thee after me;
To dwell together in solicity.
7. To Children.
Farewell sweet implings, death's sweet writ of ease
Does me remove from you, the Epitomes
Of me and my dear second! farewell; I
Must have a residence beyond the sky,
You therefore I commit, unto your Father;
Who will you keep, and unto me will gather
You, if you faithful be unto the death;
And give you crowns of life, for transient breath,
In Heaven, with Angels, Saints, and Martyrs throng,
To sing for ever Sions Lamb's sweet Song.
8. To Wife.
Farewell my better half, life of my life,
And sub-celestial comfort, dearest Wife,
One heart in two, in parting we must cleave,
As we made one of two at meeting: leave,
Spare these heart-melting cries; let cries with tears
Thy frailties to bewail, sound in Gods ears:
Swim in those streams, unto that harbor; where
The presence of our King thy heart will cheer;
I do but go before, and thee expect
Among the number of the Lords Elect.
9. To all jointly.
Farewell World, Servants, Relations, near,
Brothers, and Sisters, all my Kindred dear;
Father, Mother, Children, and dear Wife:
All whom I dearly loved as my own life.
I must be gone, I must depart from hence;
Seeing it is for my good, you will not take offense.
My King and Captain calls, me to install,
In Heaven above, free from all slavish thrall.
Once more adieu unto you all, until
We shall together meet on Sions Hill:
Where we all jointly shall loud praises sing,
Unto our God, our Savior, and our King.
FINIS.

