RELIGION OUR TRUE INTEREST: OR PRACTICAL NOTES UPON The Third Chapter of
MALACHY, THE Sixteen, Seventeen and Eighteen VERSES.

Seasonable for the Times.

By THOMAS WATSON, sometimes Minister of Stephens Walbrook, Land.

PROVE. 14.27. The Fear of the Lord is a Fountain of Life.

LONDON, Printed by I. Astwood, for Tho. Parkhurst, at the Bible and Three
Crowns, at the lower end of Cheap Side, near Mercers-Chappel. 1682.

TO THE READER.
Christian Reader,
BOOKS are the Children of the Brain. In this Writing Age Eccles. 12.12.
(fere ad nauseam) I intended my Pen should have been silent, but the variety
and Weightiness of this Subject, as also the desire of some Friends did prevail
with me to Publish it. The main design of this excellent Scripture, is to
encourage Solid Piety, and confute the Atheists of the World, who imagine there
is no gain in Godliness. It was the Speech of King Saul to his Servants, 1 Samuel
22.7. Will the Son of Iesse give every one of you Fields and Vineyards? Will
the World or men's Lusts give them such noble Recompenses of Reward, as God
bestows upon his Followers? Surely, it is Holiness carries away the Garland. As
for this Treatise, it comes abroad in a plain dress: Truth like a Diamond
Shines brightest in its native Luster; Saint Paul came not to the Corinthians
(...), with excellency of Speech 2 Cor. 1.1.
, or the Pride of Oratory Mundi facundiam non venditavit. Vorstius.
; His Study was not to Court, but Convert. It is an unhappiness that in these
Luxuriant times, Religion should for the most part run either into Notion or
Ceremony; The Spirits of Religion are evaporated. When Knowledge is turned into
Taste, and digested into Practice, then it is Saving. That God would accompany
these few impolite Lines, with the Operation and Benediction of his holy
Spirit, and make them edifying, is the Prayer of him who is

Thine in all Christian Service, Thomas Watson.
Dowgate, Nov. 22. 1681.
THE TABLE ALPHABETICAL.
A
ABusers of Gods Jewels Punished. page 181. Afflictions have their
Consolations. p. 227 Apostasy dangerous p. 8 Appearance of sin to be shunned.
p. 47 Arguments to hold fast Integrity in evil times. p. 7 Assurance and the
Fear of God consistent. p. 21
B
BEst need Sparing. p. 202 Bodies of the Saints shall be perfect. p. 192
C
CArnal Fear evil. p. 14 Christians instead of speaking one to another, speak
one of another. p. 89 Comfort when God says, Ye are mine. p. 171 Covenant
Union with God to be endeavored. p. 172
D
DAy of Judgment, how far to be feared by a Child of God. p. 71 Day of making
up Gods Jewels. p. 190 Death how far to be feared by a Child of God. p. 67
Different carriage of God toward his Children and the Wicked. p. 134
E
EVil Thoughts are Punishable in Gods Court. p. 111 Excellency of the Fear of
God. p. 29 Eyes of Sinners at present shut. p. 209
F
FEar of God Described. p. 15 Fear of God is by a Trope put for all Religion.
ibid. Fear of God makes us Fear Sin. p. 45 Fearing God and keeping his
Commandments Conjoined. p. 54 Fear of God, how to be attained. p. 80 Fear of
missing Heaven. p. 78 Folly of Idolaters. p. 136 Friends may be forgetful, but
God will not. p. 150
G
GOD deals with his Saints, as a Father with his Son. p. 195 God deals well
with his People when he Afflicts them. p. 217 God takes notice of the Good in
his Children. p. 130 Gods harkening to us should make us hearken to him. p. 138
God has a Book of Remembrance for his People. p. 140 Gods owning of his
People. p. 161 Gods Sparing them. p. 201 Good Conference to be used. p. 82
Graces of the Saints shall be perfect. p. 191
H
HAsty Words show the Devil to be in the Tongue. p. 87 Hearts Deceit. p. 62
Heart not to be hardened against God. p. 156 Helps to good Discourse. p. 100
Helps to holy Thoughts. p. 127 Hell, how far to be Feared by a Believer. p. 73
Honor attends Holiness. p. 174
I
IDle Talk Censured, p. 85 Incitements to holy Thoughts. p. 114 Ingredients
into the Fear of God. p. 16 Integrity to be preserved Inviolable. p. 3 Jovial
Sinners reproved. p. 25
M
MAking up of Gods Jewels, what it implys. p. 185 Maintain honorable Thoughts
of God in Affliction. p. 231 Matter of our Holy Musings. p. 113 Means to be
good in evil times. p. 9 Mercies of God to be Recorded. 149 Murmuring a
God-provoking Sin. p. 87
N
NAme of God, what it signifies. p. 103
O
OAths weigh heavy in Gods Balance. p. 89 Omnisciency of God to be admired. p.
132
P
Privileges of being in Covenant with God. p. 165
R
REasons enforcing the Fear of God. p. 19
S
SAints should be sparing in their Censures of others. p. 205 Saints have Gods
Ear. p. 134 Saints Purgatory is in this Life. p. 144 Saints Gods Jewels. p. 175
Saints should shine as Jewels. p. 183 Satan's Snares p. 59 Scoffers the vilest
of Sinners. p. 28 Secure Sinners Characterized. p. 27 Serve God as a Son does
his Father. p. 203 Signs of the Fear of God. p. 45 Signs of such as shall go
to Hell. p. 74 Silence in Religion a loud sin. p. 85 Sinful compliance sordid.
p. 5 Sin worse than Affliction. p. 46 Sin begins in the Thoughts. p. 109
Sinners have not right thoughts of God. p. 107 Sinners shall not be spared. p.
203 Sins of the Wicked written down in Gods Book of Remembrance. p. 146
Swasives to holy Conference. p. 94
T
THinking of God in a right manner. p. 125 Thoughts of God may be Peccant. p.
124 Thoughts and good Speeches of the Godly are Written down. p. 140 Time of
Discerning between the Righteous and the Wicked. p. 210
V
VAin Thoughts the froth of the Brain. p. 108 Vain thoughts Pernicious. p. 109
Union of the Saints at last. p. 189
W
WAnt of the Fear of God the cause of all sin. p. 22 Wicked men Vile in Gods
account. p. 178 Wisdom to engage the Lord of Hosts on our side. p. 158 Works of
Mercy. p. 57
ERRATA.
PAge 85. line 26. for no, read not. Page 155. marg. 3 Use, dele 3. Page 188.
l. 15, for discords r. discord.

PRACTICAL NOTES UPON MALACH. III. Ver. 16, 17, etc.
Then they that feared the Lord spoke often one to another, and the Lord
hearkened and heard it, and a book of remembrance was written before him for
them that feared the Lord, and that thought upon his Name. And they shall be
mine (says the Lord of Hosts) in that day when I make up my Jewels, and I will
spare them as a man spares his own Son that serves him, etc.


CHAP. 1. Showing, that Christians should hold fast their Integrity in times of
defection.
THE Scripture of Truth Dan. 10.21.
, is the Ground of Faith. This Portion of Scripture which now presents it self
to our view, has its Sacred Elegancies, and is all glorious within. It was
composed by Malachy, whose name imports Messenger (...)
; he came upon an Embassage from the God of Heaven. This Prophet was so famous,
that Origin and others (though injudiciously) supposed him to be an Angel. He
lived after the building of the second Temple, and was (...), contemporary with
Haggai, and Zechariah Drusius.
.

This blessed Prophet did lift up his voice like a Trumpet, and tell the Jewish
Nation of their sins; and he was the last Trumpet that sounded in the Old
Testament. In the words of the Text are these parts.

I. A Character of the Godly. 1. In General, they were Fearers of God; they
that feared the Lord. 2. In Special: (1) They spoke often one to another. (2)
They thought upon Gods Name.

II. The Good Effects of their Piety. 1. The Lord regarded it; he hearkened and
heard. 2. He recorded it; a book of remembrance was written. 3. He rewarded it;
and this reward consisted in three things. (1) Gods owning them; they shall be
mine. (2) Gods Honoring them; in that day when I make up my Jewels. (3) Gods
Sparing them. I will spare them as a man spares his own Son that serves him.


Before I come to the several parts distinctly, here is a connexive particle
stands in the front of the Text which may not be omitted, namely, the word Then.

Then they that feared the Lord, etc. Then, that is, after Isreal's return from
the Babylonish Captivity; then, when the major part of the people grew corrupt,
and came worse out of the Furnace than they went in, verse. 13, 14 Nihil erat
integrum neque in sacerdotibus, neque in vulgo, laxis quasi habenis in omni
genere scelerum grassati fuerunt. Calvin.
in this bad juncture of time, then they that feared the Lord spoke often one
to another. Hence observe,

That the Profaneness of the times should not slacken but highthen our zeal.
Doct.
The looser others are, the stricter we should be. In those degenerate times
when men were arrived at the (...) and highth of Impudence, and durst speak
Treason against Heaven; then they that feared the Lord spoke often one to
another. When others were Plaintiffs these were Defendants; when others spoke
against God, these spoke for God.

In Noah's days all Flesh had corrupted it self, (the old World was drowned in
sin before it was drowned in water:) now at this time, Noah was perfect in his
Generation, and Noah walked with God, Genesis 6.9. He was the Phoenix of his age.
Athanasius stood up in the defense of the Truth, when the World was turned
Arrian Iste vir totius orbis impetum sustinuit.
. The more outrageous others are in Sin, the more courageous we should be for
Truth. When the Atheists said, it is Vain to serve God, Then they that feared
the Lord spoke often one to another.

Quest.
Why should we be holiest in evil Times.

Answ.
1. Because of the divine Injunction. God charge us to be singular, Mat. 5.47.
to be circumspect, Ephesians. 5.15. to be separate from Idolaters, 2 Cor. 6.17. to
shine as Lights in the World, Philip. 2.15. He forbids us to symbolize with
Sinners, or do as they do: the way to Hell is a beaten road, the Lord calls
to us to turn out of the road, Exodus 23.2. Thou shall not follow a multitude to
do evil (...). Bias.
. This is reason enough to keep our selves pure in a time of common Infection.
As Gods Word is our Rule, so his Will is our Warrant.

2. To be holiest in evil times is an Indication of the truth of Grace. To
profess Religion when the times favor it, is no Great matter. Who almost will
not court the Queen of the Gospel when she is hung with Jewels? but to own the
ways of God when they are decried and maligned, to love a persecuted truth,
this evidenceth a vital Principle of Goodness. Dead Fish swim down the stream,
living Fish swim against it. To swim against the common stream of evil shows
Grace to be alive. The Prophet Elias continuing zealous for the Lord of Hosts,
when they had dug down Gods Altars, 1 King. 19.10. showed his heart and lips
had been touched with a Coal from the Altar.

1 Use. See hence how unworthy they are of the Name of Christians who use
sinful compliance, and cut the Garment of their Religion according to the Mode
and fashion of the times. They consult not what is best, but what is safest Non
qua eundum sed qua itur. Sen.
. Complying spirits can truckle to the humors of others; they can bow either
to the East or to the Host; they prefer a whole Skin before a pure Conscience.
They can with the Planet Mercury vary their motion; they can as the Mariner
shift their Sail with every wind: and as the Mungril Israelites speak the
Language of Canaan and Ashdod. These are like the Samaritans of whom Josephus
says, when the Jews flourished they pretended to be akin to them, and come of
the tribe of Ephraim and Manasseh, but when the Jews were persecuted, they
disclaimed Kindred with them. The old Serpent has taught men crooked windings,
and to be for that Religion not which has truth on its side, but power.

2 Use. Let us keep up the vigor of our zeal in times of degeneracy. We should
by an holy Antiperistasis burn hotter in a frozen age. We live in the dregs of
time; Sin is grown common and impudent: It Is excellent to walk Antipodes to the
World. Romans 12.2. Let us be as Lillies and Roses among the Briars. Sin is never
the better because it is in fashion, nor will this plea hold at the last day,
that we did as the most. God will say, Seeing you sinned with the Multitude,
you shall go to Hell with the Multitude. O let us keep pure among dregs; let us
be like Fish that retain their freshness in salt waters; and as that Lamp which
shined in the smoking Furnace, Genesis 15.17.

Consider, 1. To be holy in times of General defection is that which God is
Greatly pleased with. The Lord was much taken with the holy conferences and
dialogues of these Saints in the Text. When others were inveighing against the
Deity, that there should be a parcel of holy Souls speaking of Glory and the
Life to come, their words were Music in Gods ears.

2. To keep up a spirit of Holiness in an adulterous Generation, is a
Christians honor. This was the glory of the Church of Pergamus, that she held
fast Christ's Name, even where Satan's seat was, Rev. 2.13. The Impiety of the
times is a Foyl to set off Grace the more, and make it cast a greater luster.
Then a Christian is most lovely, when he is (as Ambrose says) like the
Cypress, which keeps its Viridity and freshness in the Winter season. Psalm
37.37. Mark the perfect man, and behold the Upright: An upright man is always
worth beholding, but then he is most to be admired when like a bright Star he
Shines in the dark, and having lost all, holds fast his integrity.

3. To be Good in a prosligate Age, does much animate weak beginners; it
Strengthens feeble knees, Isa. 35.3. And shores up those Temples of the Holy
Ghost which are ready to fall. One man's Zeal is a Torch for others to light at.
How did the Constancy of the Martyrs inflame the love of many to the Truth!
Though only Christ's blood does Save, yet the blood of Martyrs may strengthen.
St. Paul's Prison Chain, made Converts in Nero's Court, two of which were
afterward Martyrs as History relates. Mr. Bradford's holy advice and example
so confirmed Bishop Farrar that he would not touch with the Roman Pollution.
Fox Acts and Mon.


4. How sad will it be for Christians to fall off from their former Profession,
and espouse a novel Religion. Julian Bathed himself in the blood of Beasts
Offered in Sacrifice to the Heathen Gods, and so as much as in him lay washed
off his former Baptism. In the time of Julius Caesar this Prodigy happened,
after a plentiful Vintage there were wild Grapes appeared upon their Vines,
which was looked upon as Ominous. When men seemed to bring forth the Fruits of
Righteousness, and afterward bring forth the Wild Grapes of Impiety, it is a
sad Omen and Prognostic of their Ruin, 2 Pet. 2.21. For it had been better
for them not to have known the way of Righteousness, than after they have known
it to turn from the Holy Commandment. Let all this make us maintain the power
of Holiness in the worst Times: Though others wonder we do not sin after the
rate that they do, yet, remember, it is better to go to Heaven with a few, than
to Hell in the Crowd.

How may we keep up the briskness and fervor of Grace in times of Apostasy.
Quest.


1. Let us beware of having our hearts too much linked to the World. Answ.
The World damps zeal, as Earth chokes the fire. We are bid to love our
Enemies; but the World is such an Enemy as we must not love, 1 John 2.15. Love
not the World. The World bewitcheth with her Blandishments, and kills with her
silver Darts. He who is a Demas, will be a Judas; a lover of the World, will
for a piece of Money betray a good Cause, and make Shipwreck of a good
Conscience.

2. Let us be Volunteers in Religion; that is, Choose God's service, Psalm.
119.30. I have chosen the way of truth. It is one thing to be good out of
Design, and another thing to be good out of Choice. Hypocrites are good only
out of worldly design, they embrace the Gospel for secular advantage, and these
will in time fall away. The Chelidonian Stone keeps its Virtue no longer than
it is enclosed in Gold, take it out of the Gold, and it loses its virtue.
False Hearts are good no longer than they are enclosed in golden Prosperity,
take them out of the Gold, and they lose all their seeming Goodness: But if we
would retain our Sanctity in Backsliding times we must serve God purely out of
Choice. He who is good out of Choice loves holiness for its beauty, and adheres
to the Gospel, when all the Jewels of preferment are pulled off.

3. Let us be inlaid with sincerity. If a piece of Timber begin to bend, it is
because it is not sound. Why do any bend and comply against their Conscience,
but because their hearts are not sound, Psalm. 78.37. Their hearts were not
right with him, neither were they steadfast. Sincerity causes stability. When
the Apostle exhorts to stand fast in the evil day, among the rest of the
Christian armor, he bids them put on the Girdle of truth, Ephesians. 6.19. Stand
fast therefore, having your loins Girt about with truth. The Girdle of Truth is
nothing else but sincerity.

4. Let us get love to Christ. Love is an holy transport, it fires the
affections, steels the Courage, carries a Christian above the love of life, and
the fear of death, Cant. 8.7. Many waters cannot quench Love: Love made Christ
suffer for us. If any one ask what Christ died off; it may be answered, he died
of Love. If we love Christ, we will own him in the worst times, and be like
that Virgin Basil speaks of, who not accepting deliverance upon sinful terms,
cried out, Let Life and Money go, welcome Christ.

5. If we would keep up the sprightly Vigor of Grace in evil times, let us
harden our Hearts against the taunts and reproaches of the wicked. David was
the Song of the Drunkards, Psalm. 69.12. A Christian is never the worse for
reproach. The Stars are not the less Glorious though they have ugly names given
them, the Bear, the Dragon, etc. Reproaches are but Assulae Crucis, the Chips
of the Cross. How will he endure the Stake, who cannot bear a Scoff? Quid iste
faceret in igne, qui Christum rubuit in nube? Hierom.
Reproaches for Christ, are Ensigns of Honor, Badges of Adoption, 1 Pet. 4.14.
(...) Chrysostom.
Let Christians bind these as a Crown about their Head. Better have men
reproach you for being good, than have God Damn you for being wicked. Be not
laughed out of your Religion: If a Lame man laugh at you for going upright,
will you therefore halt?

6. If we would keep up the Vigor of devotion in a General Epilepsy, let us
beg of God confirming Grace. Habitual Grace may flag; Peter had habitual Grace,
yet was foiled; he lost a single Battle, though not the Victory. We need
exciting, assisting, corroborating Grace; not only Grace in us, but Grace with
us, 1 Cor. 15.10. Auxiliary Grace (which is (...), a fresh gale of the Spirit)
will carry us undauntedly through the Worlds blustering storms. Thus shall we
be able to keep up our Heroic zeal in corrupt times, and be as Mount Zion
which cannot be moved.

CHAP. II. Showing the Character in general of the Godly, and what the Fear of
God is.
1. HAving done with the frontispiece of the Text, I begin (1) with the
Character in General of the Godly, they are Fearers of God, they that feared
the Lord.

What Fear is meant here? Quest.


1. Negatively; Answ.
It is not meant (1) of a natural Fear, which is a tremor or palpitation of
Heart, occasioned by the approach of some imminent danger, (...). Arist. Rhet.
lib. 2. c. 6.
Eccles. 12.5. Fears shall be in the way.

2. It is not meant of a sinful Fear, which is twofold.

1. A Superstitious Fear: An Hare crossing the way, is by some more dreaded
than an Harlot lying in the Bed.

2. A Carnal fear Pessimus in dubijs timor augur.
; this is the Ague of the Soul which sets it a shaking. He who is timorous will
be treacherous; he will decoy his friend, and deny his God. Three times in one
Chapter Christ cautions us against the fear of Men, Mat. 10. Verse. 26, 28, 31.
Aristotle says the reason why the Camelion turns into so many colors, is
through excessive fear: Fear makes men change their Religion as the Camelion
does her Colors.

1. Carnal Fear is discruciating, 1 Ioh. 4.18. Fear has torment in it; the
Greek word for Torment, (...).
is sommetimes put for Hell, Mat. 25.46. Fear has Hell in it.

2. It is Pernicious. 1. It Indisposeth for Duty. The Disciples under the power
of Fear, were fitter to Fly than to Pray, Mat. 26.56.

2. It puts men upon indirect means to Save themselves, Prove. 26.25. The Fear
of man brings a Snare; what made Peter deny Christ, and Origin sprinkle
incense before the Idol, but fear?

2. Positively; the Fear meant in the Text is a Divine Fear, which is the
reverencing and adoring Gods Holiness, and setting our selves always under his
Sacred inspection. The infinite distance between God and us causes this Fear.
When Gods Glory began to shine out upon the Mount, Moses said, I exceedingly
fear and quake, Heb. 12.21. Such as approach Gods presence with light feathery
Hearts, and Worship him (...) in a rude careless manner, have none of this
fear. In the words are two parts.

1. The Act, Fear. 2. The Object, the Lord.
They that feared the Lord: The fear of God is the Sum of all Religion,
Eccles. 12.13. Fear is the leading Grace, the first seed God sows in the Heart.
When a Christian can say little of Faith, and perhaps nothing of Assurance, yet
he dares not deny but he fears God. Nehem. 1.11.
God is so Great that he is afraid of displeasing him, and so Good that he is
afraid of losing him.

It is an indispensible Duty incumbent on Christians to be Fearers of God. Doct.
Eccles. 5.7. Fear thou God. Deuteronomy. 28.58. That thou may fear this Glorious
and fearful name the Lord thy God. This goes to the very constituting of a
Saint. One can no more act as a Christian without Fear, than he can act as a
man without reason. This Holy Fear is the fixed temper and Complexion of the
Soul; This Fear is not Servile but Filial; there is difference between Fearing
God, and being afraid of God; the Godly fear God as a Child does his Father,
the wicked are afraid of God as the Prisoner is of the Judge. This divine Fear
will appear admirable, if you consider how it is mixed and interwoven with
several of the Graces.

1. The Fear of God is mixed with Love, Psalm. 145.19, 20. The Chaste Spouse
fears to displease her Husband because she loves him: There Is a necessity that
fear and love should be in conjunction. Love is as the Sails to swiften the
Souls motion, and Fear as the Ballast to keep it steady in Religion: Love will
be apt to grow wanton unless it be poised with fear.

2. The Fear of God is mixed with Faith, Hebr. 11.7. By Faith Noah moved with
fear, etc. When the Soul looks either to Gods Holiness, or it is own sinfulness,
it fears, but it is a fear mixed with faith in Christ's merits; the Soul does
tremble yet trust. Like a Ship which lies at Anchor, though it shakes with the
wind, yet it is fixed at Anchor. God in Great wisdom coupleth these two graces
of Faith and Fear. Fear preserves seriousness, faith preserves cheerfulness.
Fear is as Lead to the Net to keep a Christian from floating in presumption,
and Faith is as Cork to the Net to keep him from sinking in despair.

3. The Fear of God is mixed with Prudence: he who fears God has the Serpents
eye in the Doves head. He foresees and avoids those Rocks which others run
upon. Prove. 22.3. Though divine Fear does not make a Person Cowardly, it makes
him Cautions.

4. The Fear of God is mixed with Hope. Psalm 33.18. The eye of the Lord is on
them that fear him, that hope in his mercy. One would think Fear should destroy
Hope, but it cherishes it. Fear is to Hope as the Oil to the Lamp, it keeps it
burning: the more we fear Gods Justice, the more we may hope in his Mercy.
Indeed such as have no Fear of God do sometimes hope, but it is not (...), Good
hope through Grace, 2 Thessa. 2.16. Sinners pretend to have the helmet of Hope,
1 These. 5.8. but want the breast plate of Righteousness, Ephesians. 6.14.

5. The Fear of God is mixed with Industry, Heb. 11.7. Noah moved with fear
prepared an ark. There is 1. A fear of diffidence, which represents God as a
severe Judge, this takes the Soul off from duty Mat. 25.25.
. 2. A fear of diligence; a Christian fears and prays, fears and repents. Fear
quickens Industry. The Spouse fearing lest the Bridegroom should come before
she is dressed, hastens and puts on her Jewels, that she may be ready to meet
him. Fear causes a watchful eye, and a working hand. Fear banisheth sloth out
of it is Diocese. The Greatest labor in Religion (says Holy Fear) is far less
than the least pain the damned feel in Hell: no Greater Spur in the Heavenly
race than fear.

CHAP. III. Cogent Reasons enforcing the Fear of God.
THe Reasons enforcing this Holy Fear are, 1. Because Gods eye is always upon
us. He who is under the eye of his earthly Prince, will be careful of doing
any thing that should offend him. Job 31.4. Does not he see my ways, and count
all my Steps? God sees in the dark. Psalm 139.12. The darkness hides not from
thee. The night is no Curtain, the clouds are no Canopy to hinder or intercept
Gods sight. He sees the Heart. A Judge can judge of the fact, but God judges
of the Heart. Ier. 17.10. He is like Ezekiels wheels, full of eyes, Ezekiel.
10.12. and as Cyril says, (...), all Eye. Should not this make us walk with
fear and circumspection? we cannot sin but our Judge looks on.

2. God interprets our not fearing him a slighting of him. As not to praise
God, is to wrong him; so not to fear God, is to slight him. Of all things a
person can least endure to be slighted. Psalm 10.13. Wherefore does the wicked
contemn God (...). Arist. rhet.
? For a worm to slight it is Maker causes the fury to rise up in Gods face.
Ezekiel. 38.18.

3. God has power to destroy us. Mat. 10.28. Fear him who has power to
destroy both Soul and Body in Hell. God can look us into our Grave, and with a
breath blow us into Hell, and shall we not fear him? Is it easy to wrestle
with flames? Psalm 90.11. Who knows the Power of his anger? What engines or
buckets can quench the infernal fire? We are apt to fear men who have power in
their hand to hurt us; what is their power to Gods? They threaten a Prison, God
threatens Hell. They threaten our Life, God threatens our Soul, and shall we
not tremble before him In gehenna nec qui torquet fatigatur ^ nec qui torquetur
moritur. Bern. flor.
? O dreadful, when the great Fountains of Gods wrath shall be broken up, and
all his Bitter Vials poured out! Ezekiel. 22.14. Can thy heart endure, or can thy
hands be strong in the day that I shall deal with thee?

But are not we bid to serve God without Fear? Object.
Luke 1.74.

We must not Fear God with such a fear as the wicked do; Answ.
they fear him as a Turkish Slave does his Pateroon; they fear him so as they
hate him and wish there were no God Quem metuunt oderunt.
. We must not serve God with this hellish fear, but we must serve him with an
ingenuous fear sweetened with love.

CHAP. IV. Containing a practical Improvement of the Proposition.
IT confutes the Papists, 1 Use. Confutation.
who hold that a Christian cannot have Assurance, because he is to serve God
with fea^. Assurance and Fear are diversa but not Opposita, different but not
contrary. A Child may have assurance of his Fathers love, yet has a fear of
offending him. Who more fearful of Sin than St. Paul? 1 Cor. 9.27. Yet who had
more assurance? Galat. 2.20. Who Loved me, and Gave himself for me. Faith
procures assurance Ephesians. 1.13.
, fear preserves it.

2 Use. Information.
Is it a duty to Fear God, what strangers then are they to Religion, who are
void of this Holy Fear? The Godly fear and sin not, the wicked sin and fear
not. They are like the Leviathan, who is made without Fear, Job 41.33. Want of
the fear of God is the innate Cause of all Wickedness, Romans 3.14. Whose mouth
is full of Cursing and bitterness, their feet are swift to shed blood. Whence
was this? verse. 18. There is no fear of God before their eyes: Abraham surmized
the men of Gerar would stick at no Sin; why so? Genesis 20.11. I thought surely
the fear of God is not in this place. The Judge in the Gospel is called an
unjust Judge, Luke 18.6. And no wonder, for verse. 2. he feared not God. There
must needs be an excess of Sin where there wants the Fear of God to restrain
it. The water must needs Overflow where there are no banks to keep it out. We
live in a Godless age; durst men Sin at that rate as they do, if the fear of
God were regent in their hearts? durst they swear, be unclean, use False
weights, bear false witness, hate purity, deride Gods signs in the Heaven,
Forge Plots, Persecute Christ's body, if they had the fear of God before their
eyes? these men proclaim to the World that they are Atheists; they believe not
the Immortality of the Soul. They are worse than brutish, a Beast fears the
fire, these fear not Hell Fire. They are worse than Devils, for they believe
and tremble, Jam. 2.19.

Let us bewail the want of the Fear of God. -- Terras Astraea reliquit. Use 3.
Lamentation.


Whence is it so few fear God? Quest.


1. Because they have not the knowledge of God. Omne peccatum fundatur in
ignorantia.
Prove. 1.24. Answ.
They hated knowledge, and did not choose the fear of the Lord: did men know
God in his immense glory, they would be swallowed up with divine amazement.
When the Prophet Isaiah had a glimpse of Gods Glory, he was stricken with holy
consternation. Isaiah 6.5. Woe is me, I am undone, for mine eyes have seen the
King the Lord of Hosts. But the Ignorance of God banisheth fear.

2. Men fear not God because they presume of his Mercy. God is merciful, and
they doubt not of the Virtue of this sovereign Balm. But who is Gods mercy for?
Luke 1.50. His mercy is on them that fear him. Such as fear not Gods Justice,
shall not taste his Mercy.

Let this be for a Lamentation, that the fear of God is so vanished. Where
almost is it to be found? Some fear shame, others fear danger, but where is he
who fears a Deity? Diogenes came into a full Market with a Candle and Lanthorn;
they asked him what he sought? says he, Hominem quaero, I seek a man; that is,
a wise man. So in the Crowd of people we may go and seek a man fearing God.

And not only among the Commonalty, but even among Professors how sew fear God
in truth! Profession is often made a Mantle to cover sin. Absalom palliated his
Treason with a Religious Vow. 2 Samuel 15.7. The Pharisees made long Prayer a
preface to Oppression, Mat. 23.14. This is sordid, to carry on wicked designs
sublarva Pictatis, under a pretext of Piety. The Snow covers many a dunghill.
A snovvy white Profession covers many a foul heart. The sins of Professors are
more odious. Thistles are bad in a Field, but worse in a Garden. The sins of
the wicked anger God, but the sins of Professors Grieve him.

It reproves Jovial Sinners, Use 4. Reproof. 1 Branch*
who are so far from fearing God, that they spend their time in mirth and
vvantonness. Luke 17.27. They did eat, they drank, they married, till the flood
came and destroyed them all. There is a place in Africa called Tombutium,
where the Inhabitants spend all the day in piping and dancing. What sensual
effeminate lives do the Gallants of our age live! They spend their Life in a
Frolic. As if God had made them to be like the Leviathan who plays in the Sea.
Job 21.13. They take the Timbrel and Harp, and rejoice at the sound of the
Organ. They ride to Hell upon the back of Pleasure, and go merrily to damnation.

Though the Times are sad, they have no fear in regard of the public: Does
not God call us to trembling? our sins are the fiery Comets that presage evil.
May not we fear the Glory is departing? may not we fear the death of Religion
before the birth of Reformation? May not we fear some portentous calamity
should bring up the rear of former Judgments? and (as the Prophet Ezekiel
says,) Should me then make-mirth? Ezekiel. 21.10 Cantabat moestis tibia
funeribus. Ovid.
. But Jovial spirits have banished the fear of God. Amos 6.4, 5. That lie upon
beds of Ivory, and stretch themselves upon their couches, that drink wine in
Bowls, and anoint themselves with the chief Ointments. Sinners whose hearts are
hardened with soft pleasures, let them have their lusts, and farewell Christ and
his Gospel. Jude 12. Feeding themselves without fear. But they Forget death
will bring in the reckoning, and they must pay the reckoning in Hell. The Great
Turk when he intends the death of any of his Bashaws, invites them to a
Sumptuous Feast, and then causes them to be taken away from the Table and
strangled: so Satan Gluts men with sinful pastimes and delights, and then
strangles them. Foolish Gallants are like the Fish that swim pleasantly through
the Silver streams of Jordan, till at last they fall into the dead Sea 1 Timothy
6.9.
.

It reproves secure Sinners who have no Fear of God. Like Laish of old, 2. Br.
Judge. 18.27. A people quiet and secure. Those who are least safe, are most
confident. Security casts men into a deep Sleep. Birds that build and roost in
Steeples, being used to the continual ringing of Bells, the noise does not at
all disquiet them. So Sinners who have been long used to the sound of Aarons
Bells, though ever and anon they have a peal rung out against their sins, yet
being used to it, they are not startled. A secure sinner is Known thus:

1. He lives as bad as the worst, yet hopes to be saved as well as the best. He
does bless himself, saying, I shall have peace, though I walk in the
imagination of my heart, Deuteronomy. 29.19. As if a man should drink Poison, yet not
doubt but he shall have his health. A secure sinner lies in Delilahs lap, yet
hopes to be in Abraham's bosom.

2. A secure sinner thinks all is well, because all is in peace. He hears
others speak of a Spirit of bondage, and the terrors they have felt for sin, he
thanks God he never Knew what Trouble of spirit meant; he thinks his Conscience
is Good, because it is quiet. When the Devil keeps the Palace all is in peace,
Luke 11.21. The Philosopher says, one Great sign of an Earthquake is excessive
Calmness of the Air: ungrounded peace does presage an Earthquake in the
conscience.

3. A secure sinner is careless about the main Chance. (...). Mat. 26.26
The Soul is the princely part, which is crowned with reason; it is a glass of
the* Trinity, as Plato calls it. A secure sinner provides for his Body, but
neglects his Soul; like one that waters his Flowers, but never minds his
Jewels. Behold here a secure person, who is in a spiritual Lethargy; he has no
sense of the life to come, he is destitute of the fear of God.

It reproves Scoffers, who are the vilest of sinners. 3. Branch.
2 Pet. 3.3. There shall come in the last days Scoffers. Such were Lucian and
Porphiry. These Ishmaels jeer at holy walking, and make all Religion a
Ridicule. They throw Squibs of reproach at the Saints. Quintinus scoffed at
Christ's Apostles. In the Massacre at Paris, the Papists cried out to the
Protestants when they murdered them, Where is now your God? what is become of
all your Psalms now, and your Prayers? Some Martyrs in Prague, as they were at
Supper (being the next day to suffer) comforted themselves saying, That this
was their last Supper upon Earth, and that to morrow they should sup with
Christ in Heaven; a Great Papist flouted them, saying, Has Christ Cooks for
you in Heaven? These are Devils in the likeness of men. They are far from the
fear of God: The Scorners chair stands at the mouth of Hell.

It exhorts us to get the fear of God planted in our hearts. Use 5. Exhortation.
Prove. 28.19. Happy is he that fears always Homo Time Deum, and minantem
mundum ridebis.
. The fear of God would influence all our actions. It would make us Good in
both Tables. It would make us Holy toward God, and Righteous toward men. We
would be true in our Promises, just in our dealings. Mat. 7.12. That I may
press you to this Holy Fear, let me show you the dignity and excellency of it.

1. The fear of God is the very Badge and Livery of a Saint. The Saints of old
were men fearing God. Genesis 22.12. Act. 10.22. 1 Kin. 18.3. Obadiah feared the
Lord Greatly. Not all the Moral Virtues in their Highest elevation make a
Saint, but here is his true Character, He is one that Fears God. Saint Austin
said of himself, that he did knock at Heaven-gate tremibunda manu, with a
trembling hand; Christ calls his Elect his sheep, John 10.27. Sheep are of a
trembling nature. The Saints are tremulous, they dare not take that liberty as
others do.

2. The Fear of God is a main branch of wisdom. It Is called (...), the Head of
wisdom, Prove. 1.7. (...). Sophocles.
Wisdom is more precious than Rubies, Prove. 3.15. No Jewel we wear, does so
adorn us as wisdom; now the fear of God is our wisdom: Job 28.28. And unto man
he said, the fear of the Lord that is wisdom Corona sapientiae Timor Domini.
Aug. Tom. 9
.

Quest.
Wherein is the fear of God the true wisdom?

Answ.
1. The fear of God is Wisdom as it makes us careful about our spiritual
accounts. Wisdom lies in nothing more than in keeping accounts exactly. The
fear of God teaches one to examine the state of his Soul critally. O my Soul
how is it with thee? do thou gain or lose? is thy Faith in it is Infancy,
being but newly laid to the breast of a Promise? or is it Grown to some
stature? how is it? does Grace prevail or Sin? Thus the fear of God makes us
wisely balance our accounts, and see how matters stand between God and our
Souls. Psalm 77.6. I commune with my own heart, and my spirit made diligent
search.

2. The fear of God is Wisdom as it makes us understand divine secrets. Psalm
25.14. The secret of the Lord is with them that fear him Arcana Evangelii per
internam spiritus illuminationem enunciat Deus. Piscator.
. He must needs be wise who is acquainted with the Arcana coeli, the secrets of
Heaven. A fearer of God is acquainted with the secret of Election, 1 Thessalonians.
1.4. of Gods love, Rev. 1.5. of the holy unction, 1 John 2.20. He knows Gods
mind, 1 Cor. 2.16. We have the mind of Christ.

3. The fear of God is Wisdom as it makes us considerative. Psalm 119.59. I
considered my ways. A great part of wisdom lies in consideration. He who fears
God considers how Vain the world is, therefore dares not love it; how short
Time is, therefore dares not lose it; how precious Salvation is, therefore
dares not neglect it.

4. The Fear of God is Wisdom as it makes us walk wisely. Col. 4.5. Walk
wisely, (...), toward them that are without. 1. The Fear of God makes us walk
affably. Genesis 23.7. Abraham stood up and bowed himself to the Children of Heth.
Piety does not exclude Courtesy. 2. The Fear of God makes us walk
inoffensively: it prevents not only Scandals but Indecencies. 2 Cor. 11.12.
That I might cut off occasion from them that desire occasion. The Veneration of
a Deity causes circumcision of Heart, and circumspection of Life.

5. The Fear of God is Wisdom, as it preserves us from Hell: it is wisdom to
keep out of danger; fear makes us fly from the wrath to come.

3. The Fear of God is the best Certificate to show for Heaven. Have you
knowledge? so has Satan; have you Profession? so has Satan, he transforms
himself into an Angel of light. But have you filial fear? herein you excel him.
The fear of God is, though not our Plea, yet our Evidence for Heaven.

4. There is that in God which may command fear. Job 37.22. With God is
terrible Majesty.

1. With God is Majesty.

1. There is Majesty in Gods Name, Jehovah. It comes from an Hebrew Radix (...)
, which imports Gods absolute, Eternal, and Independent being. 2. There is
Majesty in Gods Looks. Job had but a glimpse of God, and he was even swallowed
up with divine amazement, Job 42.5. Now mine Eye sees thee, wherefore I abhor
my self. 3. There is Majesty in Gods Words, he speaks with Majesty; as when he
gave the Law in thundering, insomuch that the people said, Let not God speak
with us lest we dye. 4. There is Majesty in Gods Attributes; his Holiness,
Power, Justice, which are the Irradiations of the divine Essence. 5. There is
Majesty in Gods Works, Psalm 145.5. I will speak of the Honor and Majesty of
thy wondrous works. Every Creature sets forth Gods Majesty; we may see the
Majesty of God Blazing in the Sun, Twinkling in the Stars: Gods Majesty is
discernable in those two Wonders of nature Behemoth and Leviathan, Job 40.18.
chap. 41.19. In short, the Majesty of God is seen in humbling the Children of
Pride. He turned King Nebuchadnezzar to grass, and made him Fellow-commoner
with the Beasts: Does not all this call for Fear?

2. With God is Terrible Majesty. Psalm 76.12. He is terrible to the Kings of
the Earth. There is a time coming when God will be dreadful to his enemies;
when Conscience is awake, when Death strikes, when the last Trump sounds. And
shall not we Fear this God? Ier. 5.22. Fear ye not me, says the Lord, will ye
not tremble at my presence? The Fearing Gods Justice is the way not to feel it.

And let it not seem strange to you, if I tell you, that in respect of Gods
infinite Majesty, there will be some of this blessed Fear in Heaven. Not a Fear
that has Torment in it, for Perfect love will cast out Fear. But an Holy,
Sweet, Reverential fear. Though God has so much beauty in him as shall cause
love, and joy, in Heaven, yet this beauty is mixed with so much Majesty, as
shall cause a Veneration in Glorified Saints.

5. The Fear of God tends to life, Pro. 19.23. It is true, 1. In a temporal
sense, Prove. 10.27. The fear of the Lord prolongeth days; in the Original it
is, It adds days (...)
. Long life is Promised as a blessing, Psalm 91.16. With long Life will I
satisfy him. The best way to come to an (...), a Good Old age, is the Fear of
God. Sin curtails the life: many a man's excess wastes his Vitals, enervates his
strength, and cuts him short of those years which by the course of nature might
be arrived at Cur scelere mortem acceleras? Eccles. 7.17.
. You that desire to live long, live in the Fear of God. Deuteronomy. 6.24. The Lord
commanded us to fear the Lord our God, Mercer.
that he might preserve us alive.

2. It is true in a Spiritual sense. The Fear of the Lord tends to life:
namely, to life Eternal. Life is sweet, and Eternal makes it Sweeter AEterna
Vita verae vita, Aug.
. The Life of bliss has no Term of Years wherein it expires, 1 These. 4.17.
Ever with the Lord: The Lamp of Glory shines, but does not spend; so that
divine Fear tends to Life; a life with God and Angels for ever.

6. The Fear of God gives full satisfaction, Prove. 19.23. He that has it,
shall abide satisfied. Such as are destitute of Gods Fear never meet with
satisfaction. Job 20.22. In the midst of his sufficiency he shall be in
straits. This is a riddle, to be full yet not have enough. The meaning is,
there is still something wanting: he who Fears not God, though his Barns are
full, yet his Mind is not quiet. The sweet Waters of Pleasure do rather inflame
the thirst than satisfy it. Omnia fui et nihil expedit; I have run through all
the delights and Grandures of the world, and could never find full contentment,
said the Emperor Severus. But he who has the Fear of the Lord, shall abide
satisfied.

1. He shall be satisfied.

His Soul shall be filled with Grace, his Conscience with peace: an Holy man
said, when God had replenished him with inward joy, It is enough Lord, thy
Servant is a clay vessel and can hold no more.

2. He shall abide satisfied.

This satisfaction shall not cease; it shall be a Cordial in death, and a Crown
after death.

7. The fear of God makes a little to be sweet, Prove. 15.16. Better is a little
with the fear of the Lord. Why is a little better? because that little a
Believer has he holds in Capite, in his Head Christ; that little is sweetened
with the love of God. He has with that little a contented mind; and
contentment turns Daniels Pulse into Venison Dan. 1.12
. Again, that little is a Pledge of more; that little Oil in the Cruse is but
an earnest of that Golden joy and bliss which the Soul shall have in Heaven.
Thus a little with the Fear of God is better than all unsanctified riches.
Lazarus's Crumbs were better than Dives his Banquet.

8. The Fear of God is a Christians safety. He is invulnerable, nothing can
hurt him: Plunder him of his Money, he carries a treasure about him he cannot
be robbed of (...). Chrysostom.
. Isa. 33.6. Cast him into bonds, his Conscience is free; Kill his Body, it
shall rise again. He who has on this Breast Plate of Gods Fear, may be shot
at, but can never be shot through Si vis esse securus, semper time.
.

9. The Fear of God makes all things go well with us, Psalm 128.2. Blessed is
every one that fears the Lord, happy shall thou be, and it shall be well with
thee Eccles. 8.12.
.

Is it not well with that man who has all things go on his side, and has
nothing wanting that may do him Good? Psalm 84.11. If God sees Health or Riches
Good for him, he shall have them. Every Providence shall center in his
happiness. O what an inducement is here to solid Piety. Come what times will,
it shall be well with them that Fear God. When they dye they shall go to God,
and while they live every thing in the world shall do them good.

10. The Fear of God is a great Cleanser, Psalm 19.9. The fear of the Lord is
clean. It is so, 1. In its own nature, it is a pure, Crystal, Orient grace. 2.
It is clean Effective, in the effect of it; it cleanses the Heart and Life; as
a Spring works out the mud, so it purges out the love of sin. The Heart is the
Temple of God, and Fear sweeps and cleanses this Temple that it be not defiled.

11. The Fear of God makes us accepted with God, Act. 10.35. In every nation he
that Fears God is accepted with him. What was St. Paul so ambitious of? 2
Cor. 5.9. We labor that we may be accepted with him (...).
. Divine Fear ingratiates us into divine Favor. Such as are Fearless of God,
neither their Persons or Offerings find acceptance, Amos 5.21, 22. I despise
your Feast days, and I will not smell in your solemn Assemblies; though ye
offer me burnt-offerings, I will not accept them. Who will take a Gift from one
that has the plague?

12. The Fear of God lays a train for spiritual joy: some may think the Fear
of God breeds sadness; no, it is the inlet to joy (...). Chrysostom. ad pop.
Antioch. Hom. 18.
The Fear of God is the morning Star, which ushers in the Sun light of comfort,
Acts 9.31. Walking in the Fear of the Lord, and in the comforts of the Holy
ghost. The Fear of God has solid joy in it, though not wanton. Oecolampadius
an holy man being on his sickbed, was asked if the Light offended him? he
putting his hand to his heart said, Hic sat lucis; Here I have light enough.
God mixeth joy with Holy Fear, that fear may not seem slavish.

13. The Fear of God drives out all other base Fear Quid timet homo, in sinu
Dei positus? Aug.
. Carnal fear is an enemy to Religion. The Fear of God frights it away; it
causes Courage, Exodus 18.21. Able men, such as Fear God: some Translations
render it, Men of Courage. When a Dictator Governed in Rome, all other Offices
ceased. Where the Fear of God rules in the Heart, it expells fleshly Fear. When
the Emperess Eudoxia threatened to banish Chrysostom, Tell her, says he, I fear
nothing but sin. The Fear of God swallows up all other Fear, as Moses Rod
swallowed up the Magitians Rods.

14. To be void of Gods Fear, is Folly, Psalm 75.4. I said to the Fools, deal
not Foolishly, and to the wicked, lift not up the Horn. 1. Are not they Fools
who gratify their Enemy? They who want the Fear of God do so. Satan baits his
hook with pleasure and profit, and they swallow bait and hook and all; this
pleases Satan, men's sins feast the Devil Vitia hominum sunt epulae daemonum.
. Who but a Fool would humor his enemy?

2. Is it not folly to prefer Slavery before Liberty? if a Slave in the gally
should have his freedom offered him, but he should say, he had rather Tug at
the Oar and be a slave, than have his liberty, would not he be Judged
indiscreet? Such is the case of him who Fears not God. The Gospel offers to
free him from the miserable captivity of Sin, but he chooses rather to be a
slave to his lusts Stulti est compedes licet aureas amare. Seneca.
. He is like the Servant under the Law. Exodus 21.5. I love my Master, I will
not go out free. He was displeased with a year of Iubilee: The Foolish sinner
had rather have his Ear bored to the Devils service, than be translated into
the Glorious liberty of the Sons of God, Romans 8.21.

3. Is not he a Fool, who having but one Jewel will venture the loss of it? The
Soul is this Jewel, and the sinner is fearless of it, he will throw it away
upon the world; as if one should throw Pearls and Diamonds at Pear Trees.
Ephrem Syrus used to say, He who Pampers his body and neglects his Soul, is
like him who feasts his Slave and starves his Wife.

4. Is not he a Fool, who refuses a rich offer? if one should offer to adopt
another, and make him Heir of his Estate, and he should refuse it, would not
his discretion be called in question? God offers Christ to a sinner, and
promises to entail all the riches of Heaven upon him, but wanting the Fear of
God he refuses this Great offer. Psalm 81.11. Israel would none of me: Is not
this a Prodigy of madness? may not the Devil beg every sinner for a Fool at the
last day Numquid Deus stultis daturus est regnum coelorum. Aug.
?

15. The Fear of God is a Sovereign Antidote against Apostasy: the Devil was
the first Apostate. How rife is this sin! more shipwracks are at Land than at
Sea; men make shipwreck of a Good Conscience. Apostates are said to put Christ
to open shame, Heb. 6.6. The Fear of God is a (...), a preservative against
Apostasy. Ier. 32.40. I will put my Fear in their hearts, that they shall not
depart from me. I will so love them, that I will not depart from them; and they
shall so Fear me, that they shall not depart from me.

15. There are excellent Promises made to them that Fear God, Malach. 4.2. Unto
you that Fear my Name, shall the Sun of righteousness arise with healing in his
Wings. Here is a promise of Christ; he is a Sun for Light and Vivifical
Influence; and a Sun of Righteousness, as he diffuseth the Golden beams of
Justification Radiis justitiae suae p^rsundens animum. Tremel.
. And he has healing in his Wings; the Sun heals the Air, dries up the Cold
moistures, exhales the Vapors which would be Pestilential; so Christ has
healing in his Wings, he heals the hardness and impurity of the Soul. And the
Horison in which this Sun arises, is in hearts Fearing God. To you that Fear
my Name, shall the Sun of righteousness arise. And, there is another Great
Promise, Psalm 115.13. He will bless them that Fear the Lord, both Small and
Great. God blesses such in their Name, Estate, Souls. And this blessing can
never be reversed: As Isaac said, I have blessed him, and he shall be blessed,
Genesis 27.33. Such as Fear God are privileged Persons, none can take away from
them either their birthright, or their blessing.

16. Fear is an admirable Instrument in Promoting Salvation, Philip. 2.12. Work
out your Salvation with Fear. Fear is that flaming Sword, which turns every way
to keep sin from entering Custos animae timor. Aug.
. Prove. 6.16. Fear stands Sentinel in the Soul, and is ever upon it is
Watchtower. Fear causes circumspection, he who walks in Fear treads warily:
Fear begets Prayer, and Prayer engages the help of Heaven.

17. The Lord is much pleased with such as Fear him. Psalm 147.11. The Lord
takes pleasure in them that Fear him. In the Septuagint it is (...).
, The Lord bears Good will toward them that Fear him: Pagnin and Buxtorf
render it, The Lord delights in them that Fear him. Never did Suitor take such
pleasure in a Person he loved, as God does in them that Fear him; they are his
Hephsibah, or chief solace, Isa. 62.4. He says of them as of Sihon, Psalm
132.14. Here is my rest for ever, here will I dwell. A sinner is a vessel in
which is no pleasure, Hosea 8.8. But Fearers of God are Favorites.

18. Such as Fear God are the only persons that shall be saved. Psalm 85.9.
Salvation is nigh them that Fear him. Salvation is said to be far from the
Wicked, Psalm 119.155. They and Salvation are so far asunder, that they are
like never to meet. But Gods Salvation is nigh them that Fear him: What do we
aspire after but Salvation? It Is the end of all our Prayers, Tears, Sufferings.
Salvation is the Crown of our desires, the flower of our joy. And who shall be
enriched with Salvation, but the Fearers of God? His Salvation is nigh them
that Fear him. Let these cogent arguments persuade to the Fear of God.

Let us put our selves upon a strict Scrutiny and Trial, Use 6. Trial.
whether we have the Fear of God planted in our hearts.

How may we know it? Quest.


1. The Fear of God will make a man fear sin, Genesis 39.9. Answ.
How can I do this Great wickedness and sin against God; indeed sin is the only
Formidable thing; this is the Gorgons Head, that affrights; it is the Evil of
Evils. It Is the Poison the Old Serpent has spit into our Virgin-nature: In Sin
is both Pollution and Enmity: Sin is compared to a Thick Cloud, Isa. 44.22.
which not only hides the light of Gods Face, but brings down showers of Wrath.
Sin is worse than all penal evils: there is more evil in a drop of Sin, than in
a Sea of Affliction. 1. Sin is the cause of Affliction, it conjures up all the
Winds and Storms in the World (...). Chrysostom.
. Out of this Viperous womb come Mutinies, Divisions, Massacres, and the cause
is worse than the effect.

2. In Affliction Conscience may be quiet; the Hail may beat upon the Tiles,
when there is Music in the room: but Sin terrifies the Conscience. Nero in the
midst of Feasts and Roman sports was full of horror of mind; the numbers of
men he had Killed, troubled him. Cataline was frighted at every noise. Cain in
Killing Abel stabbed half the World at one blow, yet could not he Kill the Worm
of his own Conscience.

Sin is the Spirits of Mischief distilled, it puts a Sting into death, 1 Cor.
15.56. It is worse than Hell. 1. Hell is a burden only to the sinner, but sin
is a Burden to God, Amos 2.13.

2. There is Justice in Hell, but sin is the most unjust thing. It would rob
God of his Glory, Christ of his Purchase, the Soul of it is Happiness. It Is more
bitter to sin against Christ, than to suffer the torments of Hell, says
Chrysostom: Is not sin then to be feared? he who Fears God is afraid of
touching this forbidden fruit: More Particularly:

1. He who Fears God, is afraid to do any thing that he doubts may be sinful,
Romans 14.23. He will not swallow Oaths like Pills, lest they should afterward
work in his Conscience: he dares not mix any thing in Gods Worship which he
has not appointed, he doubts it is like Offering strange fire. Where
Conscience is Scrupulous, it is safer to forbear; for, what is not of Faith is
Sin.

2. He who Fears God, fears the appearance of Sin, 1 These. 5.22. Abstain,
(...), from all appearance of Evil. Some things are Male colorata (as Bernard
speaks) they have a bad look, and carry a show of evil in them: To go to the
Idol Temple, though one does not join with them in Worship, is an appearance of
evil. He whose Heart is ballasted with Gods Fear, flies from that which looks
like sin. It was a good speech of Bernard to Eugenius, By avoiding the Act of
sin we preserve our Peace, by avoiding the appearance of it we preserve our
Fame. The Fear of God makes us shun the Occasion of sin: the Nazarite under the
Law was not only to forbear Wine, but he must not eat Grapes, which might
occasion intemperancy. Joseph fled from his Mistresses temptation, he would not
be seen in her company.

The appearance of evil though it defile not ones own Conscience, it may offend
another Conscience: and hear what the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 8.12. When ye
wound the weak Conscience, ye sin against Christ. Such as avoid not the
appearances and in-lets to sin, make the truth of their Grace to be suspected:
How far are they from the Fear of God, who forgetting their prayer, Lead us not
into temptation, run themselves into the Devils mouth? they go to Plays and
Masquerades, which are the Lures and Incentives of Filthiness; others associate
familiarly with the Wicked, and are too often in their Company: which is like
going among them that have the Plague. 1 Cor. 5.9. I wrote to you not to
Company with Fornicators. Traffic is one thing, keeping Company is another.
Polycarp would have no Society with Marcion the Heretic. Twisting into a cord
of Friendship with sinners is a show of evil, it hardens them in sin, and
wounds the credit of Religion.

But did not Christ often converse with Sinners? Object.


1. Christ did sometimes go among the Wicked, Answ.
not that he approved of their sins: but as a Physician goes among the diseased
to heal them; so Christ intended to Work a Cure upon them, Mark 2.17. It was
their conversion he aimed at.

2. Though Jesus Christ did sometimes converse with Sinners, yet he could
receive no Infection by them: his divine nature was a sufficient Antidote
against the contagion of sin. As the Sun cannot be defiled with the thick
Vapors which are exhaled from the Earth, and fly into the middle Region: so
the black Vapors of sin could not defile the Sun of Righteousness. Christ was
of that spotless purity that he had no receptibility of Evil; but the case is
altered with us, we have a stock of corruption within: therefore it is
dangerous to incorporate with the Wicked lest we be defiled.

Such as revere the divine Majesty dare not go near the borders of Sin. Those
who went near the Fiery Furnace, though they did not go into it, were burned,
Dan. 3.22. A wise Christian should in all his transactions put those three
questions of An liceat, an deceat, an expediat.
Bernard to himself; Whether is this I do lawful, or decent, or expedient.

3. He who Fears God, dares not sin secretly. An Hypocrite may forbear gross
sin, because of the shame; but not clandestine secret sin. He is like one that
shuts up his Shop-windows, but follows his Trade within doors: But a man
Fearing God dares not sin, though he had Gyges's Ring and could walk invisibly,
and no eye see him. Levit. 19.14. Thou shall not curse the deaf, or put a
stumbling block before the blind; but shall Fear thy God. If one should curse a
deaf man, he cannot hear him; or lay a stumbling block in a blind man's way, he
cannot see him: Yea but the Fear of God will make one avoid those sins which
can neither be heard or seen by men. Gods Seeing in secret is a sufficient
Supersedeas and Counterpoison against Sin.

4. He who Fears God dares not commit sin, though it might bring him in
Emolument. Gain is the Golden bait with which Satan fisheth for Souls: this was
the last temptation the Devil used to Christ, All this will I give thee, Mat.
4.9. How many bow down to the Golden Image! Joshua who could stop the course of
the Sun, could not stop Achan in his pursuit after the wedge of Gold Cui nihil
satis est, eidem nihil turpe. Tacitus.
. But he who Fears God dares not sin to get preferment: David durst not touch
the Lords anointed though he knew he was to reign next, 2 Samuel 26.23. A Godly
man is assured that a full Purse is but a poor recompense for a wounded
Conscience. If any shall go to choke him with Steeples, he says as Peter, Acts
8.20. Thy money perish with thee.

5. He who Fears God, dares not gratify his own revengeful humor. Homer
says, Revenge is sweet as dropping Honey; but Grace makes a man rather bury an
injury than revenge it. He knows who has said, Vengeance is mine, I will
repay, Romans 12.19. He who has the Fear of God before his eyes, is so far from
revenge, that he requites good for evil. Miriam murmured against Moses, and
Moses prayed for her, that God would heal her of her Leprosy, Numb. 12.13. The
Prophet Elisha instead of smiteing his Enemies, set Bread and Water before
them, 2 King 6.22.

6. He who Fears God dares not do that which is of evil report, though possibly
the thing in it self may be no sin. 1 Cor. 6.1. Dare any of you having a matter
against another, go to law before the unjust? Yes, might some say, what sin is
it to have a just cause brought before unbelievers, that it may be decided? O
but, might the Apostle reply, though the thing in it self be lawful, yet
because it sounds ill, and exposes your Religion to the Scorn and insult of
unbelievers, you that Fear God should not dare to do it. It were better to
decide it by a prudent arbitration. 1 Cor. 6.12. All things are lawful unto me,
but all things are not expedient.

7. He who Fears God is not only afraid of evil actions, but to offend God in
his Thoughts. Deuteronomy. 19.6. Beware that there be not a thought in thy wicked
heart, etc. To think of sin with delight is to act it over in the fancy, this
is Culpable. A man may think himself into Hell. What were the Apostate Angels
damned for, was it for any more than Proud thoughts? This is the first note of
Trial, He who reverenceth a Deity flies from Sin. It is a saying of Anselm, If
Sin were on one side and Hell on the other, I would rather leap into Hell than
willingly sin against God.

2. He who Fears God, walks by Rule rather than Example: Example is for the
most part corrupt. Examples of great men are influential Princeps imperio
magnus, exemplo major Paterculus.
. Pharaoh had learned Joseph to swear, but Joseph had not learned Pharaoh to
pray. The examples of others cannnot justify a thing intrinsecally evil
Multitudo errantium non parit errori patrocinium, Hierom.
. A fearer of God steers the Rudder of his Life according to the Compass of the
Word. He looks to the sacred Canon as the Mariner to the Load-Star, or Israel
to the Pillar of Fire, to direct him. Isa. 8.20. To the Law, to the Testimony.

3. He who Fears God keeps his commandments, Eccles. 12.13. Fear God, and keep
his commandments. Luther said, He had rather obey God than work miracles. A
Gracious Soul crosses his own will to fulfill Gods: if the Lord bid him
Crucify his bosom-sin, forgive his enemies, he instantly obeys. An Heathen
exercising much cruelty to a Christian, asked him in scorn, What Great Miracle
his Master Christ ever did? The Christian replied, This Miracle, that though
you use me thus Cruelly, I can forgive you. An Holy Heart Knows there is
nothing lost by obedience. David swear unto the Lord, that he would not rest
till he found a place for God, Psalm 132.4, 5. And God Swear again to David,
that of the fruit of his body he would set upon his throne, Psalm 132.11.

4. He who Fears God is alike Good in all Companies: He diffuseth the sweet
savor of Godliness where ever he comes. Hypocrites can change themselves into
all shapes, and be as their company is; Serious in one comcompany, and Vain in
another: He who reverenceth a Deity, is semper idem, alike Good in all places.
An even Pulse shows Health: an even walking shows Grace. If a Good man be
providentially cast among the wicked, he will not coalesce with them, but in
his deportment shows forth a Majesty of Holiness.

5. He who Fears God is good in the Station where God has set him. Take an
instance in Joseph, Genesis 42.18. I fear God. And see a pattern of Relative
sanctity: He showed toward his Master fidelity, toward his Mistress
chastity, toward his Father duty, toward his Brethren bounty. A good man
makes his family Palaestra Pietatis, a Nursery of Piety Psalm 102.1.
, as it was said of Cranmer.

6. He who Fears God, dares not neglect Family or Closet-prayer, Psalm 109.4. I
Give my self to Prayer. Prayer whispers in Gods ears. Clemens Alexandrinus
calls it private conference with God. Why was Nymphas's house called a Church,
Col. 4.15. But because it was consecrated by Prayer? A Gracious Soul puts forth
fervent sighs in Prayer, Romans 8.26. And sure that prayer does soonest pierce
Heaven which pierces ones own Heart.

If Prayer be made the Touchstone, then the number of those who Fear God is
but small. Are there not many prayerless Families in this City and Nation? Job
15.4. Thou casts off fear, thou restrainest prayer. When men restrain prayer,
they cast off the Fear of God. It is the brand set upon a Reprobate, Psalm
14.4. He calls not upon God.

7. He who Fears God will not oppress his Neighbor. Levit. 25.17. Ye shall not
oppress one another, but thou shall fear thy God. How can he be Holy who is not
just? A Saint, yet an Extortioner is a Soloecism. A cruel oppressor is like
Judas, his bowels are fallen out. The Fear of God would cure this. Neh. 5.8.
Will ye sell your brethren? v. 9. Ought ye not to walk in the fear of our God?
As if Nehemiah had said, If ye had the Fear of God ye would not be so wicked,
ye would not rise upon the ruins of others, and to wrong them, damn your
selves.

8. He who Fears God is given to works of Mercy. The Fear of God is always
joined with love to our Brethren. Grace may have a Trembling hand, but it has
not a Withered hand, it stretches out its self to relieve the indigent. Iam.
1.27. Pure Religion before God and the Father is this, to Visit the Fatherless
and the Widows in their Affliction. To Visit them is not only to go to see
them in Affliction: our Savior expounds what Visiting is, Mat. 25.36. Ye
visited me; how was that? verse. 35. I was an hungered, and ye gave me meat. Good
works are not the Cause of our Justification, but they are the Evidence. How
far are they from the Fear of God, who are hard-hearted to Christ's Poor! You
may as well extract Oil out of a Flint, as the Golden Oil of Charity out of
their hearts. Dives denied Lazarus a Crumb of Bread, and Dives was denied a
drop of Water.

9. He who Fears God had rather displease man than God. Exodus 1.17. The
Midwives Feared God, and did not as the King commanded, but saved the
Men-children alive. What, not obey the Kings Command! How could this stand with
their Allegiance? Very well, because it was an unlawful command. The King bad
them put to death the Males of the Hebrews, which they durst not do, for Fear
of incurring Gods displeasure. King Nebuchadnezzar, erected a Golden Image to
be worshipped, but the three Children (or rather Champions) said, Be it known
unto thee O King, we will not serve thy Gods, or worship thy Golden Image, Dan.
3.18. They would rather burn than bow: He who Fears God, knows it is best to
keep in with God; he is the surest Friend, but the sorest Enemy.

10. The Fear of God will make a man Fear these six things.

1. Satan's Snares. 2. His own Heart. 3. Death. 4. Judgment. 5. Hell. 6.
Heaven.
1. The Fear of God will make a man afraid of Satan's snares. He has the eye of
Faith to see these snares, and the wing of Fear to fly from them -- Pedibus
Timor addidit alas -- 2 Cor. 2.11. We are not ignorant of his devices. The word
is (...), subtle Stratagems. Satan is called the Old Serpent, Rev. 12.9.
Though he has lost his Holiness, he has not lost his Policy: his snares are
so Cunningly laid, that without the Guidance of Gods Fear we cannot escape them.

1. One subtle Artifice of Satan is, he baits his Hook with Religion: he can
change his Flag, and hang out Christ's Colors; here he Transforms himself into
an Angel of light. The Devil tempts men to Evil, that Good may come of it, Romans
3.8. He whistles them into the snare of preferment, that hereby they may be in
a capacity of doing God more service. The white Devil is worst. Who would
suspect Satan when he comes as a Divine, and if need be, can quote Scripture?

2. Another snare of Satan is, to tempt to sin under a plea of Necessity. Lot
offered to expose his Daughters to the lusts of the Sodomites, that he might
preserve his Angel-guests who were come into his house, Genesis 19.8. Did not
Satan instigate him to this? Necessity will not excuse impiety.

3d. Snare is to Color over sin with the Pretense of Virtue. Alcibiades hung a
Curtain curiously embroidered over a foul Picture full of Owls and Satyrs.
Satan puts Good names on sin, as Physicians call that Film in the eye which
hinders the sight, a Pearl in the eye. Satan Colored over Jehu's Ambition with
the Name of Zeal, 2 Kin. 10.16. He makes men believe Revenge is Valor,
Covetousness Frugality: as if one should write balm-water upon a glass of
Poison.

4th. Snare of Satan is, to carry on his mischievous designs under a pretense
of Friendship. He puts off his Lions Skin, and comes in Sheeps Clothing
Antonini blandimenta magis timebantur quam iracundia.
. Thus Satan came to Christ; Command that these Stones be made bread, Mat. 4.3.
As if he had said, I see thou art Hungry, I therefore out of Pity Counsel thee
to get something to eat, turn stones to bread that thy hunger may be satisfied:
but Christ spied the Serpent in the Temptation and repulsed him. Thus Satan
came to Eve under the Notion of a Friend. Eat, says he, of the Tree in the
midst of the Garden, Ye shall not dye, ye shall be as Gods, Genesis 3.4, 5. As if
he had said, I persuade you only to that which will put you into a better
condition than now ye are; eat of the Tree of knowledge and it will make you
Omniscient. What a kind Devil was here! but Eve found a Worm in the Apple.
Timeo Danaos et dona ferentes -- Virg. AEn. 2.
.

5th. Snare, if Satan cannot take a Christian off from duty, he will put him on
too far in duty. Humiliation is a duty, but Satan suggests that the Soul is not
humbled enough: and indeed he never thinks it humbled enough till it despairs.
Satan comes thus to a man: Thy sins have bin great, and thy Sorrow should be
proportionable; But is it so? can thou say thou have bin as great a Mourner
as thou have bin a Sinner? what is a drop of Sorrow to a Sea of Sin? This is
laid only as a Snare: the subtle enemy would have a Christian weep himself
blind, and in a desperate humor throw away the Anchor of Hope. And if Satan
has such fallacies, and as a Decoy draws so many Millions into his snares, is
there not cause of jealous fear lest we should be trappan'd? The fear of God
will make us Fear Hells stratagems. Satan's snares are worse than his darts.

2. The Fear of God will make a man afraid of his own Heart. Luther used to
say, he feared his Heart more than the Pope or Cardinals, Ier. 17.9. The Heart
is deceitful above all things.

1. It is deceitful.

The word signifies, it is a Jacob (...)
, or Supplanter. As Jacob supplanted his brother, and got away the blessing; so
our Hearts would supplant and beguile us.

2. Above all things.

There is deceit in Weights, deceit in Friends; but the Heart has an art of
deceiving beyond all Multae sunt in animo latebrae, Cicero.
. In the best hearts there is some fallaciousness. David was upright in all
things, save only in the matter of Vriah, 1 King 15.5. A Godly man Knowing
there is a spice of this deceit in his Heart, Fears himself. The flesh is a
Bosom-Traitor. No man can believe what evil is in his Heart. 2 Kin. 8.12. Is
thy Servant a Dog? Hazael could not believe his Heart had bin big of such
Monsters. If one had come to Noah and said* thou will be drunk shortly; he
would have said, Is thy Servant a Dog? No man knows what is in his breast, or
what scandal he may fall into if God leaves him. Christ warns his own Apostles
to take heed of surfeiting and drunkenness, Luke 21.34. A Godly man therefore
fears his Heart with a Fear of Caution and jealousy. The Heart is not only
stubborn, but subtle. Let us a little Trace this Impostor, and see if there be
not cause to fear it. The heart shows it is deceitfulness about 1. Things
Sinful. 2. Things Sacred.


1. The Heart shows it is deceitfulness about things sinful; this deceit is 1.
In hiding of sin, as Rahab hid the spies in the flax, Josh. 2.6. So the Heart
Hides sin: and how does it hide it? Just as Adam hid himself under figleaves,
so the Heart hides sin under the figleaves of excuses. It was done against the
will, or in a Passion; or it was long of others: Aaron laid his sin in making
the Golden calf upon the people, Exo. 32.22. The people are set on mischief:
And Adam tacitly laid his sin upon God himself, Genesis 3.12. The Woman thou
gave me, she gave me of the tree. As to say, If thou had not given me this
tempting woman, I had not eat.

2. The Hearts deceit is seen in Flattering of us, it will make us believe we
are not so bad as we are. The Physician deceives the patient, when he tells him
his disease is not so dangerous, yet he is falling into the hands of death. The
Heart will tell a man he is free from Theft, when yet he robs others of their
Good Name; he is free from Drunkenness, when, though he will not be drunk with
Wine, he will be drunk with Passion. Thus the Heart is a flattering Glass, to
make one look fairer than he is: and is there not cause to suspect this
Impostor?

2. The Heart shows it is deceitfulness about things Sacred; it will be ready to
put us off with Counterfeit Grace. Many have bin deceived in taking false Money,
and it is to be feared in taking false Grace.

1. The Heart is ready to deceive with a false repentance. A Sinner is troubled
a little for Sin, or rather, the consequent of it, and perhaps sheds a few
tears, and now his Heart sooths him up that he is a true Penitent. But every
legal terror is not Repentance, Acts 2.37. They were pricked in their Heart:
yet after this, Peter said unto them Repent, ver. 38. If every slight Trouble
for sin were true Repentance, then Judas and Cain may be listed in the number
of penitents. Evangelical Repentance works a change of Heart, 1 Cor. 6.11. It
produces Sanctity. But the false penitentiary, though he has trouble of
Spirit, yet no Metamorphise or change. He has a weeping Eye, but an adulterous
Heart. Ahab Fasts and puts on sackcloth, but after this, he puts the Prophet
Micaiah in Prison, 1 Kin. 22.27.

2. The Heart is apt to deceive with a false Faith, it would put the dead child
in the room of the living. They in the second of John are said to believe: But
Christ did not believe their faith, John 2.24. True Faith, as it casts it self
into Christ's arms to embrace him, so it casts it self at Christ's feet to serve
him: But spurious Faith though it be forward to Receive Christ's benefits, yet
it plucks the Government from his shoulders, Isa. 9.6. It would have him a
Priest, but not upon his throne, Zach. 6.13. Thus the Heart is full of
fallacies; he who Fears God fears his Heart lest it should rob him of the
blessing. That saying of Epicharmus is Good, (...), Remember not to trust.

3. The Fear of God will make a man Fear death. Death may challenge a part in
our Fear. 1. Because it is such a serious thing, it is the inlet to eternity:
and puts us into an unalterable estate. 2. Because of it is Proximity: it is
nearer to us than we are aware (...). Aristor.
: it may be within a few hours march of us. God may this night seal a Lease of
Ejectment, and say, Give an account of your stewardship; and what if death
should come before we are ready? 3. Because after death there is nothing to be
done for our Souls, there is no repenting in the Grave, Eccles. 9.10. There is
no work nor device in the Grave whither thou go. So that death is to be
feared with an holy and Religious Fear.

How far may a child of God Fear death? Quest.


1. So far as the Fear of Death is a Curben-bit to keep him from Sin. Answ.
A believer may lawfully make use of all means to deter him from sin. No
stronger antidote against sin, says Austin, than the Fear of Death. Am I
sinning, and to morrow may be dying?

2. A Child of God may so far Fear death, as it makes him dye to the World. The
Fear of death would sound a retreat and call us off from Vanity. What is the
world? we must leave it shortly, and all we can purchase is a burying-place
Genesis 49.30.


3. A Child of God may so far Fear death, as this Fear fits him more for death.
Jacob feared his brother Esau's coming against him, and he prepared to meet
him, he addressed himself to Prayer, Genesis 32.7, 24. So when we Fear deaths
coming and we prepare to meet it, we set our Soul in order. This is a Good Fear
of death.

But this Fear of death in the Godly must be mixed with hope. The nature of
death to a Believer is quite changed: death is in it self a curse, but God has
turned this Curse into a Blessing. To a Child of God death is not a destruction
but a deliverance. When the Mantle of his flesh drops off, he ascends in a
fiery chariot to Heaven.

4. The Fear of God will make a man fear Judgment. Anselm spent most of his
thoughts upon the day of Judgment; and Hierom thought he always heard that
Voice sounding in his ears, Surgite mortui, Arise ye dead and come to Judgment
Si amor Dei te non teneat, timor Iudicis te terreat. Hugo.
. That there shall be such a day is evident, 1. From Gods Veracity: He who is
the Oracle of truth has asserted it, Psalm 96.13. For he comes, for he comes
to Judge the earth; There is a duplication, 1. To show the Certainty he comes,
he comes, it is an indubitable Maxim. 2. To show the Celerity, he comes, he
comes, the time draws near, it is almost daybreak, and the Judge is ready to
take the bench, Jam. 5.9. Gods decree cannot be reversed.

2. There shall be such a day for the Vindication of Gods Justice. Things seem
to be carried in the World Partially: the Godly suffer, the Wicked Prosper.
Atheists are ready to think God has cast off the Government of the World, and
minds not how things are transacted here below: therefore there must be a
judicial Process that God may undeceive the World and set things right.

3. That there shall be such a day is evident by the Principles ingrafted in a
natural conscience. When Paul reasoned of Judgment to come, Felix trembled,
Acts 24.25. The Prisoner at bar made the Judge tremble. That a Wicked man dying
is so surprised with terrors, whence is this but from a secret apprehension of
Judgment ensuing?

It will be a great Assizes, never was the like seen. 2 Cor. 5.10. We must all
appear before the Judgment Seat. There is no flying, no absconding, no bribing,
no appearing by a Proxy, but all must make their Personal appearance Veniet,
veniet dies Iudicii, ubi plus valebunt pura Corda, quam astuta verba. Bernard.
They who were above Trial here, and the Law could not reach them, must appear
before the Tribunal of Heaven.

Quest.
Who shall be Judge?

Answ.
Jesus Christ, John 5.22. Acts 17.31. He has appointed a day in which he will
judge the world by that man whom he has ordained. In that Christ is called a
Man, hence the Socinians blasphemously deny the essential Deity of Christ. That
he is God, is most clearly evinced from Isaiah 9.6. Ioh. 1.1. 1 Cor. 8.6. 1
Ioh. 5.20. We are in him that is True, even in his Son Jesus Christ, this is
the true God. Christ is (...), Consubstantiate with God the Father, Heb. 1.3.
But Christ the Judge is called Man, because he shall Judge the world in a
Visible Shape. He must be both God and Man: he must be God that he may see men's
Hearts: and he must be man that he himself may be seen.

What a solemn day will this be, when Christ shall sit upon the Bench of
Judicature! he will judge righteously, Psalm 9.8. Though he himself was
wronged, he will do no wrong: And he will judge Critically, Mat. 3.12. Whose
fan is in his hand and he will thoroughly purge his floor. He will see what is
Wheat, what is Chaff, who have his Image upon him, and who the mark of the
beast. Sure the Fear of God will cause an holy trembling at the thoughts of
this day.

In what sense should those that Fear God, Fear the day of Judgment? Quest.


Not with a Fear of amazement or despondency, Answ.
for the day of Judgment will be a Iubile, a blessed comfortable day to them.
The Thrush sings at the approach of Rain: so may Believers at the approach of
Judgment: Christ who is their Judge is their Advocate. But,

1. The Godly should so fear Judgment, as every day to renew their Sorrow for
Sin. They have sins quotidiani incursus, that creep upon them daily, and they
must with Peter, weep bitterly; they must steep their Souls in the brinish
Tears of Repentance: It would be sad to be found at the last day in any sin
unrepented of.

2. The Godly should so Fear the day of Judgment as it makes them afraid of
Sins of Omission. The not dressing a wound brings death: the not discharging
duty may bring d^mnation. You may read the solemn Process at the last day, Mat.
25.42. I was an hungered and ye gave me no meat, naked and ye clothed me not,
sick and in Prison and ye Visited me not. The charge here brought in, is for
sins of Omission. Christ does not say, Ye took away my meat from me, but, Ye
gave me no meat; He says not, Ye put me in prison, but, Ye visited me not. The
sins of Omission condemned them. Not praying in the family, not sanctfying the
Sabbath, not giving Alms, will be the fatal Indictment.

3. The Godly should so far Fear the day of Judgment, as it makes them afraid
of dissembling in Religion. For at that day false hearts will be unmasked. Why
did Paul walk with such integrity? 2 These. 2.10 Ye are witnesses and God also,
how holily, and justly, and unblamably we behaved our selves among you. What
was the cause of this? sure a Fear of the Judgment day approaching, 2 Cor.
5.10. For we must all appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ. The word in
the orinal is (...), we must be made manifest, our hearts must be laid open
before Men and Angels. Such is the Witchcraft of Hypocrisy that it is hard in
this life to know who is false, and who is sincere; but shortly there will be a
full discovery. It Is good for Gods people so to Fear Judgment, as it makes them
strive against prevarication and Hypocrisy: for then the Hypocrite will be
found out.

5. The Fear of God makes a man Fear Hell. Hell is called the place of Torment,
Luke 16.28. Not only flagitious Sinners, but such as Fear God ought to Fear
Hell, Luke 12.4. I say unto you my friends, Fear him who has power to cast
into Hell Descendamus in infernum viventes, ne descendamus morientes. Bern.
.

How far should Gods people Fear Hell? Quest.


Not so as to let go their Hope. Answ.
A Mariner fears a Storm, but not so as to throw away his Anchor. Such as Fear
God should Fear Hell four ways.

1. They should fear Hell tanquam meritum, as that which they have deserved.
Their sins have merited Hell. Woe to the Holiest man alive if God should weigh
him in the balance of his Justice.

2. They who Fear, God ought so far to Fear Hell, as it is a means to make them
shake off Spiritual sloth. This disease is apt to seize upon Gods own people:
the Wise Virgins Slumbred, Mat. 25.5. Now so far as the fear of Hell is an
alarm or Watchbell to awaken the Godly out of security, and make them run
faster to Heaven, so far it is a good and blessed Fear.

3. The Fear of Hell is so far Good in the Godly, as it makes them afraid of
being in the number of those who shall go to Hell. There are certain Persons in
danger of Hell. 1. Who have all their Heaven in this Life, Isa. 47.8. Thou that
art given to pleasure. Epicures swim in sensual delights; they had rather
displease God than deny the flesh: these shall take up their quarters in Hell;
Isa. 22.12, 13. In that day did the Lord of Hosts call to weeping, and behold
joy and Gladness, eating Flesh, and drinking Wine: surely this iniquity shall
not be purged from you till you dye, says the Lord. That is, this Sin shall
not be done away by any Sacrifice.

2. They are in danger to be cast into Hell who live in the Sin of Adultery
Prove. 22.14.
; they who burn in lust shall burn in Hell: 2 Pet. 2.9. The Lord knows how to
reserve the unjust to be punished; (...), but chiefly them that walk after the
flesh, in the lust of uncleanness. See the corruption of man's nature! If God
had made all common, he would have sought an enclosure; and now God has made
an enclosure, he endeavors to lay all common. Instead of drinking Water out of
his own Cistern, he loves stolen Waters Prove. 9.17.
: The same Latin word praesepe signifies a Stable, and a Whore-house: both are
for Beasts.

3. They are like to go to Hell, who by giving bad Example cause others to Sin.
Bad example like the Plague is catching. Great men are Glasses which the common
people dress themselves by Magis intuentur quid fecerit Jupiter, quam quid
docuit, Plato, Aug.
. Such as give bad example have not only their own sins, but the sins of others
to answer for: and that doubtless was the reason why Dives entreated Abraham
that one might go from the Dead to Preach to his Brethren, Luke 16.27. Not that
Dives had love to their Souls, but it was because while he was alive he had
occasioned his Brethrens sins by his Wicked example, and he knew that their
coming to Hell would increase his Torment.

4. They are like to go to Hell who live and dye in the contempt of Gods Word.
Ministers have preached till the bellows are burnt, their Vitals wasted, but
men stop their Ears and harden their Hearts Durum est quod non cedit tactui.
, Zach. 7.12. They make their Heart as an Adamant. Hardness of Heart lies in
the insensibleness of the Conscience Ephesians. 4.19.
, and the inflexibleness of the Will Jer. 44.16, 17.
. Obdurate Sinners shake out the Arrow of Conviction, Scorn Reproof. When the
Prophet cried to the Altar of Stone it rent, 1 King. 13.2. But Sinners Hearts
rend not; these are like to have the Wrath of God flame about their Ears, 2
These. 1.8. The Lord Jesus shall be revealed from Heaven in flaming fire, taking
Vengeance on them who obey not the Gospel.

5. They shall go to Hell, who fall away Finally, Mat. 13.6. Because they had
no root they withered. Flowers in a Waterpot will keep Green and fresh a while,
but having no root wither. Demas and Julian made a fair show a while, but ended
as the Silkworm, which after all her Curious Spinning, at last becomes a Common
fly. Heb. 10.26. If we sin wilfully after we have received the knowledge of the
truth, there remains no more Sacrifice for sin. Thus we see who are like to be
thrown into Hell: Now it is good for the Godly so to Fear Hell, as to fear to
be in the number of those who shall go to Hell.

4. The Fear of Hell is so far good in the Godly, as it is a Fear mixed with
Rejoicing, Psalm 2.11. Rejoice with trembling. A Believers Fear of Hell must be
like the Fear of the two Mary's going from the Sepulcher, Mat. 28.8. They
departed from the Sepulcher with Fear and great Joy: Fear, because they had
seen an Angel; and Joy, because Christ was risen. So must the Godly look on
Hell, with Fear and Joy; Fear, because of the Fire; Joy, because Christ has
freed them from it. A man that stands upon an high rock, Fears when he looks
down into the Sea, yet Rejoices that he is not there struggling with the Waves:
So a Child of God when he looks down into Hell by Contemplation may fear
because of the dreadfulness of the Torment; yet this Fear should be mingled
with Joy, to think he shall never come there. Jesus has delivered him from
Wrath to come 1 These. 1.10.
.

6. The Fear of God will make a man Fear Heaven. You may say, that is strange,
rather Hope for Heaven; nay, a Regenerate person is to Fear Heaven lest he fall
short of it. Hebr. 4.1. Let us Fear lest a promise being lest us of entering
into his rest, any of you should seem to come short of it (...).
. It Is a Metaphor taken from Racers, who Growing weary and lagging behind come
short of the prize. Who had more hope of Heaven than St. Paul? yet he was not
without his Fears, 1 Cor. 9.27. I keep under my Body, lest when I have preached
to others I my self should be a Castaway. And well may he who shall go to
Heaven Fear least he miss of it, if you consider,

1 It is Possible for many who make a Splendid Profession to lose Heaven. What
think you of the Foolish Virgins? They are called Virgins because they were not
tainted with any gross Sin; yet these Virgin-Professors were shut out, Mat.
25.10. Balaam a Prophet, Judas an Apostle, both cashiered. We have seen some
Ships have had glorious names given them, the Good-speed, the Hope, the
Safeguard, yet cast away at Sea.

2. It is possible to come near to Heaven, yet fall short of it, Mark 12.34.
Thou art not far from the Kingdom of God; yet he was not near enough. Men may
countenance the Ministry of the Word, have their Affections moved at an
Ordinance, and in outward show out-go the Children of God Number. 23.1, 2.
; yet not having the Oil of Sincerity in their Vessels, they may be frustrated
of happiness: And how dismal is that, to lose God, to lose their Souls, to lose
their Hopes! The Millions of Tears shed in Hell are not sufficient to bewail
the loss of Heaven. Well may such as have Heaven in them Fear their coming
short of it. Thus much for the Use of Trial.

Quest.
How shall we arrive at this Blessed Fear?

Answ.
1. Let us set God ever in our eye, study his Immensity. He is (...) God
Almighty, Genesis 17.1. He gives laws to the Angels, binds the Consciences of men,
cuts off the Spirit of Princes, Psalm 76.12. The Thoughts of Gods
incomprehensible Greatness would strike an Holy awe into our Hearts. Elijah
wrapped his face in a Mantle when Gods Glory passed by. The reason men Fear not
God, is because they entertain slight thoughts of him. Psalm 40.21. Thou
thoughtest I was such an one as thy self.

2. Let us pray for this Fear of God, which is the Root of all Holiness, and
the Mother of all Wisdom. Psalm 86.11. Unite my Heart to Fear thy Name; the
Lord has Promised to put his Fear in our Heart, Ier. 32.40. Let us pray over
this Promise: while some pray for Riches, and others for Children, let us pray
for an Heart to Fear God.

To conclude this, you who have this Fear planted in your Souls, bless God for
it, Psalm 135.20. Ye that Fear the Lord bless the Lord. God has done more for
you than if he had made you Kings and Queens, and caused you to ride upon the
High places of the Earth. He has enriched you with that Jewel which he bestows
only upon the Elect.

O stand upon Mount Gerizim blessing. The Fear of God is an Immortal* Seed
springing up into Glory, Psalm 22.23. Ye that fear the Lord praise him. Begin
the Work of Heaven now, be Spiritual Quiristers: sound forth Holy Doxologies
and Triumphs; say as David, Psalm 71.8. Let my Mouth be filled with thy Praise,
and with thy Honor all the day. God has but little praise in the world: Who
should pay him this Quit-rent if not they that fear him?

CHAP. V. Showing the first Character in special of the Godly, namely, Speaking
of God.
2. HAving done with the Character of the Godly in General, I proceed next to
their Special Characters. 1. Special Character.
1* They spoke often one to another. When the Wicked said, It is Vain to serve
God, then they that feared the Lord spoke often one to another. The meaning of
this word, they spoke often, is, they did discourse Religiously together, their
Tongues were Divinely tuned by the Holy Ghost.

Doct.
Christians when they meet together should use holy Conference. This is not only
an advice, but a charge, Deu. 6.6. These words shall be in thy Heart, and thou
shall talk of them when thou sit in thy House, and when thou walk by the
way, and when thou lie down, and when thou risest up. Indeed where there is
Gratia infusa, it will be effusa; Grace changes the Language, and makes it
Spiritual. When the Holy Ghost came upon the Apostles, they spoke with other
Tongues, Act. 2.4. Grace makes Christians speak with Other Tongues. A good
Christian has not only the Law of God in his Heart, Psalm 37.31. but in his
Tongue, verse. 30. The body is the Temple of God, 1 Cor. 6.19. The Tongue is the
Organ in this Temple, which sounds in Holy discourse, Prove. 10.20. The tongue
of the Just is as Choice Silver. He drops Silver sentences, enriching others
with Knowledge, Mat. 12.35. A Good man out of the Good treasure of his Heart
brings forth good things. In his heart is a Treasure of Goodness, and this is
not like a bag of Money Sealed, but he brings something out of the Treasure
within to the enriching of others. Grace is of the Nature of fire, which will
not be pent up: like new Wine it will have Vent Acts 4.20.
. There is a principle within constrains to holy Conference, Job 32.18. The
Spirit within me constrains me.

CHAP. VI. Containing the Applicatory part.
1 Use. Inform.
IT shows the Genius and temper of true Saints, they speak often one to another;
their Lips drop as an Honeycomb. A man is known what country he belongs to by
his Language. He who belongs to the Jerusalem above speaks the Language of
Canaan; none of Gods children are dumb; their mouth is a wellspring of Wisdom,
Prove. 18.4.

2 Use. Reproof. 1 Br.
Here I may draw up a bill of Indictment against five sorts of Persons. 1. Such
as are silent in matters of Religion. They would be counted Good, but he must
have good eyes that can see it, I know not whether it be Ignorance or
Bashfulness that makes good discourse waved. Many are so mute in Religion as if
their Tongues did cleave to the roof of their Mouth: had they any love to God,
or had they ever tasted how sweet the Lord is, their mouth would talk of his
Righteousness, Psalm 71.24. Friends, what should we mind but Salvation? what
are the things of this world? they are neither Entia Pro. 23.5
, nor Manentia 1 Cor. 7.3.
. Do not we see men heap up Riches, and on a sudden, death as Gods Sergeant
Arrests them? What should we talk of but the things Pertaining to the Kingdom
of God? Let this cause blushing among Christians, that their meetings are so
unprofitable, they leave God out of their discourse. Why is there no good
conference? Have you so much Knowledge that you need not have it increased?
Have you so much Faith that you need not have it Strengthened? Silence in
Religion is a loud sin. We read of one who was possessed with a Dumb Devil,
Mark 9.12. How many are Spiritually possessed with a Dumb Devil!

It is a rebuke to such as when they meet together, 2 Branch.
instead of speaking of Heaven, they have idle frothy discourse Foliis leviora
caducis verba, Ovid.
. They do (...) but no (...), as Plutarch said of Alcibiades. Their Lips do not
drop as an Honeycomb, but run as a Spout; their speaking is Just like a Child's
scribbling, Psalm 12.2. They speak Vanity every one with his Neighbor. If
Christ should ask some as he did the two Disciples going to Emaus, Luke 24.17.
What manner of Communications have you as you walk, they could not say as they
did, concerning Jesus of Nazareth; no, perhaps about Toys, or new Fashions. If
Idle words must be accounted for, Mat 12.36. Lord, what an account will some
have to give!

3 Branch.
It reproves the Avaritious Person, who instead of speaking of Heaven, talks of
nothing but the World: the Farmer speaks of his Plough and Yoke of Oxen, the
Tradesman of his Wares and Drugs; but not a word of God. John 3.31. He that is
of the Earth speaks of the Earth. Many are like the Fish in the Gospel that
had Money in it is Mouth, Mat. 12.27. They talk only of Secular things, as if
they Imagined to fetch happiness out of that Earth which God has Cursed.
Seneca being asked of what Country he was, answered he was (...), a Citizen of
this World: we may know many to be Citizens of this World, their speech
bewrays them. -- O curvae in terras animae, et caelestium inanes.

4. It reproves them who do indeed speak often to one another but in a bad
sense. 1. They speak one to another in hasty words. Their words should be like
the Waters of Shiloah that go softly, but too often they are fierce and
Pungent. Magnoque irarum fluctuat aestu. Virgil.
Water when it is hot soon boils over; when the Heart is heated with anger it
soon boils over in furious speeches, Jam. 3.6. Passion transports. Many curse
in their anger. The Tongue is made in the fashion of a Sword, and it cuts like
a Sword: Angry words often prejudice him that utters them: Rehoboam with one
churlish word lost ten tribes. A fiery Spirit is unsuitable to the Master we
serve, the Prince of Peace; and to his Embassage, the Gospel of Peace. Such
whose tongues are set on fire, let them take heed they do not one day in Hell
desire a drop of Water to Cool their Tongue.

2. They speak one to another in a bad sense who Murmr and complain one to
another; they do not complain of their Sins, but their Wants. Murmuring
proceeds from unbelief, Psalm 106.24. They believed not his word but murmured.
When men distrust Gods Promises, they murmur at his Providence: this is a Sin
God can hardly bear, Numb. 14.27. How long shall I bear with this People that
murmur against me? Isreal's speeches were Venomous, and God punished them with
Venomous Serpents, 1 Cor. 10.10.

3. They speak one to another in a bad sense, who vent themselves in filthy
scurrilous Language. The Heart is a Vessel full of Wickedness, and the Tongue
sets it a-broach. When the Face breaks out in Sores and Pimples, it shows the
Blood is corrupt: when men break forth in unsavory speeches it shows the Heart
is Profane. 1 Cor. 15.35. Evil communication corrupts good manners. We read
that the Lips of the Leper were to be covered, Levit. 13.45. It were happy if
we had such Magistrates as would by their Authority cover the unclean Lips of
these Lepers.

4. They speak one to another in a bad sense, who instead of seasoning their
words with Grace, mix them with Oaths. Swearers rend and tear Gods Name, and
like mad Dogs fly in the face of Heaven, Jer. 23.10. Because of swearing the
Land mourns. Some think it the Grace of speech to interlard every sentence with
an Oath; as if they would go to Hell Genteelly. But says one, it is my Custom
to Swear. Is this an excuse or an aggravation of the sin? If a Malefactor
should be arraigned for Robbery, and he should say to the Judge spare me for it
is my custom to rob on the High way, the Judge would say, thou shall the rather
dye. For every Oath that a man Swears, God puts a drop of Wrath into his Vial.

5. It reproves them who instead of speaking in an holy manner one to another,
speak one of another; 1. In censuring, some make it a part of their Religion to
Descant and Criticize upon others. They do not imitate their graces but reflect
upon their failings. God grant professors may wash their hands of this. Were
peoples hearts more humble, their Tongues would be more charitable. It Is the
sign of an Hypocrite to censure others and commend himself.

2. They speak one of another in slandering: Psalm 50.20. Thou sit and
slanderest thy own Mothers son. Slandering is when we speak to the prejudice of
another, and speak that which is not true. Worth is blasted by slander.
Holiness it self is no shield from this sin. The Lambs Innocence will not
preserve it from the Wolf. Job calls slandering the scourge of the Tongue, Job
5.21. You may smite a man and never touch him. A slanderer wounds another
fame, and no Physician can heal these wounds Majora sunt linguae Vulnera quam
gladii, Aug.
. The Eye and the Name are two tender things. God takes it ill at our hands to
calumniate others, especially to asperse those who help to keep up the credit
of Religion. Number. 12.8. Were not ye afraid to speak against my Servant Moses?
what my Servant, who has wrought so many Miracles, whom I have spoken with in
the Mount Face to Face, were not ye afraid to speak against him? The Greek word
slanderer signifies Devil 1 Timothy 3.11.
. This is the Devils proper Sin, he is the accuser of the Brethren, Rev. 12.10.
He does not commit Adultery, but he bears false Witness. The slanderer may be
indicted for Clipping, he clips his Neighbors credit to make it weigh lighter.
This our nature is prone to; but remember, it is as well a sin in Gods account,
to break the Ninth Commandment, as the Eighth.

Put this Great duty in Practice, 3 Use. Exhortation.
imitate these Holy ones in the Text, They spoke often one to another. Hierom
thinks they did speak something in defense of the Providence of God, they
vindicated God in his dealings, and exhorted one another not to be discouraged
at the Virulent speeches of the Wicked, but still hold on a course of Piety.
Thus (Christians) when you meet, give one another Souls a visit, drop your
Knowledge, impart your experiences each to other, Psalm 66.16. Sampson having
found Honey did not only eat of it himself, but carried it to his Father and
Mother, Judge. 14.9. Have you Tasted the Honey of the word? let others have a
Taste with you. He who has bin in a Perfumers shop does not only himself
partake of those sweet smells, but some of the perfume sticks to his clothes,
so that those who come near him partake of those perfumes: so having our selves
perceived the sweet Savor of Christ's Ointments, we should let others partake
with us, and by our Heavenly discourse, diffuse the perfume of Religion to
them, Col. 4.6. Let your words be seasoned with Salt: let Grace be the salt
which seasons your Words and makes them Savoury. Christians should take all
occasions of Good discourse when they walk together, and sit at Table together.
This makes their eating and drinking be to the Glory of God, 1 Cor. 10.31. What
makes it a Communion of Saints but Good conference?

But some may say they are barren of matter, and know not what to speak of?

No, have you walked so often through the field of Scripture, yet gathered no
ears of Corn? have not you matter enough in the Word to furnish you with
discourse? Let me suggest a few things to you. When you meet speak one to
another of the Promises. No Honey so sweet, as that which drops from a Promise.
The promises are the support of Faith, the springs of joy, the ^aints Royal
Charter. Are you Citizens of Heaven, and not speak of your Charter? Speak of
the preciousness of Christ: he is Beauty and Love; he has laid down his blood
as the (...) or price of your Redemption. Have you a friend that has redeemed
you, and never speak of him? Speak one to another of Sin, what a deadly evil it
is, how it has infected your Virgin-nature, and turned it into a lesser Hell.
Speak of the Beauty of Holiness, which is the Souls Embroidery, filling it with
such Oriental splendour as makes God and Angels fall in love with it. The Graces
are (as Damascen says) the Sacred Characters and Impressions of the Divine
nature (...).
. Speak one to another of your Souls: enquire whether they are in health. Speak
about Death and Eternity: can you belong to Heaven and not speak of your
Country? Speak one to another of the Times, wherein God is the Greatest
sufferer: let your hearts bleed for his dishonours. Thus you see here is matter
enough for Holy conference.

Why then do you not set good discourse on Foot? I persuade my self one main
reason of the decay of the Power of Godliness is want of Christian conference:
people when they meet talk of Impertinencies, but God and Heaven are left out
of their discourse. That I may persuade you in your converses to put in a word
about your Souls, let me offer these few things to your consideration.

1. It was the practice of the Saints of old. Elijah, and Elisha went on
talking good discourse till the Chariot of Heaven came to part them, 2 Kin.
2.11. David's Tongue was Tuned to the Language of Canaan, Psalm 71.24. My Tongue
shall talk of thy Righteousness. The Primitive Christians into whatever company
they came, were speaking of a Glorious Kingdom they expected, insomuch that
some thought they were ambitious of worldly honor; which made Justin Martyr
Apologize for them, that the Kingdom they looked for was not of this World, but
a Kingdom with Christ in Heaven. Ierom says of some of the Roman Ladies, They
did spend much of their time in communing together, and they would not let him
alone, for asking him Questions about their Souls.

2. We are bid to Redeem the Time, Ephesians. 5.16. The Poets painted time with
Wings, because it flies so fast -- Volat ambiguis mobilis alis hora -- Time
lost had need be redeemed; and is there any better way to redeem time, than to
improve it in trading for Heaven, and speaking of God and our Souls?

3. Jesus Christ has set us a Pattern: his words were perfumed with Holiness,
Luke 4.22. All bare him witness, and Wondered at the Gracious words which
proceeded out of his Mouth. Christ had Grace poured into his Lips, Psalm 45.2.
In all companies he set good discourse on foot. When he sat on Jacobs Well he
falls into an Heavenly discourse with the Woman of Samaria about the Water of
Life, John 4.14. And so when Levi made him a Feast, Luke 5 -- He feasts him
again with Heavenly discourse. And no sooner was Christ risen from the Grave,
but he was speaking of the things pertaining to the Kingdom of God, Acts 1.3.
The more Spiritual we are in our speeches, the more we resemble Christ: should
not the Members be like the Head? Christ will not be our Savior, unless we
make him our Pattern.

4. Good discourse would prevent sinful discourse. Much sin passes in ordinary
talk, as Gravel and Mud pass along with the Water. How many are Guilty of
Tongue-sins! Good discourse would prevent evil, as labor prevents idleness. By
inuring our Tongues to the Heavenly Dialect, the Devil would not have so much
Power over us.

5. We may guess at men's Hearts by their common discourse. Words are the
Looking-glass of the Mind Verba sunt speculum mentis. Bernard.
. As you may Judge of a Face by the glass whether it be fair or foul; So by the
words we may Judge of the Heart. A lascivious Tongue shows a lustful heart, an
earthly Tongue a covetous heart; a Gracious Tongue, a Gracious Heart. The
Ephraimites were known by their Pronunciation, saying Sibboleth for Shiboleth,
Judge. 12.6. So by the manner of our speech we may be known who we belong to.
The Tongue is the Index of the Heart. If you broach a Vessel that which is
within will come out; by that which comes out of the Mouth, you may Guess what
is within in the Heart, Luke 6 45. Out of the abundance of the Heart the mouth
speaks.

6. Good discourse is beneficial, Job 6.23. How forcible are rights words? A
word spoken in season may make such a powerful impression upon another Heart
as may do him Good all his Life. One single coal is apt to dye, but many coals
put together keep in the heat. Christians by their Heavenly talk do (...), blow
up one another Grace into a flame. Monica Austins Mother, hearing others
discourse of Heaven, was greatly affected and cried out, What do I do here? Why
is my Soul held any longer with this Earthen fetter of my Flesh? When the
Daughters of Jerusalem had conversed a while with the Spouse, and had heard her
describe Christ's admirable beauty, their Affections began to be enflamed, and
they would seek him with her, Cant. 6.1. Whither is thy beloved gone O thou
fairest among women, that we may seek him with thee? A Christian by divine
discourse may enlighten another when he is ignorant, warm him when he is
Frozen, comfort him when he is sad, confirm him when he is wavering. Latimer
was much strengthened by discourse with Mr Bilny in Prison, and hearing his
confession of Faith Acts and Mon.
. A good life adorns Religion, a good Tongue Propagates it. When the Apostle
would have us edify one another, what better way could he prescribe than this,
to have such Holy speeches proceed out of our Mouths as might Minister Grace
unto the hearers? Ephesians. 4.29.

7. We must be accountable to God for our speeches. Words are judged light, but
theyweigh heavy in Gods Balance; by our words we shall be either saved or
damned, Mat. 12.37. For by thy words thou shall be justified, and by thy words
thou shall be condemned. If our words have been seasoned with Grace, then the
acquitting sentence is like to go on our side.

8. Good discourse is a Christians Honor. The Tongue is called our Glory,
Psalm 30.12. Because it is the Instrument of Glorifying God. When our Tongues
are out of tune in murmuring, then they are not our Glory; but when these
Organs sound in Holy discourse, then our Tongues are our Glory.

9. Good discourse will be a means to bring Christ into our company. While the
two Disciples were conferring about the death and Sufferings of Christ, Jesus
Christ himself came among them, Luke 24.15. While they communed together, Jesus
himself drew near, and went with them. When bad discourse is set on Foot, Satan
draws near, and makes one of the Company; but when Good discourse is promoted,
Jesus Christ draws near.

Let all that has bin said excite good conference: certainly, there is no
better way than this to increase our Stock of Grace. Others by spending Grow
Poor; but the more we spend our selves in Holy discourse, the richer we Grow in
Grace, as the Widows Oil by Pouring out increased.

CHAP. VII. Means conducing to Holy Conference.
IF it be asked how may Good conference be arrived at? 1. If you would be
discursive in Religion, get your minds well furnished with knowledge. Hereby,
you will have a Treasure to fetch from, Job 38.18. I am (says Elihu) full of
matter. Some are backward to speak of Good for want of matter: the empty Vessel
cannot run. If you would have your Tongues run fluently in Religion, they must
be fed with a spring of knowledge, Col. 3.16. Let the Word of Christ dwell in
you richly. In one of the Miracles that Christ wrought, he first caused the
Water-pots to be filled with Water, and then says he, Draw out now, John 2.8.
So we must first have our Heads filled with Knowledge, and then we shall be
able to draw out to others in Good discourse.

2. If you would discourse readily in the things of God, make Religion your
delight. What men delight in, they will be speaking of: the sensualist speaks
of his sports; the worldling of his rich purchase. Delight makes the Tongue as
the Pen of a ready writer. The Spouse being delighted and inamoured with
Christ's beauty, could not conceal her self; she makes an elegant and Pathetical
Oration in the commendation of Christ, Cant. 5.10. My Beloved is white and
ruddy, the chiefest among ten thousand.

3. Pray that God will both Gift and Grace you for Christian conference, Psalm
51.15. Lord open thou my Lips. Satan has locked up men's Lips, pray that God
will open them. Perhaps you pray that you may Believe in Christ, but do you
pray that you may Confess him, and not be ashamed to speak of him before
others? Psalm 119.46. I will speak of thy Testimonies before Kings, and not be
ashamed. To end this, let me briefly insert two Cautions.

1. Not but that it is lawful to confer of worldly Negotiations sometimes; 1
Caution.
Traffic requires conference: But with this proviso, that we should show more
Delectation and Earnestness in speaking of Spiritual things, than Earthly;
Remembering the Soul is far more Valuable than the World.

Second Caution.
2. When persons speak of Religion let it not be for any Sinister Unworthy end,
not for Ostentation, but Edification; and then having your aim right, speak of
the things of God with Life and Affection, that others may perceive you feel
those Truths which you speak.

CHAP. VIII. Showing the Second Character in special of the Godly, namely,
thinking of God.
2. THe Second Character of the Godly in special is, 2 Special Character.
they thought upon Gods name; these Saints when they were together did speak of
God, when they were alone they did think of God; That Thought upon his name.

What is meant by Gods name? Quest.


1. By the Name of God is meant his Essence; Answ.
Gods Name is put for God himself.

2. By the Name of God is meant his Glorious Attributes, which are the several
Letters of his Name.

3. By the Name of God is meant his Worship and Ordinances where his Name is
called upon, Ier. 7.12. Go ye unto my Place which was in Shiloh where I set my
Name at first: That is, where I first set up my Public worship.

Now this Name of God, the Saints in the Text did contemplate, they Thought
upon his Name. Thoughts are the firstborn of the Soul, the conceptions of the
mind, the immediate Fruit and Issue of a rational being. Thoughts are the
Images of things in the Fancy Cogitationes sunt rerum imagines. Moller.
. These devout Souls in the Text were chiefly busying their Thoughts about God
and Heaven.

It is the inseparable sign of a Godly man to employ his chief Thoughts about
God, Prove. 12.5. Doct.
The Thoughts of the Righteous are Right. That is they are set upon the Right
Object. It Is natural to Think. Thoughts fly out of the Mind, as Sparks out of a
Furnace. The Hebrew word* for a Thought, signifies the Boughs of a Tree (...)
; Because Thoughts shoot out from our Minds, as branches do from a Tree. It Is I
say natural to Think, but it is not natural to Think of God, this is proper to
a Saint: his Thoughts are Sublime and Seraphical, they fly to Heaven. The Mind
is a Mint-house where Thoughts are Minted. David minted Golden Cogitations,
Psalm 139.18. I am still with thee. That is (as learned Ainsworth expounds it)
by Divine Contemplation. Thoughts are Travelers in the Soul. David's Thoughts
kept Heaven-road, Psalm 73.23. I am continually with thee. As the Mariners
needle turns to the North Pole: so a Saints Thoughts are still pointing toward
God.

Quest.
Whence is it that the Saints thoughts mount up to God?

Answ.
There will be this Thinking on God, 1. From those intrinsecal Perfections which
are in him. The loveliness of the Object attracts the thoughts: God is the
supreme Good. There is nothing but God worth thinking on Quid ultra quaerit cui
omnia suus conditor sit? Prosper.
. Psalm. 119.57. Thou art my Portion, O Lord. Will not a man's thoughts run upon
his Portion? A gracious Soul has found Pleasure in thinking on God, Psalm.
63.5, 6. He has had those Transfigurations on the Mount, those Illapses of the
Spirit, those Incomes of Gods Love, those praelibations and foretastes of
glory, that he cannot keep his thoughts off from God: To hinder him from
thinking on God, is to bar him of all his Pleasure.

2. There will be thinking on God from the powerful. Operations of the Holy
Ghost. We cannot of our selves think a good thought, 2 Cor. 3.5. but the Spirit
elevates and fixes the heart on God. Ezekiel. 3.14. The Spirit lifted me up. When
you see the Iron move upward, there has been some Lodestone drawing it: so
when the thoughts move upwards toward God, the Spirit has, as a divine
Lodestone, drawn them.

CHAP. IX. Containing a sharp Redargution.
OUT of the quiver of this Text I may draw several Arrows of Reproof. 1 Use.
Reproof. 1 Branch.
1. It reproves such as do not think upon Gods Name. It is the Brand-mark of a
Reprobate, God is not in all his thoughts, Psalm 10.4. Dei nunquam recordatur,
ita se gerit ac si non esset Deus. Mariana.
He endeavors to expunge and blot God out of his mind: though he draws his
Breath from God, yet he does not think of him: his thoughts shoot into the
Earth, Philip. 3.19. Had not sinners by their fall lost their Headpiece, they
would reason thus with themselves: Sure God is best worth thinking on; is there
any excellency in the World? then what is there in God that made it? He gives
the Star its beauty, the Flower its fragrancy, Food its suavity; and if there
be such deliciousness in the Creature, what is in God? He must needs be better
than all Quod essicit Tale, id est magis Tale.
. O my Soul, shall I admire the Drop and not the Ocean? Shall I think of the
Workmanship, and not of him that made it? This is the fruit of Original Sin, it
has warped the Soul, and taken it off from the right Object.

It reproves such as indeed think of God, 2 Branch*
but they have not Right Thoughts of him. As the Lord said to Eliphaz, Job
42.7. Ye have not spoken of me the thing that is right; so some think of God,
but they do not think of him the thing that is right. 1. They have Low unworthy
Thoughts of God, they Fancy God to be like themselves, Psalm 50.21. Men think
God is as short-sighted as they, and that he cannot see them through the thick
Canopy of the Clouds: but he that makes a Watch knows all the Wheels and Pins
in it, and the Spring which causes the Motion. God who is (...) the inspector
of the Heart, sees all the intrigues and Private Caballs in the Thoughts Job
42.2. Amos 4.13
. God knows the true Motion of a false Heart, Ier. 29.23. I know and am a
witness, says the Lord.

2. Men have Injurious Thoughts of God: 1. They deem his ways unequal, Ezekiel.
18.25. Is not my way equal? Some call Gods Providence to the Bar of Reason, and
Judge his proceedings excentrick; but God lays Righteousness to the Plummet,
Isa. 28.17. His ways are secret, but always just. God is most in his way,
when we think he is out of his way.

2. They think his ways are not Profitable, Mal. 3.14. What profit is it that
we have kept his ordinance? we cannot show our earnings. These are not Right
Thoughts of God. Men think him to be an hard Master: But God will be in no man's
debt, he gives double pay, Mal. 1.10. Neither do ye kindle a sire on my Altar
for naught.

^ Branch.
It reproves such as instead of thinking on God, their minds are wholly taken up
with Vain Thoughts. Vain Thoughts are the froth of the Brain, Ier. 4.14. How
long shall Vain Thoughts lodge with thee? I deny not but Vain Thoughts may
sometimes come into the best Hearts, but they have a care to turn them out
before night, that they do not Lodge. This denominates a Wicked man, his
Thoughts Dw^ll upon Vanity; and well may his Thoughts be said to be Vain,
because they do not turn to any profit, Ier. 16.19. Vanity, and things wherein
there is no Profit. They are Vain Thoughts which are about Foolish things, and
run all into straw. They are Vain Thoughts which do not Better the Heart, nor
will give one drop of Comfort at death, Psalm 146.4. In that very day his
Thoughts perish. Vain Thoughts are Pernicious, they Fly-blow the Heart and
leave an ill tincture behind.

4. It reproves such as have not only Vain Thoughts, but Vile Thoughts. 4
Branch.
1. Proud Thoughts, while they view themselves in the Glass of Self-love, they
begin to take up Venerable Thoughts of themselves, and so Pride fumes up into
their Head and makes them Giddy Acts 5.36
.

2. Impure Thoughts. They think how to Gratify their Lusts, they do (...) make
provision, or as the word signifies, become Caterers for the Flesh, Romans 13.14.

Sin begins in the Thoughts; first men Devise sin, then Act it, Mica. 2.2. For
instance, would one have preferment: he bethinks himself by what Ladder he may
climb to Honor. He will Cringe and comply, and lay aside Conscience, and this
is the way to rise. Would a man Grow rich: he sets his Thoughts a work how to
compass an estate, he will circumvent, and pull down his Soul to build up an
estate. Would he wreak his Malice on another; he frames an Engine in his
Thoughts to take away his Life: as Iezabel (that Painted Harlot) when she would
ruin Naboth, presently fains a Sham-Plot and Subtly thinks of a way how to
dispatch him, 1 King. 21.9. Proclaim a fast, and set Naboth on high among the
People, and set two men Sons of Belial to Witness against him, saying, thou
did blaspheme God and the King, and carry him out and stone him. O the
Mischief of Thoughts! A man may Deny God in his Thoughts, Psalm 14.1. The Fool
has said in his Heart there is no God. He may commit Adultery in his Thoughts,
Mat. 5.28. Whosoever looks on a Woman to Lust after her has committed Adultery
with her in his Heart. A man may Murder another in his Thoughts, 1 Ioh. 3.15.
Whosoever hates his brother is a murderer. O how much contemplative wickedness
is in the World! Tremble at sinful Thoughts. We startle at Gross sin, but we
are not troubled so much for sinful Thoughts. Know, 1. That sin may be
committed in the Thoughts, though it never blossom into outward Act, Prove.
24.9. The Thought of Foolishness is sin. See this in two things.

1. Envy, the Jews envied Christ the fame of his Miracles, Mat. 27.18. Pilat
knew that for envy they had delivered him. Here was sin committed in the
Thoughts: the Jews sinned by envying Christ, though they had never Crucified
him.

2. Discontent, Genesis 24.5. Cain was wroth and his Countenance fell. He did
Malign his Brother, and his thoughts were boiled up to Discontent. Here was sin
committed in the thoughts. Cain sinned by Discontent though he had never
Murdered his Brother.

2. God will punish for sinful thoughts. We say Thoughts are free; so they are
in man's Court Cogitationis poenam in nostro soro nemo luat, is the Civilians
Rule.
; but God will punish for Thoughts: it was set upon Herod's score, that he
thought to have destroyed Christ under a pretense of worshipping him, Mat. 2.8.

Let us be humbled for the sins of our Thoughts, Prove. 30.32. If thou have
thought evil, lay thy hand upon thy Mouth. That is, humble and abase thy self
before the Lord. The best alive had need be humbled for their thoughts. 1. The
Instability of their Thoughts. How do the Thoughts Dance up and down in Prayer:
like Quicksilver they will not six. It Is hard to tie two Good Thoughts
together.

2. The Impiety of their Thoughts. In the fairest fruit may be a Worm, and in
the best Heart evil Thoughts may arise. Did men's Hearts stand where their faces
do, they would blush to look one upon another. Let us I say be deeply humbled
for our Thoughts. Let us look up to Christ that he would stand between us and
Gods Justice, and that he would intercede for us that the Thoughts of our
Hearts may be forgiven us.

2 Use. Exhortation.
Let us think of Gods Name; 1 Branch.
let us lock up our selves with God every day; let our Thoughts get Wings, and
with the Birds of Paradise fly up toward Heaven. Christians, look up on that
day to be lost, wherein you have not conversed with God in your Thoughts; think
of God in your Closet, in your Shop: Trade above the Moon. Isaac went out into
the field to meditate, Genesis 24.63. He did take a turn in Heaven by holy
Ejaculations. Our Minds should be steeped in holy Thoughts. It is not enough to
have a few Transient Thoughts of God by the By, but there must be an immoration
or staying our Minds on God, till our Hearts are warmed in love to him, and we
can say as they, Luke 24.32. Did not our Hearts burn within us?

But what should be the matter of our holy Musings? Quest.


1. Think of Gods Immense Being. Answ.
Adore his illustrious Attributes, which are the Beams by which the Divine
nature shines forth. Think of Gods Omnisciency: he makes a Curious and Critical
descant upon all our Actions, and enters them down into his day-book. Think of
Gods Holiness, which is the most sparkling Jewel of his Crown, Exodus 15.11.
Think of Gods Mercy: this makes all his other Attributes sweet. Holiness
without Mercy, and Justice without Mercy would be terrible. Think of Gods
Veracity, Exodus 34.6. Abundant in Truth; that is, God will be so far from
coming short of his word, that he does more then he has said. He shoots beyond
the Promise, never short of it.

2. Think of the Works of God, Psalm 77.12. I will meditate of all thy Works.
Gods works are bound up in three great Volumes, Creation, Redemption,
Providence: here is sweet matter for our Thoughts to expatiate upon.

CHAP. X. Swasives and Incentives to Holy Thoughts.
LET me, to enforce the Exhortation, propound some Swasives and Inducements to
be frequent in the Thoughts of God. 1. The end why God has given us this
thinking faculty is, that we may think on his Name. When our Cogitations run
out in Impertinencies (like water running beside the Mill) we should think with
our selves thus: did God give us a Talent to misimploy? did he give us Thoughts
that we should think of every thing but him? were these Arrows given us to
shoot beside the Mark?

2. If we do not inure our selves to Good thoughts, we cannot be Good
Christians. Thinking seriously on Heavenly things, makes them stay in our Mind,
causes delight in them, and makes them Nutritive. Musing on Holy Objects is
like concocting food, which turns it to Blood and Spirits: so that without Holy
Cogitation, no Religion. Can a man be Religious and scarce ever think of it?

3. We are deeply obliged to think on God. 1. God is our maker, Psalm 100.3. It
is he that has made us, and not we our selves. Our bodies are Gods curious
needle work, Psalm 139.15. And as God has wrought the Cabinet, so he has put
a Jewel in it, the Precious Soul. Has God made us, and shall not we think of
him? 2. God has sweetened our Lives with Various Mercies. The city of Syracuse
in Sicily was so curiously situated, that the Sun was never out of sight: God
has so placed us by his Providence, that the Sunshine of Mercy is never out
of sight. We are Bemiracled with Mercy; Mercy feeds us with the Finest of the
wheat, the Bread of Life; Mercy guards us with a Guard of Angels; it makes the
Rock pour forth Rivers of Oil: and shall not the Stream lead us to the
Fountain? shall not we think of the God of our Mercies? this were high
Ingratitude.

4. To have frequent and Devout Thoughts of God witnesses Sincerity. No truer
Touchstone of Sanctity, than the Spirituality of the Thoughts: that a man is,
that his Thoughts are, Prove. 23.7. For as he thinks in his Heart so is he.
Thoughts are freer from Hypocrisy than words: one may speak well for applause,
or to stand right in the Opinion of others; but when we are alone and think of
Gods Name, and admire his Excellencies, this shows the Heart to be Right.
Thoughts are freer from Hypocrisy than an Unblamable Life. A man may in his
outward carriage be fair, yet have a Covetous, Revengeful mind. The Acts of Sin
may be forborne, when the Heart sits brooding upon Sin; but to have the Thoughts
Spiritualized and set upon God, is a truer Symptom of sincerity, than a Life
free from Vice. Christians, what do your Thoughts run upon? where do they make
their most frequent Visits? can you say, Lord, our Hearts are still Mounting up
to Heaven, our Thoughts are lodged in Paradise; though we do not see thy face,
yet we think on thy Name? this is a good Evidence of Sincerity. We Judge of men
by their Actions; God Judges of them by their Thoughts.

5. Thinking much on God would Cure the Love of the World. Great things seem
little to him that stands high. To such as stand upon the top of the Alps the
great Cities of Campania seem little Villages: they who are Mounted High in the
contemplation of Christ and Glory, how do the things of the World disappear,
and even shrink into nothing! A Soul elevated by faith above the Visible Orbs,
has the Moon under his feet. A true Saint intermedles with Secular Affairs
more out of Necessity than Choice. St. Paul's Thoughts were sublime, he lived in
the Altitudes, and how did he scorn the World Quae cito aspecta placent,
inspecta displicent, Seneca.
! Gal. 6.14. The world is crucified to me *.

6. Thinking on God would be expulsive of Sin. Whence is Impiety but from
Incogitancy? Did men Ruminate upon Gods Holiness and Justice, durst they sin at
that rate as they do? That which checked Joseph, was the Thoughts of a
Sin-revenging God. When the delights of sin Tickle, let the Thoughts of God
come into men's Minds, that he is both the Spectatour and the Judge, and after
the Golden Crowns and Women's Hair come the Lions Teeth, Rev. 9.8. This would
put them into a cold Sweat, and be as the Angels drawn Sword Number. 22.31.
, it would scare them from sin.

7. Thinking on God is an admirable means to increase our love to God. As it
was with David's musing on Mortality, Psam 39.3. As I was Musing the fire
burned; so it is with our Musing on the Deity: while we are thinking on God,
our Hearts will kindle in love to him. The Reason our Affections are so chill
and cold in Religion is, because we do not warm them with the Thoughts of God.
Hold a Burning-glass to the Sun, and the glass burns that which is near to it:
So when our Thoughts are lifted up to Christ the Sun of Righteousness, our
Affections are set on fire. No sooner had the Spouse been thinking on her
Saviors Beauty, but she fell sick of love, Cant. 5.8. O ye Saints, do but let
your Cogitations dwell upon the Love of Christ, who did pass by Angels and
think of you; who was wounded, that out of his wounds the Balm of Gilead might
come to heal you; who leaped into the Sea of his Fathers wrath, to save you
from drowning: think of this unparalled love which sets the Angels a
Wondering, and see if it will not affect your Hearts and cause Tears of love to
slow forth.

8. Thinking on God will by degrees transform us into his Image. As Jacobs
Flock looking on the Rods that had White streaks conceived and brought forth
like them, Genesis ^^, 39. So by contemplating Gods Holiness, we are in some
measure changed into his likeness. 2 Cor. 3.18. Beholding as in a Glass the
Glory of the Lord, we are changed into the same Image. The contemplative sight
of God was transforming: they had some Print of Gods Holiness upon them; as
Moses when he had been on the Mount with God, his face shined, Exodus 34.35.
What is Godliness but God-likeness? and who are so like him as they that think
on his Name?

9. Thinking on God is sweet, it Ushers in a secret delight into the Soul Psalm
104.34. My meditation of him shall be sweet. He whose Head is got above the
Clouds, his Thoughts are sled aloft, and he has God in his eye, is full of
divine Raptures, and cries out as Peter in the transfiguration, Lord, it is
good to be here. Holy Thoughts are the Dove we send out of the Ark of our
Souls, and they bring an Olive branch of Peace. Some complain they have no Joy
of their lives; and truly no wonder, when they are such strangers to Heavenly
Contemplation. Would you have God give you Comfort, and never think of him?
Indeed Israel had Manna dropped into their Tents, and they never Thought of it;
but God will not drop down this Manna of Heavenly Joy on that Soul which seldom
or never thinks of him. Would you have your Spirits cheerful? let your Thoughts
be celestial. The higher the Lark flies, the Sweeter it sings: The higher a
Soul ascends in the Thoughts of God, the sweeter Joy it has.

10. Thoughts of God will turn to the best account. Thoughts spent on the World
are often in Vain. Some spend Thoughts about laying up a Portion for such a
Child; and perhaps, either it dies, or lives to be a Cross. Others beat their
Brains how to rise at Court; and when Royal Favor has shined upon them, on a
sudden an Eclipse falls out, and the Kings smile is turned into a frown, and
then their Thoughts are frustrated -- Et stultus labor est ineptiarum --
Martial.
. How often do men build Castles in the Air? But the Thoughts of God will turn to
a good account, they Augment Sanctification, and bring Satisfaction, Psalm
63.5. My Soul shall be satisfied as with marrow and fatness, when I remember
thee on my bed, and meditate on thee, etc. The Thoughts we have of God in the
time of health, will be a Comfort to us in the time of sickness.

11. God thinks of us, and shall not we think of him? Psalm 40.17. The Lord
thinks upon me. God thinks on us every Morning, Lam. 3.23. His Mercies are
new every Morning. He gives us Night-Mercies, he Rocks us every Night asleep,
Psalm 127.2. So he gives his beloved Sleep: and if we chance to wake he gives
us Songs in the Night, Job 35.10. If God be thinking of us Day and Night, shall
not we think of his Name? How can we forget a friend who is ever mindful of us?
Jer. 29.11. I know the Thoughts that I think toward you (says the Lord)
Thoughts of Peace. Though God be out of our sight, we are not out of his
Thoughts.

12. God will one Day reckon with us for our Thoughts. He will say I gave you a
Cogitative faculty, what have you done with it? If God asks a Covetous man,
what have been your Sentiments? which way have your Thoughts run? he will
Answer, to heap up Riches: if God asks Princes and Emperors, how have you
employed your Thoughts? they will say, how by our Scepter to beat down the
Power of Godliness. What a dreadful account will these Persons have to give at
last! Not only men's Actions, but their Thoughts will accuse them, Romans 2.15.

13. Our Thoughts of God shall not be lost. God accepts of the Thought for the
deed. David had a good Thought come into his Mind to build God an House, and
God took it as kindly as if he had done it, 2 Chronicles. 6.8. Forasmuch as it was
in thy Heart to build an house to my Name, thou did well that it was in thy
Heart. When Christians have Thoughts of promoting Gods Glory, they would do
such good Acts if it were in their Power, build Hospitals, distribute Justice,
cut off offenders from the City of God, the Lord looks upon it as if they had
done it: so that our Thoughts of God are not lost.

2 Branch.
Let us think of God in a Right manner. A Good Medicine may be spoiled in the
making: so may a Good Duty be spoiled in the doing. Thoughts may be Good for
the matter of them, yet may be Faulty in the manner. I shall show you 1. How
Thoughts of God may fail in the Manner. 2. The Right Manner of Thinking upon
God.


1. How Thoughts of God may fail in the Manner. 1. A man may Think of God, yet
not intend his glory. Jehu had good Thoughts came into his Mind, to destroy the
Baal-worshippers, but his intent was to advance himself into the Throne. Bad
aims Fly-blow good Actions. 2. A man may have Good Thoughts but they are
forced, -- Virtus nolentium nulla est -- When one bleeds under Gods afflicting
hand, he may Think of God, yet have no love to him, Psalm 78.34. When he slew
them, then they remembered that God was their Rock, and the high God their
Redeemer: nevertheless they did flatter him with their Mouth. These were good
Thoughts, but it was to complement with God, and to get rid of the Affliction.
3. A man may have Thoughts of God out of design to stop the Mouth of
Conscience. Conscience does lash the profane Sinner; what art thou so Wicked as
never to Think of God, who indulgeth thee with so many favors? Hereupon he may
have a few good Thoughts; but they are irksome to him: this is not from a
Principle of Conscience, but to quiet Conscience. 4. A man may think of God
with Horror: he thinks of Gods Sovereignty, and dreads the Thoughts of God.
You see one may think of God, yet these Thoughts may become sinful.

2. I shall show you the Right manner of Thinking upon God: 1. Our Thoughts of
God must be Serious. Feathers swim on the top, but Gold sinks into the Water:
Feathery Spirits have some floting Thoughts; but good Hearts sink deep in the
Thoughts of a Deity. 2. Our Thoughts of God must be Spiritual. Take heed of
framing any gross conceits of God in our Minds, representing him by the
similitude of the Creature, Deuteronomy. 4.15. Ye* saw no Similitude. Conceive of God
in Christ: we cannot see him any other way, as we cannot see the Sun in the
Circle but in the Beams, the Godhead dwells in Christ's Humane nature, Col.
2.9. Think of God as a Spirit full of immense Glory, propitious to us through a
Mediator. 3. Our Thoughts of God must be Delightful. With what Delight does a
Child think of his Father! A gracious Soul counts them the Sweetest hours which
are spent with God. 4. Our Thoughts of God must be Vertual and Efficacious,
leaving our Hearts in a a better Tune: The Thoughts of Gods faithfulness must
make us confide in him, the Thoughts of Gods Holiness must make us conform to
him. This is the Right thinking on God when it is influential, it leaves us in
a more Heavenly frame.

CHAP. XI. Helps to Holy Thoughts.
IT shows us how to have our Thoughts frequently fixed upon God. 1. 3 Use.
Direction.
Begin the day with Holy Thoughts (...), Aristot.
, Psalm 139.17. When I awake I am still with thee. God should have the first
buddings of our Thoughts. In the Law, the Lord would have the first fruits
offered him: give God your Virgin-thoughts in the Morning -- Quo semel est
imbuta recens servabit odorem testa diu -- what the Vessel is first seasoned
with, it keeps the relish a long time after. The Mind being seasoned with Good
Thoughts in the Morning, will keep the Heart in a better Decorum all the day
afrer.

2. If you would think of God take heed of hindrances. 1. Turn away your eyes
from beholding Vanity, Psalm. 119.37. Vain Objects Poison the Imagination,
lascivious Pictures, and wanton talk leave bad impressions upon the fancy. 2.
Call off your Thoughts what you can from the world. If worldly Thoughts come
Crowding into our Mind, good Thoughts will be lost in the Crowd.

3. Get a love to God and his ways. One cannot but think of that which he
loves, Ier. 2.32. Can a Maid forget her Ornaments? when she has not her Jewel
on her Ear, she will have it in her Thoughts. A person deeply in love cannot
keep his Thoughts off from the Object he loves. The reason we Think on God no
more, is, because we love him no more. Let there be but one spark of love to
God, it will fly Upward in Heavenly Ejaculations. By nature we have
Quicksilver Hearts which cannot be made to fix on God, but by love.

4. If you would think often on God, get an interest in him, Psalm 48.14. This
God is our God. We think most upon that which is our own. If a man ride by
brave Houses and Gardens, he casts his Eye slightly upon them, and does not
much Mind them; but let him have an house of his own, and his Thoughts dwell in
it. Why do men think no more of God, but because God and they are strangers.
Let a man's interest in God be cleared, and he will not be able to keep his
Thoughts off from God.

CHAP. XII. Showing the first Good Effect of the Saints Piety.
2. THE Good effects of the Saints Piety. 1. God Regarded it. The Lord
hearkened and heard.

These blessed ones in the Text were speaking and thinking of God, and he did
not turn away his Ear from them, as if he had not minded them; but he hearkened
and heard; which expression denotes.

1. Diligence. 2. Delight.
1. It notes the diligent heed God gave to these Saints, He hearkened. Here was
attention of Ear, and intensness of Mind. Hearkening is the Gesture of one that
Listens to what another says.

2. Gods hearkening shows the delight he took in the Holy Dialogues of these
Saints: he was pleased with them, they were to him as sweet Melody.

Doct.
That God takes special Notice of of the Good which he sees in his People. The
Children of God may perhaps think that God does not regard them, Job 30.20. I
cry unto thee, and thou do not hear me. The Church complains, God did shut
out her Prayer, Lam. 3.8. But though God be sometimes Silent, he is not Deaf:
he takes Notice of all the good Services of his People, the Lord hearkened and
heard.

Quest.
Whence is it God takes such Notice of his Peoples Services?

Answ.
1. Not from any Merit in them, but the Impulsive cause is his (...) or
Free Grace. The best duties of the Righteous could not endure Gods balance
Horreo quicquid de meo est. Bern.
, but God will display the Trophies of his Mercy. Free Grace accepts what
Justice might condemn.

2. Gods taking Notice of the good in his people, is through Christ, Ephesians. 1.6.
He has made us accepted (...).
in the Beloved. Or as Chrysostom renders it, he has made us Favorites.
Through the Red glass every thing appears of a Red Color: through Christ's
blood, both our Persons and Duties appear Ruddy and Beautiful in Gods Eyes.

3. God takes Notice of the Services of his People, because they flow from a
Principle of Grace. God regards the Voice of Faith, Cant. 2.14. O my Dove, let
me hear thy Voice, for sweet is thy Voice. The Services of the Wicked are harsh
and sour, but the Godly give God the first ripe Cluster Micah 7.1.
Which grows from the sweet and pleasant Root of Grace.

CHAP. XIII. Inferences drawn from the Proposition.
IF God hearkens and hears, hence I infer Gods Omnisciency. 1 Use. Inform. 1
Branch.
How could, he being in Heaven, hear what the Saints speak and think, were he
not Omniscient? Through the bright Mirror of his own essence he has a full Idea
of all things. He knows the Intrigues of States, the Stratagems of his Enemies,
Exodus 14.24. Future Contingencies fall within his Cognizance (...). Chrysostom.
. Gods Knowledge is Primary: he is the Original, Pattern, and Prototype of all
Knowledge. Gods Knowledge is Instantaneous. He knows all at once: Our Knowledge
is Successive, we know one thing after another, and argue from the Effect to
the cause; but all things are in Gods view uno intuitu, in one entire prospect.
Gods Knowledge is infallible and not Subject to mistake. Such is the Infinity
of his Knowledge, that the Apostle cries out in Admiration (...), O the depth
of the Riches both of the Wisdom and Knowledge of God! Romans 11.33. The World is
to God as a Bee-hive of Glass, where you see the working of the Bees, and the
framing of their Combs. All things are unvailed to the Eye of Jehovah.

See Gods Goodness who often passes by the failings of his People Numb. 23.21.
, 2 Branch.
and takes Notice of the good in them, He hearkened and heard. 1 Pet. 3.6.
Sarah obeyed Abraham, calling him Lord. The Holy Ghost passes by her unbelief
and Laughing at the Promise, and took Notice of her reverence to her Husband,
she called him Lord. Jam. 5.11. Ye have heard of the Patience of Job. We have
heard of his Impatience, cursing his Birthday: But the Lord does not upbraid
him with that, but observes the good that was in him; ye have heard of the
Patience of Job. The Painter who drew Alexanders Picture, Drew him with his
finger upon his Scar; so God puts a finger of Mercy upon the Scars of his
Children. He sees their Faith, and Winks at their failing.

3 Branch.
See Gods different carriage toward the Godly and the Wicked: If the Godly
Think of his Name, he hearkens and hears; but if the Wicked meddle with
Religious duties, he turns away his Ear, Genesis 4.5. To Cain and his Offering God
had no respect. Suppose a man had a Sweet breath, yet if he had the Plague, no
body would come near him: So, though a sinner may give God many a sweet elegant
Expression in Prayer, yet having the Plague of the Heart, God will not receive
any Offering from him. If God shut men's Prayers out of Heaven, it is a sad
Prognostic that he will shut their Persons out of Heaven.

4 Branch.
See the Privilege of the Godly: they have Gods Ear, the Lord hearkened and
heard, Psalm 34.15. His Ears are open to their cry: it would be counted a great
happiness to have the Kings ear; but what is it to have Gods Ear! The Lord
hearkened and heard. Believers have the Spirit of God breathing in them, and
God cannot but hear the Voice of his own Spirit.

See what an encouragement here is to be conversant in the duties of Gods
Worship: 5 Branch.
he takes Notice of the services of his People; he hearkens to them as to sweet
Music. Who would not come with their humble addresses to God, when he is so
pleased with them? Prove. 15.8.

But my deserts are nothing? Object 1.


God bestows not his Favors according to our desert, Answ.
but according to his Promise.

But I have prayed a long time and have no Answer. Object 2.


God may hear Prayer when he does not Answer. Answ.
He may lend us his Ear, when he does not show us his Face. The Text says, the
Lord hearkened and heard. It Is not said he gave an Answer, but he hearkened. It
becomes suitors to wait. Faith stays upon God, Patience stays for God, Psalm.
123.2. As the Eyes of Servants look unto the hand of their Masters, so our Eyes
wait upon the Lord our God, until he have Mercy upon us.

See the difference between God and men: 6 Branch.
God takes Notice of the good in his people; the Wicked pass by the good in the
Godly, and take Notice only of their failings. If they can spy any indecency or
blemish in them, they upbraid them with it; Like those children, 2 King 2.23.
who reproached Elisha for his Baldness, but took no Notice of the Prophets
Miracles. Erasmus speaks of one, who observed all the lame Verses in Homer, but
passed over the good.

7 Branch.
From this, the Lord hearkened and heard, Behold the folly of Idolaters: they
worship a God who can neither hearken nor hear. The Cretians Pictured Jupiter
without Ears. Idol-Gods have Ears, but hear not, Psalm 115.16. A life-less God
is good enough for a life-less worship.

Let the People of God stand and Wonder. 2 Use. Exhortation.
1. At Gods Condescension, that he who is so high in the praises and
acclamations of the Angels, 1 Branch.
should stoop so low, as to listen to the lispings of his children. The Lord
hearkened and heard: Alas, God has no need of our Services; he is infinitely
blessed in reflecting upon the Splendor of his own infinite Being: we cannot
add the least Cubit to his Essential Glory, Job 35.7. If thou be Righteous
what give thou to him? or what receives he at thy hands? yet such is his
sweet Condescension, that he does as it were stoop below himself, and take
Notice of his Peoples Poor Oblations.

2. Wonder at Gods Love, that he should regard those services of his People,
which are so mixed with Corruption, Isa. 64.6. Our Righteousnesses are as
filthy Rags Splendida peccata. Aug.
. The Eucharistical Sacrifice, which was the highest, had some Leaven joined
with it, Levit. 7.13. Our best duties have some Leaven of Imperfection in them;
yet such is Gods love, that he has a liking to them, and accepts them, Cant.
5.1. I have eaten my Honeycomb with my Honey. Honey is sweet, but the Honeycomb
is Viscous and bitter, and can hardly be eaten; yet such was Christ's love to
his Spouse, that he eat of her Honeycomb, her services mixed with Imperfection,
and was pleased to take delight in them. Oh the Love of God! that he should
have respect to our offerings that are interlarded with sin. Our best duties
are as sweet Wine coming out of a Sour Cask.

2 Branch.
If God hearkens to us when we speak, let us hearken to him when he speaks. In
the word preached God speaks to us. He is said now to speak to us from Heaven,
Heb. 12.25. That is, by the preaching of the word, as a King speaks by his
Ambassador. Does God hearken to us, and shall not we hearken to him? Be not
like the Deaf-adder which stops her Ear. This the Lord complains of, Job
33.14. God speaks Once, yea Twice; yet man regards it not. If Gods word
does not prevail with us, our prayers will not prevail with him.

CHAP. XIV. Showing the second Good Effect of the Saints Piety,
2. THE Second Good effect of the Saints Piety, was, God recorded it. A Book of
Remembrance was written before him: The word in the Original for Book of
Remembrance (...).
Signifies a Book of Memorials or Monuments. The words immediately foregoing
recite Gods hearkening and hearing; but lest any should say, though God does at
the present hear the Holy Speeches and Thoughts of his Children, yet may they
not in time slip out of his Mind? therefore these words are added, a Book of
Remembrance was written before him. The Lord did not only hear the Good
speeches of the Saints, but Recorded them, and Wrote them down; a Book of
Remembrance was written. This is spoken (...) after the manner of men. Not that
God has any book of Records by him, he needs not write down any thing for the
help of his Memory, he is not Subject to oblivion. Things done a thousand years
ago are as fresh to him, as if they were done but Yesterday, Psalm. 90.4. A
thousand years in thy sight are but as Yesterday when it is past. This book of
Remembrance therefore, is a borrowed speech, taken from Kings, who have their
Chronicles wherein they note Memorable things Metaphora a regibus sumpta qui
habent annals in quibus memoranda annotant. Grotius.
. King Ahasuerus had his book of Records, wherein were written the worthy deeds
of Mordecai, Esther 6.1, 2. So God bears in Mind all the Good speeches and
pious actions of his Children. Gods curious and Critical observation is a Book
of Records, where nothing can be lost or torn out.

God does Eternally remember all the Good designs, Doct.
and Pious endeavors of his People, Heb. 6.10. God is not unrighteous to
forget your Work and labor of love, which you have showed toward his Name.
Eight things God writes down in his Book of Remembrance.

1. The Lord writes down the Names of his Saints, Philip. 4.3. Whose Names are
in the Book of Life. This Book has no Errata's, Rev. 3.5.

2. The Lord writes down the good speeches of his People. When Christians speak
together of the Mysteries of Heaven (which is like Music in consort) God is
much taken with it: When their Tongues are going, Gods pen is going in Heaven.
They that feared the Lord spoke often one to another, and a Book of Remembrance
was written.

3. The Lord writes down the Tears of his People. Tears drop down to the Earth,
but they reach Heaven Deorsum cadunt, fursum volant.
: God has his Bottle and his Book, Psalm 56.8. Put thou my Tears into thy
bottle, are they not in thy Book? Tears drop from the Saints, as Water from the
Roses: they are fragrant to God, and he puts them in his Bottle. And besides
this, he has his Book of Remembrance, where he sets them down; are they not in
thy Book? Especially God writes down such Tears as are shed for the sins of the
times, Ezekiel. 9.2. One was clothed with linen; with a writers Inkhorn by his
side: this was to write down the Tears of the Mourners, and to set a mark upon
the foreheads of them that sighed for the Abominations done in the midst of the
City, ver. 4.

4. God writes down the Thoughts of his People. We can write down men's Words,
but we cannot write down their Thoughts. It would pose the Angels to write men's
Thoughts: but be assured, never an Holy cogitation comes into our Mind, but God
writes it down. So in the Text, a Book of Remembrance was written for them that
Thought upon his Name. Two things are silent, yet have a Voice, Tears Psalm. 6.8.
, and Thoughts Isa. 66.18.
.

5. God writes down the desires of his People, Psalm. 38 9. All my desire is
before thee: That is, it is set down in thy book. Desire is the Spiritual
Appetite, or the Souls Anhelation and breathing after God, Psalm 84.2. In this
Life we do rather desire God than enjoy him. Can we say we take our Souls e
Corporis Pharetra out of the quiver of our Bodies, and shoot them into Heaven?
do our Affections sally forth toward Christ? do we desire him superlatively
and uncessantly? Every such desire is put down in Gods Register Book: all my
desire is before thee.

6. The Lord writes down the prayers of his People, Jonah 2.7. Prayer, though
it be not Vocal, only Mental, is Recorded, 1 Samuel 1.13. Hannah spoke in her
Heart. That prayer God did write down and Answer; God was better to her than
her prayer; she prayed for a Son, and God gave her a Prophet. When the heart is
so full of grief, that it can only groan in Prayer; yet a Groan is sometimes
the best part of a Prayer, and God writes it down, Psalm 38.9. Lord, my
Groaning is not hid from thee. If we cannot speak with elegancy in Prayer, if
it be only lisping and chattering, God puts it in his Book of Remembrance, Isa.
38.14. Like a Crane, so did I chatter: yet that prayer was heard and registered,
Ver. 5. I have heard thy prayer, I have seen thy Tears.

7. God writes down the Alms of his People. Works of Mercy must be done out of
Love to God: as Mary out of love brought her Ointments and sweet Spices and
anointed Christ's dead body: so out of pure love we must bring our Ointments of
Charity to anoint the Saints, which are Christ's living body, Such Alms are not
lost Opera eleemosynaria non pereunt sed parturiunt.
. Heb. 13.16. With such Sacrifices God is well pleased. And that we may see how
well the Lord is pleased with them, he has a Book of Remembrance for them, he
writes them down. Item, so much lent to the Lord, Acts 10.4. Cornelius, thine
Alms are come up for a memorial before God.

8. God has a Book of Remembrance for the Sufferings of his People. The Saints
Purgatory is in this life. But there are two things may bear up their Spirits.
1. Every Groan of theirs goes to Gods Heart, Exodus 6.7. I have heard the
Groanings of the Children of Israel. In Music when one string is touched, all
the rest sound: when the Saints are stricken Gods bowels sound. 2. God has a
Book of Records to write down his Peoples injuries. The wicked make wounds in
the backs of the Righteous, and then pour in Vinegar: God writes down their
Cruelty. 1 Samuel 15.2. I Remember what Amalek did to Israel. Amalek was Esaus
Grandchild Genesis 56.21.
. A bitter enemy of Israel. The Amalekites showed their Spite to Israel two
ways. 1. They did lie in ambush; and as Israel passed by, fell upon their
rear, and cut off the feeble in their army, 1 Samuel 15.2.

2. They did openly give Battle to them, and would have hindered them from going
into Canaan, Exodus 17.8. Now God took Notice of Isreal's sufferings by Amalek. I
Remember that Amalek did to Israel, I have my Book of Remembrance, I write it
down, Ver. 3. Go and smite Amalek.

CHAP. XV. Several Corollaries flowing from the Proposition.
IT shows us that it is not in Vain to serve God. 1 Use. Inform.
The Wicked who know not God, 1 Branch.
think him an hard-master, and say as they, Job 21.15. What profit should we
have if we pray to him? But the Text shows us that God records all the Services
of his People, a Book of Remembrance was written before him. Gods writing in a
Book is, 1. An honor to the Saints the Romans wrote the names of their
Senators in a Book, and in token of Honor they were called Patres conscripti:
so Gods Book of Remembrance shows his high esteem of his People and their
services, he writes them down. 2. Gods writing in a Book denotes the special
favor God bears to his People; he Registers them and their services with an
intent to Crown them. Tamerlain wrote down all the Memorable deeds of his
Soldiers, whom he afterward preferred to places of dignity. Gods service is
most eligible; let us make Joshua's Choice, Josh. 24.15. As for me and my
house, we will serve the Lord. If we should desert Gods service, whither shall
we go? when Christ asked his Disciples will ye also go away? says Peter, Lord
to whom shall we go? John 6.68. As if he had said, if we leave thee, we do not
know where to mend our selves. Let us adhere to God, he has his Book of
Memorials to record our Allegiance. We may be losers for him, we shall not be
losers by him.

2 Branch.
See from hence that as God does Register the good works of his People, so he
has a Book of Remembrance to write down the sins of the wicked, Isa. 30.8. Go,
write it before them in a Table, and note it in a book, that it may be for the
time to come, for ever, that this is a Rebellious People, that will not hear
the Law of the Lord. Men's sins are written in the book of Conscience, and the
Book of Gods Omnisciency. They think because God does not speak to them by his
loud Judgments, therefore God does not know their sins; but though God does
not speak, he writes, Jer. 17.1. The sin of Judah is written with a Pen of Iron
and the Point of a Diamond. God scores down every act of Oppression, Bribery,
Uncleanness, Hos. 7.2. They consider not in their Heart, that I remember all
their wickedness. King Belshazzer was carousing and drinking wine in bowls, and
praising his Gods of Gold and Silver; but while he was sinning, God was
writing, Dan. 5.6. In the same hour came forth fingers of a man's hand, and
wrote upon the Plaster of the Wall of the Kings Palace, and the King saw part
of the hand that wrote: then the Kings countenance was changed. We read of Gods
Book, Rev. 20.12. The books were opened: and his Bag, Job 14.17. My
transgression is sealed up in a bag. It seems to allude to Law-Courts where
there are Indictments against such Malefactors sealed up in a Bag, and are
produced at the assizes. When God shall open his black book wherein men's Names
are written, and his bag wherein their sins are written: then their Hearts will
tremble, and their knees smite one against another. Every Lie a sinner tells,
every Oath he Swears, every drunken bout, God writes it down in his book of
Remembrance; and woe to him if the book be not crossed with the Blood of Christ.

3. See the Mercifulness of God to his Children, who blots their sins out of
his book of Remembrance, and writes their good deeds in his book of
Remembrance, Isa. 43.25. I, even I am he that blotteth out thy Transgressions:
it is a Metaphor borrowed from a Creditor, who takes his pen and blots out the
debt owing him; so says God, I will blot out thy Transgressions. Or as the
Hebrew carries it, I am blotting them out (...)
.

God in forgiving sin passes an act of Oblivion, Jer. 31.34. I will remember
your sins no more. God will not upbraid his People with their former offenses.
We never read after Peter repented, that Christ upbraided him with his denial
of him. O the Heavenly indulgence and kindness of God to his People! he
remembers every thing but their sins. He writes down their good Thoughts and
speeches in a Merciful book of Remembrance; but their sins are as if they had
never been, they are carried into the Land of Oblivion.

If God records our services, 2 Use. Exhortation.
then let us record his Mercies, let us have our Book of Remembrance. A
Christian should keep two books always by him; one to write his sins in, that
he may be humble; the other to write his Mercies in, that he may be thankful.
David had his book of Remembrance, 1 Chronicles. 16.4. He appointed certain of the
Levites to record, and thank, and praise the Lord God of Israel. We should keep
a Register-book of Gods Mercies, though I think it is hard to get a book big
enough to hold them. At such a time we were in straits, and God supplied us; at
such a time under sadness of Spirit, and God dropped in the Oil of gladness, at
such a time near death, and God Miraculously restored us. If God be mindful of
what we do for him, shall not we be mindful of what he does for us? Gods
mercies, like Jewels, are too good to be lost: get a Book of Remembrance.

3 Use. Comfort.
It is Comfort to the Godly. 1. In case of friends forgetting them. Joseph did
Pharaoh's Butler a kindness, yet did not the chief Butler remember Joseph; but
forgot him. Genesis 40.23. It Is too usual to remember Injuries, and forget
Friends; but God has a Book of Remembrance, where he writes down all his old
friends. Near Relations may sometimes be forgetful: the tender Mother may
forget her infant, Isa. 49.15. Can a Woman forget her sucking child? yea she
may, but I will not forget thee: a Mother may sooner be unnatural than God
forgetful. Christ our High Priest has the Names of the Saints written upon his
Breast Plate, and all their good deeds written in his Book of Memorials. Let
this be as Bezar stone to revive the Hearts of Gods people; though friends may
blot you out of their Mind, yet God will not blot you out of his Book.

2. This is a consolation to the Godly, the Lord keeps a Book of Remembrance
for this end, that he may at the last day make a public and solemn mention of
all the good which his Saints have done. God will open his Book of Records, and
say as, Mat. 25.35. I was an hundred, and ye gave me meat; thirsty, and ye gave
me drink, etc. God will make known all the memorable and pious actions of his
People before men and Angels: he will say, here are they who have prayed, and
wept for Sin; here are they who have been Advocates for my Truth; here are they
who have laid to Heart my dishonours, and have mourned for what they could not
reform. These are my renowned ones, my Hephzibahs in whom my Soul delights.
What a Glorious thing will this be, to have God divulge the Encomium of his
Saints! when Alexander saw the Sepulcher of Achilles, he cried out O happy
Achilles who had Homer to set forth thy praise! what an honor will it be to
have the Names and worthy deeds of the Saints mentioned, and God himself to be
the Herald to proclaim their praises! 2 Cor. 4.5


CHAP. XVI. Showing the Third Good Effect of the Saints Piety.
3. THE third Good effect of the Saints Piety, was, God rewarded it, verse. 17.
And they shall be mine, says the Lord of Hosts, in that day when I make up my
Jewels. The reward is threefold. 1. Gods owning them; they shall be mine, says
the Lord of Hosts: where observe.

1. The Person speaking, the Lord of Hosts. 2. The Reward it self, they shall
be mine.
1. The Person speaking, the Lord of Hosts. This is too great a word to be
passed by in silence. God is often in Scripture styled, Dominus exercituum, the
Lord of Hosts, Psalm 46.11. Isa. 1.24. That is, he is the Supreme General, and
Commander of all Armies and forces, and gives Victory to whom he will.

Why is this Name, 1 Quest.
The Lord of Hosts given to God?

Not that God needs any Hosts to protect himself, Answ.
or Suppress his enemies. Earthly Princes have Armies to defend their Persons
from danger, but God needs none to help him: he can fight without an army. God
puts strength into all Armies; other Captains may give their Soldiers Armor,
but they cannot give them Strength: but God does, Psalm 18.39. Thou have Girded
me with strength unto battle. Why then is God said to have Hosts and Armies if
he needs them not.

1. It is to set forth his Sovereign Power, and Grandeur: Answ.
all Armies and Regiments are under his command.

2. It is to show us that though God can effect all things by himself; 2 Quest.
yet in his Wisdom he often uses the Agency of the Creature to bring to pass his
will and purpose.

What are these Hosts or Armies of which God is the Sovereign Lord? 1. Quest.


1. God has an Army in Heaven, Angels and Archangels, Answ.
1 King 22.19. I saw the Lord sitting on his Throne, and all the Host of Heaven
standing by him. By the Host of Heaven is meant the Angels; they being Spirits
are a Puissant Army, Psalm 103.20. Ye Angels which excel in Strength. We read
of one Angel who destroyed in one Night an hundred fourscore and five thousand,
2 King 19.35. If one Angel destroyed such a vast Army, what can a Legion of
Angels do? a Legion consisted of six thousand six hundred sixty six, says
Hesychius: how many of these Legions go to make up the Heavenly Host! Dan. 7.10


2: The Stars are Gods Army, Deuteronomy. 4.19. These were set in Battalia and fought
against Gods enemies, Judge. 5.20. The Stars in their courses fought against
Sisera. That is, the Stars did charge like an Army, raising Storms and tempests
by their influences, and so destroying the whole Army of Sisera. 2. God has
Armies upon earth.

1. Rational. 2. Irrational.
1. Rational, Hosts of men: these are under Gods command and conduct, they stir
not without his Warrant: the Lord has the managing of all Martial affairs: not
a stroke is struck, but God orders it: not a Bullet flies but God directs it.

2. Irrational, God can raise an Army of Flies, as he did against King Pharaoh,
Exodus 8.24. An Army of Worms, as he did against King Herod, Acts 12.23. O what
a Lord is here who has so many Hosts under his Pay and conduct!

Let us Dread this Lord of Hosts: 3 Use. Exhortation.
we fear men who are in Power, and is not that God to be adored and feared who
acts pro arbitrio. 1 Branch.
He does what he pleases in the Armies of Heaven and earth, Dan. 9.35. His
Power is as large as his will, Job 23 13. What his Soul desires, even that he
does. The Ephori had Power over the King of Sparta; the Tribunes over the Roman
consuls; much more has God a Sovereign Power over all. He pours contempt
upon Princes, Job 12.21. He threw the Proud Angels to Hell. God can with a word
unpin the Wheels and break the Axle tree of the Creation. Gods Power is a
Glorious Power, Col. 1.11. And herein it appears Glorious, it i^ never spent or
wasted. Men while they exercise their strength, weaken it. But, the Lord, the
Creator of the ends of the earth, faints not, neither is weary, Isa. 40.28.
Though God spends his Arrows upon his enemies, Deuteronomy. 32.23. yet not his
strength. O then tremble before this Lord of Hosts, Remember (O hard-hearted
sinner!) how many ways God can be revenged on thee. He can raise an Army of
diseases against thee in thy body: he can set the humors of the body one
against another, he can make the heat dry up the Moisture, or the Moisture
drown the heat; he can Arm every Creature against thee, the Dog, the Boar, the
Elephant. He can Arm Conscience against thee, as he did against Spira making
him a Terror to himself: O dread this Lord of Hosts.

If God be the Lord of Hosts, let us take heed of hardening our Hearts against
God. 2 Branch.
It was the saying of Pompey that with one stamp of his Foot he could raise all
Italy up in Arms Plut.
. God can with a word raise all the Militia of Heaven and Earth against us: and
shall we dare affront him? Job 9.4. Who has hardened himself against him, and
prospered? Such as live in the open breach of Gods Commandments harden their
Hearts against God; they raise a War against Heaven, Job 15.25. He
strengthens himself against the Almighty Induravit seputans s^deum posse
vincere, Mercer.
. Like Warriors, who Muster up all the forces they can, to fight with their
Antagonists: so the sinner harnesseth, and strengthens himself against Jehovah,
Ver. 26. He runs upon him, even on his neck, upon the thick bosses of his
bucklers. Bucklers anciently had one great boss in the middle with a sharp pike
in it to wound the adversary. The flagitious sinner encounters the God of
Heaven, and runs upon the thick bosses of his fury, which will wound mortally.
The Wicked do as Caligula, who challenged Jupiter to a duel: but who ever
hardened himself against God and prospered? will men go to measure Arms with
God? Job 40.9. Have thou an Arm like God? God is Almighty, therefore can hurt
his enemies; and he is invisible, therefore they cannot hurt him. Who can fight
with a Spirit? God will be too hard for his Enemies at the long run Qualis per
arva Leo fulvam mijnaci front concutiens jubam, Juven.
, Psalm 68.21. God shall wound the head of his Enemies, and the hairy scalp of
such an one as goes on still in his trespasses. Julian hardened his Heart
against God, but what got he at last? did he prosper? Being wounded in Battle
he threw up his blood into the Air, and said to Christ, Vicisti Galilaee: O
Galilean thou have overcome, I acknowledge thy Power whose Name and truth I
have opposed. How easily can God chastise Rebels? Exodus 14.24. In the
morning-watch God looked to the host of the Egyptians through the Pillar of
fire, and troubled their host. It needs cost God no more to destroy his
Proudest adversaries, than a look, a cast of the Eye. It Is better to lie
Prostrate at Gods feet, and meet him with tears in our Eyes, than Weapons in
our hands: we overcome God, not by resistance, but by Repentance.

3 Branch.
If God be the Lord of Hosts, let us be so wise as to engage him on our side,
Psalm 46 11. The Lord of Hosts is with us. Great is the Privilege to have the
Lord of Hosts for us. 1. If the Lord of Hosts be on our side, he can discover
the subtle plots of Enemies. Thus he detected the Counsel of Achitophel, 2 Samuel
17.16. And did not the Lord discover the Popish conspirators both in the
Powder Treason (that Catholic villainy) and of late, when they would have
subverted Religion and Laws, and like Italian Butchers have turned England into
an Akeldama or Field of blood? If it had not been the Lord who was on our side,
now may England say, when men rose up against us, they had swallowed us up
quick.

2. If the Lord of Hosts be on our side, he can bridle his Enemies, and lay
such a restraint upon their Spirits, that they shall not do the mischief they
intend, Genesis 31.39. It is in the Power of my hand to do you hurt (said Laban to
Jacob) but the God of your fathers spoke unto me saying, take heed thou speak
not to Jacob either good or bad. Laban had power to do hurt, but no heart. When
Balak called upon Balaam to curse Israel, God so dispirited Balaam that he
could not discharge his thunderbolt, Number. 23.8. How shall I curse whom God has
not cursed? He had a good mind to curse, but God held him back.

3. If the Lord of Hosts be for us, he can help us, though means fail, and
things seem to be given for lost. When Gideons Army was small, and rendered
despicable, then God Crowned them with Victory, Judge. 7.2, 22. When the Arm of
Flesh shrinks, now is a time for the Arm of Omnipotency to be put forth, Deuteronomy.
32.36. The Lord shall repent himself for his Servants when he sees their Power
is gone, and there is none shut up or left. The less of man is seen, the more
of God.

4. If the Lord be on our side he can save us in that very way in which we
think he will destroy us. Would not any have thought the Whales belly should
have been Jonahs Grave? but God made the fish a ship, in which he sailed safe
to shore. Paul got to Land by the breaking of the ship, Acts, 28.44. God can
make the adverse Party do his Work; he can cause divisions among the Enemies,
and turn their own Weapons against themselves 2 Chronicles. 20.23. Judge. 7.22.
, Isa. 19.2. I will set the Egyptians against the Egyptians.

5. If the Lord of Hosts be on our side, he can make the Churches affliction a
means of her Augmentation, Exodus 1.12. The more they afflicted them, the more
they multiplied. The Church of God is like that Plant Gregory Nazianzen speaks
of, which lives by dying, and grows by cutting (...).
. Persecution propagates the Church: the scattering of the Apostles up and
down, was like scattering of seed, it did tend much to the spreading of the
Gospel, Acts 8.1.4.

6. If the Lord of Hosts be on our side, he can alter the scene and turn the
balance of affairs when he pleases, Dan. 1.21. He changes times and seasons.
God can remove Mountains which lie in the way, or leap over them. His Power is
uncontrollable: he can bring Harmony out of discord. He who brought Isaac out
of a dead Womb, and the Messiah out of a Virgins Womb, what cannot he do? The
Lord of Hosts can in an instant alter the face of things. There are no
Impossibles with God: if means fail he can Create. It Is therefore high prudence
to get this Lord of Hosts on our side. Romans 8.31. If God be for us, who can be
against us? And if we would engage God to be on our side,

1. Let us be earnest suitors to him, exercise Eyes of Faith, and Knees of
prayer. Jer. 14.9. And in prayer let us use Joshua's argument, Josh. 7.9. What
will thou do unto thy great name? Lord, if the cause of Religion lose ground,
how will thy name suffer! Popish Enemies never prevail, but they Blaspheme.

2. Let us put away iniquity out of our Tabernacles, Job 11.14. Sin is not
worth keeping: who would keep a Plague Sore? Let us discard and abjure our sins
Jer. 7.3.
; And then the Lord of Hosts will be on our side, and as a Pledge of his
favorable presence, he will entail the Gospel, that Crowning blessing, upon us
and our posterity. So much for the Person speaking; the Lord of Hosts.

CHAP. XVII. The first Part of the Saints reward, Gods owning them.
2. I Come now to the reward it self, the first part whereof is Gods owning
them, they shall be mine.

Expositors here vary: I take the sense of it to be, they shall be mine in
Covenant, Ezekiel. 16.8. I entered into Covenant with thee, and thou becamest mine
Isa. 43.1.
. This is no small favor to be in Covenant with God: therefore when God told
Abraham that he would enter into Covenant with him, Abraham fell on his face;
Genesis 17.2. as being amazed that the great God should bestow such a signal
favor upon him. God never entered into Covenant with the Angels when they fell,
but he proclaims himself God in Covenant with Believers, they shall be mine.
This Covenant enriched with Free Grace, is a better Covenant than that which
was made with Adam in Innocence. For

1. The least failing would have made the first Covenant null and void: but
many failings do not invalidate the Covenant of Grace. I grant the least sin
makes a trespass upon the Covenant; but does not rescind it. Every failing in
the Conjugal Relation breaks not the Marriage bond.

2. The first Covenant being violated, allowed the sinner no remedy; all doors
of hope were shut: but the new Covenant allows of a Remedy: it provides a
surety, Heb. 12.24. Jesus the Mediator of the new Covenant.

1 Use. Inform.
See the amazing goodness of God to his People, to enter into Covenant with
them, and say, Ye are mine, 2 Samuel 23.5. He has made with me an Everlasting
Covenant, ordered in all things and sure. The first Covenant stood upon the
ticklish Foundation of Works. Adam had no sooner a stock of Original
Righteousness to Trade with, but he broke: but this Covenant of Grace is
confirmed with Gods Decree, and rests upon two mighty Pillars, the Oath of God,
and the Blood of God. That ye may see how great a privilege this is to be
owned by the Lord federally, that he should be our God, and we his people,
consider,

1. If we are in Covenant with God and he says to us Ye are mine, then all
that is in God is ours. A person falling to decay marrying to a King, has an
interest in all the Crown-revenues: God having entered into a near Relation with
us, and saying ye are mine, we have a share in his Rich revenues. The Lord
says to every Believer as the King of Israel said to the King of Syria, 1 Kin.
20.4. I am thine and all that I have: My Wisdom shall be thine to teach thee,
my Holiness shall be thine to Sanctify thee, my Mercy shall be thine to save
thee. What richer dowry than Deity? God is a whole Ocean of blessedness. If
there is enough in him to fill the Angels, then sure he has enough to fill us.

2. If God says to us ye are mine, then he will have a tender care of us. 1
Pet. 5.7. He cares for you Res est solliciti plena timoris amor.
. God to show his tender anxiousness toward Israel, bare them as upon Eagles
wings, Exodus 19.4. The Eagle carries her young ones upon her wing to defend
them; the Arrow must first shoot through the Old Eagle, before it can touch her
Young ones. A Mothers care is seen in leading the Child that it may not fall:
such is Gods care. Hos. 11.3. I taught Ephraim to go, leading them by their
Arms. We may argue a minori ad majus, if God take care of the meanest Infects
and Animals that creep upon the earth, much more will he take care of his
Covenant-Saints. He is still consulting and projecting for their good; if they
wander out of the way, he guides them; if they stumble, he holds them by the
hand; if they fall, he raises them; if they be dull, he quickens them by his
Spirit; if they be froward, he draws them with cords of Love; if they be sad,
he Comforts them with his promises.

3. If God says to us, ye are mine, then he will entirely love us, Jer. 31.3.
I have loved thee with an Everlasting love. The Lord may give a man riches and
not love him: his prosperity may be as Isreal's Quails sawced with Gods wrath.
Number. 11.32, 33. But when God says, ye are mine, he cannot but love; every one
loves his own. If God has any love better than other, his Vovenant People
shall have it; he will distill the Spirits of his love for them, he loves them
as he loves Christ, John 17.24.

4. If God says to us ye are mine, then he will not suffer us to want.
Believers are not only of Gods family, but of Christ's body; and will the head
let the body starve? Psalm 37.3. Verily thou shall be fed. God has not
promised dainties; he will not satisfy his Peoples lusts, but he will supply
their wants; if the Bill of Fare grows low, what they lack in cheer, they shall
have in blessing, Exodus 23.25. He will bless thy bread and thy water. God will
rather work a miracle, than any of his Children shall famish. The Raven that is
so unnatural she will hardly feed her young, yet did turn Caterer and brought
food to the Prophet Elijah.

5. If God says to us, ye are mine, then we have great immunites: 1. We are
freed from the revenging wrath of God. We are not free from Gods anger as a
Father, but as a Judge. God will not pour his vindictive Justice upon us.
Christ has drunk the Red wine of Gods wrath upon the Cross, that Believers may
not taste a drop of it.

2. We are freed from the Predominancy of sin, Romans 6.14. Sin shall not have
dominion, or as the word is (...), it shall not Lord it over you. Though
Believers are not freed from the In-being of sin, nor from the Combat with it,
yet they are freed from its Imperious command. As it is said of those beasts in
Daniel, they had their Dominion taken away, yet their Lives were prolonged for
a season, Dan. 7.12. So sin Lives in the Regenerate, but its Dominion is taken
away. And to be thus freed from the jurisdictive power and tyranny of sin is no
small blessing. A Wicked man is at the command of sin, as the Ass is at the
command of the driver: the curse of Cham is upon him, Genesis 9.25. A Servant of
Servants shall he be. He is a slave to his Lusts, and a slave to Satan. O what
a privilege is it to have ones neck out of the Devils Yoke!

3. We are freed from the accusations of Conscience. The worm of Conscience is
part of the Torment of Hell Tandem flagitia in supplicia Vertuntur, Tacitus.
. But God being our God we are freed from the Clamors of this hellish Fury:
Conscience sprinkled with Christ's blood speaks Peace; a good Conscience like
the Be gives Honey; it is like the Golden pot which had Manna in it, 2 Cor.
1.12.

6. If God says to us ye are mine, we shall be his for ever, Psalm 48.14. This
God is our God for ever and ever. You cannot say you have health and you shall
have it for ever, you have a Child and you shall have it for ever; but if God
be your God, you shall have him for ever. The Covenant of Grace is Sacrum
diploma, a Royal Charter, and this is the Happiness of it, it is eternized
Iustificatio nunquam rescinditur.
. The interest between God and his people shall never be broken off; How false
therefore is the Opinion of falling from Grace! Shall any that God makes his
own by Federal union, Fall finally? Indeed if Salvation has no better Pillar
to rest upon than man's will (as the Arminians hold) no wonder if there be
falling away* but a Christians stability in Grace, is built upon a surer basis,
namely, Gods inviolable Covenant, Isa. 55.3. (...).
Once in Christ and ever in Christ. A Star may sooner fall out of its orb than
a true Believer be plucked away from God Aliud est recedere, aliud excidere a
gratia, Aug.
.

7. If God says to us ye are mine, he will take us up to himself at death.
Death breaks the union between the Body and the Soul, but perfects the union
between God and the Soul. This is the Emphasis of Heavens Glory, to be with
God. What is the Joy of the blessed, but to have a clear transparent sight of
God, and to be in the sweet and soft embraces of his love for ever? This has
made the Saints desire death, as the Bride the wedding day, Phil. 1.23. Lead
me, Lord, to that glory (said an Holy man) a glimpse whereof I have seen as in
a glass darkly.

2 Use. Comfort.
Let this be a Consolatory to the Saints; there is a Covenant-union between God
and them, God is theirs and they are his, they shall be mine says the Lord.
Here is a standing cordial for the Godly, God looks upon them as having a
propriety in them, they shall be mine. This is Comfort 1. In respect of Satan's
accusations, he accuses the Saints first to God, then to themselves; but if
God says ye are mine, this answers all Satan's Bills of Indictment. Christ will
show the debt-book crossed in his blood. It was a saying of Bucer, I am
Christ's, and the Devil has nothing to do with me.

2. It is Comfort in respect of Poverty? Believers are matched into the Crown
of Heaven, and all that is in God is theirs. The Philosopher comforted himself
with this, that though he had no Music or Vine-trees, yet he had the household
Gods with him (...).
: So though we have not the Vine or Fig Tree, yet if God be ours and we are
his, this Creates joy in the most indigent condition.

And that which may raise the comfort of the godly higher, and cause a
jubilation of Spirit is, that shortly God will own his people before all the
world, and say, these are mine. At present the elect are not known, 1 John 3.2.
It does not yet appear what we shall be. The Saints are like Kings in disguise;
but how will their hearts leap for joy, when God shall pronounce that word,
these are mine; These the lot of Free Grace is fallen upon, these shall lie for
ever in the Bosom of my love.

2 Use.
To all who are yet strangers to God: Labor to get into Covenant with him that
he may say, ye are mine. Why does God woo and beseech you by his Ambassadors,
if he were not willing to be in Covenant?

Quest.
What shall a poor forlorn Creature do, to get into Covenant with God?

Answ.
1. If you would be in Covenant with God, break off the Covenant with sin, 1 Samuel 7.3. What King will be in league with him that holds correspondence with
his Enemy?

2. Labor for Faith; 1. Faith in the Mercy of God, Jer. 3.12. I am merciful,
says the Lord, and will not keep anger for ever. As the Sea covers great Rocks
as well as little Sands; so Gods Mercy covers great sins: Manasseh a bloody
sinner was held forth as a pattern of Mercy. Some of the Jews who had an hand
in Crucifying of Christ, yet their sins were forgiven.

2. Faith in the merit of Christ. Christ's blood is not only (...) but (...):
not only a Sacrifice to appease God, but a Propitiation to ingratiate us into
Gods favor, 1 John 2.2.
and make him look upon us with a smiling aspect.

CHAP. XVIII. The Second part of the Saints Reward, Gods Honoring them.
2. THE Second part of the Saints reward is Gods Honoring them, in that day
when I make up my Jewels: Here are three Propositions; 1. That God has a great
honor for his People. 2. That Gods People are his Jewels. 3. That there is a
day when God will make up his Jewels.


1st. That God has a great honor for his People. He speaks of them here with
Honor, in that day when I make up my Jewels, Isai. 43.4. Since thou wast
precious in my sight, thou have been honorable: Honor attends Holiness. That
the Lord does highly honor the fearers of him, is evident by four
demonstrations.

1. In that he prefers them before others. He chooses them, and passes by the
rest, Mal. 1.2. Was not Jacob Esaus brother? (says the Lord,) yet I hated Esau
and loved Jacob.

2. In that God gives them frequent Visits. It Is counted an Honor for a
Subject to have his Prince Visit him. 1 John 3.3. Our (...) or Communion is
with the Father and his Son Jesus. The Rabbis say, Moses had an Hundred and
fifty conferences with God, and died with a Kiss from Gods mouth. What greater
Honor for a Person, than to have God keep him Company? Exodus 33.11.

3. In that God makes them Rich heirs; Romans 8.17. (...), joint heirs with
Christ. For a man to adopt another and make him heir to his estate, is no small
honor done to him. The Youngest Believer is an heir, yea, and an Heir of the
Crown, 1 Pet. 5.4. This Crown he has in promisso, in the Promise, Rev. 2.10.
And in primitiis, in the first fruits, Romans 8.23.

4. In that God sends his Angels to be their Servitors. Such as are Gods
Servants have Angels to be theirs: Heb. 1.14. Are they not all ministering
Spirits sent forth to Minister for them who shall be heirs of Salvation?

Who would not be fearers of God? 1 Use.
this makes God have an honorable esteem of them; all men (says Chrysostom)
are ambitious of Honor (...). 2 Use.
: the true Honor comes from God, John 5.44.

If God does so Honor his People, let them Honor him; Mal. 1.6. Where is my
Honor? let the Saints be God-exalters, let them lift up his Name in the World,
and make his praise glorious, Psalm 66.2. But I only glance at this.

2ly. That Gods People are his Jewels, in that day when I make up my Jewels.
Jewels are precious things; the Hebrew word for Jewels (...) signifies a
treasure. A treasure is made up of costly things: Gold and Pearl, and Rubies:
such a precious Treasure are the Saints to God.

In what sense are the Godly Jewels? Quest.


1. They are Jewels for their sparkling quality Splendore.
. Answ.
Their Holiness shines and sparkles in Gods eyes, Cant. 4.9. Thou have ravished
my Heart with one of thine eyes, that is, one of thy Graces.

2. The Godly are Jewels for their Scarcity Raritate.
. Pearls are not common; so the Godly are scarce and Rare: there are but few of
these to be found: there are many false Professors (as there are Bastard
Diamonds) but few Israelites indeed; Mat. 20.16. Few are Chosen. Among the
Millions in Rome, there were but few Senators: among the swarms of People in
the World, but few Believers.

3. The Godly are Jewels for their Price Pretio.
. Queen Cleopatra had two Jewels that contained half the price of a Kingdom.
Thus the Saints are Jewels for their Value: God esteems them at an high rate,
he parted with his best Jewel for them; Christ's precious blood was shed to
ransom these Jewels.

4. The Saints are Jewels, for their adorning quality Orna mento.
. Jewels adorn them that wear them: the Saints are Jewels that adorn the World.
Their Piety mixed with Prudence honors the Gospel. Hypocrites Eclipse Religion
and make it evilly spoken of: the Saints as Jewels render it illustrious by
their Sanctity.

1. See the worth of the Godly, 1 Use. Inform.
they are Jewels; they are a Royal diadem in the hand of God, Isa. 62.3. That
is, they are eminent above others, as a Crown hung with Jewels is an ensign of
the highest state and Honor. The Saints are Gods Glory, Isa. 46.13. As if Gods
Glory did lie in them.

2. See then that which may bring Holiness into repute, 2 Branch.
and make us become Proselytes to it. It casts a splendor upon us, and makes
God number us among his Jewels. Some are loath to embrace Godliness for fear it
will be a stain to their Reputation, and bring them out of favor with great
men: you see how it does raise a persons renown, it makes him precious in Gods
sight, he is a Jewel. Believers in regard of their mystical union with Christ,
have a preciousness above the Angels: the Angels are Morning Stars, Job 38, 7.
Believers are clothed with the Sun of Righteousness, Rev. 12.1.

See the different Opinion that God has of the Godly and the Wicked: 3 Branch.
the one he esteems precious, the other vile, Nahum 1.14. I will make thy
Grave, for thou art Vile: this is spoken of King Senacherib: though he was by
Birth Noble, yet he was by sin Vile. The Hebrew word for Vile (...)
, signifies, of base esteem. Though the Wicked are high in dignity and worldly
grandeur, yet God slights them. A dunghill may be higher than other ground, but
it sends forth noisome Vapors: Psalm 14.3. They are altogether become filthy.
In the Original it is, they are become stinking (...)
. The Wicked are compared to Dogs and Swine, 2 Pet. 2.22. to dross, Ezekiel.
22.19. Dross is the filth of the Metal Scoria est m^talli Sordes.
. Sinners are compared to Chaff, Psalm. 1.4. When a Wicked man dies, there is
only a little Chaff blown away. A sinner is the most contemptible thing in
nature; there is no worth in him while he lives, and no loss of him when he
dies. A sinner is worse than a Toad or Serpent; A Toad has nothing but what
God has put into it, but a Wicked man has that which the Devil has put into
him: Act 5.3. Why has Satan filled thy Heart to lie to the Holy Ghost?

See what an high estimate we should set upon the Godly, they are Jewels, 4
Branch.
they are the Glory of the Creation: they are compared to Stars for their
beauty, Rev. 1.20. to Spice Trees for their perfume, Cant. 4.14. They are the
Chariots and Horsemen of Israel, 2 King 2.12.
they are the excellent of the Earth, Psalm 16.3. The Lord would soon break up
house in the World, but that he has some Jewels in it. Prize the Saints though
they are humbled with Poverty: we esteem of a Pearl though it lie in the dust:
John Baptist was girt with a Leathern Girdle; yet he was a Jewel, Mat. 11.9. He
was the Morning Star, to usher in the Sun of Righteousness into the World. The
Saints are precious, for they are Gods lesser Heaven, Isa. 57.15.

3. See the Saints Safety: 5 Branch.
they are Gods Jewels, and he will have a care to preserve them* A man is
careful that he does not lose his Jewels. God often gives his people a temporal
Salvation: if a storm comes he knows how to hide his Jewels. He hid an hundred
Prophets in a Cave, 1 Kin. 18.4. The Angel is commanded before he poured his
Vial of curses on the earth, to seal the Saints of God on their foreheads,
Rev. 7.3. Which was signum salutare a mark of safety: however God will look to
the Spiritual safety of his Jewels, Joh. 17.12. Not one of them is lost.

If the Saints are Gods Jewels, then how incensed and enraged will God be
against those who shall abuse these Jewels? 6 Branch.
Theodosius counted them Traitors who abused his Statue: what will become of
them who persecute Gods Saints, and tread upon his Jewels? It goes near to God
to see his Jewels sprinkled with blood: what is done to them the Lord takes it
as done to him self, Act. 9.4. Why persecutest thou me? When the foot was trod
on, the head cried out. The Saints are Gods Royal diadem Isa. 62.3.
. Will a King endure to have his Robes spit upon, or his Crown-royal thrown in
the dust? Psalm 105.14. He reproved Kings for their sakes. What Monuments of
Gods Vengeance were Nero, Dioclesian, Gardner, and the rest of that persecuting
tribe? Luke 18.7. Shall not God avenge his own elect? I tell you he will avenge
them speedily. Persecutors stand in the place where all Gods Arrows fly, Psalm
7.13. He ordains his Arrows against the Persecutors. That is a killing
Scripture, Zach. 13.12. And this shall be the Plague wherewith God will smite
all the People, that have fought against Jerusalem, their flesh shall consume
away while they stand upon their feet, and their eyes shall consume away in
their holes, and their Tongues shall consume away in their Mouth.

Here is Comfort to the people of God, 2 Use. Consolation.
in case of the Worlds disesteem of them, yet God values them as Jewels; and
his Judgment is according to truth, Romans 2.2. The Wicked have low Thoughts of
the Righteous, they beat down the price of these Jewels what they can, they
think them the refuse and scurse, they disdain them, load them with slanders
and Invectives: the Prophet Elijah was looked upon by King Ahab as the Troubler
of Israel, 1 Kin. 18.17. And Luther was called a Trumpet of Rebellion; St. Paul
was Judged a Pestilent fellow, Acts 24.5. The Wicked think of all things in the
World the Saints may be best spared: 1 Cor. 4.13. We are made (...) as the
filth and off-scowring of all things: but this is Vinum in pectore, a great
consolation to Believers, that as low esteem as the reprobate world has of
them, yet God has high Thoughts of them, he numbers them among his Jewels
Peculium and (...) Dei. Corn. lap.
. They are compared for their preciousness to Gold and Silver, Rev. 1.20. They
are the Coin and Medals that bear Gods own Image. They are Princes in all
Lands, Psalm 45.16. Christ engraves their Names on his breast, as the Names of
the twelve Tribes were set with Precious Stones in Gold upon Aarons
Breast Plate. God will give whole Kingdoms to ransom his jewels, Isa. 43.3.
The wicked think the Godly are not worthy to live in the world, Acts 22. 21.
and God thinks the World is not worthy of them, Heb. 11.38. Hence it is God
takes away his Jewels so fast, and places them among the Cherubims.

To the People of God. 3 Use. Exhortation.
Are you Gods Jewels? then I beseech you shine as Jewels: walk (...)
accurately, 1 Branch.
and Holily, Phil. 2.15. Among whom ye shine as lights in the World. Such as
are Gods Jewels should let the World see they have worth in them. O Christians,
let your Lives be an Imitation of the Life of Christ. Such a Jewel was Mr.
Bradford, Martyr, so humble and Innocent in his carriage, that at his death,
many of the Papists could not refrain from Weeping. Are you Gods Jewels? do
nothing that may Eclipse or Sully your luster. When Professors are Proud,
Envious, Censorious, when they break their promises, or Cheat their Creditors,
these do not look like Saints: What will others say? These are the Devils
Lumber, not Gods Jewels. O I beseech you who profess to be of an higher rank
than others, Honor that Worthy name by which you are called; shine as earthly
Angels, 1 Pet. 2.9. But ye are a Royal Priesthood, a peculiar People that ye
should show forth the Praises of him who has called you. Alexander would have
the Grecians known not only by their Garments, but their Virtues. Gods people
should be known by the sparkling of their Graces: shall there be no difference
in behavior between the Wicked and the Godly? between a clod of Earth and a
Diamond? let it appear that you are Candidates for Heaven: you who are Gods
People, the Lord expects some Singular thing from you, Mat. 5.47. He looks that
you should bring more Glory to him, and by your exemplary Piety make Proselytes
to Religion.

It exhorts the Godly to thankfulness. God has taken you out of the rubbish of
mankind, 2 Branch.
and made you Jewels, Psalm 113.7. He raises up the poor out of the dust, that
he may set him with Princes: let me allude, God has raised you out of the dust
of a natural Estate, and ennobled you, that he may set you with Angels those
Princes above. O admire God, set the Crown of your praises upon the head of
Free Grace. A Gratulatory thankful frame of Heart is pleasing to God: if
Repentance be the Joy, Praise is the Music of Heaven. Bless God who has
wrought such a change in you, and of lumps of Earth and sin has made you
Jewels.

The Third Proposition is, Thirdly.
That there is a time shortly coming when God will make up his Jewels; in that
day when I make up my Jewels: Here are two Questions.

1. What is meant by Gods making up his Jewels? 2. What is that day when God
will make up his Jewels?
1. What is meant by Gods making up his Jewels? Quest.
There is a difference between th^se two, Gods making of Jewels, and his making
up of Jewels. Gods making of Jewels, is, when he works Grace, but what is Gods
making up of Jewels?

Gods making up his Jewels implies two things. Answ.


1. Gods gathering his Saints together. 2. Gods perfecting his Saints.
1. Gods making up his Jewels implies his gathering his Saints together. The
Godly in this life are like scattered Pearls, they lie distant one from
another, and are dispersed into several Regions: but there is a day coming,
when God will gather all his Saints together, as one puts all his Pearls
together on a string. There must be such an aggregation or gathering together
Gods scattered Saints,

1. From the near Relation they have to all the Persons in the Trinity: 1. To
God the Faterh; he has chosen these Jewels and set them apart for himself,
Psalm 4.3. and will he lose any of his Elect? 2. They are related to Christ; he
has bought these Jewels with his blood, and will he lose his purchase? 3. They
are related to the Holy Ghost; he has sanctified them. When they were a lump
of sin, he made them Jewels; and when he has bestowed cost on them, will he
lose his cost? will he not string these Pearls, and put them in his celestial
Cabinet?

2. There must be a gathering together Gods scattered Saints, from the Prayer
of Christ. It was Christ's prayer to his Father, that he would make up his
Jewels; that he would gather together his Pearls, that they might be with him
in Heaven, John 17.24. That they may be with me where I am. Christ thinks long,
till all the Elect Jewels lie together in his bosom. He thinks not himself
complete, till all his Saints be with him.

Here is a Sovereign Comfort to the People of God in two cases. Use.


1. In case of Scattering. 2. In case of Dividing.
1. In case of Scattering. Gods people are scattered up and down in the World:
and, which is worst, these Jewels lie among rubbish, they dwell among the
Wicked, Psalm 120.5. Woe is me that I dwell in the Tents of Kedar. Kedar was
Ishmaels Son. Woe is me (says David) that I live with an Ishmael-brood. The
Wicked are still molesting the Righteous: Gods Jewels lie scattered among the
unclean; but here is the Comfort, that shortly God will gather his People from
among the Wicked, he will make up his Jewels, and all the Pearls and precious
stones shall be by themselves in Bliss.

2. It is Comfort in case of Dividing. Gods People here are divided; their love
is so little it may almost lie upon a knives point: they often look strange one
upon another: these divisions are unseemly, and are flaws in Gods Diamonds.
Discords among Christians, brings a reproach upon Religion, advances Satan's
Kingdom, hinders the growth of Grace. Divisions are fatal, and do presage Gods
Judgments coming upon us. Impius haec tam cult a novalia miles habebit
Barbarus, has segetes? Enquo discordiacives
Perduxit miseros. --


But this is Comfort, God will shortly make up his Jewels: he will so gather
his Saints together, that he will unite them together, they shall be (...), all
of one Heart, Act 2.46. What an happy time will it be when the Saints shall be
as so many Pearls upon one string, and shall accord together in a blessed Unity!

2. Gods making up his Jewels implies his perfecting his Saints. Then a thing
is said to be made up when it is perfected; you make up a Garment when you
perfect it; you make up a Watch, when you put all the Wheels and Pins in
perfect order: so Gods making up his Jewels signifies his perfecting them. The
Godly in this Life are imperfect, they cast but a faint luster of Holiness,
they receive but the first fruits of the Spirit, Romans 8.23. that is, a small
measure of Grace: the first fruits under the Law were but an handful to the
whole Vintage. This may humble us to consider if we are Jewels, yet imperfect:
our knowledge is checkered with Ignorance, 1 Cor. 13.5. Our love to God is
feeble. Behold here Clouds in the Diamond. This may take down our Top-sail of
Pride, to consider how incomplete we are: but when God shall make up his
Jewels, and perfect his Saints, it will be a glorious time, and this brings me
to the second Question.

2 Quest.
What is that day when God will make up his Jewels?

Answ.
1. God makes up his Jewels at the day of Death, then he makes the Saints Graces
perfect.

2. He makes up His Jewels at the day of the Resurrection, then he makes the
Saints Bodies perfect.

1. God makes up His Jewels at the day of death, then he makes the Saints
Graces perfect. Hence it is the Saints departed are called the Spirits of just
men made perfect, Heb. 12.23. Sin does mix and incorporate with a Christian, he
cannot write a Copy of Holiness without blotting. Grace, though it does abate,
yet not abolish Corruption: but at Death God makes up His Jewels; he perfects
the Graces of his People. Will not that be a blessed Time, never to have a Vain
thought more? never to be within the sight of a temptation or the fear of a
Relapse? This me thinks may make death desirable to the Godly; then the Lord
will make up his Jewels, he will complete the Graces of his Children; they
shall be as holy as they desire to be, and as God would have them to be. How
will Gods Diamonds sparkle when they shall be without flawes? In that day of
death when God makes up His Jewels, the Saints

1. Light will be clear, 2. Love will be perfect.
1. Their Light will be clear. They shall be so divinely irradiated, that they
shall know the (...), the deep things of God. They shall in this sense be
(...), as the Angels, Mat. 22.30. Their Intellectuals shall be raised higher,
and made more capacious than in Innocence. Through the Crystal Glass of
Christ's Humane Nature the Saints shall have Glorious transparent sights of God:
they shall know as they are known, 1 Cor. 13.12. A riddle too mysterious for us
Mortals, if not for Angels to expound.

2. In that day the Saints Love will be perfect: Love is the Queen of the
Graces, it out-lives all the other Graces. In this life our love to God is
lukewarm, and sometimes Frozen; a Believer weeps that he can love God no more:
but at the day of death when God makes up his Jewels, then the Saints love
shall be Seraphical: the spark of Love shall be blown up into into a pure
flame: the Saints shall love God secundum actum (as the Schoolmen speak) as
much as they are able: they shall love him superlatively, and indeficiently,
they shall be made up of love. O blessed day of death! when God shall make up
his Jewels, the Saints Graces shall shine forth in their Meridian Splendor.

2. God makes up his Jewels at the day of the Resurrection, then he makes the
Saints bodies perfect: these like sparkling Diamonds shall shine in Glory. At
the Resurrection God is said to change the bodies of the Saints, Phil. 3.21.
How will he change them? not that they shall be other bodies than they were
before: the substance of their bodies shall not be changed, but the qualities:
as wool when it is died into a Purple color, is not altered in the substance,
but quality, and is made more illustrious; so God in making up his Jewels will
cause a greater resplendency in the Saints bodies than before. When God makes
up the Jewels of the Saints Bodies at the Resurrection, they shall be perfect
four ways.

1. In Amability or sweetness of Beauty. Here the Bodies of the Righteous are
often deformed; Leah has her blear Eyes, and Barzillai his lameness; but at the
Resurrection the bodies of the Saints shall be of unspotted fairness: and no
wonder, for they shall be made like Christ's Glorious body, Phil. 3.21.

2. When God at the Resurrection makes up the Jewels of the Saints bodies, they
shall have Perfection of parts. Their bodies in this World may be maimed and
dismembered; but in the day of the Resurrection they shall have all the parts of
their bodies restored, Acts 3.21. Such as have lost an Eye, shall have their
Eye again; such as want a Leg or an Arm, shall have their Arm again.

3. When God makes up the Jewels of the Saints bodies at the Resurrection, they
shall be Velocious and quick in their Motion. Here the Bodies of the Saints
move heavily: but then they shall be sprightly, and move swiftly from one place
to another. Here the body is a Weight; in Heaven it shall be a Wing.

4. When God makes up the Jewels of the Saints bodies, they shall be Immortal:
the Body once Glorified shall never be Subject to death, 1 Cor. 15.53. This
corruptible shall put on Incorruption. Heaven is an healthful Climate, no
Passing Bell goes there: this mortal shall put on Immortality.

Let us labor to be in the number of Gods Jewels, Use.
that when the Lord shall make up his Jewels, he may perfect our Souls and
Bodies in Glory.

Quest.
How shall we know that we are in the number of Gods Jewels?

Answ.
Have we inherent Holiness? 1 Cor. 6.11. But ye are washed, but ye are
Sanctified. We are not Jewels by Creation, but Regeneration. If Holiness
sparkle in us, it is a sign we are Jewels; and then when God comes to make up
his Jewels, he will put Glory upon our Souls and Bodies for ever.

CHAP. XIX. The Third part of the Saints Reward, Gods sparing them.
3. THE Third part of the Saints reward is Gods Sparing them. I will spare them
as a man spares his own Son that serves him. The Hebrew word to spare (...)
signifies to use Clemency: In this Phrase is a Meiosis, there is less said and
more intended; I will spare them, that is, I will deal with them as a Father
does with his Son: the same tenderness that a Father shows to his Child, the
same will I show to them that Fear me.

God will deal with them that Fear him, as a Father does with his Son. Doct*
Two things are in this Proposition.

1. That God is a Father. He is a Father, 1. By Creation, he has given us our
Being, Mal. 2.10. Have not we all one Father? has not one God created us?

2. God is a Father by Election; he has culled out a certain number to be his
Children, Ephesians. 1.4.

3. God is a Father by special Grace, he stamps his impress of Holiness upon
men, Col. 3.10. All Gods Children resemble him, though some are more like him
than others.

2. That God will deal with them that Fear him, as a Father does with his Son:
1. God will accept them as a Father does his Son. If the Child does but lisp
and can hardly speak plain, the Father takes all well: so God as a Father will
accept of what his Children do in sincerity: Ezekiel. 20.40. There will I require
your Offerings, I will accept you with your sweet Savor.

2. Such as Fear God, he will be full of Bowels to them as a Father is to his
Son. There are in God

1. Bowels of Compassion. 2. Bowels of Complacency.
1. Bowels of Compassion. A Father Compassionates his Child. Sozomen makes
mention of a Father who offered to be put to death for his two Sons, who were
sentenced to dye: God has soundings of Bowels, Isa. 63.15. The Compassions of
Parents are Steel and Marble compared with Gods: Luke 1.78. Through the tender
Mercy of our God: in the Greek it is (...), the Bowels of Mercy: these Bowels
make God sympathize with his Children in Misery: he is touched in their wounds,
Psalm. 103.13. As a Father pitieth his Children, so the Lord pitieth them that
fear him.

2. In God are Bowels of Complacency. How dearly did Jacob love Benjamin; his
life was bound up in him, Genesis 44.30. All the Affections of Parents come from
God: they are but a drop of his Ocean, a spark of his flame; Gods love is a
love that passes Knowledge, Ephesians. 3.19. The Saints cannot Love their own
Souls so entirely as God loves them. In particular,

1. God loves the persons of his Children: they are the Apple of his Eye, Zach.
2.8. He engraves them upon the Palms of his hands, Isa. 49.16. It alludes to
them who carry about them graven on the Stone of their Ring the Picture of some
dear Friend whom they entirely affect.

2. God loves the places his Children were born in the better for their sakes:
Psalm. 87.2. God loves the Gates of Sion: ver. 5. This and that man was born in
her; (i. e.) This and that Believer. God loves the very ground his Children go
upon. Why was Iudaea (the Ancient seat of Israel) called a delightsome Land?
Mal. 5.12. Not so much delightful for the fruit growing in it, as for the
Saints living in it.

3. God so loves his Children that he charge the great ones of the World upon
pain of death not to hurt them: their persons are sacred, Psalm 105.14. He
reproved Kings for their sakes, saying, Touch not mine anointed. By anointed,
are meant such as have the anointing of the Spirit, 1 John 2.20.

4. God delights in his Childrens company, he loves to see their faces, Cant.
2.24. Let me see thy Countenance. If but two or three of Gods Children meet and
pray together, God will be sure to make one of the company; Mat. 18.20. There
am I in the midst of them.

5. God so loves his Children, that his Eye is never off them; Psalm 33.18. The
Eye of the Lord is upon them that fear him. But is this such a privilege, to
have Gods Eye upon his Children? Gods Eye is upon the Wicked too. Answ. It is
one kind of Eye that the Judge casts upon the Malefactor, and another that the
Prince casts upon his Favorite. Gods Eye upon the Wicked is (...), an Eye of
Revenge; but his Eye upon his Children is an Eye of Benediction.

6. God sets a continual guard about his Children, to preserve them from
danger. He hides them in his Pavilion, Psalm 27.5. He covers them with the
Golden Feathers of his Protection, Psalm 91.4. God preserved Athanasius
strangely, he put it into his Mind to depart out of the House he was in, the
night before the Enemies came to search for him. No Prince goes so well guarded
as Gods Child, for he has a guard of Angels about him. The Angels are a
numerous guard, 2 Kin. 6.17. The Mountain was full of Horses and Chariots of
fire: those Horses and Chariots of fire were the Angels of God, gathered
together in the manner of an huge host to defend the Prophet Elisha.

7. God puts his Children in rich apparel: Psalm. 45.13. Her clothing is of
wrought Gold. Jacob loved his Son Joseph, and gave him a finer Coat to wear
than the rest of his brethren, Genesis 37.3. He made him a Coat of diverse Colors.
God loves his Children and gives them a finer Coat, more curiously Woven, a
Coat of diverse Colors: it is partly made of Christ's Righteousness, and partly
made of inherent Holiness Rev. 19.8.
.

8. Such is Gods love, that he thinks nothing too Good for his Children, he
enricheth them with the upper and nether Springs; he gives them the Kidneys of
the Wheat, and Honey out of the Rock; he makes them a feast of fat things, Isa.
25.6. He gives them the body and blood of his Son, and delights to see his
Children spreading themselves as Olive plants round about his Table Psalm 128.3.
.

3. Such as are Fearers of God, he will receive their Petitions from them as a
Father does from his Son; they may come boldly to the throne of Grace, Heb.
4.16. If they come for pardon of sin, strength against Temptation, God will not
deny them. Three things may cause boldness in prayer; the Saints have a Father
to pray to, and the Spirit to help them to pray, and Jesus Christ as their
Advocate to present their Prayers.

4. Such as are Fearers of God, God will bestow an Inheritance upon them, as a
Father does upon his Son: this Inheritance is no less than a Kingdom, Luke
12.32. In it are Gates of Pearl, Rivers of Pleasure: and which is to be noted
as a difference between Gods settling an Inheritance on his Children, and a
Fathers settling an Inheritance: a Son cannot enjoy the Inheritance till his
Father be dead; but every adopted child of God may at once enjoy both the
Inheritance and the Father, because God is both Father and Inheritance Genesis
15.1.
.

5. Such as are Fearers of God, God will pass by many infirmities. That is
meant by this expression in the Text, I will spare them as a man spares his
own Son. What a wonder is this, that God did not spare the Angels! 2 Pet. 2.4.
Nay, he did not spare his natural Son, Romans 8.32. Yet he will spare his Adopted
Sons: I will spare them, I will not use extremity as I might, but pass by many
aberrations.

Caution.
Not that the Sins of Gods Children are hid from him; but such is his paternal
Clemency, that he is pleased to bear with many frailties in his Children. He
spares them as a Father spares his Son. How often do Gods people grieve his
Spirit by the neglect of their Spiritual Watch, the loss of their first-love;
but God spares them! Israel provoked God with their murmurings, but he used
Fatherly Indulgence toward them, Psalm 78.38. But he being full of Compassion,
forgave their Iniquity, yea many a time turned he his anger away from them Neh.
9.17.
.

From this word, I will spare them as a man spares his Son, 1 Use. Inform.
take Notice, that the best need sparing, 1 Branch.
Psalm 130.3. If thou, Lord, should mark Iniquities, Lord, who shall stand?
The Papists speak of Merits, but how can we merit when our best services are so
defective that we need sparing? how can these two stand together, our meriting
and God's sparing? what will become of us without sparing Mercy? we had need
pray as Nehemiah, cap. 13.22. Remember me, O my God, concerning this, and spare
me according to the greatness of thy Mercy. Let us fly to this Asylum, Lord
spare us as a Father spares his Son.

See Gods different dealing with the Godly and the Wicked; 2 Branch.
the Lord will not spare the Wicked, Jer. 13.14. I will not Pity, nor spare,
nor have Mercy, but destroy them. It Is sad, when the Prisoner begs of the Judge
to spare him, but the Judge will show him no favor. Gods cup of wrath is
unmixed, Rev. 14.10. Yet it is said to be mixed, Psalm. 78.5. Gods cup of wrath
he gives the Wicked is mixed with all sorts of Plagues, but it is a Cup
unmixed, without the least drop of Mercy in it. God for a while Reprieves men,
but forbearance is no forgiveness. Though God spare his Children, yet obdurate
sinners shall feel the weight of his wrath.

If the Lord spares his people as a Father does his Son, 3 Branch*
then they should serve him as a Son does his Father: serve him willingly, 1 Chronicles. 28.9. Know thou the God of thy Fathers, and serve him with a willing
mind. God does not love to be put to strain Virtus nolentium nulla est.
. Therefore Cains Sacrifice was rejected, because he brought it grudgingly, and
against his Mind: it was rather the paying of a tax than a free will Offering.
That is the best obedience which is voluntary, as that is the best Honey which
drops from the Comb. God sometimes accepts of willingness without the Work 1
King 8.18.
, but never of the work without willingness.

2. Serve God Universally. True obedience is Uniform, it observes one command
as well as another Quicquid propter Deum fit, aequaliter fit.
, it sets upon duties difficult and dangerous. As the Needle points that way
which the Loadstone draws: so a Gracious Heart inclines to those things which
the word suggests; Luke 1.6. It Is the note of an Hypocrite to be partial in
Obedience; some sin he will indulge 2 King 5.18.
, some duty he will dispense with, his Obedience is lame on one foot.

3. Serve God Swiftly: Beware of a dull temper of Soul; the loveliness of
Obedience is in the liveliness: we read of two Women, Zach. 5.9. The Wind was
in their Wings: Wings are Swift, but Wind in the Wings denotes great Swiftness;
such Swiftness should be in our Obedience to God: If God spares us as a Father
does his Son, we should serve him as a Son does his Father.

If God Spares us as a Father does his Son, let us imitate God. 2 Use.
Exhortation.
It Is natural for Children to imitate their Parents; look what the Father does,
the Child is apt to learn the same. Let us imitate God in this one thing, as
God spares us, and passes by many failures, so let us be sparing in our
Censures of others; let us look upon the Weaknesses and Indiscretions of our
Brethren with a more tender compassionate eye. Indeed, in case of Scandal, here
we ought not to bear with others, but sharply reprove them: But if through
Inadvertency or Passion they commit Indecencies, let us Pity and Pray for them:
How much does God bear with in us! He Spares us, and shall not we be Sparing to
others? perhaps they may be wronged, and false things may be laid to their
Charge. Athanasius was falsely Accused by the Arrians of Adultery, Basil of
Heresy. It Is usual for the World to misrepresent the People of God; therefore
let us be sparing in our Censures: God spares us, and shall not we be sparing
toward others?

3 Use. Comfort.
Here is Comfort to the Children of God in case of Failings: The Lord will not
be severe to mark what they have done amiss, but will Spare them: He passes by
many Infirmities, Zeph. 3.17. He will rest in his Love; in the Original it is,
He will be silent in his Love (...)
. As if the Prophet had said, Though the Church had her Failings, yet Gods Love
was such, that it would not suffer him to mention them: He will be silent in
his Love. God winks at many oversights, Ezekiel. 20.17. Mine eye Spared them from
destroying them. I speak not of presumptuous sins, but Failings, as vain
Thoughts, deadness in Duty, sudden Surprizals by Temptation: these being
mourned for, God for Christ's fake will Spare us as a Father does his Son Si
n^evum aspiciat pater in silio, non ideo extrudet de domo, Calv.
.

This is one of the richest Comforts in the Book of God: Who is he that lives
and sins not? how defective are we in our best Duties! how full are our Lives
either of Blanks or Blots! Were it not for Sparing Mercy, we should all go to
Hell; but this Text is a standing Cordial; if our Hearts are sincere, God will
Spare us as a Father does his Son: Hosea 11.9. I will not execute the
fierceness of mine Anger. I know not a greater Rock of Support for a fainting
Christian than this; God will abate of the Severity of the Law; though we come
short in our Duty, he will not fail of his Mercy, but will Spare us as a Father
Spares his Son.

CHAP. XX. Containing the Epiphonema, or shutting up of the Chapter.
MAL. III. 18. Then shall ye return, and discern between the Righteous and the
Wicked, between him that Serves God, and him that Serves him not.


HEre follows the close of the Chapter, which I shall little more than
Paraphrase upon. These words are spoken to the wicked, as Piscator, Calvin,
Grotius, and other learned Expositors assert: for though the Godly shall at
last discern what a difference God makes between them and the Wicked, how
Indulgent he is to the one, and how Severe to the other; yet this Text is
chiefly spoken to the Wicked, verse. 14. Ye have said it is vain to Serve God;
and verse. 15. Now we call the Proud happy, yea they that work Wickedness are
set up: Well says God, though now ye call the Proud happy and the Godly
indiscreet, yet when I have made up my Jewels, then you Wicked ones shall see
clearly what a Difference I make between the Righteous, and the Wicked, between
him that Serves God and him that Serves him not.

Then, when it is too late, when the day of Grace is past, and the Drawbridge
of Mercy is pulled up, then shall ye discern a difference between the Holy and
the Profane.

The Wicked at present have their Eyes shut, Deuteronomy. 29.4. 1 Doct*
The Lord has not given you an Heart to perceive, and Eyes to see, and Ears to
hear unto this day. Natural men have the Sword upon their right Eye, Zach.
11.17. They see no difference between the Pious and the Impious, they see not
but it fares as well with the Wicked as the Righteous; nay, it seems to fare
better, the wicked flourish, Psalm 73.12. These are the ungodly who prosper in
the World, they increase in riches; whereas they that Pray and Fast, are
Oppressed. The Wicked bless themselves, and think they are now in a better
condition than the Righteous; the matter is not to be wondered at, for the God
of this World has blinded the minds of Sinners, 2 Cor. 4.4. But at last their
eyes shall be opened: and that brings me to the second;

2 Doct.
That there is a time shortly coming, when Impious flagitious Sinners shall see
a sensible difference between the Godly and the Wicked. Vertetur alea, the
Tables will then be turned: Then shall ye return, and discern between the
righteous and the wicked.

Quest.
When is the time when the Eyes of Sinners shall be opened, and they shall see a
difference between the Righteous and the Wicked?

Answ.
There are two times when Sinners shall see a manifest difference between the
Righteous and the Wicked.

1. At the day of Judgment. 2. At the hour of Separation.
1. At the day of Judgment; That will be a day of Discrimination Videbitis in
die iudicii quantum diversa sit sors pii and impii, Grotius.
. Things will then appear in their proper colors; the difference will easily
be seen between good and bad; the one being Absolved, the other Condemned.

2. At the hour of Separation; When God shall Eternally Separate the Reprobate
from the Elect, as a Fan separateth the Chaff from the Wheat, then shall there
be a visible discerning between the Righteous and the Wicked, Mat. 25.32.
Before him shall be gathered all Nations, and he shall separate them one from
another, as a Shepherd divides the Sheep from the Goats. Jesus Christ will
take his Saints up with him into Glory, and will cast the Wicked down to Hell:
He will make up the Godly as Jewels, and make up the Wicked in Bundles, Mat.
13.30. Bind them in Bundles and burn them Impii exoriuntur ut exurantur. Austin.
. Now Sinners shall be convinced with a Vengeance, that the State of the
Righteous and Wicked is different: They shall see the Righteous advanced to a
Kingdom, and themselves cast into a Fiery Prison. O the dreadfulness of that
place of Torment! -- Et vox et verba deficiunt -- Could men lay their Ears to
the Infernal Lake, and but for one hour hear the Groans and Shrieks of the
Damned, they would tell us that they now see what before they would not
believe, the infinite difference between the Righteous and the Wicked Spelaea
nefarij intrant, ardenti Phlegetonte natant.
. In Hell is Torment upon Torment, Blackness of darkness, Jude 13. Bonds and
Chains, 2 Pet. 2.4. These Chains are Gods Decree ordaining, and his Power
binding men under Wrath; and that which does accent and put a Sting into the
Torments of the wicked is, that they shall be always Scorching in the Torrid
Zone of Gods Wrath, Revel. 14.11. The Smoke of their Torment ascends up for
ever and ever. Christ said of his Suffering on the Cross, It is finished; But
Sinners shall never say of their Sufferings in Hell, they are finished: no,
imagine so many thousand Years the Damned have lain in Hell as there are drops
in the Sea, Eternity is yet to begin.

1 Use.
This may inform all wicked men, that (how Blind soever they are now, yet) at
last the Vail shall be taken from their Eyes: They now count themselves the
only happy men, and look upon the People of God with Derision, they load them
with Invectives, and Curse them with their Excommunications: Well, the time is
not far off, when the Wicked shall clearly discern who belong to Christ, and
who belong to the Devil; as Moses said to Korah and his Company, Numb. 16.5. To
morrow the Lord will show who are his: So at the day of Judgment the Lord will
show who are his, and who are not; nay, sooner than so; at the day of Death the
Wicked shall guess how it is like to be with them to Eternity.

O that the Eyes of Sinners may be speedily opened, that they may in time see
the difference of things, the Beauty that is in Holiness, and the Prodigy of
madness that is in Sin.

Consolation to the Righteous. Though at present they are slighted, 2 Use.
and have the Odium of the World cast upon them, yet shortly God will make a
Visible difference between them and the Wicked; as it was with Pharaohs two
Officers, the Butler and the Baker; at first there seemed to be no difference
between them, but within a while there was a difference made; the chief Butler
was advanced to Honor, but the chief Baker was Executed, Genesis 40.21. So though
now Gods People are low and despised, and the Wicked Insult over them, yet when
the Critical-day comes, there shall be a final Separation made between the
Righteous and the Wicked: the one shall be Dignified, the other Damned, Mat.
25.46.

Be encouraged therefore, O ye Saints of God, to persist in a course of
Holiness; though now ye seem to be lower-most, yet in the Resurrection ye shall
be uppermost, Psalm 49.14. The Righteous shall have Dominion over them in the
Morning; They shall have Dominion over the Wicked in the Morning of the
Resurrection. They shall then Laugh the Wicked to Scorn, Psalm 52.6. Then shall
the difference be seen between the Righteous and the Wicked, between him that
Served God and him that Served him not.

CHAP. XXI. Showing Gods Gracious dealing with His People. OR A Consolatory in
Affliction.
PSALM CXIX. 65. Thou have dealt well with thy Servant, O Lord.


THe Psalms are the Marrow of the Bible, they are both for Delight and Use;
like rich Cordials which do not only gratify the Palate, but strengthen the
Spirits. This Psalm is full of Divine and Spiritual matter: it was Composed, if
not Sung by the Sweet Singer of Israel: The Words fall into two Parts.

1. Gods Kindness to David, He dealt well with him. 2. David's grateful
acknowledgment of this Favor, Thou have dealt well with thy Servant O Lord.
From Gods Kindness to David, observe

Doct.
That God deals well with his People, Genesis 33.12. The Lord has dealt
graciously with me. Gods People often walk unanswerable to his Love: but though
they deal ill with God, God deals well with them.

Gods dealing well with his People arises from the Intrinsecal goodness of his
Nature; God is love, 1 John 4.16. From this flow all Acts of Royal Bounty.

Quest.
Wherein does Gods dealing well with his People appear?

Answ.
In enriching them with variety of Mercies; his Footsteps drop Fatness, Psalm
65.11. He Feeds, Adopts, Crowns them; and is not this dealing well with them?

But how does God deal well with the Saints, Object.
when he lays his hand so heavy upon them in Affliction? His pen is full of
Gall, and he writes bitter things against them, Psalm 73.14. I am chastened
every morning: how does God deal well with his People, when it fares ill with
them?

It must be held as an undoubted maxim, Answ.
that when the Lord severely chastizeth the Saints, he deals well with them:
but we are ready to Question this Truth, and say as the Virgin Mary to the
Angel, how can this be; therefore I shall demonstrate it, that when it goes ill
with the Righteous, yet God deals well with them.

1. When the Lord afflicts the Saints yet he deals well with them, because he
is their God. David was in the deep of Sorrow, Psalm 130.1. Yet he could say,
the Lord was his Portion, Psalm 16.5. God is an exceeding great reward, Genesis
15.1. He is a whole Paradise of delight -- Bonum in quo omnia bona -- He who
has God for his God, all his Estate lies in Jewels. If then God passes over
himself to his People by a Deed of gift to be their God, here is enough to
countervail all their troubles: what can God give more than himself?

2. When it goes ill with the Godly, yet God deals well with them, because
while he is inflicting evil upon them, he is doing them good. That which the
Text renders, thou have dealt well with thy Servant, in the Hebrew it is, thou
have done good to thy Servant (...)
: Psalm 129.71. It is good for me that I have been afflicted: David does not
say, it is Good for me that I have been in prosperity, but that I have been
afflicted. God does his People good by Affliction Two ways;

1. The Godly grow wiser Vexatio dat intellectum.
. Affliction is schola lucis; it discovers that pride, earthliness, unmortified
passion which they could not have believed was in their Hearts, Job 36.8. If
they be held in cords of Affliction, then he shows them their Transgression.
Affliction cures the Eyesight.

2. Affliction promotes Holiness (...). Chrysostom.
: The more the Diamond is cut, the more it sparkles, Heb. 12.10. That we may be
partakers of his Holiness. When prosperity makes Grace rust, God scowres us
with Affliction. The Godly are beholding to their Sufferings: God by the
wholesome discipline of the Cross makes them more humble, more conformed to
Christ's Image: the sharp Frosts of Affliction bring on the spring Flowers of
Grace: now if God while he is chastising is doing us good, then sure he deals
well with us.

3. When God puts his Children to the School of the Cross, yet he deals well
with them, because he does not leave them without a Promise, 1 Cor. 10.13. God
is faithful who will not suffer you to be tempted above that ye are able. God
knows our frame, that we are imbecil and weak; our flesh is not as brass, Job 6
12. And the Lord will not try us above our strength, he will not lay a Giants
burden upon a Child's back. God will not stretch the strings of his Viol too
hard, lest they break: if God strike with one hand, he will support with the
other, Cant. 8.3. Either he will make our Yoke Lighter, or our Faith stronger.
This Promise is Honey at the end of the Rod.

4. God deals well with his People when he afflicts, because Afflictions are
Preventive. 1. They prevent sin, 2 Cor. 12.7. Lest I should be exalted above
measure, there was given me a Thorn in the Flesh. Prosperity like Opium is
ready to make men fall asleep in Sin, God awakens them by the Voice of the Rod,
and so prevents a Spiritual Lethargy.

2. They prevent Hell, 1 Cor. 11.32. We are chastened of the Lord that we
should not be condemned with the World. Does not a Judge deal well with a
Prisoner, when he lays some light penalty on him and saves his Life? Is it not
goodness in God, when he lays upon us light Affliction, and saves us from
Wrath to come? 2 Cor. 4.17. What is a drop of Sorrow the Godly taste of, to that
bottomless Sea of Wrath the Wicked must drink?

5. When God corrects he deals well with his People, because all he does is in
Love (...), Chrysostom.
. Afflictions are (as Gregory Nazianzen faith) sharp Arrows, but they are shot
from the hand of a loving Father. As Gods not afflicting the Wicked is in
anger: Gods hand is Heaviest when it is lightest, Hosea 4.14. I will not punish
your daughters when they commit Whoredom: A Father gives over correcting a
Child whom he intends to disinherit: so Gods chastizing the Godly is in Love,
Rev. 3.19. As many as I Love I rebuke; when God has the Look of an Enemy, he
has the Heart of a Father. As when Abraham lift up his hand to Sacrifice
Isaac, he loved him; so when God Sacrifices the Comforts of his Children, he
loves them. Was not God severe against Christ: yet it was proclaimed by a Voice
from Heaven, This is my beloved Son, Mat. 3.17. Well then, if God only send
love tokens to us, he deals well with us.

6. God deals well with his People when he afflicts them, because he moderates
his stroke, Ier. 30.11. Jer. 46.28.
I will correct thee in Measure. 1. God does not smite his Children so much as
he might, Psalm. 78.38. He did not stir up all his Wrath: God does not make the
Cup so bitter as he could. He uses Lenitives rather than* Corrosives: he lays
a lighter burden on, he might lay on an heavier. Does God take away a Child? he
might take away his Spirit; Does he chastize the Body? he might torment the
Conscience.

2. God does not correct his Children so much as they have deserved, Ezra 9.13.
Thou have punished us less than our Iniquities deserve. Does God make us drink
in a Cup of Wormwood? we have deserved to drink in a Cup of Wrath: does God cut
us short? we have deserved he should cut us off, Ezekiel. 47.3. The Waters were to
the Ankles. Do the Waters of Affliction come up to our Ankles? we have deserved
to be drowned in these Waters.

7. When God afflicts his Children, he deals well with them, because he keeps
them from Sinning in Affliction, John 17.15. I pray that thou keep them from
the evil.

1. The Godly are kept from impatience. When the Wicked are under Gods black
Rod, they either faint or fret, Rev. 16.9. Men were scorched with great heat,
and blasphemed the name of God: but the Godly are silent under the Rod, Levit.
10.3. And Aaron held his Peace: 'twas a sore Trial, both his Sons were consumed
with fire, but Aaron held his Peace. Gods People open their Ear to hear the
Voice of the Rod, but shut their Mouth, they have not one word to say against
God.

2. The Godly dare not use any indirect means to extricate themselves out of
Trouble. Wicked men, like Malefactors, care not how they get loose, they will
sin themselves out of straits: the People of God had rather lie in the Furnace
to have their dross purged, than come out too soon: they will not purchase the
liberty of their Persons by insnaring their Consciences. Does not God deal well
with his Children in keeping them from sinning in Affliction? Affliction cannot
do that mischief as sin does: the one is like a rent in the Garment, the other
is like a rent in the Flesh. Affliction may deprive us of our Estates, but Sin
deprives us of our God.

8. God deals well with his Children in Affliction, because though he Correct
them, he does not forsake them. Indeed Sion said, the Lord has forsaken me,
Isa. 49.14; But that was under a Temptation, Lam. 3.31. The Lord will not cast
off for Ever. God may alter his Providence, not his purpose: he may change his
dispensation, not his disposition, Hos. 11.8. How shall I give thee up O
Ephraim? It alludes to a Father who is about to disinherit his Son, but when he
is going to set his hand to the deed, his bowels begin to Work; I am his
Father, and though he be a Rebellious Son, yet he is a Son: how shall I
disinherit him? Such are the Workings of Gods bowels to his Children; though he
may give them a severe rebuke, yet he will not cut off the entail of Mercy.

9. God deals well with his Children in Affliction, because though their
condition be sad, yet it is not so bad as others: the Lord puts a difference
between the Chastisements of the Godly, and the Punishments of the Wicked: the
Godly man has Pain in his sickness, but the Wicked man has Wrath in his
sickness, Eccles. 5.17. The Lord shoots a single Arrow at the Godly, but a
whole shower of Arrows at the Wicked: he punishes them in their Body, Estate,
Conscience. A good man has God to Pity him in his Sorrows, Isa. 63.9. But the
Wicked have God to laugh at them in their Miseries, Prove. 1.26. The Godly have
Christ to pray for them, in their Afflictions; but the Impenitent when in
Torment, are shut out of Christ's prayer, Ioh. 17.9. I pray not for the World.
Gods People are apt to say, Never did any suffer as they: yes, it is worse with
the Wicked; their Sins and Sufferings meet together.

10. God in Affliction deals well with his Children, because if he take away
one Comfort, he leaves more behind. God threatened Jerusalem to strip her of all
her Jewels and leave her bare, Ezekiel. 16.39. But you who belong to God, may Sing
of Mercy and Judgment, Psalm. 101.1. If God has fleeced your Estate, he has
raised you up Friends: If he has taken away one of your Jewels, he has left
you more: if he has plucked one dear Relation from you, he has left other
sweet Clusters behind, and can double your Comfort in them: is not all this
kindness? But this is our Sin, we grieve more for one Loss, than we are
thankful for an Hundred Mercies. Jacob was more troubled for the loss of
Joseph, than he was Comforted with the Lives of all his other Children, Genesis
37.35.

11. When God Afflicts he deals well with his People, because he takes away
nothing from them but he gives them that which is better. What damage can it
be to a man to lose his Farthings, and have Gold given him? If God take away
Health, he gives Holiness: If he take away a Child, he gives a Christ; is not
this better? God takes away a Flower and gives a Jewel.

12. When God Afflicts his Children he deals well with them, because he affords
them his Divine presence, Psalm 91.15. I will be with him in trouble. God never
Promised us a Charter of Exemption from trouble, but he has Promised to be
with us in trouble. Better be in a Prison and have Gods presence, than on a
Throne and want it. Gods presence gives courage, Act. 23.11. When Polycarp was
near the Theater and going to Suffer, a Voice came from Heaven, Be of good
cheer O Polycarp. Was not Christ with the Three Children? did not he go with
them into the fire? Dan. 3.25. I see four men in the fire, and the form of the
fourth is like the Son of God. He who is the Second Person in the Trinity, made
the Fourth Person in the Furnace.

13. God in Afflicting deals well with his Children, because he gives them that
which makes amends for their Afflictions; he drops in the Oil of Gladness; he
makes them gather Grapes of Thorns: John 16.22. Your Sorrow shall be turned
into Joy. We see a Godly man's Sufferings, but we know not what Joy he feels: as
we hear the roaring of the Sea, but we see not the Gold at the bottom. Philip
Lantgrave of Hesse said, that in his trouble he felt the divine Consolations of
the Martyrs: Here was Honey out of the Lion. The Saints have been sometimes so
sweetly enlarged, that they had rather endure their Afflictions than want their
Comforts, 2 Cor. 1.5. As the Sufferings of Christ abound in us: so our
Consolation also abounds by Christ Martyr in catena gaudet, Tertul.
. Saint Paul had his Prison-Songs, Act. 16 25. This Bird of Paradise could sing
in Winter. God turns the Waters of Marah into Wine; He keeps his Cordials for
fainting. When the Saints taste most of the Wrath of Men, they shall feel most
of the Love of God: thus the Lord candies his Wormwood with Sugar.

14. When God Corrects his Children he deals well with them, because these
Paroxysms or hot trials do not last long. -- Post nubila Phoebus -- 1 Kin.
11.39. I will Afflict the Seed of David, but not for ever: God will love for
ever, but not afflict for ever; he will ere long give his people a Writ of
ease. A Sinners best, and a Saints worst are but short; Affliction is called a
Cup, Ezekiel. 23.32. The Wicked drink a Sea of Wrath; the Godly sip only of the
Cup of Affliction, and God will shortly say, Transeat Calix, Let this Cup pass
away from them, Isa. 35.10. Sorrow and sighing shall fly away. As Affliction
has a Sting to torment, so it has a Wing to fly.

15. When God puts his Children to the School of the Cross, he deals well with
them, because these Afflictions are Manuductions to lead them to Heaven. Per
crucem ad coelum. 2 Cor. 4.17. Our light Affliction works for us a far more
exceeding and Eternal weight of Glory. Upon the dark Color of Affliction God
lays the Golden Color of Glory. O thou weeping Saint, what a blessed change
shall thou shortly have! Thou shall change thy Pilgrimage for Paradise: Thou
shall have thy wish. Are riches desirable? thou shall have Gates of Pearl: Is
Honor desirable? thou shall have white Robes: Is Pleasure desirable? thou
shall enter into the Joy of thy Lord. O think what it will be to be sweetly
immersed in the River of Life, and Bathe in the Hony-streams of Gods Love for
ever: think what the Beatifical Vision will be: what it will be to wear a
Garland made of the Flowers of Paradise: think what it will be to have the Soul
thicker set with Jewels of Glory, than the Firmament is bespangled with Stars:
O what a Compensation will this be for all a Christians Trials! A sight of this
bliss will make him forget his Sufferings. One Sunbeam of Glory will dry up
the Water of his Tears.

If God dealswell with us when he Use.
chastises us, then it becomes us to Cherish good Thoughts of God. We are apt
in Adversity to think hardly of God; this arises from Pride. Such commonly as
are of high Spirits are of high Passions; they think themselves better than
others, and that they have deserved better at Gods hands, and now Pride vents
it self in murmuring. O let us take heed of having hard Thoughts of God. The
Patient has no cause to think ill of the Physician when he prescribes him a
bitter Potion, seeing it is in order to a Cure. Gods afflictive Providence are
the strokes of a Father, not the Wounds of an Enemy. God smites that he may
save. Out of the bitterest Drug God distills his Glory, and our Happiness.

Let us Think well of God; nay, in all adverse Providence let us learn to
bless God, 1 These. 5.18. (...), In every thing give thanks: if in every thing,
then, in Affliction: And good reason, because God deals well with us. Job
blessed God in Affliction, cap. 1.21. The smiting of Jobs Body was like the
striking upon a musical Instrument, he sounded forth Thankfulness. A gracious
Soul should bless God that he will take so much Notice of him as to Visit him
with the Rod Job 7.18.
; and is so kind as rather to Afflict him than lose him. This shows an high
degree of Grace, not only to Justify God in Affliction, but Magnify him.
Believers are Gods Temples, and where should his Praises be sounded forth but
in his Temples?

FINIS.

