PAPAYTHION: OR, A WORD OF COMFORT FOR THE Church of God.

By THOMAS WATSON, Pastor of Stephens Walbrook, LONDON.

Isa. 40. 2. Speak ye comfortably to Jerusalem.

Deus ecclesiae suae, and judex, and vindex. Isidor.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Parkhurst, at the three Crowns at the lower end of
Cheapside. 1662.

TO THE READER.
Christian Reader,
HOW infinitely happy are they who have a God to go to! The Saints have that
great Prince Dan. 12. 1^
on their side, by whom Princes reign. They are in such a condition, that
nothing can make them miserable; take away their money, their treasure is in
heaven; banish them their Country, they are Citizens of the New Jerusalem;
cast them into bonds, their Consciences are free; kill their bodies, they shall
rise again; take away their names, they are written in the book of life. This
calls to mind that golden aphorism, Isaiah 3. 10. It shall be well with the
righteous. Nay, at present, it is well with them; they are favorites of the
King of heaven; the Lord sets them as a seal upon his heart Cant. 8. 6.
; he sympathizeth with them in all their sufferings; When the rage of the enemy
is kindled, are not Gods repentings kindled too? Hosea 11. 8. and while his
heart is full of sympathy, so long his head will befull of care. This tender
care of God toward his Church Militant, is the Subject of this ensuing
discourse; Cordials are kept for fainting. Out of this Vial are poured forth,
not chemical, but spiritual drops of consolation to animate us. God himself is
the Churches Lifeguard. The Lion of the Tribe of Judah, marches in the head
of the Saints Army; This makes Jerusalem, terrible as an Army with banners,
Cant. 6. 4. Jesus is our Emmanuel; Then, what need we fear though the earth
tremble upon her pillars? I shall not further expatiate, but commending this
small piece to the blessing of God, I remain

Walbr. April 19. 1662. Thy Friend and Servant in the Gospel, THOMAS WATSON*

A WORD OF COMFORT FOR THE Church of God.
PSALM. 46. 5. God is in the midst of her, she shall not be moved. --
SOlomon says, A word fitly spoken, is like apples of gold in pictures of
silver, Prove. 25. 11. In which regard I have made choice of this Scripture,
which may be a word in season, to revive the desponding hearts of Gods people.
God is in the midst of her, she shall not be moved.

This Psalm is (...), a Triumphal Exultation, wherein the Church with joy
commemorates former deliverances, and by faith depends on God for future
mercies.

God is our refuge and strength, ver. 1.] The Saints in all their dangers have
an Asylum, or Garrison to retreat to, they know where to put in for Harbor,
the Name of the Lord is a strong Tower, and this is their Refuge and Fort-Royal.

A very present help] God is (...) Aristot.
, an help at a pinch. An Army may be worsted ere their Auxiliary Forces come;
but God never comes too late, his help is at hand, his Forces are in the field,
he is a present help. An help [ in trouble.] The Aethiopick, renders it, in
vehement trouble.

God is in the midst of her, she shall not be moved. What is meant by this
(...), in the midst of her? This looks back to the former verse, where there is
mention made of the City of God, ver. 4. There is a River, the streams whereof
shall make glad the City of God; by this City of God, is meant Jerusalem, which
is called the City of Jehovah, Isa. 60. 14. and the holy City, Isa. 52. 1. This
City of Jerusalem is put by a Synecdoche, for the Church of God here upon
earth; and of this the Text speaks, God is in the midst of her.

The words consist of two general parts.

1. The Churches privilege, God is in the midst of her.

2. The Churches safety, She shall not be moved: That is, so as to be removed.

Doctr. When the Church of God is beleagured and environed with Enemies, God is
in the midst of her Insurgunt inimici and Ecclesiam conantur pessundare, sed
vivit Christus, eamque dextra sua fortiter tuetur. Glass. exeg.
. Deutr. 23. 14. For the Lord thy God walks in the midst of thy Camp to
deliver thee. Jer. 14. 9. Thou* O Lord, art in the midst of us. The Church of
God has not only enemies without her, to conflict with, but within her, such
as are Hypocrites and Apostates; she complains that her own sons vexed her Cant
1. 6. That is, those who had been bred up in her bosom, and pretended Religion,
these falfe Friends vexed her; the Churches Enemies are of her own house: But
be they what they will, Foreign or Intestine, the Church has ONE that will
take her part; when she is most assaulted, she is most assisted, God is in the
midst of her.

But what Prerogative is this to have God in the midst of his Church? Quest.
where is he not? he is an immense, infinite being, and his circumference is
every where. Psalm. 139. 7, 9. Whither shall I fly from thy presence? If I take
the wings of the morning, and dwell in the uttermost parts of the Sea, even
there shall thy hand lead me. What privilege is it to have God in the midst of
his Church, seeing he is in the midst of his enemies too?

There is a twofold presence of God. Answ.


1. There is his universal presence, whereby he is in all places Deus est in
loco repletive.
. Jer. 23. 23. Do not I fill heaven and earth, says the Lord? This is no
privilege at all; for this universal presence is with the damned, they have
the presence of his power and justice.

2. There is a peculiar presence of God, and this is confined to his people.
This presence of God is either, 1. In heaven, which is nothing else but his
glorious presence. Psalm. 11. 4. The Lords Throne is in heaven. Or, 2. On earth,
and that is either,

1. His favorable presence, whereby he manifests the pledges of his grace and
goodness toward his people; and so he is present in the Assemblies of his
Saints, breathing forth the sweet perfume of his Spirit. Exodus 20. 24. In all
places where I record my Name, I will come unto thee, and I will bless thee.
This is that presence the Saints desire in the Ordinances, Gods quickening,
sanctifying, comforting presence; the smiles of his face, the kisses of his
lips; nothing is so delightful, as to hold the King in the Galleries Cant. 7. 5.
. and have the Banner of his love sweetly displayed, Cant. 2. 4.

Or, 2. His providential presence, wherein the Lord appears admirably for his
people in his providential actings, showing himself to be a wonder-working God;
and this is chiefly meant in the Text, God is in the midst of her, to defend,
to deliver, to bless: Thus he was with his people Israel by the pillar of fire,
and a cloud; and thus will he be present with his Church to the end of the
World.

The Reasons why God is in the midst of his Church to defend and bless it, are,

1. The dear interest he has in it. 1. Reason.
The people of God are called (...), a peculiar people, 1 Pet. 2. 9. The World
lies in Common, and is as so much waste ground; but the Church is Gods Vineyard
and Enclosure, therefore he will hedge it in with protection: Cant. 8. 1. My
Vineyard which is mine is before me. The Saints are Gods Jewels, Mal. 2. 17.
Therefore he will not let them be lost: For their sins he may sometimes lay
these Jewels to pawn, as he did, when Israel was in Babylon, but he will
recover the pawn. The Church is una cum Christo Caro Bern.
, Christ's mystical body, the least bone whereof he will as surely preserve, as
he did every bone of his natural body, John 19. 36. A bone of it shall not be
broken.

2. God is in the midst of his Church, II. Reason.
because of the entire love which he bears to it. Psalm. 132. 13, 14, 15. The
Lord has chosen Sihon, he has desired it for his habitation, this is my rest
for ever, here will I dwell, for I have desired it. God loves his people with
the choicest of his love, they have the spirits of his love distilled; and to
show this, he calls them by those Titles which denote love; the apple of his
eye, Deutr. 32. 10. The dearly beloved of his soul, Jer. 12. 7. His Treasure,
Psalm. 135. 4. His Turtle-dove, Psalm. 74. 19. His Spouse, Cant. 5. 2. His
Orchard of Pomgranates, Cant. 4. 13. His glory, Isa. 46. ult. God loves the
World with a more common love, his Church has the cream of his love: It Is one
love wherewith a man loves his Bird, and another wherewith he loves his Child;
and God cannot but love his people, because he sees his own image shining in
them Amor fandat^^ in similitudine.
. They are adorned with the graces of his Spirit, as a chain of pearl: And as
they have the beauty of inherent holiness, so they have an interest in the
unspotted holiness of Christ. Gods love to his Church is vehement, like the
Coals of Juniper, or the Sunbeams contracted in a burning Glass, which are
more intense and ardent; and because he loves Sion, therefore he is in the
midst of it, to defend and bless it. Zeph. 3. 17. The Lord thy God in the midst
of thee is mighty, he will save, he will rejoice over thee, he will rest in his
love.

3. God will be in the midst of his people, III. Reason.
because they are engaged in his quarrel. Jer. 15. 15. Know that for thy sake I
have suffered rebuke! All the oppositions the godly meet with, are for standing
up in the defense of Truth; if they would desist from Religion, and throw off
Christ's colors, they would have none to oppose them; but because they espouse
Christ's quarrel, and fight under the Banner of his Gospel, therefore Gebal and
Ammon, and all the powers of Hell unite and muster their Forces against them.
The Princes of Persia had no other Article against Daniel, but the Law of his
God, Dan. 6. 5. Now, because the Church of God appears in his Cause, and loses
blood in his quarrel, therefore God is in the midst of her, he counts himself
concerned in point of honor to stand by his people.

But wherein does it appear that God is in the midst of his Church? Quest.


Answ. Answ.
It appears,

1. By his strange preserving and delivering his Church.

1. By unthought of means; when Israel were hemmed in, the red Sea before,
Pharaoh and his Host pursuing behind, God preserves them by unthought of means,
they never thought of the parting of the waters; Who would have imagined that
God should have made a Cawsey in the Sea? So when flesh failed in the
Wilderness, the people of Israel could not devise how God should spread them a
Table there; there was no plowing or sowing, nothing to be seen but wild Beasts
and Serpents; the Lord made the Heavens a Granary, and rained down bread upon
them; here he was (...), in the midst of his people.

2. By contemptible means: The blowing of Trumpets, and blazing of Lamps, made
the walls of Hiericho fall down, Judge. 7. 20. Jeremy was drawn out to the
Dungeon by rotten rags, Jer. 37. 11. God often saves his Church by despicable
instruments, he makes use of rotten rags. God raised up Luthar in Germany
against the Pope, the Enemy looked upon him with a contemptible eye, one of
them said, He was fitter to pray in a Cloister, than to do any great Exploits
abroad: But God made him a rare Instrument in his Church, he did so shake the
Popes Chair, that never to this day has he sat safe in it.

3. By contrary means: That the Rock should be set abroach, that Jonah should
be saved, by being swallowed up; God made the Fish a Ship in which he sailed
safe to shore. That the Raven, who is so unnatural, she will hardly feed her
young, should bring meat to the Prophet Eliah, this shows God is in the midst
of his people: How often is it seen that God makes use of a contrary wind; the
Enemies of his Church shall do his work, he will play his game by their hand.

1. Either he will make his Enemies friendly to his people. Exodus 12. 35. The
children of Israel borrowed of the Egyptians jewels of silver, and jewels of
gold, and the Lord gave his people favor in the eyes of the Egyptians. God can
make wolves to suckle his lambs: Or,

2. He will work divisions among his Enemies, and turn their own weapons
against themselves. 2. Chron. 20. 23. The children of Ammon fell upon the
Inhabitants of Mount Seir, and after that, every one helped to destroy another.
Thus God makes the Seed of the Serpent, a means to break the Serpents head. We
read in Ecclesiastical History, in the time of the good Emperor Theodosius,
when the Persians did shoot their arrows against the Christians, by a sudden
and violent wind their arrows were driven back, and did fly in their own faces.

2. It is evident that God is in the midst of seasonable appearing for his
people. When the Church of God has been brought very low, nothing in view but
desperation, their power has been gone, and their hopes gone, then God has
stepped in for their relief, and given the Victory on the Churches side. Deutr.
32. 36. The Lord shall repent himself for his servants, when he sees that
their power is gone, and there is none shut up and left. When Peter was
sinking, then Christ put forth his hand, and took him into the Ship. When the
Church of God has been inter malleum, and incudem, like Isaac on the Altar,
going to be sacrificed to the rage and fury of men, then has the Providence of
God stepped in as the Angel, and said, Lay not thy hand upon the child. God may
let the Enemy nibble at the heel of his Church, but still he defends the head;
when malice is boiled up to revenge, and the designs of men carry destruction
in the Front, now appears the Churches morning star of deliverance. This shows
God is in the midst of Lion, because when things have seemed to be in the
forlorn hope, and all given for lost, now God has come riding in the Chariots
of salvation.

Use 1. Here is good news for the Church of God, Use 1. Inform. 1. Branch.
Gods people are apt to despond when they see things move excentrick, and go
cross to their expectation, God is in the midst of Zion. He has a special
super-intendency over the Affairs of his Church; God has more care of his
Church than we can. We read in Ezekiels Vision, of a wheel within a wheel,
Ezekiel. 1. 16. Gods Decree is the inner wheel that turns all the outward wheels of
Providence; the Church never wants Enemies to assault, and make inrodes upon
her, but God is in the midst of her. Here is a River of consolation, whose
crystal streams may refresh the City of God. Gods eye is upon his people for
good; The eye of the Lord is upon them that fear him Psalm. 33. 18.
and it is a watchful eye, for he neither slumbers nor sleeps, Psalm. 121. 4.
But what privilege is this that Gods eye is upon his people, his eye is upon
the wicked too? I answer, Gods eye which is upon Zion, is not only an eye of
inspection, but an eye of benediction: Zion has not only his eye, but his
heart. Psalm. 5. 12. For thou Lord wilt bless the righteous, with favor will thou compass him, as with a shield.

2. If God be in the midst of Zion, 2. Branch.
then see the Churches beauty and strength.

1. The Churches beauty, God is in the midst of her, this is her glory and
beauty. O quam candi-rubra Ecclesia, and eximio praelucens fulgore! Zac. 2. 5.
I will be the glory in the midst of her. This is the best Jewel of the Churches
Crown; as the Diamond to the Ring, as the Sun to the World, which does
bespangle it with its beams, so is Gods presence to his Church. The Ark which
was the emblem and sign of Gods presence, was styled, the glory of Israel. Why
is the Church called a Royal Diadem, and a Crown of beauty, Isa. 62. 3. but
because God casts his resplendent luster upon her? I will be the glory in the
midst of her.

2. See here the Churches strength. God is in the midst of her; he is with his
Church not only to behold her, but uphold her. (...). Cyrill.
The Church of God is like a Castle walled in with rocks, Isa. 33. 16. his
place of defense shall be the munitions of rocks. But a man may starve upon a
rock, therefore it follows, bread shall be given him, his waters shall be sure.
If God be in the midst of Sihon, he will be both defensive and offensive. He is
both a Shield and a Sword, Deuteronomy 33. 29. Happy art thou O Israel, who is like
unto thee, O people saved by the Lord, the shield of thy help, and who is the
sword of thy excellency! God is a golden shield to his people, and a flaming
sword to his enemies, Zach. 2. 5. For I says the Lord will be unto her a wall
of fire round about. A wall, That is defensive; a wall of fire that is
offensive, Isa. 27. 2. In that day sing ye unto her a Vineyard, of red wine, I
the Lord do keep it, I will water it lest any hurt it, I will keep it night and
day. They that go to overthrow the Church must do it in such a time when it is
neither night nor day, for God has promised to keep it, night and day.

3. 3. Branch.
See hence how vain are all the attempts and combinations of wicked men against
the Church of God. God is in the midst of her. When we look upon things with an
humane eye, we may wonder the Church of God is not over-topped: that the Sea
should be higher than the earth yet not drown it, is strange; So that the power
and force which seems to be so much above the Church should not overflow it,
is not a little to be wondered at, but God is in the midst of her, therefore she
is impregnable; men must first overcome God, before they can overcome the
Church Nemo nos laedet nisi qui Deum vincit. Luthar.
. How simple is the wisdom of man when it sets it self against God! What do men
do when they wage War against the Church? they attempt impossibilities, God is
in the midst of her. What an infinite disproportion is there between the
Enemies and God? as much as between finite and infinite. Will weak man go to
measure arms with God (...). Cyrill.
? How easily can God check the pride, and break the power, and infatuate the
councels of the wicked? He can destroy his enemies with the turning of an hand,
Psalm. 81. 14. with a word, Psalm. 2. 5. with a breath, Isa. 30. 28, with a look,
Exodus 14. 24. It needs cost God no more to destroy all his Adversaries, than a
cast of the eye: For men to contend with the great God, is as if a child should
go to fight with a Giant, or Archangel; or as if the Thorns should set
themselves in battle array against the fire Ifa. 27. 4.
: Oh how vain and silly are all attempts against the Church! (...) God is in
the midst of her. Zac. 12. 3. In that day I will make Jerusalem a burdensome
stone to all people. The Enemies are heaving at the Church to remove it, but it
is a burdensome stone that will fall upon them, and grind them in pieces. Zac.
12. 6. I will make the Governors of Judah like a Torch of fire in a sheaf. The
grand opposers of Zion shall be as combustible matter, and the Church as a
Torch of fire to burn them up.

4. 4. Branch.
If God be in the midst of Zion, then it follows that all Providence toward
the Church shall be for the best. There is nothing stirs in the World, but
shall carry on Gods designs; as the cross wheels in a Watch carry on the motion
of it, and serve to make the Alarm strike. That which the wicked intend for
the destruction, shall turn to the deliverance of the Church: As Luthar wrote
to the Elector of Saxony, Let Your Highness know that the Affairs of the Church
are far otherwise orderedin heaven, than by the Emperor and States at
Norimberg. While the Adversaries go about to ruin the Church, they shall only
repair it. God is in the midst of his people, therefore the most violent storms
of persecution, are but as the beating of the wind against the Sails, which
makes the Ship go faster, and brings it the sooner to its desired Haven.

Use 2. Use 2. Exhort.
Let us labor, that as God is in the midst of his Church, so he may be in the
midst of our hearts. 1. Branch.
It Is little comfort to hear that God is in the midst of his Church, unless we
find him in the midst of our hearts: As he, who when he was drowning, saw a
Rainbow, What am I the better, says he, that the World shall not be drowned,
if I drown? So what are we the better that God is in the midst of his Church by
his providential presence, if he be not in the midst of our hearts by his
sanctifying presence. It should he our care not only to have Christ with us,
but in us. Col. 1. 27. Christ in you the hope of glory. This will be a Cordial
when we are dying; what though death be in our body, if Christ be in our heart?
This should be our wisdom and ambition, not only to have the presence of God
with us, but the Spirit of God in us. Gal. 4. 6. God has sent forth the Spirit
of his Son into your hearts.

2. 2. Branch.
If God be in the midst of his Church to uphold and preserve it, then let not
God; people give way to distrust and despondency, let them not fear the Enemies
of the Church. Psalm. 46. 1, 2. God is our refuge and strength, therefore will
not we fear, though the earth be removed, and the mountains carried into the
midst of the Sea. If we should be in new straits and exigencies, let us not say
we shall be undone, God will set all his Attributes on work for his people. His
wisdom shall be to guide them, his power to defend them, his holiness to
sanctify them, his mercy to save them. To fear the creature, is to undervalue
God. When Antigonus overheard his Soldiers saying. How many their enemies
were, he steps in suddenly with these words, And how many do you reckon me for?
This word, God is in the midst of her, should beat down unbelief, and put to
flight a whole Army of fears that are apt to arise in the heart. It is high
ingratitude either to murmur or distrust, after so many signal mercies and
preservations as we have received. But because the hearts of Gods own people
are ready to be overpowered with a spirit of fear, I shall therefore prescribe
these five antidotes against fear.

1. 1. Antidote.
God will have a Church upon earth. Mat. 16. 18. The gates of hell shall not
prevail against it Neither the Serpents subtilty, nor the Dragons fierceness
shall overturn the Church. The Ship in the Gospel was tossed, because sin was
in it, but not overwhelmed, because Christ was in it. Be of good comfort,
Christ is in the Ship. Sacro-sanctu^ Ecclesiae emblema arcturus, qui in coeli
arce constitutus, septem stellarum radiis fulgens, semper versatur, and nunqua^
mergitur.
Exodus 3. 2. The Angel of the Lord appeared in a flame of fire out of the midst
of a bush, and the bush burned, and was not consumed. An emblem of the Church
Militant, this bush burns, but is not consumed, for God is in the midst of her
Ecclesia potest opprimi non supprim; The Church of God may be oppressed, not
suppressed. Cain put the knife to Abels thro^t, and ever since the Churches
veins have bled, but she is not so weak, but she can stand upon her legs. The
Church Universal is not extinguished.

Not but that the Church of God may suffer in several parts of it. Caution.
For, as by virtue of the Covenant made with Noah, the whole earth shall never
be overflown with a deluge, yet there may, and has been such inundations
since, that several parts of the earth have been swallowed up with water: So
the Church Universal cannot be extinct, yet it may suffer in some parts and
branches of it, as the seven Asian Churches had their golden Candlesticks
removed.

2. 2. Antidote.
The suffering of any particular Church, is for their good, Jer. 24. 5. Them
that are carried away captive of Judah, I have sent into the Land of the
Coldeans for their good. God makes use of the wicked for the good of his
Church. He sometimes suffers his people to be cast out in the open field, and
lets the wicked pour waters of affliction upon them, but he is all this while
laying his people a whitening, Dan. 12. 10. Many shall be tried, and made
white; the wicked are flails to thresh off the husks of his people, files to
brighten their graces, leeches to suck out their noxious blood. Tully makes
mention of one Phereus, whom his enemy running at with a Sword, accidentally
opened his impostume, and so cured him Iully lib. 3. de nature. deorum
. The enemies of the Church, only cure the impostume of pride; Isa. 31. 9. Gods
fire is in Zion. This Fi^e is not consuming, but refining. The Church is Gods
House Domus D^i splendida. Aug.
, the enemies think to break down the Walls of this House, but they shall only
purge the floor. They think to crucify, they shall only clarify Gods Church,
and take it off from its fulsome lees. Thus God turns all the sufferings of his
people to their good. He stretches the strings of his Voial, to make the
music better.

3. 3. Antidote.
The more Gods Church is opposed, the more it increases. It receives its
augmentation, by its diminution, Exodus 1. 12. The more they afflicted them, the
more they multiplied. Witness the ten Persecutions in the time of Nero,
Dioclesian, Trajan, etc.

Sanguine fundata est ecclesia sanguine crevit.

Sanguine showers have always made the Church grow the more: The more the
Torch is beaten, the more it flames (...) Chrysostom.
Julian therefore did forbear to persecute the Christians, not out of pity, but
envy, because they grew so fast Greg Naz.
Religion is that Phoenix which has always revived and flourished in the ashes
of holy men. The Church of God is a Palmtree, with this motto -- Percussa
resurgo -- The more weight is laid upon it, the higher it rises. Ecclesia dum
premitur floret, dum caeditur vivit Cassiodor.


4. 4. Antidote.
When the Church of God is lowest, mercy is nearest: The sorer the pangs, the
nearer the deliverance. Isa. 33. 9, ^0. The earth mourns, Lebanon is ashamed,
Sharon is like a Wilderness, now, will I rise, says the Lord, now will will I
be exalted, now will I lift up my self; If you go to the Thames, and observe
the ebbing of the water, when the ebb is at the lowest, an high tide is ready
to come in: So when the Church of God seems to be at a dead low water, the
spring-tyde of deliverance is nearest. When Dioclesian raged, and things seemed
desperate, soon after was the golden time of Constantius Calvisius in Chronol.
. It Is usually darkest a little before morning.

5. 5. Antidote.
Though the Church of God may seem sometimes to be in the wain, yet when she
loses ground in one place, she gains in another; as when the fire is quenched
at one end of the house, it breaks out at the other. Or as the Sun when it
leaves our Hemisphere, goes to the Antipodes. At Rome there were two Laurel
Trees, when one withered, the other flourished: An emblem of the Church
Militant, when it seems to wither in one place, it shall revive and flourish in
another. All this may comfort us concerning the Church of God, and may be as
Physic, to kill the worm of Unbelief and Fear in our hearts. God is in the
midst of her, Therefore will not we fear though the earth be removed.

If God be in the midst of his Church, let 3 Branch.
us do two things.

1. Let us take heed of driving God from A people that provokes me to anger,
these are a smoke in my nose. In particular, there are Nine sins which drive
God out of a Land, and when he marches out, judgment marches in.

1. Idolatry. 2 King. 17. 12, 18. For they served Idols, whereof the Lord had
said unto them, Ye shall not do this thing, therefore the Lord was very angry
with Israel, and removed them out of his sight. Idolatry is a sin which breaks
the Marriage-knot, and makes the Lord disclaim his interest in a people, Exodus
32. 7. Thy people have corrupted themselves. Before, God called Israel, HIS
PEOPLE, but when once they had defiled themselves with Idolatry, then God
disclaims them; he does not say to Moses, MY people, but THY people, as if he
had quite discarded them, and cut off the entail of mercy. Take heed of
Idolatry; yea, and of Superstition too, which is a Bridge leading over to it.
Superstition is an intermixing our fancies and inventions with divine
institutions; it is an affront offered to God, as if he were not wise enough to
appoint the manner of his own worship.

2. Rapine and Oppression. Jer. 12. 7, 8. I have forsaken my house, my heritage
is to me as a speckled bird. Or as a bird of prey. Uncis unguibus tanquam
digitis in praedam involans. Jun.
. When Gods Dove becomes a Vulture, and is given to ravening and cruelty,
staining her feathers with blood, God will then break up House, and be gone.

3. Uncleanness Hos. 7. 4. They are all Adulterers, as an Oven heated by the
Baker. They who should have been Temples of the Holy Ghost, are hot Ovens
burning in lust Urbs est jam tatae Iupanar.
. -- Verse. 12. I will spread my net upon them. That is, I will spread the net
of my judgments over them, and they shall be taken in the Net.

4. Covetousness. Jer 6. 12. I will stretch out my hand upon the inhabitants of
the Land, for from the least of them, even to the greatest, every one is given
to Covetousness. When men smell rank of the earth, when they love the Exchange
better than the Temple, and are more for the earthly Mammon, than the heavenly
Manna, God will take his leave, and be gone. God is a Spirit, he can no more
converse with an earthly people, than a Prince can converse with a Swine.

5. Apostasy. Jer. 6. 28. They are all grievous revolters, Reprobate silver
shall one call them, because the Lord has rejected them. This made God remove
his golden Candlestick from the Church of Ephesus, because she had left her
first Love, Rev. 2. 4. And if apostasy will make God depart from a people, then
how can we expect he should stay long with us? Where is that zeal for God, and
love to truth, as formerly? We live in the fall of the leaf; There are many who
courted the Queen of Religion when she had a Jewel hung at her ear, but when
she is in her night-dress, and her Jewels of preferment are pulled off, now
they desert her. Lots wife was turned into a pillar of salt, for looking back.
If all who look back, should have this judgment inflicted on them, we should
hardly go in the streets for meeting pillars of salt. Merchants tell us of
diverse Ships cast away at Sea; I believe there have been of late more
shipwracks at Land, than at Sea, I mean, such, as have made shipwreck of faith
and a good conscience. The golden head is degenerated into Iron, a more
faeculent and impure metal -- Desinit in piscem mulier formosa superne. --

6. Weariness of Gods Ordinances; Amos 8. 5. When will the New Moon be gone,
and the Sabbath? Verse. 11. Behold, the days come, says the Lord, that I will
send a famine in the Land, not a famine of bread, nor a thirst for water, but
of hearing the Word of the Lord. God has fed this Nation with the finest of
the wheat, even the bread of life, we have had the Cream of Ordinances, God
has come down to us in a golden shower of blessings, the Vintage of other
Nations, has not been so good as the gleanings of England, but have not we
said, What a weariness is it? Mal. 1. 13. Is not our sin Sermon-surfeiting?
though we have liked the dressing, we have loathed the food; we have said, Who
is this Moses? and what is this Manna? and may not we fear God is now coming to
punish us for this sin? When we have lost our stomachs, God may cause the cloth
to be taken away; and would not that be dismal? How sad is it for any Nation,
when their Seers are blind! In what a condition is that people, who have husks
given them instead of Manna, and Music instead of food! Weariness of the
Gospel, forfeits the Gospel. If God sees that Sanctuary-blessings bear but a
low price, he will remove the Market.

7. Perjury. Jer. 11. 10. The house of Israel, and the house of Judah have
broken my Covenant; therefore thus says the Lord, Behold, I will bring evil
upon them, which they shall not be able to escape, and though they shall cry
unto me, I will not hearken unto them (...). Chrysostom ost.
. When a people play fast and loose with God, breaking their Solemn Vows and
Obligations, whether Sacramental or other, this is a Godprovoking sin, it will
make the Lord go away from a Nation, and though they cry after him, he will
turn a deaf ear. God will pass by infirmity, but he will punish Treachery.

8. Hatred of Reformation. When God calls to a people by his Word, Spirit,
Judgments, but they regard him not, he will pack up and be gone. Jer. 7. 13. I
spoke unto you rising up early, but you heard not, therefore will I do to this
house which is called by my Name, as I did to Shilo. Why, what did God to
Shilo? There the Priests were slain, the Ark was carried away captive, all the
signs of Gods presence were removed, the Vision ceased, and we never read that
the Ark returned to Shilo any more. Has not God called to us to be an holy
reformed people, but are there not those found among us, who hate Holiness, and
cry down Reformation? Oh take heed that God does not do to us, as he did to
Shilo, unpeople us, unchurch us, and send a flying roll of curses against us.

9. Incivilities offered to them who labor in the Word and Doctrine. God will
avenge the wrongs done to his Ambassadors. 2 Chronicles. 36. 16, 17. The Lord God of
their fathers sent to them by his Messengers, rising up betimes, and sending,
because he had compassion on his people, and on his dwelling place; but they
mocked the messengers of God, and despised his words, and misused his Prophets,
until the wrath of the Lord arose against his people, till there was no remedy.
Let us take heed of these sins, which will cause God to depart from the Nation.

2. If God be in the midst of his Church, Israel endeavored to keep the Ark
among them, which was the sign of Gods presence, Hos. 9. 12. Woe to them, when I
depart from them. If God be gone, then all other blessings go too; peace and
trading will be gone; Oh let us strive to keep God among us. What is the glory
of a Nation, but the presence of God in his Word and Ordinances? Zach 2*5. I
will be the glory in the midst of thee. If God be once gone, the glory is
departed. If God be gone, England will be like an house that has the furniture
taken down, and is falling to ruin. Isa. 13. 31. Owls shall dwell there, and
Satyrs shall dance there. If God be gone, Satan will be the next Tenant.

Quest. Quest.
How shall we do to keep God amongst us?

Answ. 1. Answ. 1.
By Prayer. Jer. 14. 9. We are called by thy Name, leave us not. Exercise eyes
of Faith, and knees of Prayer; let us hang upon God by holy importunity, and
not let him go (...) Chrysostom.
. Luke 24. 29. They constrained him, saying, Abide with us, for it is toward
evening. Is not God upon the threshold of his Temple ready to fly? Are not the
shadows of the evening stretched out? And may we not fear the Sunsetting of
the Gospel? Oh let us by humble prayer lie at Christ's feet, and constrain him
to stay with us; Prayer makes a sweet sound in Gods ears, and he will not go
away where there is that music.

2. By setting upon the work of Reformation. Ier. 7. 3. Amend your ways, and
your doings. There is a profane party in the Land, who drink, and roar, and
declare their sin as Sodom; These Sampsons are like to pull down the house upon
our head; instead of bringing the water of tears to quench Gods anger, they
add oil to the flame. The men of Lystra seeing the miracle wrought by Paul
and Barnabas, cried out, The gods are come down to us in the likeness of men,
Act. 14. 11. But we may now say, The Devils are come up to us in the likeness
of men; Never was there such a spirit of wickedness in the Land, never were
there such heaven-daring abominations committed; but though Israel play the
Harlot, yet let not Judah offend, Hos. 4. 15. Though others are licentious and
exorbitant, (being carried to hell with wind and tide) yet let us keep our
garments pure, and preserve the Virginity of our Consciences; let us labor to
reform our selves, and mourn for what we cannot reform in others. Let us walk
(...), acurately and circumspectly, Ephesians. 5. 15. Let us shine forth in a kind of
Angelical brightness, that we may not only profess the Gospel, but beautify
it. Were we such a Reformed People, we might keep God still in the midst of us,
and as a pledge of his favorable presence, he would entail his Gospel, that
Crowning Blessing, both upon us, and our Posterity.

Quest. Quest.
But is not the Decree past? Are there any hopes that God will be still in the
midst of England?

Answ. Answ.
There is hope in Israel concerning this. I would encourage Gods people, and
speak something that might be as the Cork to the Net, to keep their hearts from
sinking.

I confess, when I look upon the dark side of the cloud, it fills me with
trembling and astonishment; the sins and divisions of the Nation are gray hairs
upon us; it is ominous, when the joints of the same body begin to smite. But
though we have many Symptoms of a dying Patient, yet there are six seeds of
hope left, that God will still abide in the midst of England.

Sodom, if there had been ten righteous persons in it; it is to be hoped there
are many tens in England; Isa 65. 8. As new wine is found in the cluster, and
one says, Destroy it not, for a blessing is in it. Though the Vine in England
is so blasted, that the Lord might cut it down, yet there are some good
Clusters, and for these God may spare the Vine, and say, Is there not a
blessing in it? Were the godly, (who are the Charets and Horsemen in Israel)
removed, the Lord would make quick work with the Nation; he would destroy the
weeds, were it not for the Corn. The Ship of Church and State would soon be
drowned, if the Elect were not in it. The Saints stay Gods hand when he is
going to strike. Genesis 19. 22. Haste thee (to Zoar) for I cannot do anything
till thou become thither. The Saints are the excellent of the earth, Psalm. 16.
3. Precious and honorable, Isa. 43. 4. and for their sakes God may yet be
entreated to be propitious to us.

Spartans Walls were their Spears. The Wall, and Bulwark of a Nation, is
Prayer; as there are crying sins in the Land, so there are crying prayers.
Whole Vollies of sighs and groans are daily sent up to heaven (...) Menand.
. When the Lord intends to pour out the Vial of his indignation, he stops all
the sluices of prayer. Ier. 7. 16. Pray not for this people. God has not said
so yet; Prayer is a powerful Orator for mercy, it comes, as it were, with
Letters of mandamus to heaven. Isa. 45. 11. Concerning the works of my hands
command ye me. -- Et Dominum mundi flectere vota solent Martial.
-- Prayer staves off wrath from a Land. Exodus 32. 10. Let me alone, that my
wrath may wax hot against them. Why, what did Moses? he only prayed. Prayer
overcomes the Almighty Vincit invincibilem. Luth.
; it finds God free, but leaves him bound. This gives some crevis of hope, that
God will not wholly leave us; there are those that cry day and night, Spare thy
people, O Lord, and give not thy heritage to reproach. When Prayer leads the
Van, Deliverance brings up the Rear. Psalm. 10. 17. Thou will prepare their
heart, thou will cause thine ear to hear.

Joshua's Argument, Josh. 7. 9. What will thou do unto thy great Name? If the
People of God should be extinct, and the cause of Religion trampled under foot,
this would reflect upon the glory of God, and his Name would suffer. The wicked
seldom prevail, but they blaspheme, they say, Where is your God? Psalm 42. 10.
Now, Gods glory is dear to him, it is the most orient Pearl of his Crown; he
will stand upon his honor; while he consults his peoples safety, he promotes
his own glory. Psalm. 106. 8. Nevertheless he saved them for his Name sake.

Jesus hears the names of his people upon his breast, and sets them as a golden
Signet upon his heart; his prayers go up to heaven as sweet odors. Revel. 8. 4.
The smoke of incense ascended up before God out of the Angels hand. Though out
sins go up to heaven, as the smoke of a furnace, yet Christ's prayers go up as
the smoke of incense. Christ's intercession is meritorious, his blood will never
leave crying, till the blood of his enemies be shed.

5. A fifth seed of hope is, the mercy of Isa. 63. 9. In his love, and in his
pity he redeemed them. God is the Father of mercies, 2 Cor. 1. 3. Mercy does
naturally issue from him. He is rich in mercy, Ephesians. 2. 4. He delights in
mercy, Mic. 7. 18. Justice is Gods strange work, Isa, 28. 21. Mercy is his
proper work: Why may not Mercy give the casting-voice? And that which may make
us hope in this mercy, is, 1o. The mercy of God is free. Hos. 14. 4. I will
love them freely (...) Chrysostom.
. Mercy sends out its pardons to whom it will; Mercy does not go by desert, but
by Prerogative, I will love them freely. 2o. The mercy of God is healing. Hos.
14. 4. I will heal their backslidings. Mercy can heal the impurity and
stubbornness of a people; Mercy can as well give repentance, as deliverance.
Mercy can destroy the sins of a Nation, and save the Nation. It can burn up the
Chaff, and save the Corn. I will heal their backslidings. Mercy can stop the
bloody issue of sin, and so make way for the issues from death, Psalm. 68. 20.
Pliny says, the watercourse of Rome are the worlds wonder; but behold here a
Sacred Watercourse of Gods mercy, this is a sweet wonder; Mercy can overcome a
sinful people, it can save a Nation in its Climacterical year; We read that the
fire of the Lord fell, and licked up the water, 1 Kings 18. 38. Thus the fire
of Gods mercy can lick up, and devour the water of our sins.

England, is, That there have been many sins committed in the Nation, which are
not the sins of the Nation; some have perjured themselves, but all have not; A
sober and considerable party in the Land (however traduced) have entered their
dissent, and openly protested against the scandalous actings of others; so that
it is to be hoped, the Lord will not impute the sin of some to the whole. There
are a certain number that said as David, 1 Samuel 26. 11. God forbid that I
should stretch forth my hand against the Lords anointed. They looked upon it as
impious and irrational, to go to cut off the HEAD, to preserve the body. Thus I
have showed you a Rainbow in the cloud, and given you some probable grounds of
hope, That the Lord will still be in the midst of England, Which I intend as a
preservative against despondency, not as fuel for security.

Quest. Quest.
But how is it possible there should be any good toward us? That the sins in
which the Nation has been so steeped, and parboiled, should be forgiven? that
our divisions and animosities should be healed, Gods Ordinances refined, and
the Lord continue his gracious presence in the midst of us?

Answ. Answ.
I say with our blessed Savior, Luke 18. 27. The things which are unpossible
with men, are possible with God. What cannot that God do, that can create? God
can bring about those things, which in the eye of sense are not feasible. That
Iron should swim, that the Rock should be a Spring, is in nature impossible,
but God has brought this to pass. Cannot God untye those knots which do amuse
and puzzle us? Zach. 8. 6. If it be mavelous in the eyes of the remnant of
this people, should it also be mavelous in mine eyes? says the Lord of
hosts. Can difficulties pose the Almighty? Jer. 32 27. Is there any thing too
hard for me? Did not he make the dry bones live? Ezekiel. 37. 7, 8. God can bring
light out of darkness 2 Cor. 4 6.
, harmony out of confusion; he can do more than we can think Ephesians. 3. 20.
, else he should not be God. How apt are Gods own people to be discouraged with
seeming impossibilities? Moses who was one of the brighest Stars that ever
shined in the Churches Orb, yet ready to hesitate, and sink at seeming
impossibilities, Numb. 11. ^1. The people amongst whom I am, are six hundred
thousand footmen, and thou have said, I will give them flesh that they may eat
a whole month; shall the flocks and the herds be slain for them to suffice
them? or shall all the fish of the Sea be gathered together for them to suffice
them? As if Moses had said in plain English, he did not see how such a numerous
people could be fed for a month. God gives him a kind of check for his
infidelity, verse. 23. Is the Lords hand waxed short? Do I find mouths, and not
meat? Cannot I make provision for my household? Is the Lords hand waxed short?
That God who brought Isaac out of a dead womb, and the Messiah out of a Virgins
womb, what cannot he do (...) Chrysostom.
? When things act never so irregularly, God can put them in joint again. When
his Church is so low, that she seems to be in the Grave, and have a Tombstone
laid upon her, he can in an instant cause a glorious resurrection. Therefore
let us not be out of heart, but still rest on the arm of Gods power and
Sovereignty, remembering there are no desperate Cases with God.

To conclude all, the Lord may let his Church be a while under hatches, to
punish her security, and awaken her out of her slumbering fits, yet, surely the
storm will not continue long; The Church shall not dye in travel, but God will
manifest that he is in the midst of Zion, and after his Church has suffered a
while, (as her head Christ has done) he will cause the morning star of her
Salvation to appear, and she shall come out of all her troubles, as the wings
of a Dove covered with silver, and her feathers with yellow gold.

FINIS.

