THE MISCHIEF OF SIN, It brings a Person Low.

Published by Thomas Watson Minister of the Gospel.

Isa. 64.7. Thou have consumed us because of our iniquities.

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Parkhurst, and are to be sold at his Shop at the
Bible and three Crowns in Cheapside near Mercers Chapel, and at the Bible on
London Bridge. 1671.

THE EPISTLE TO THE READER.
Christian Reader,
THE excess of impiety which has broken down the Banks of common Civility and
Modesty, did at first lead my thoughts to these subjects ensuing. The Spirits
of men are leavened with Atheism, and their lives stained with debauchery. Homo
ad Dei (...) conditus, brutis deterior evasit; lustra sectatur, in sordibus
stercoreque volutatur; quam turpiter inversa in microcosmo nostro lex illa and
politia, qua corpus animae parere jubetur. Mornaeus.
I know not what to call them, but Baptitized Heathens. Not long since there
was a complaint that the Springs grew low: Sure I am the floods of sin are
risen, even to a Deluge. There is a Generation among us, of whom I may say as
Oecumenius, they militate against Religion; (...). Aecum.
they are so prodigiously profane, that they esteem the Bible a Fable, and Non
percussit Ismael fratrem gladio, sed scom mate. Calvin.
would jeer all Holiness out of the world. The Prince of the Air, now works
in the children of disobedience, Ephesians. 2.2. in our Saviors time, many men's
Bodies were possessed with the Devil, but now their souls are possessed. One is
possessed with a blasphemous Devil, another with a spightful Devil, another
with a drunken Devil. This is one great sign of the approach of the last day,
iniquity shall abound, Mat. 24.12. Men's lusts grow fierce and insatiable, and
like Imps lie sucking them. But O how direful and tremendous will the effects
of sin be. My Text says Peccatum transit actu, manet reatu.
, they were brought low for their iniquity: Sin is such a Trade, that whosoever
follows, is sure to break. What got Achan by his wedge of Gold? It was a wedge
to cleave asunder his soul from God. What got Judas by his Treason? He
purchased an Halter. What got King Ahaz by worshipping the Gods of Damascus?
they were the Ruin of him and of all Israel, 2 Chronicles. 28.23. Sin is first
Comical, and then Tragical. I may fitly apply those words of Solomon to sin,
Prove. 7.26. She has cast down many wounded: O what an Harvest of souls is the
Devil like to have! Isaiah 5.14. Hell has enlarged it self. It is fain to make
room for its guests. It Is matter of grief to think, that the Dragon should have
so many followers, and the Lamb so few. Cyprian brings in the Devil insulting
over Christ, thus; As for my followers, I never dyed for them as Christ has
done for his, I never promised them so great a Reward as Christ has done to
his, yet I have greater numbers than he, and my followers venture more for me,
than his do for him. Some sin out of ignorance, yet even the blind can find the
way to Hell. But most sin out of choice, they know the Dish forbidden, but they
lust after it, though in the day they eat thereof, they shall surely die. My
design in this small Tract, is to give check to Sinners, and sound a Religious
Retreat in their ears, to make them return from the hot pursuit of their
impieties. If notwithstanding all admonitions, they will run counter to the
Word, and prostitute themselves to their sordid lusts, they are felo de se, and
their blood will be upon their own head. What remains, but that God should say
in anger, as Zach. 11.9. That that dies, let it dye, and that that is to be
cut off, let it be cut off. I have at the request of some friends, made this
Discourse (imparted formerly to my own family) public. I acknowledge it is not
rhetorico flatu cothurnatus, embellished with flowers of Eloquence. St. Paul's
preaching was not with enticing words of man's wisdom, but in the demonstration
of the Spirit, and Power, 1 Cor. 2.4. Plainness is ever best in beating down
sin. When a wound festers, it is fitter to lance it, than to embroyder it with
Silk, or lay Vermilion upon it. Reader, that God will bless these few
Meditations to thee, and make them operative upon thy Heart, shall be the
Prayer of him, who is,

Thy Friend, studious of thy eternal welfare, Thomas Watson.

THE MISCHIEF OF SIN, It brings a Person Low.
PSALM 106.43. And were brought low, for their Iniquity.
IF the Scripture be a Spiritual Rosary or Garden, (as St. Chrysostom says)
the Book of Psalms is a Knot in this Garden, set with fragrant Flowers: Luther
calls the Psalms, parva Biblia, a little Bible. The Psalms make sweeter Music,
than ever David's Harp did: they are calculated for every Christians condition,
and may serve either for illumination, or consolation.

In this Psalm David sets down the people of Isreal's sins.

First, In General; Ver. 6. We have sinned with our Fathers. The examples of
Fathers, are not always to be urged. Shall we be wiser than our Fathers?
Fathers may err; a 2 Chro. 29.6.
Son had sometimes better take his Land from his Father, than his Religion.

Secondly, David makes a particular enumeration of their sins.

1. Their forgetfulness of God. Ver. 13. They soon forgot his works; or as it
is in the Original, they made haste to forget his works (...)
. The Lord wrought a famous Miracle for them, Ver. 11. he drowned Isreal's
enemies, and Israel drowned his mercies. Our sins, and Gods kindnesses are apt
quickly to slip out of our memory. We deal with Gods mercies, as with Flowers,
when they are fresh, we smell to them, and put them in our bosom, but within a
while we throw them away, and never mind them (...) Theodor.
. They made haste to forget his works.

2. Their inordinate lusting, V. 14. They lusted exceedingly in the Wilderness.
They were weary of the Provision which God sent them miraculously from Heaven;
they grew dainty, they wept for Quails; they were not content, that God should
supply their Wants, but they would have him satisfy their lusts too; God lets
them have their request; Quails they had, but in anger; Deus saepe dat iratus,
quod negat propitius. Aug.
He sent leanness into their souls, (i. e.) he sent a Plague whereby they pined
and consumed away.

3. Their Idolatry. Ver. 19. They made a Calf in Horeb. They framed to
themselves a god of Gold and worshipped it. (...)
The Scripture calls Idols, Bosheth, a shame, Hos. 9.10. For this God
disclaimed them from being his people, Exodus 32.2. Thy people have corrupted
themselves. Formerly God called them His people, but now he does not say to
Moses, My people, but Thy people.

4. Their Infidelity. Ver. 24. They believed not his word, Cum Deus ipsa
bonitas sit; ipsae devitiae; qui fit ut nemo Deo inniti possit satis? Mornaeus.
but murmured. They did not think that God would subdue their enemies, and
bring them into that pleasant Land flowing with Milk and Honey; and this
unbelief did break forth into murmuring. Invalidum omne natura querulum. Seneca.
They wished they had made their Graves in Egypt; Exodus 16.3.
when men begin to distrust the Promise, then they quarrel at Providence. When
faith grows low, passions grow high. For these things God did stretch out his
hand against them, as it is in the Text, And they were brought low, for their
iniquity.

The words branch themselves into two Parts.

1. Isreal's Misery. They were brought low; Depressi fuerunt. Vatabl.
Some Expositors translate it, They waxed lean; Marcuerunt. Fabrit.
The Hebrew and Septuagint render it, They were humbled. (...)


2. The procuring cause of it; for their iniquity (...)
.

Doct. The Proposition resulting from the Text is, That sin brings a Person
low. Psalm. 197.6. The wicked he casts down to the ground. Sin is a Planet of
a bad Aspect; as Ieptha said to his daughter, when she met them with Timbrel
and Dances, Judge. 11.35. Alas my daughter, thou have brought me very low. So a
man may say to his sin, alas my sin, thou have brought me very low. Sin is the
great Leveller; it brings a Family low: it cuts off the Arm, and dissolves the
Pillars thereof. 1 Samuel 2.29. Wherefore kick ye at my Sacrifice? Ver. 31.
Behold, the days come, that I will cut off thy arm; and the arm of thy Fathers
house, that there shall not be an old man in thy house. Which threatening God
made good, when he cut off Elies two Sons, and put by the other Sons from the
Priesthood.

Sin brings a Kingdom low, 1 Samuel 15.19. Wherefore did not thou obey the
voice of the Lord, but did evil in his sight? Ver. 28. The Lord has rent the
Kingdom of Israel from thee this day. Sin breaks the Axletree of Church and
State, Hos. 13.1. When Ephraim spoke trembling, he exalted himself, but when he
offended in Baal he dyed. The Tribe of Ephraim did carry a Majesty with it, and
was superior to the ten Tribes. When Ephraim spoke, he struck an awe and
terror into others; But when he offended in Baal he dyed. When he once fell
from God by Idolatry, he did inter cuneos residere, degrade himself of his
honor; his strength and glory came to nothing. Now every puny adversary would
insult over him, as the Hare will tread upon a dead Lion Leoni mortuo and
lepores insultant.
.

Among the many threatenings against sin, this was one, Deuteronomy. 28.43. Thou shall
come down very low; and in the Text this threatening is exemplified and made
good, They were brought low for their iniquity. That I may amplify and
illustrate the Proposition, I shall show 1. How many ways sin brings a man
low. 2. Why sin must needs bring a man low.


1. How many ways sin brings a man low.

1. Sin brings a man low in Gods esteem. The sinner sets an high price upon
himself, Prove. 26.16. but God has low thoughts of him, and looks upon him with
a despicable eye, Dan. 11.21. And in his estate, shall stand up a vile person.
Who was this spoken of? It was Antiochus Epiphanes; he was a King, and his Name
signifies Illustrious, and by some he was worshipped, yet in Gods account, he
was a vile person. The Psalmist speaking of the wicked, says, they are become
filthy; in the Hebrew it is, they are become stinking. (...)
That you may see how low a sinner is fallen in Gods account, the Lord compares
him to dross, Psalm. 119.119. to chafe, Psalm. 1.4. to a Pot boiling with scumm,
Ezekiel. 24.6. to a Dog, 2 Pet. 2.22. which under the Law was unclean; to a
Serpent, Matthew. 23.33. which is a cursed creature; Genesis 3.14.
nay, he is worse than a Serpent, for the poison of a Serpent, is what God has
put into it; but a wicked man has that which the Devil has put into him, Acts
5.3. Why has Satan filled thy heart?

Caelius Rhodiginus reports of an ancient Woman, who had always used
flattering Glasses, by chance, seeing her face in a true Glass, fell mad; In
insaniam delapsa est.
a sinner is well conceited of himself, while he does dress himself by the
flattering Glass of presumption, but if he knew how loathsome and disfigured he
were in Gods eye, he would abhor himself in the dust. Zac. 11.8


2. Sin brings a man low in his intellectuals. It has eclipsed the (...), the
Rational Part; darkness is upon the face of this deep. Since the Fall, the Lamp
of Reason burns dim, 1 Cor. 13.9. We know but in part. (...): nondum sumus
absoluti. Calv.
There are many arcana naturae, knots in Nature, that are not easy to untye.
Why Nilus should overflow in Summer, when by the course of nature Waters are
lowest? Why the Loadstone should rather draw Iron, than Gold a more Noble
Metal? What way the light is parted? Job 38.24. How the bones grow in the
womb? Eccles. 11.5.
Many of these are Paradoxes that we understand not. The Key of Knowledge Luke
11.52.
, is lost in the Tree of Knowledge.

Especially, in matters Sacred, we are inveloped with ignorance, The Sword is
upon our right eye, Zach. 11.16. What a little of the Sea, will a Nut-shell
hold? How little of God will our intellect contain? Job. 11.7. Can thou find
out the Almighty unto perfection? Who can fully unriddle the Trinity? or fadom
the mystery of the Hypostatical Union? And alas, as to salvifical
heart-transforming knowledge, how are we to seek, till Gods Spirit light our
Lamp! 1 Cor. 2.14.

3. Sin brings a man low in affliction; Psalm 107.39.
that is the meaning of the Text, They were brought low for their iniquity.
Adams sin brought him low; it banished him out of Paradise, 2 Chronicles. 28.18. In
those days, God cut Israel short. Sin makes God cut a people short in their
Spiritual and Civil liberties. Sin is the Womb of sorrow, and the Grave of
comfort. Sin turns the body into an Hospital, it causeeth Fevers, Ulcers,
Catarrhes. -- macies and nova febrium terris incubuit cohors -- H^rat.
Sin buries the Name, melts the Estate, pulls away near Relations as limbs from
our body. Sin is the Trojan Horse, out of which a whole Troop of afflictions
comes. Sin drowned the old World, burnt Sodom, Sin made Sibon sit in Babylon.
Lam. 1.8. Jerusalem has grievously sinned, therefore she is removed. Sin did
shut up Gods bowels, Lam. 2.21. Thou have killed, and not pitied. Israel did
sin, and not repent, and God did kill, and not pity. Sin is the great Humbler:
Did not David's sin bring him low? Psalm 38.3. There is no rest in my bones,
because of my sin. Did not Manassehs sin bring him low? It changed his
Crown-Royal into Fetters, 2 Chronicles. 33.11. God for sin, turned King
Nebuchadnezzar to grass, Dan. 4.33. Sin is like the Egyptian Reed, too feeble
to support us, but sharp enough to wound us. Jer. 2.16. The Children of Noph
and Tahapanes have broke the Crown of thy head. The Egyptians were not a
warlike, but a womanish people Herodotus.
, imbecil and weak, yet these were too hard for Israel, and made a spoil of
her. Ver. 17. Have thou not procured this to thy self? Is it not thy sin has
brought thee low?

Nay, Sin does not only bring us low in affliction, but it imbitters
affliction; Sin puts teeth into the Cross. Guilt makes affliction heavy; A
little water is heavy in a Leaden Vessel; and a little affliction is heavy in a
guilty conscience.

4. Sin brings one low in Melancholy: this is atra bilis, a black humor seated
chiefly in the brain. Some have strange and dismal conceits, fancying their
bodies to be made all of Glass, Nonnulli humore melancholico corrupti, se bruta
animalia esse credunt, quorum ^oces imitantur; nonnulli vasa fictilia, ideo
cuivis obviam venienti cedunt, ne attactu frangantur. Vitam sibi acerbam
faciunt, ejusque exitum accelerant. Baldw. lib. 3. c. 4. de Cas. Consc.
and that if any one touch them, they shall break. Melancholy clothes the mind
in Sable; it puts a Christian out of tune, that he is not fit for prayer,
Animae functiones tolluntur in mania, depravantur in melancholia.
nor praise. Lute-strings when wet, will not sound: nor can one under the power
of Melancholy, Make melody in his heart to the Lord, Ephesians. 5.19. when the mind
is troubled, it is unfit to go about work. Melancholy does disturb Reason, and
weaken Faith. Satan works much on this temper: it is balneum diaboli; he bathes
himself with delight in such a person. Through the black Spectacles of
Melancholy, every thing appears black. When a Christian looks upon sin, says
he, this Leviathan will devour me; when he looks upon Ordinances, these will
serve to increase my guilt; when he looks upon affliction, this gulf will
swallow me up. Melancholy creates fears in the mind, it excites jealousies; and
misprisions. I may allude to that Psalm. 53.5. There were they in great fear,
where no fear was. Qui hoc morbo laborant, valde meticulosi sunt, ne vel aedes
in quibus habitant, vel and ipsum coelum ruat, pertimentes. Baldw.


5. Sin brings a man low in spiritual Plagues. It brings many an one, to a
seared conscience, to final induration, Isa. 29.10. The Lord has poured out
upon you, the spirit of a deep sleep, (...).
and has closed your eyes. Men are brought low indeed, when the sound of
Aarons Bell will not awaken them, no Sermon will stir them. They are like the
Smiths Dog, that can lie and sleep near the Anvil, when all the sparkles fly
about. Conscience is in a Lethargy. Eo insanabile vulnus, cuo insensibile.
Bern. Flores.
When once a man's speech is gone, and his feeling lost, he draws on apace to
death: So when the checks of Conscience cease, and a man is sensible neither of
sin, nor wrath, you may ring out the Bell, he is past hope of recovery. Thus
some are brought low, even to a reprobate sense. This is limen inferni, the
threshold of damnation.

6. Sin brings a man low in temptation. Paul began to be proud, and he had a
messenger of Satan to buffet him, (...), etc. Chrysostom.
2 Cor. 12.7. Some think it was a visible apparition of Satan, tempting him to
sin; others, that the Devil was now assaulting Paul's faith, making him believe
he was an hypocrite. Satan laid the train of temptation, to blow up the fort of
his Grace. And this temptation was so sore, that he called it, a thorn in the
flesh (...).
, it did put him to much anguish. Such temptations do the godly often fall into.
They are tempted to question the truth of the Promises, or the truth of their
own Graces. Sometimes they are tempted to blasphemy, sometimes to self-murder;
thus, they are brought low, they are almost gone, and ready to give consent.
The Devil nibbles at their heel, but God wards off the blow from their head.

7. Sin brings one low in desertion. This is an abyss indeed. Psalm. 88.6. Thou
have laid me in the lowest pit Se captivo comparat, qui in tetrum ac profundum
lacum conjectus, miserrime jacet, nec quicquam spei de vita sua reliquum habet.
Musculus.
. Desertion is a short Hell. Cant. 5.6. My beloved has withdrawn himself, and
was gone. Christ knocked, but the Spouse was loath to rise off her bed of
sloth, and open to him presently, Christ was gone. When the Devil finds a
person sleeping, he enters; but when Christ finds him sleeping he is gone. And
if this Sun of Righteousness withdraws his Golden beams from the soul, darkness
follows. Desertion is the arrow of God, shot into the soul. Haeret lateri
lethalis arundo.
Job 6.4. The arrows of the Almighty are within me, the poison whereof drinks
up my Spirit. The Scythians in their Wars did use to dip their Arrows in the
blood and gall of Asps, that the venomous heat of them might the more torture
the enemy. So the Lord did shoot his poisoned arrow of desertion at Job, under
the wounds whereof, his Spirit lay bleeding. God is called in Scripture, a
light, and a fire. The deserted soul feels the fire, but does not see the
light. So dreadful is this, that the most tormenting pains, Stone, Colic,
Strangury, are but a pleasure to it. All the delights under the Sun will
administer no comfort in this condition. Worldly things can no more relieve a
troubled mind, than a silken Stocken can ease a broken Leg. Psalm. 88.15. While
I suffer thy terrors, I am distracted. Luther in desertion, was like one giving
up the ghost, He had no blood seen in his face, nor was heard to speak, but his
body seemed dead; Nec calor, nec sanguis, nec vita superesset.
as one writes in an Epistle to Melancthon.

8. Sin brings many low in despair; this is a gulf that none but reprobates
fall into. Desperare est in infernum descendere. Isidor.
Jer. 18.11. Thou said, there is no hope. Despair is devoratoria salutis,
Tertul.
it is a millstone tied about the soul, that sinks it in perdition. Despair
looks on God, not as a Father, but a Judge. It refuses the remedy. Other sins
need Christ, despair rejects him: It closes the Orifice of Christ's wounds,
that no blood will come out to heal. This is the voice of despair, My sin is
greater than the mercy of God can pardon. It makes the wound broader than the
plaster. Despair is a God-affronting sin; it is sacrilege, it robs God of his
Crown-jewels, his Power, Goodness, Truth. How does Satan triumph to see the
honor of Gods Attributes laid in the dust by despair. Despair casts away the
Anchor of hope, and then the soul must needs sink. What will a Ship do in a
storm without an Anchor? Despair locks men up in impenitency. I have read of
one Hubertus who dyed despairing; he made his Will after this manner, I yield
my goods to the King, my body to the grave, my soul to the Devil. Isa. 38.18.
They that go down into the pit, cannot hope for thy truth. They who go down
into this pit of despair, cannot hope for the truth of Gods promise. And this
despair grows at last into horror and raving, Sen. Trag.
-- Eheu quis intus scorpio? --

9. Sin brings a man without repentance into the bottomless pit, and then he is
brought low indeed Fovea omnium infima. Fabrit.
. Sin draws Hell at the heels of it. Psalm. 9.7. The wicked shall be turned into
Hell. Not to speak of the punishment of loss, which Divines think is the worst
part of Hell: (i. e.) the being separated from the beatifical sight of God, in
whose presence is fullness of joy Psalm 16.11.
. The poena sensus, the punishment of sense, is bad enough. Then wrath will
come upon sinners, (...), to the uttermost, 1 These. 2.16.

If when Gods anger is kindled but a little, and a spark of it flies into a
man's conscience in this life, it is so terrible, what will it be, when he stirs
up all his wrath? Psalm. 78.38. How sad was it with Spira when he did but sip of
the Cup of wrath? he was a very Anatomy, his flesh consumed, he became a terror
to himself. What is it then to lie steeping in Hell?

Some may ask, where the place of Hell is? but as Chrysostom says, let us not
be inquisitive where it is, but rather let our care be to escape it. (...), etc.
But to satisfy curiosity, Hell is some infernal place, it lies low, Prove.
15.24. Hell beneath. Inferos credimus certum ac definitum locum esse, quem non
frustra abyssum vocarit Scriptura, horrendis and aeternis Satanae and impiorum
suppliciis destinatum. Beza.
Hesiod says, Hell is as far under the Earth, as Heaven is above it. Infernum
est locus subterraneus. Tertul. lib. 3. de anim.
If sin then brings a man to Hell, it brings him low. Consider,

1. The plurality of Hell torments. In bodily sickness, seldom above one
Disease at a time troubles the Patient; the Stone, or Gout; but in Hell there
is a diversity of torments. There is, 1. Darkness, Jude 13. Hell is a dark
Region. Per tenebras, Scriptura metaphorice horrendum horrorem designat. Calv.
in Mat.
2. There are bonds and chains. 2 Pet. 2.4. God has Golden cords which are his
Precepts, tying men to duty; and Iron chains, which are partly his decree, in
ordaining men to destruction, and partly his Power, in bridling and chaining
them up under wrath. The binding the wicked in chains, notes that the damned in
Hell cannot move from place to place, which might perhaps a little alleviate
and abate their misery, but they shall be tied to the stake never to stir. The
wicked could go from one sin to another, but in Hell they shall not move from
one place to another.

3. The Worm that never dies. Mar. 9.44. This is a self-accusing mind, which is
so torturing, as if a Worm full of poison, were gnawing at a man's heart. Such
as would not hear the voice of conscience, shall be made to feel the worm of
conscience.

2. The severity of Hell torment. It is expressed by a lake of Fire, Rev.
20.15. Fire is the most torturing Element. Nebuchadnezzars fiery Furnace, was
but painted fire to this. It is called Fire prepared, Matthew. 25.41. as if God
had been sitting down to devise some exquisite torment. Dives cries out, O I am
tormented in this flame, Luke 16.24.

3. The torments of Hell shall be in every part both of body and soul. 1. The
body shall be tormented. That body which was so tender and delicate, that it
could not bear heat or cold, shall suffer in every part. The eyes shall be
tormented with sights of Devils, Oculi cruciabuntur aspectu daemonum.
the ears with the hideous shrieks of the damned; the tongue that was fired
with passion, shall now have fire enough, Luke 16.24. Send Lazarus that he may
dip the tip of his finger in water, and cool my tongue.

2. All the powers of the soul shall be tormented. The mind to apprehend Divine
displeasure; the memory to remember what mercies have been abused, what means
of Grace have been slighted, and what an Heaven is forfeited; the conscience
shall be tormented with self-accusations; the sinner shall arraign himself for
stifling, and resisting the motions of the blessed Spirit.

4. The wicked shall not only be forced to behold the Devil, but shall be shut
up in the Den with this roaring Lion, and he shall spit fire in their faces.

5. The wicked shall hear the language of Hell, Revel. 16.9. Men were scorched
with heat, and blasphemed the Name of God. To hear reprobates cursing God, and
have ones ears chained to their Oaths and Blasphemies, what an Hell will this
be?

6. The torments of Hell have no period put to them. Origin fancied a fiery
stream, in which the souls of sinful men, yea, Devils and all, were to be
purged, and then pass into Heaven: but the Scripture asserts, that whosoever
are not purged from sin by Christ's blood, 1 John 1.7.
are to lie under the Torrid Zone of Gods wrath to all eternity, Revel. 14.11.
The smoke of their torment, ascends up for ever and ever. This word ever
burns hotter than the Fire. At death all our worldly sorrows dye; but the
torments of Hell are as long-lived as Eternity, Rev. 9.6. They shall seek
death, and shall not find it. Always dying, but never dead. Sic moriantur
damnati ut semper vivant, and sic vivent, ut semper moriantur; ubi nec qui
torquet fatigatur, nec qui torquetur Moritur. Bern. Flor.
Here the wicked thought a Prayer long, a Sabbath long, Amos 8.5. But how long
will it be to lie in Hell for ever.

-- Vestigia nulla retrorsum -- 7. The pains of Hell are without intermission.
If a man be in pain, yet while he is asleep, he does not feel it. There is no
sleep in Hell. What would the damned give for one hours sleep, Rev. 4.8. They
rest not day nor night. In outward pain there is some abatement; the burning
fit is sometimes off, and the sick Patient is more at ease than he was. But the
damned soul never says, I have more ease; those infernal pains are always
acute and sharp; no cooling fits in those inflammations.

8. In Hell the wicked shall see the godly advanced to a Kingdom, and
themselves devoted to misery, Luke 13.28. Then shall be weeping and gnashing of
teeth, when ye shall see Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, and all the Prophets in
the Kingdom of God, and you your selves thrust out. When sinners shall see
those whom they hated and scorned, to be set at Christ's right hand, and crowned
with glory, and themselves cast out to the Devils; nay, when the ungodly shall
see those whom they censured and persecuted sit as their Judges, and join with
Christ in condemning them, Deus tanto honor dignatus est sanctos, ut eos
constituerit totius mundi judices, (i. e.) cum Christo assessores. Calvin.
1 Cor. 6.2. Know ye not, that the Saints shall judge the world? How will this
aggravate the misery of those hellish Caitiffs, and make them gnash their teeth
for envy.

9. In Hell the wicked shall have none to sympathize with them. It is some
comfort to have friends condole with us in our sufferings, but the damned have
none to compassionate them. Mercy will not pity them, mercy abused turns to
fury. God the Father will not pity them, he will laugh at them Prove. 1.26. I
will laugh at your calamity. Is not this sad, for a damned soul to lie roaring
in flames, and have God sit and laugh at him? Jesus Christ will not pity the
wicked, they slighted his blood, and now his blood cries against them. The
Angels will not pity them; it is a desirable sight to them, to see Gods Justice
glorified. Nec Deus, nec Angeli, ulla afficientur sympathia.
The Saints in Heaven will not pity them; they were continually persecuted by
them, and they shall rejoice when they see the vengeance, Psalm 58.10. Nay,
such as were their nearest Relations on Earth will not pity them; the Father
will not pity his Child in Hell, nor the Wife her Husband; the reason is,
because the Saints glorified have their wills made perfectly subject to Gods
will, and when they see his will is done, they rejoice, though it be in the
damning of their near relations.

Does not sin then bring men low, when it brings them to Hell? Ezekiel. 32.27.
They are gone down to Hell, they have laid their swords under their heads, but
their iniquity shall be upon their bones. Thus I have shown you how many ways
sin brings one low.

2. Why sin must needs bring a man low.

1. Because sin is a Disease, and that brings low. Take the healthiest
Constitution, the most sanguine Complexion, yet if sickness get into it, it
brings the body low, the beauty withers, -- Languebant corpora morbo -- Virgil.
the Silver Cord begins to be loosed. So it is in spirituals, the soul which
was once of an Orient brightness, the mind angelified, the will crowned with
liberty, the affections as so many Seraphims burning in love to God, yet by sin
is become diseased, Isa. 1.6.
and this disease brings it low. The soul is fallen from its pristine dignity,
it has lost its noble and sublimated operations, and lies exposed (without
Grace) to the second death.

2. Sin must needs bring a man low, because the sinner enters a contest with
God. -- invadunt Martem clypeis, pugnamque lacessunt -- He tramples upon Gods
Law, crosses his will; if God be of one mind, the sinner will be of another;
(...). Menand.
he does all he can to spite God, Jer. 44.16. As for the word which thou have
spoken to us in the name of the Lord, we will not hearken to thee, but we will
do whatsoever thing proceeds out of our own mouth, to burn incense to the
Queen of Heaven Stat pro ratione voluntas.
. The same Hebrew word for sin, signifies rebellion (...)
. Now can the Lord endure to be thus sawcily confronted by proud dust? God will
never let his own creature rise up in arms against him, he will pull down the
sinners plumes, and bring him low. God is called El Elim, the Mighty of
Mighties.
Psalm. 18.26. With the froward, thou will show thy self froward; In the Hebrew
it is, (...)
thou will wrestle; and if God once wrestle with the sinner, he will throw him
to the ground. When the Angel wrestled with Jacob, he touched only the hollow
of his thigh, Genesis 32.25. But when God wrestles with a sinner, he will rent the
caul of his heart, (...) Pericardio, quo scisso mors obrepit.
Hos. 13.8. The Apostle says, It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of
the living God, Heb. 10.31. It Is good to fall into Gods hands when he is a
friend, but it is ill falling into his hands when he is an enemy.

3. Sin must needs bring a man low, because the sinner labors what he can to
bring God low. It Is true, God cannot lose any of his essential glory, he is so
high that no strength of Mortals can reach him, but a wicked man does what in
him lies to bring God low. He has low thoughts of God; he slights his
sovereignty, questions his truth, looks upon all Gods Promises as a forged
deed. The sinner therefore is said to despise God, Numb. 11.20.

Again, the sinner lessens God, and brings him low in the thoughts of others.
Ezekiel. 8.12. They say, the Lord sees us not, the Lord has forsaken the earth.
Do but secure your selves from man's eye, and as for Gods taking notice of sin,
you need not trouble your selves, the Lord sees you not, Irridendum vero curam
agere rerum humanarum illud quicquid est summum. Pliny.
he has forsaken the earth. Zeph. 1.12. They say the Lord will not do good,
neither will he do evil. If you serve him you must not look for reward, and if
you do not serve him, you need not fear punishment. Mal. 2.17. Ye say, every
one that does evil, is good in the sight of the Lord, and he delights in
them: or where is the God of judgment? Here they blemish Gods Sanctity; God is
not so holy, but he bears as much favor to the wicked, as to the good; and,
Where is the God of judgment? Here they tax his justice; as if they had said,
God does not order things right, he does not weigh matters impartially in an
equal balance; Where is the God of judgment? Thus a sinner eclipseth the
glory of the Godhead, and labors to bring God low in the thoughts of others.

And besides, he does what in him lies to extirpate a Deity; he wishes there
were no God; he says, Quem quisque odit, periisse cupit.
Cause the holy One of Israel to cease, Isa. 30.11. A wicked man would not only
unthrone God, but unbee God; if he could help it, God should be no longer God.
Now if a sinner be thus impious, as to endeavor to bring God low, no wonder if
God brings him low. Nahum. 1.19. I will make thy grave, for thou art vile. I
will bring thee (O Sennacherib) from the throne to the tomb. I will kick thee
into thy grave, Obad. ver. 4. Though thou set thy nest among the Stars, thence
will I bring thee down says the Lord.

4. Sin must needs bring a person low, because sin is the only thing God has
an antipathy against. The Lord does not hate a man, because he is poor, or
despised; you do not hate your friend, because he is sick; but that which draws
forth the keenness of Gods hatred, is sin, Jer. 44.4. Do not this abominable
thing that I hate. Now for any one to espouse that which Gods soul hates, it
must needs undo him at last. Is that subject like to thrive, whom his Prince
hates? The cherishing countenancing of sin, makes the fury come up in Gods
face, Ezekiel. 38.16. And if his wrath be once kindled, it burns to the lowest
Hell. The Psalmist says, Who can stand before his cold? Psalm. 147.17. But
rather, who can stand before his heat? Isa. 33.14.

5. Sin must needs bring the sinner low, because it exposes him to Gods curse,
and Gods curse blasts where ever it comes, Deuteronomy. 28.15, 16. If thou will not
harken to the voice of the Lord, all these curses shall come upon thee. Cursed
shall thou be in the City, and cursed shall thou be in the field, cursed shall
be thy basket and thy store. The curse of God haunts the sinner where ever he
goes; if he be in the City, it spoils his Trade, if he be in the Country, it
destroys his Crop; Gods curse drops poison into every thing. It is a Moth in
the Wardrobe, Murrain among the Cattle, Rot among the Sheep. If the flying Roll
of curses enters into a man's house, it consumes the timber and walls of it,
Zach. 5.4. Maledictio egrediens, est (...) supplicium, quod ante in coelo and
arca Dei quasi absconditum latuerat. Lap.
When Christ cursed the figtree, it presently withered, Mat. 21.19. Men's curses
are insignificant, they shoot without bullets, but Numb. 22.6. He whom thou
cursest, is cursed. Gods curse kills, Psalm. 37.22. They that are cursed of him,
shall be cut off. If all Gods curses are levelled against the sinner, then he
must needs be brought low.

Use 1. Informat. 1. Branch: See then from hence, that Gods punishing either a
person or a Nation is not without a cause. A Father may chastise his Son out of
an humor, when there is no cause, but God does never punish without a just
cause. He does it not purely to show his Sovereignty, or because he takes
pleasure to bring his creature low, Lam. 3.33. He does not willingly afflict;
or as it is in the Hebrew, from the heart, (...)
but there is some impellent cause, They were brought low for their iniquity.
Cyprian writes thus, concerning the Persecution of the Church under the
Emperor Valerian, We must confess that this sad calamity, which has in a
great part wasted our Churches, has risen from our own intestine wickedness,
whilst we are full of avarice, ambition, emulation, etc. Ergo sivit hoc
flagellum Deus, etc.
Jer. 4.17. As keepers of a field, are they against her round about. Like as
Horses or Deer in a field, are so enclosed with hedges, and so narrowly
watched, that they cannot get out. So Jerusalem was so besieged with enemies,
and watched, that there was no escape for her, without danger of life. Verse
18. Thy way and thy doings have procured these things unto thee, this is thy
wickedness. As we use to say to Children when they are sick, this is your green
fruit ye have eat, or your going in the Snow: So says God, This is thy
wickedness. Jer. 30.15. Why cryest thou for thy affliction, because thy sins
were increased, I have done these things unto thee. The Sword that wounds thee,
is of thy own whetting; the cords that pinch thee are of thy own twisting;
thank thy sin for all. 1 Cor. 11.30. For this cause many are sick, and weak,
and many fall asleep. The Church of Corinth was punished with corporal death,
because of coming unworthily to the Lords Table, and profaning the body and
blood of the Lord. Neque divinat Paulus ide^ ipsos plecti, sed asserit rem sibi
compertam, dicit igitur multos decumbere aegrotos, etc. ob illum coenae abusum.
Calvin.
The abuse of holy things incenseth God. Nadab and Abihu found the flames of
wrath hot about the Altar. Levit. 10.1, 2.
So that still there is a propter hoc, a cause why God brings any person low.
There is no reason why God should love us, but there is a great deal of reason
why God should punish us. They were brought low for their iniquity.

2. See from hence, 2. Branch
what a mischievous thing sin is, it brings a person, and a Nation low.
Ascensus peccati, descensus poenae.
Hos. 14.1. Thou have fallen by thy iniquity. Sin lays men low in the Grave,
and in Hell too without repentance* Sin is the Achan that troubles. Flagitium
and flagellum sunt tanquam acus and filum.
It is the Gall in our Cup, and the Gravel in our Bread. Prove. 20.17.
Sin and punishment are linked together with Adamantine Chains. Sin is the
Phaeton that sets the world on fire. It is a Coal that not only blacks but
burns. Sin runs men into the briars, Job 30.7. Among the bushes they brayed.
Sin conjures up all the winds; (...). Chrysostom.
all the crosses which befall us, all the storms in conscience, sin raises
them. Never let any one think to rise by sin, for the Text says, it brings him
low. Sin first tempts and then damns. It Is first a Fox, and then a Lion. Sin
does to a man, as Iael to Sisera, she gave him Milk, but then she brought him
low, Judge. 5.26, 27. She put her hand to the Nail, and with the Hammer she
smote Sisera, she smote off his head, when she had pierced and stricken through
his Temples, at her feet he bowed, etc. Sin first brings its pleasures with
delight, and charms the senses, and then comes with its Nail and Hammer. Sin
does to the sinner, as Absalom to Amnon, when his heart was merry with wine,
then he killed him, 2 Samuel 13.28. Sins last act is always Tragical.

How evil a thing is sin, that not only brings a people low, but it makes God
delight in bringing them low, Ezekiel. 5.13. I will cause my fury to rest upon
them, and I will be comforted. God does not use to take delight in punishing,
Judge. 10.16. His soul was grieved for the misery of Israel. Like a Father that
with tears chastises his Child; but God was so provoked with the Jews, that it
seemed a delight to him to afflict; I will cause my fury to rest upon them, and
I will be comforted. -- Minuit vindicta dolorem.
O what a venomous accursed thing is sin, that makes a merciful God take
comfort in the destruction of his own creature.

3. Branch
3. See then what little cause any have to wonder that they are brought low. As
the Apostle says, 1 Pet. 4.12. Think it not strange (...).
concerning the fiery trial. So, think it not strange, if you be as full of
Eclipses and Changes as the Moon. Mutat luna vices.
Wonder not, if you are under the black rod. A sick man may as well wonder that
he is in pain, as a sinful man wonder that he is afflicted; do not Vapors
cause Thunder? Is it a wonder after the hellish vapors of our sins have been
sent up, to hear Gods thundering voice? Sin is a debt, it is set out in
Scripture by a debt of ten thousand talents, Mat. 18.24. Is it a wonder for a
man that is in debt, to be arrested? Never wonder God does arrest thee with his
judgments, when thou art so deeply in arrears. Sin is a walking Antipodes to
God, and if men walk contrary to God, is it a wonder God walks contrary to
them? Levit. 26.17. If ye will walk contrary to me, then I will also walk
contrary to you, and I even I will chastise you seven times more for your sins.
O sinner, do not wonder it is so bad with thee, but rather wonder it is no
worse. Art thou in the deep of affliction, it is a wonder thou art not in the
deep of Hell. If Jesus Christ was brought low, is it a wonder that thou art
brought low? Christ was brought low Nullificamen populi; Tertul. de resur.
Phil. 2.7. (...); se ipsum exinanivit, gloriam non Minuendo sed supprimendo.
Calvin.
in poverty. The Manger was his Cradle, the Cobwebs were his Curtains. He was
brought low in temptation, Mat. 4.1. He was led into the Wilderness to be
tempted of the Devil. No sooner was Christ out of the water of Baptism, but he
was in the fire of temptation. Only his Godhead was too strong a bulwark for
Satan's fiery darts to enter. He was brought low in his agonies; he swet blood
in the Garden, he shed blood on the Cross. If Christ was brought low who knew
no sin, do thou wonder thou art brought low, who art so full of sin? Lam.
3.39. Why does a living man complain, a man for the punishment of his sin? What
a sinner, and wonder or murmur that thou art afflicted? Sin does as naturally
draw punishment to it, as the Loadstone draws the Iron.

4. Branch.
4. See the Text fulfilled this day in our eyes; sin has brought our Nation
low. We are Cadent, if not Morient; we do not want for sin; there is a Spirit
of wickedness in the Land. Ours are mighty sins, Amos 5.12. bloody sins, Hos.
4.2. The sins of Denmark, Spain, France, Italy, are translated into English; we
have many Sodoms among us, and may fear to have the line of confusion stretched
over us. By our impieties and blasphemies, we have sounded a Trumpet of
Rebellion against Heaven. Were our sins engraven upon our foreheads, we should
be ashamed to look up. Men invent new sins, Romans 1.30. Inventers of evil
things. (...).
Some invent new errors, others invent new snares: this Age exceeds former Ages
in sinning. As it is with Trades, there may be old Trades, but there are some
Tradesmen now, who are grown more dexterous and cunning in their Trade, than
they were in former times: So it is with sin, sin is an old Trade, but there
are persons now alive, who are more skilled in the Trade, and are grown more
expert in sin, than those who are dead and gone. Sinners in former times, were
but bunglers at sin, to what they are now. They are cunning at self-damnation,
Jer. 4.22. Wise to do evil. The Devils Mint is going every day, and sin is
minted faster than money. People sin (...)* with greediness, Ephesians. 4.19. They
drink iniquity like water, Job 15.16. They are grown Rampant in wickedness,
having laid aside the vail of modesty, Zeph. 3.5. The unjust knows no shame. We
read Nebuchadnezzar had the heart of a beast given him, Dan. 4.16. If all who
have the hearts of beasts, should have the faces of beasts, men would grow very
scarce.

And if sin be so high, well may it bring us low. While the body is in an
Hectic Feavor, it cannot thrive. The Body Politic being in this Paroxysme or
burning Feavor of sin, must needs waste. Has not sin brought us low? What
Wars, Pestilences, Fires have broken forth among us? The Splendor and
Magnificence of the City was brought low, and laid in the ashes.

Sin has brought us low in our Repute, Prove. 14.34. Sin is a reproach to any
people. Time was when God made the sheaves of other Nations do obeisance to our
sheaf. Genesis 37.7.
But our pristine fame and renown is eclipsed, Mal. 2.2. I have made you base
and contemptible. Trading is brought low; many men's estates are boiled to
nothing; their gourd is withered, their cruse of Oil fails, Ruth 1.21. I went
out full, but the Lord has brought me home empty. Sin has brought other
Nations low, and do we think to escape better than they? Salvian observes, that
in Africa, when the Church of God had degenerated from its purity, the Land
abounded in Vice, and was sick of a Pleurisy of sin, then the Vandals entered
Africa, and the enemies Sword let them blood. Number. 32.23. Be sure your sin
will find you out: as a Blood-hound it will pursue you.

It may be enquired, what are those sins, Quest.
that have brought this City, and Nation so low?

Resp. 1.
1. The first sin that has brought us low, is Pride, Prove. 29.23. A man's pride
shall bring him low. Pride is ex Traduce, it runs in a blood. Our first Parents
aspired after a Deity; they did not content themselves to know God, but they
would be knowing as God. St. Austin calls pride, the mother of all sin. The
Persian Kings would have their Image worshipped of all that came into Babylon.
Brissonius.
Sapor, writes himself Brother to the Sun and Moon, and Partner with the Stars.
Caligula the Emperor commanded himself to be adored as a God; he caused a
Temple to be erected for him, he used to have the most costly Fowls sacrificed
to him: Sometimes he would sit with a golden Beard, and a Thunderbolt in his
hand like Jupiter; and sometimes with a Trident like Neptune. Some persons
would be more deserving, if (as Solon says) we could pluck the Worm of Pride
out of their head. Pride discolours our Virtues, envenomes our mercies. The
higher we lift up our selves in pride, the lower God casts us down. Prove.
15.25. The Lord will destroy the house of the proud. There is,

1. A Spiritual Pride; which is threefold.

1. Some take a pride in their parts. The Lord enricheth them with Wit and
Parts suitable to the places he calls them too, and Pride fumes from their
heart into their head, and makes them giddy. Herod was proud of the Oration he
made, and assumed that glory to himself, which he should have given to God,
Laudatas ostendit avis Iunonia pennas --
and his pride brought him low; he was eaten of worms, Acts 12.23.

2. Some take a pride in their duties. This Worm breeds in sweet fruit. Etiam
in bonis cavenda est superbia. Aug.
They have said so many prayers, heard so many Sermons; Luke 18.12. I fast
twice a week, Gratias Deo agit, sed sibi gratulatur. Brugensis.
and now they think they have made God amends, he is beholding to them, and
they shall be accepted for their Religious performances. What is this but
pride? Is not this to make a Christ of our duties? The Devil destroys some by
making them neglect duty, and others by making them idolize duty. Better is
that infirmity which humbles me, than that duty which makes me proud.

3. Some take a pride in their Graces. This seems strange, that seeing Grace is
given to humble, any should be proud of his Grace. But Pride is not from the
Grace in us, but the corruption; not from the strength of holiness, but the
weakness. Christians may be said to be proud of their Grace,

1. When they lay too much stress upon their Grace; Thus Peter, Mat. 26.33.
Though all men shall be offended because of thee, yet will not I. Here was a
double pride. First, That he thought he had more Grace, than the rest of the
Apostles. Secondly, In that he did lay such weight upon his Grace, making it
like the Tower of David, on which did hang the shield of his hope. Cant. 4.4.
He leaned more upon his Grace, than upon Christ.

2. Men are proud of their Grace, when they slight others which they think are
inferior to them in Grace. Instead of the strong bearing the infirmities of
the weak, Romans 15.1. They are ready to despise the weak. Our Savior saw this
pride breeding in his own Disciples, therefore cautions them against it, Mat.
18.10. Take heed, that ye despise not one of these little ones.

2. There is a carnal pride. I call it carnal, because it is conversant about
carnal objects. As,

1. Some are proud of their bodies. Pride is seen in long and tedious
dressings: people spend that time between the Comb and the Glass, which should
be spent in prayer and holy meditation.

Pride is seen in painting of their faces, overlaying Gods work, with the
Devils colors Qui formam quam Plasmator finxit, fuco and stibio in aliam
transfigurare contendit, nonne Deo dicere videtur, cur me fecisti sic? Aug.
Sermon. 247.
Opus Dei est omne quod nascitur, Diaboli omne quod mutatur. Cyprian.
.

-- Gratior est pulchro veniens e corpore virtus -- Pride is seen in spotting
themselves. Pimples in the face, show that the blood is corrupt; spots in the
face, show that the heart is corrupt. Cyprian says, they who paint and spot
their faces may justly fear that at the resurrection their Creator will not
know them. Non metuis ne cum resurrectionis Dies venerit, artifex tuus te non
recogn^scat? Non metuis ne judex dicat, imago haec non est nostra, cum te flavo
medicamine, and pigmento polluisti, formam quam dederam tibi, mendacio
deformasti? Deum videre non poteris, quoniam oculi tibi non sunt quos Deus
fecit, sed quos Diabolus infecit. Cyprian.
And how terrible is that word, I know you not.

Pride is seen in the strange antic fashions wherewith some people do dress,
or rather disguise themselves. Quanto ornatius corpus foris excolitur, tanto
interius anima foedatur. Bern. in Apolog. ad Guliel. Abb.
They cloth their flesh like the Rainbow with diverse colors. Adam was
ashamed of his nakedness, these may be ashamed of their clothing. They are so
plumed and gawdily attired that they tempt the Devil to fall in love with them.

2. Some are proud of their estates. Riches are fuel for pride Divitiarum comes
est superbia.
Ezekiel. 28.5. Thy heart is lifted up because of thy riches. Men's hearts rise
with their estates, as the Boats on the Thames rise higher with the Tide. Now
all this pride will bring a person low. For this sin God strikes many with
Frenzy, and so levels the Mountain of pride. God has stained the pride of
Englands glory, Isa. 23.9. He has stripped us of our Jewels, Prove. 16.8. Pride
goes before destruction. Where pride leads the Van, destruction brings up the
Rear.

-- Tolluntur in altum, ut lapsu graviore ruant -- 2. Another sin which has
brought us low, is Sabbath-prophanation. The Sabbath is given as a distinctive
Sign between the people of God, and the profane. Exodus 31.17. And among the
Primitive Saints, when the question was asked, Have thou kept the Lords Day?
Servasti dominicum?
the answer was, I am a Christian, and dare not omit the celebration of this
day. The Lord has commanded the observation of the Sabbath under a sub poena.
He has enclosed this day for himself: He has set an hedge about it. Remember
to keep holy the Sabbath Day. But how is this enclosure made common? This
blessed day which is made purposely for communion with God, is become a day of
perambulation. People frequent the Fields or Taverns, more than the holy
assemblies. O that our head were waters, and our eyes a fountain of tears! That
we might weep, Ier. 9.1.
To see men pollute what God himself has consecrated. If they are to take
Physic, it must be on the Lords Day; if they are to make Feasts or Visits, it
must be on this day. And so in a profane sense, they call the Sabbath a
delight. Isa. 58.13.
Sabbath-breaking is Sacrilege; it is a robbing God of his due. Iustitia suum
cuique tribuit.
People take that time which should be dedicated wholly to the Lord, and spend
it in the service of the Devil and their lusts: and has not this sin brought
us low? God threatens Jer. 17.27. If ye will not hearken to me, to hallow the
Sabbath Day, then will I kindle a fire. I observe, the devouring Fire which
brake out in London, began on the Sabbath Day; as if God would tell us from
Heaven, he was now punishing us, for our profaning his day.

3. The third sin which has brought us low, is neglect of Family Worship.
(...). Theodor.
Religion in men's families, is brought low. No reading of Scripture; they look
oftener upon a pair of Cards, than a Bible. No praying; Ier. 10.25.
it is made the note of a reprobate, He calls not upon God, Psalm 14.4. The
Atheist will be sure his prayer shall not be turned into sin, for he never
prays at all. Homini natura insevit, ut sacrificet. Averr. Arist.
The Graecians asked counsel of their feigned Gods by their Oracles, Proclus ex
Platonis, Porphyrii, Plotini caeterorumque ejus notae scriptis, hoc eloquium
profert, (...), and Dei invocationem, homini convenire, ut proprium apud
Aristotelem quarto modo, and qui ea careat hominem esse aut dici non posse.
the Persians by their Magi, the Galls by their Druides, the Romans by their
Augures: Shall Ethnicks pray, and not Christians? Creatures by the instinct of
nature cry to God, Psalm. 147.9. The young Ravens which cry. Prayer has no
enemies, unless infernal spirits, and such as are near of Kin to them.

Keys that are often used are bright, but if they be laid aside and never
used, they grow rusty: so it is with men's hearts, if they are not used to
family prayer, they will be rusted over with sin.

For this God has brought us low. Why did he pull down many houses in this
City, but because they were unhallowed houses, there was no prayer in them.

How do we think to have a blessing from God, if we never ask it? Then God
should do more for us, than he did for his own Son. Heb. 5.7. In the days of
his flesh, he offered up prayers, with strong cries and tears.

4. Another sin which has brought us low, is Covenant-violation. Psalm. 78.10.
They kept not the Covenant of God. Ver. 50. He made a way to his anger, he
spared not their souls from death. The Carthaginians were noted for
Covenant Breaking. Plaut.
O that this sin had dyed with them. Does not this poisonful Weed grow in our
soil? Did not we make a vow in Baptism, to fight under Christ's banner, against
world, flesh and Devil? Did not we solemnly covenant to be the Lords people, to
shine in sanctity, going each one before another in an exemplary Reformation?
Deuteronomy. 5.28, 29. They have well said, in all that they have spoken, O that there
were such an heart in them, that they would fear me and keep my commandments!
We have much conforming, but where is reforming? Is not Jesus Christ opposed in
his Kingly Office? This is the great Controversy, who shall reign, Sin or
Christ? for this God has been as a Moth to us, and we may fear lest he make
good that commination, Levit. 26.25. I will bring a Sword that shall avenge the
quarrel of my Covenant.

5. Another sin which has brought us low, is the abuse of the Gospel. We are
sick of Isreal's disease: they despised Manna, Number. 21.5. Our soul loatheth this
light bread. We did nauseate the bread of life. The Gospel is the visible token
of Gods presence, it is the sacred Conduit-pipe, that empties the golden Oil
of mercy into us, it is the Glass in which we see the face of Christ, it is the
Celestial banquet wherewith God does cheer and refocillate the souls of his
people. Isa. 25.6.
But was there not a Gospel surfeit in England? People had itching ears, and
knew not who to hear, and has not our curiosity brought us to scarcity? God
had no better way to raise the price of the Gospel, than by abating the plenty.
Acriora orexim excitant embammata.
God surely did bring us low, when darkness did overspread our Horison, and the
Lord suffered so many hundred Lights to be at one time put under a bushel. The
Egyptian Priests of old, told the people when any Eclipse happened, that the
Gods were angry, and great miseries would follow. Quint. Curt. l. 4.
What sad catastrophies have ensued this spiritual Eclipse, is not unknown.

6. Another sin which has brought us low, is Covetousness. Pruritus avaritiae
est scabies animae.
When men's Spirits are low, and with the Serpent they lick the dust, then God
lays them in the dust, Isa. 57.17. For the iniquity of his Covetousness, I was
wroth and smote him. Covetousness is the Dropsy of the soul; men are set upon
the world, when God is plucking it from them. Covetousness is a Key that opens
the door to further wickedness. -- opes irritamenta malorum -- 1 Timothy 6.10. The
love of money, is the root of all evil. (...) omnium vitiorum Metropolin,
prisci vocarunt.
A covetous man will stick at no sin. This made Absalom attempt to dethrone his
Father; this made Ahab stone Naboth. Cui nihil satis, eidem nihil turpe.
Tacitus.


And what is one the better for all his wealth at death? 1 Timothy 6.10. We
brought nothing into the world, and it is certain we can carry nothing out.
When the rich Miser dies, what scrambling is there? his friends are scrambling
for his goods, the worms are scrambling for his body, and the Devils are
scrambling for his soul.

This sin is most uncomely in those that profess better. They pretend to live
by faith, and yet are as worldly and griping as others. These are spots in the
face of Religion, Jer. 45.5. Seek thou great things for thy self? For this
sin God has brought us low, he has made our Fig Tree to wither, and suffered
the Palmer-worm to eat our Vine.

7. Another sin which has brought us low, is Barrenness under the Means of
Grace, Hos. 10.1. Israel is an empty Vine; his juice runs out only into leaves.
(...) Evacuans; quia scil. succum in frondes effundit, ut nil supersit, quod in
Was transferat. Corn. lap.
We have had much pruning and dressing, the silver drops of Heaven have fallen
upon us, but we have not brought forth the fruits of humility and repentance;
we can discourse of Religion, but this is only to bring forth leaves, not
fruit: non-proficiency has laid us low, and we may fear will lay us waste; God
may pull up the hedge, and let in a foreign Wild-Boar.

Ursin tells us, that those who fled out of England in Queen Mary's days,
acknowledged that that calamity befell them for their great unprofitableness
under the Means of Grace in King Edwards days. What man will sow seed in
barren ground? If the Lord lays out his cost, and sees no good return, the
next word will be, Cut down the tree, why cumbreth it the ground?

8. Another sin that has brought us low, is the sin of swearing. Christ says,
Swear not at all, Mat. 5.34. And a godly man is said to fear an Oath, Eccles.
9.2. Truly it is a matter of tears, we can hardly go in the Streets, but our
ears are crucified with hearing of Oaths and Cursings. (...). Philo.
Chrysostom spent most of his Sermons at Antioch against swearers; we need many
Chrysostoms now adays, to preach against this sin. This may well be called the
unfruitful work of darkness, Ephesians. 5.11.
for it is a sin has neither pleasure nor profit in it. How do men shoot their
Oaths, as chain-bullets against Heaven? I knew a great swearer (says Reverend
Mr. Bolton) whose heart Satan so filled, that on his deathbed, he swore as
fast as he could, and desired the standers by to help him with Oaths, and to
swear for him. Will the Lord reckon with men for idle Words, what will he do
for sinful Oaths? for every Oath a man swears, God puts a drop of wrath in his
Vial. Nay, usually Gods judgments overtake the swearer in this life. I have
read of a German Boy who was given to swearing, Germ. Hist.
and did use to invent new Oaths, the Lord sent a Canker into his mouth which
did eat out his tongue. In quo quis peccat, in eodem plectitur.


But says one, it is my custom to swear, and I cannot leave it.

Is this a good plea? As if a Thief should plead to a Judge not to condemn him,
because it is his custom to rob and steal; therefore will the Judge say, thou
shall the rather dye. This sin has brought us low, Jer. 23.10. For because of
swearing the Land mourns.

9. Another sin which has brought us low, and is like to bring us yet lower,
is uncleanness. The adulterers heart is a Mount Aetna burning with lust.
Adultery is the shipwreck of chastity, the murder of conscience. It was said of
Rome of old, it was become a Stews, -- Urbs est jam tota Lupanar -- I wish it
might not be verified of many parts of this Land.

Adultery is a brutish sin, Jer. 5.8. They neighed every one after his
neighbors Wife. (...). Isocr.
It is a branded sin; it does not only stigmatize men's names, Prove. 6.33. But
God makes them carry the marks of this sin in their Bodies: it is a costly sin;
it proves a Purgatory to the Purse, Prove. 6.26. By means of a whorish woman, a
man is brought to a piece of bread. There is no coming to an Harlot, but as
Jupiter did to Danae in a golden shower. It is a confounding sin.

-- laeta venire Venus, tristis abire solet -- The adulterer hastens his own
death. In Hispaniola insula arbor est, cujus fructus Pyris muscatis persimilis,
jucundo odore, esui gratissimus, verum pestiferi succi; nam Indi illo sagittas
oblinunt veluti veneno. Causs.
The Romans were wont to have their Funerals at the Gate of Venus Temple: to
signify that lust ends in death. The adulterer takes a short cut to Hell.
Prove. 26.23.27. Till a dart strike through his Liver. (i. e.) Donec se and
anima and corpore perdiderit. Cartwr.


Creatures void of reason, will rise up in judgment against such. The
Turtle-Dove is an Hieroglyphick of chastity. The Stork comes into no Nest but
his own, and if any Stork leaves his Mate, and joins with another, all the rest
fall upon him, and pluck his feathers from him. God will chiefly (...)
punish such as walk in the lust of uncleanness. 2 Pet. 2.10. This sin has
brought us low. The fire of lust has kindled the fire of Gods anger.

10. Another sin which has brought us low, is our unbrotherly animosities,
Mat. 12.25. A Kingdom divided against it self cannot stand. Salva autem esse
societas nisi amore and custodia partium non potest. Senec. lib. 2. de ira. c.
31.
The Turks pray that the Christians may be kept at variance; we have in a great
measure fulfilled the Turks prayer. -- rara est concordia fratrum -- What seeds
of dissension are sown among us, how are we crumbled into Parties! one is for
Paul, and another for Apollo, but I fear few for Christ. Our divisions have
given much advantage to the Popish adversary. When there is a breach made in
the wall of a Castle, there the enemy enters. If the Popish enemy enter, it
will be at our breaches. These divisions have cut the lock where our strength
lay. Omne divisibile est corruptibile.
Cut off the top of the Beech-tree, and the whole body of the tree withers.
Divisions have taken away unity and amity, here is the top of the Beech-tree
cut off, and this has made us to wither apace. Dei maledictio Graeciae totique
orienti incubuit per jugum turcicum: Angliae per discordiam. Corn. lap.
These are the sins which have brought us low, and if the Lord prevent not; are
like to bring Englands gray hairs with sorrow to the grave.

5. Branch
5. Hence I infer, if sin brings a person low, then what madness is it for any
one to be in love with sin? 2 Thessalonians. 2.12. Who take pleasure in iniquity. The
Devil can so cook and dress sin, that it pleases the sinners pallat. (...).
Basil.
But hear what Job says, Job 20.12.14. Though wickedness be sweet in his
mouth, it is the gall of Asps within him. Nocet empta dolor voluptas.
Herodotus writes of the River Hypanis, that near to the fountain, the water
is sweet, but a few leagues off it is exceeding bitter. Sin will bring one low,
who would love such an enemy? The forbidden fruit is sawced with bitter herbs.
Sin is a Serpent by the way that biteth. Genesis 49.17. When you are about to
commit sin, say to your soul, as Boaz said to his Kinsman, Ruth. 4.4. What day
thou buyest the Field, thou must have Ruth with it. So if thou will have the
sweet of sin, thou must have the curse with it, Non est tantum ab hostibus
armatis periculi, quantum a circumfusis undique voluptatibus. Live. lib. 10.
decad. 3.
it will bring thee low. To love sin, is to love a disease. A sinner is
perfectly distracted. Solomon speaks of a generation of men, Madness is in
their heart while they live, Eccles. 9.3. It Is true of those who love sin, sin
puts a worm into conscience, a thorn into death, yet that men should love sin,
Madness is in their heart. There is no creature does willingly destroy it self
but man. Sin is a Silken Halter, yet he loves it. O remember that saying of St.
Austin, the pleasure of sin is soon gone, but the sting remains. Momentaneum
est quod delectat, aeternum quod cruciat.


6. See what little cause we have to envy sinners, Prove. 3.31. 6. Brancb
Envy thou not the Oppressor. Men are high in worldly Grandeur, God has given
them large estates, and they sin with their estates, but though they build
among the Stars, God will bring them down, Ezekiel. 28.18. I will bring thee to
ashes. Who would envy men* their greatness, their sins will bring them low.
Deuteronomy. 32.35. Their foot shall slide in due time. There is a Story of a Roman,
who was by a Court-Marshal condemned to dye, for breaking his rank to steal a
bunch of Grapes; and as he was going to execution, some of the Soldiers envied
him that he had Grapes, and they had none; says he, Do ye envy me my Grapes? I
must pay dear for them. So the wicked must pay dear for what they have.

The prosperity of the wicked, is a great temptation to the godly; David
stumbled at it, and had like to have fallen, Psalm. 73.2. My steps had well nigh
slipped, for I was envious at the foolish, etc. We are ready to murmur when we
see our selves low, and envy when we see the wicked high. Invidus alterius
rebus macrescit opimis -- Horat. Ep. 1.
Sinners live in a serene Climate, under a perpetual calm, Psalm. 73.5. They are
not in trouble as other men, their eyes stand out with fatness. Ferunt in
Italia quaedam pascua tam esse pinguia, ut nisi pecudes interdum abigantur,
saturitate suffocentur. Reyn. Orat.

Segetem nimia sternit ubertas. Seneca.


It is said of Polycrates King of Egypt, that he never met with any cross in
his life. And Alexander hearing that Parmenio his General had won the Victory,
and his young Son Alexander was born the same day, prayed the Gods to spice his
joy with some bitterness, lest he should surfeit of too much joy. But this
prosperous state of the wicked is matter rather of pity, than envy, their sins
will bring them low, Isa. 14.12. How art thou fallen from Heaven O Lucifer, Son
of the Morning. Tanquam a Tarpeia rupe prolapsus es.
It Is spoken of the Chaldean Monarch, who though high had a sudden change
befell him, Isa. 97.1. Come down and sit in the dust. Babylon was the Lady of
Kingdoms, but says God, Sit in the dust. Go in Pistrinum into the Mill-house,
Ver. 2. Take the Millstones and grind. So will God say to the wicked, come
down from all your pomp and glory, sit in the dust, nay, sit among the damned,
and there grind at Mill. The Lord will proportion torment, to all the pleasure
the wicked have had, Revel. 18.7. How much she has lived deliciously, so much
torment and sorrow give her.

7. See the great difference between sin and Grace, 7. Branch
sin brings a man low, but Grace lifts him high. Sin tumbles him in the ditch,
but Grace sets him upon the Throne, Psalm. 91.14. I will set him on high,
because he has known my name. Grace raises a person four ways.

1. Grace raises his Projects, his designs are high. He looks not at things
which are seen, 2 Cor. 4.18. His eye is above the Stars, Instar est peregrinae
illius avis, quam vocant avem Dei, reperitur in novis insulis, pascitur rore
coeli, nunquam attingit terram, pedibus prorsus caret. Aldrovand. Ormitholog.
lib. 12. cap. 21.
he aims at the enjoying of God. A clownish Rustic when he goes to the Court,
is much taken with the gay Pictures and Hangings, but a Privy Counselor
passes by those things as scarce worthy of his notice, his business is with
the King. So a carnal mind, is much taken with the things of the world, but a
Saint passes by these gay things with an holy contempt, his business is with
God, 1 John 1.3. Our Communion is with the Father and his Son Jesus. A
Christian of the right breed does (...), aspire after the things within the
Veyl, his ambition is the favor of God, he looks no lower than a Crown; he is
in the altitudes, and trades among the Angels.

2. Grace raises a man's Repute. It embalms his name. 1 Samuel 18.30. David's name
was much set by; or as the Original carries it, it was precious. (...)
Heb. 11.2. By faith the Elders obtained a good report. How renowned were the
godly Patriarks for their sanctity! Moses for his self-denial, Job for his
patience, Phineas for his zeal. What a fresh perfume do their names send forth
to this day. A good name is a Saints Heir, it lives when he is dead.

3. Grace raises a man's worth, Prove. 12.26. The Apud mortales pietas a tergo
rejicitur, nec veluti in lanceam venit; excellentior veruntamen est justus
quovis injusta nobilitate generis, ut qui Deum habet patrem; divitiis, ut qui
haeres fit coeli; sapientia, ut qui sacrosanctam accepit unctionem; victu, ut
qui pascitur coelesti manna; vestitu, ut qui Christi justitia induitur; cum
injustus ne viri quidem nomen meretur. Cartwr.
righteous is more excellent than his neighbor. As the Flower of the Roses in
Spring, as the fat of the Peace Offering, as the precious stones upon Aarons
Breast Plate, so is a Saint in Gods eye. Besides the shining luster of the
Gold, it has an internal worth, and is of great price and value: So Grace does
not only make a man's name shine, but it puts a real worth into him, he is more
excellent than his neighbor. An Heart full of love to God is precious. It is
Gods Hephzibah, or delight, Isa. 62.4.
it is the apple of his eye, it is his jewel, it is his Garden of Spices, it
is his lesser Heaven where he dwells, Isa. 57.17. I dwell with him that is of
an humble spirit.

4. Grace raises a man's privilege; it advances him into the heavenly
kindred. By it he is born of God, 1 John 3.1. He is a Prince in all Lands,
Psalm. 45.16. (though in this world like a Prince in disguise). He is higher
than the Kings of the earth, Psalm. 89.27. Allied to Angels. In short, Grace
lifts a man up where Christ is, far above all Heavens. Ephesians. 4.10.


And Grace raises a Nation as well as a Person, Prove. 14.34. Righteousness
exalts a Nation.

8. If sin brings one low, see what an imprudent choice they make, 8. Branch
who commit sin to avoid trouble. Job 36.21. Take heed, regard not iniquity,
for this have thou chosen rather than affliction. This was a false charge
against Job, but many may be indighted of such folly; they choose iniquity,
rather than affliction. To avoid poverty, they will lie and cousen, to avoid a
Prison, they will comply against their conscience. What imprudence is this,
when sin draws such dark shadows after it, and entails misery upon all its
heirs and successors. By committing sin, to avoid trouble, we meet with greater
trouble. Origin to save himself from suffering, sprinkled Incense before the
Idol, and being after to preach, as he opened his Bible, he did accidentally
light on that Text, Psalm. 50.16. But to the wicked God says, what have thou to
do to declare my Statutes, or that thou should take my Covenant in thy mouth;
at the sight of which Scripture, he fell into a passion of weeping, and was so
stricken with grief and consternation, that he was not able to speak a word to
the people, but came down the Pulpit. Spira sinned against his conscience to
save his life and estate, he chose iniquity rather than affliction; but what an
Hell did he feel in his conscience, he professed he envyed Cain, and Judas, as
thinking their condition more eligible. His sin did bring him low. O what
unparalled folly is it to choose sin rather than affliction. (...), etc.
Origin.
Affliction is like a rent in the Coat, sin is like a rent in the flesh. He
that to save himself from trouble, commits sin, is like one, that to save his
Mantle, lets his flesh be torn. Affliction has a promise made to it, 2 Samuel
22.28. but there is no promise made to sin. Prove. 10.29.


Sure then they do ill consult for themselves, who choose rather sin than
suffering; who to avoid a lesser evil, choose a greater; to avoid the stinging
of a Gnat, run into the Paw of a Lion.

9. If God brings his own people 9. Branch
low for sin ( Israel were brought low) then how low will he bring the wicked?
David was in the deep waters, and Jonah went down to the bottom of the
Mountains, Cap. 2.6. and Jeremy was in the deep dungeon, then what a gulf of
misery shall swallow up the reprobate part of the world? Gods people do not
allow themselves in sin, Romans 7.15. They tremble at it, they hate it, yet they
suffer; if they that blush at their failings are brought low, what will become
of them that boast of their scandals? If this be done to the green tree, what
shall be done to the dry? If the godly lie among the pots, Psalm. 68.13. the
wicked shall lie among the Devils. If judgment begin at the house of God, what
shall the end be of them that obey not the Gospel? 1 Pet. 4.17. If God mingles
his peoples cup with wormwood, he will mingle the sinners cup with fire and
brimstone, Psalm 11.6. If God thresh the Wheat, he will burn the Chaff. If the
Lord afflicts them whom he loves, how severe will he be against them whom he
hates? They shall feel the second death, Rev. 21.8. Horreo Vermem Mordacem and
mortem vivacem. Bernard.


Use 2. Exhortation, 1. Branch. 1. If sin brings a person low, 1. Branch
then let us fear to come near sin; it will bring us either into affliction or
worse. Its foul face may offend, but its breath kills. Sin is the Apollyon, the
Man-devourer. O that we were as wise for our souls, as we are for our bodies!
How afraid are we of that meat which we know will bring the Gowt or Stone, or
will make our Ague return. Sin is aguish meat which will put conscience into a
shaking fit, and shall we not be afraid to touch this forbidden fruit? Genesis
39.9. How can I do this great wickedness, and sin against God? When the Empress
Eudoxia threatened to banish Chrysostom, Tell her (says he) I fear nothing but
sin. It was a saying of Anselm, if Hell were on one side, and sin were on the
other, I would rather leap into Hell, than willingly commit sin. Incipiat
tremor, ubi incipit (...).
Love will be apt to grow wanton, if it be not poised with holy fear. No better
Curb or Antidote against sin, than fear, Deuteronomy. 17.13. They shall fear, and do
no more presumptuously. If we could see Hell fire in every sin, it would make
us fear to commit it. The fiercest creatures dread fire. When Moses his rod was
turned into a Serpent, he was afraid and fled from it: Sin will prove a
stinging Serpent, O fly from it. Most people are like the Leviathan, made
without fear, Job 41.33. They play upon the hole of the Asp. Sinners never fear
till they feel. Nothing will convince them, but fire and brimstone.

2. Branch
2. If sin brings a person low, then when we are brought low under Gods
afflicting hand, let us behave our selves wisely* and as becomes Christians. I
shall show,

1. What we must not do when we are brought low.

When our condition is low, let not our passions be high; impatience is not the
way to get out of trouble, but rather to go lower into trouble. What gets the
Child by struggling, but more blows? Vis ferulam igni tradat pater, intumeseit
vero tibi cor adhuc. Mornaeus.
Oh do not lispe out a murmuring word against God. Murmuring is the skum which
boils off from a discontented heart, Psalm 39.9. I was dumb, and opened not my
mouth, because thou Lord did it. Illorum est hic flagella percipere, quibus
datur de aeternitate gaudere. Bern. Ser. 10. de Coen. d.
David's ear was open to hear the voice of the Rod, but his mouth was not open
in complaining. Christian, who should thou complain of, but thy self? thy own
sin has brought thee low.

2. What we must do when we are brought low.

1. Let us search the sin which is the cause of our trouble, Job 10.2. Show me
wherefore thou contendest with me: Lord, What is that sin which has provoked
thee to bring me low? Lam. 3.40. Let us search and try our ways. As the people
of Israel, when they were worsted in battle, searched the cause, and at last
found out the Achan that troubled them, and stoned him to death. Josh. 7.18. So
let us search out that Achan which has troubled us. Perhaps our sin was
censoriousness, we have been ready to judge, and slander others; and now we our
selves lie under an evil tongue, and have false reports raised on us: perhaps
our sin was pride, and God has sent poverty as a thorn to humble us. Perhaps
our sin was remisness in holy duties, we had forgot our first love, and were
ready to fall into slumbering fits, Virtus sine exercitio, similis est
taciturnae lyrae. Claud.
and God has sent a sharp cross to awaken us out of our security. We may
oftentimes read our sin in our punishment. O let us search the Achan, and say
as Job, Chap. 34.32. If I have done iniquity, I will do so no more.

2. When we are brought low, let us justify God. God is just, not only when he
punishes the guilty, but when he afflicts the righteous. Let us take heed of
entertaining hard thoughts of God, as if he had dealt too severely with us, and
had put too much Wormwood in our Cup: No, let us vindicate God, and say as the
Emperor Mauritius, when he saw five of his Sons slain before his eyes, by
Phocas, Righteous art thou O Lord in all thy ways. Iustus es Domine, and
rectum judicium tuum.
Let us speak well of God. If we have never so much affliction, yet not one
drop of injustice, Psalm 97.2. Clouds and darkness are round about him,
righteousness and judgment are the habitation of his Throne.

3. When we are brought low in affliction, let us bring our selves low in
humiliation. (...). Chrysostom.
1 Pet. 5.6. Humble your selves under the mighty hand of God. When we are in
the Valley of Tears, we must be in the Valley of Humility. Lam. 3.19. Remembering
the Wormwood and the Gall, my soul has them continually in remembrance, and is
humbled in me. If our condition be low, then is a time to have our hearts lie
low.

4. When we are brought low in affliction, let us be low upon our knees in
prayer. Premuntur justi, ut pressi clament, etc.
Psalm 130.1. Ex Profundis Clamavi -- Out of the depths have I cried unto thee
O Lord. Psalm 79.8. Let thy tender mercies speedily prevent us, for we are
brought very low. Jacob never prayed so fervently, as when he was in fear of
his life; he oyled the Key of prayer with tears, Hos. 12.4. He wept and made
supplication. One reason why God lets us be brought low, is to highten a Spirit
of prayer.

But what should we pray for in affliction? Let us pray that all our Hell may
be here. As Pilate said concerning Christ, Luke 23.22. I will chastise him, and
let him go. So pray that God when he does chastise us, will let us go, that he
will free us from Hell and Damnation. Let us pray rather for the sanctification
of affliction, than the removal; pray that the Rod may be a Divine Pencil, to
draw Gods Image more lively upon our souls, Heb. 12.10. That affliction may be
a Furnace to refine, not consume us. Pray, that if God do correct us, it may
not be in anger, Psalm. 6.1. That we may taste the honey of his love at the end
of the rod. Let it be our prayer, that God will lay no more upon us, than he
will enable us to bear. 1 Cor. 10.13.
That if the burden be heavier, our shoulders may be stronger.

5. When we are brought low, let our faith be high. Let us believe that God
intends us no hurt. That though he casts us into the deep, he will not drown
us. Believe that still he is a Father; he afflicts us in as much mercy, as he
gives Christ to us. He does by his rod of Discipline fit us for the
inheritance, Col. 1.12. O let this Star of faith appear in the dark night of
affliction. Ionahs faith was never more in Heaven, than when he lay in the
belly of Hell, Jonah 2.4.

6. When we are brought low in affliction, let us labor to be bettered by
being brought low. Rosae suavius olent quibus umbelicus est asper.
Pick some good out of the cross; get some honey out of this Lion. The wicked
are worse for affliction. Weeds stamped in a Mortar are more unsavory. 2 Chronicles. 28.22. In the time of his distress did he trespass yet more against the
Lord. This is that King Ahaz.

But let us labor to be meliorated, and made better by affliction. Dolor hic
tibi proderit olim. Ovid.
Christ learned obedience by what he suffered, Heb. 5.8. If we are brought low
in affliction and get no good, then the affliction is lost.

When are we battered by afflictions? Quest.


When our eyes are more opened, Answ. 1.
Scholae crucis, scholae lucis.
and we are not only chastned, but taught. Psalm. 94.12. Wormwood is bitter to
the taste, but is good to clear the eyesight; then our spiritual eyesight is
cleared,

1. When we see more of Gods holiness. He is a jealous and sin-hating God; he
will not suffer evil in his own children to go unpunished, if they make light
of sin, he will make their chain heavy, Lam. 3.2.

2. When we have a clearer infight into our selves. We see more of our hearts
than we did before; we see that earthliness, impatience, Natura vexata prodit
seipsam.
distrust of God, which we did not discover before. We never thought we had
such a flux of corruption, or that there had been so much of the old man in the
new man. The fire of affliction makes that skum of sin boil up, which before
lay hid. When our eyesight is thus cleared, and both the rod and the lamp go
together, now we are bettered by affliction.

2. When our hearts are softened. Affliction is Gods furnace where he melts his
gold, Jer. 9.7. I will melt them and try them. When our eyes are more watery,
our thoughts more serious, our consciences more tender, when we can say as Job,
Chap. 23.16. God makes my heart soft. This melting of the heart whereby we are
fitted to receive the impression of the Holy Ghost, is a blessed sign we are
bettered by affliction.

3. When our wills are subdued. Sinite virgam corrigentem, ne sentiatis malleum
conterentem. Bernard.
Mic. 7.9. I will bear the indignation of the Lord, because I have sinned
against him. Why does God bring us low, but to tame our cursed hearts? A wicked
man is (...), when he is brought low he quarrels with God: therefore is
compared to a wild Bull in a net, Isa. 51.20. If you go to rub a piece of Stuff
which is rotten, it frets and tears: So when God rubs a wicked man by
affliction, he frets and tears himself with vexation, Isa. 8.21. They shall
fret themselves, and curse their King and their God.

But when our spirits are calmed, and we are wrought to a sweet submission to
Gods will; we accept of the punishment, Levit. 26.41. and do in patience
possess our souls, Luke 21.19. When we say as Eli, 1 Samuel 3.18. It is the Lord,
let him do what seems him good. I know this trial is in mercy; God will
rather afflict me, than lose me, let him hedge me with thorns, if he will plant
me with flowers; Adversa reddunt hominem mansuetum. Chemnitius.
Let him do what seems him good: now we are bettered by the affliction.

4. When sin is purged out. Isa. 27.9. This is all the fruit to take away
iniquity. Our hearts are dreggish and sinful, our Gold is mixed with Dross, our
Stars with Clouds; now when affliction consumes pride, formality, hypocrisy,
when Gods Lance lets out our spiritual Imposthume, then we are bettered by
affliction.

5. When our hearts are more unglued from the world; What are all these
under-moon things! the cares of the world, exceed the comforts. The Emblem that
King Henry the seventh used, was, a Crown of Gold, hung in a bush of Thorns.
Many who have escaped the Rocks of scandalous sins, have been cast away upon
the Golden sands. The Arabic Proverb is, The world is a carcass, and they that
hunt after it are dogs. Mundus cadaver est, and petentes eum sunt canes.
Is not love of the world become almost the epidemick Disease? If the Lord
bestows a plentiful estate upon men, they are apt to make an Idol of it. And
therefore God is forced to take that out of their hand, which kept him out of
their heart. Now when the Lord comes and afflicts any of us in that which we
most love, he hits us in the apple of our eye, and our hearts grow more dead to
the world, and sick of love to Christ; when God has been withering our gourd,
and our affections to it begin to wither, when he has been digging about our
root, and we are more loosened from the earth, then we are bettered by
affliction*

6. When affliction has produced more appetite to the Word. Perhaps in health
and prosperity, we and the Bible seldom meet, or if we did chance to read, it
was in a dull cursory manner, but the Lord by imbittering the breast of the
creature, has made us run to the breast of a Promise; and we can say as David,
Psalm. 119.103. How sweet are thy words unto my taste; yea, sweeter than honey.
Dei Eloquia sic faucibus piorum indulcorantur, ut quovis mellis favo suavius
afficiant. Muscul.
Solomon says truly the light is sweet. Eccles. 11.7. But we can say, truly
the Word is sweet, We have tasted Christ in a Promise, the Word has caused an
exuberancy of joy, Psalm 19.8. This is the Manna we love to feed upon; every
leaf of Scripture drops Myrrh, and as a rich Cordial cheers our spirit; when
it is thus, now we are bettered by our trials, Psalm 119.50.

7. When our title to Heaven is more confirmed. In prosperity, we are more
careless in getting, at least in clearing our spiritual title. People would be
loath their evidences for their Land, were no better, than their evidences for
Heaven. Many a man's evidence for glory is either forged or blotted; he is not
able to read any discriminating work of Gods Spirit, he is pendulous, and hangs
in a doubtful suspense, not knowing whether he has Grace or no; now when we
are brought low in affliction* and we fall to the work of self-examination, we
see how matters stand between God and our souls, Totum diem mecum scrutor,
facta and dicta mea remetior, nihil mihi ipse abscondo, nihil transeo. Sen.
lib. 3. de ira.
we turn over every lea^ of the Book of conscience, we make a critical descant
upon our hearts and after a thorough survey o^ our selves, we can say, We know
the grace of God in truth, Col. 1.^* We have received the holy anointing 1 John
2.27. Our Grace will bear the touchstone, though not the balance, certainly
then we have made a good proficiency in the time of affliction, and are
bettered by it.

8. When we grow more fruitful in Grace. A Christian should be like the
Olive Tree, fair and of goodly fruit, Jer. 11.16. There is a tree in the Isle
of Pomonia which has its fruit folded and wrapped up in the leaves of it. An
emblem of a good Christian, who has the fruits of Grace wrapped up in the
leaves of his profession. Now after pruning, what fruits have we brought forth?
The fruits of obedience, love, self-denial, meekness, heavenliness, longing to
be with Christ? If the sharp Frost of affliction has brought on the Spring
flowers of Grace, Crescit de vulnere virtus --
which the Apostle calls, the peaceable fruits of righteousness, Heb. 12.11.
then we are bettered by affliction. A fruitful heart is better than a full Crop.

9. When we do really commiserate and put on bowels to such as are in a
suffering condition.

-- Haud ignara mali miseris succurrere disco -- Jesus Christ having suffered
is touched with our infirmity, Heb. 4.15. Having felt hunger and cold, he knows
how to pity us. Before we have drunk of the bitter Cup, instead of pitying
others in misery, we are ready to despise them. Psalm 123.4. Our soul is filled
with the scorning of them which are at ease. But when we have been under the
Harrow, and can sympathize with our suffering Brethren, and weep with them that
weep; this is a sign we are bettered by the affliction. In Music, when one
string is touched, all the rest sound: so our bowels sound as an harp, Isa.
16.11.

10. When we have learned to bless God in affliction. Job. 1.21. The Lord has
taken away, blessed be the name of the Lord: Many can bless God, when he is
giving; Job blesses him when he takes away. This is excellent, not only to
praise God when we are upon the Mountain of Prosperity, but in the Valley of
adversity, Deuteronomy. 8.10. When thou have eaten and art full, then thou shall bless
the Lord. But it is a greater matter when we are empty and in want, then to
bless him, 1 These. 5.18. In every thing give thanks. (...) in adversis aeque ac
Prosperis; quia non minus amoris Sigil^um est inopia, quam copia. C. lap. --
Hinc laudat Augustinus veterum sanctorum morem, qui saepe habebant in ore hoc
verbum Deo gratias. Aug. in Psalm. 132.


But what should we bless God for in affliction? We are to bless God that it is
no worse with us. He might have put more Gall in our Cup, Ezra 9.14. We are to
bless God, that he will choose rather to correct us in the world, than to
condemn us with the world, 1 Cor. 11.32. That he has made affliction a means
to prevent sin; that he proportions our strength to our trials; that he gives
us any support in our trouble, Psalm 112.4. Though he does not break our yoke,
yet he lines our yoke with inward peace, and makes it soft and pleasant. We are
to bless God that he deals with us as Children, setting his seal of affliction
on us, and so marking us for his own; Tertul.
We are to bless God, that Christ has taken the sting out of the Cross; that
there is an hope of better things laid up for us in Heaven, Col. 1.5. When we
can upon these considerations break forth into an holy gratitude and triumph in
affliction, this is to be bettered by affliction, and it shows a Spirit of God
and glory rests upon us, 1 Pet. 4.14.

To bless God in Heaven, when he is crowning us with glory, is no wonder; but
to bless God when he is correcting us, to bless him in a Prison, to give thanks
on a sickbed; not only to kiss the Rod, but to bless the hand that holds it;
here is the Sun in the Zenith, this speaks an high degree of Grace, indeed, and
does very much adorn our sufferings.

If we can find these sweet fruits of the Cross, we may assure our selves the
affliction is sanctified; Venenum aliquando pro remedio fuit. Seneca.
and we may say as David, Psalm 119.71. It is good for me, that I was
afflicted: and then, God will throw away the Rod, and make us glad after the
days of our mourning* Luctus in laetitiam vertetur, saccus in sericum, cineres
in corollas.
Ezekiel. 16.42. So will I make my fury toward thee to rest, and my jealousy
shall depart from thee, and I will be quiet, and will be no more angry.

3. If sin brings us low, let us labor to bring our sins low. 3. Branch
Let all our spite be at sin; let us pursue it with an holy malice. Sin has
brought us even to the dust, and would bring us lower into the abyss of Hell,
let us then shed the blood of sin, which would shed our blood, Col. 3.5.
Mortify your members which are upon the earth, Motus carnis indies repullulant
adeoque non uno ictu sed sensim resecanda. Corn. lap.
fornication, uncleanness, etc. We are apt to plead for sin, Is it not a little
one? Who would plead for him that seeks his life? We are ready to say to the
Minister concerning sin, as David to Joab concerning Absalom, 2 Samuel 18.5. Deal
gently with the young man. So, Sir, deal gently with my sins; Oh be not too
sharp in your reproofs; Why? Does not the traitor sin, seek to take away thy
Crown of glory, as Absalom did his Fathers Crown? Would it not bring thee low?
If therefore thou art wise, spare it not. Do with thy sin, as Joab with
Absalom; he took three darts in his hand, and thrust them through the heart of
Absalom; 2 Samuel 18.14. So take these three darts, the Word of God, Prayer,
Mortification, and strike through the heart of thy lusts that they dye. As
Sampson dealt with the Philistines, they brought him low, they put out his eyes,
and he never left till he was revenged on them, and brought them low, Judges
16.30. He bowed himself with all his might, and the house fell upon the Lords,
etc. Sampson dyed, we live by the death of our enemies. O that every day, some
limb of the old man may drop off. Hoc mihi satis est quotidie ex vitiis meis
aliquid demere, and errores meos objurgare. Sen* de vit. beat. c. 17.
What is the end of all a Christians duties, praying and hearing, but to weaken
and mortify lust? Why is this spiritual Physic taken, but to kill the child
of sin he goes with? Sin will insinuate it self, and plead for a reprieve, but
show it no mercy. Saul's sparing Agag, lost him the Kingdom, and your sparing
sin, will lose you the Kingdom of Heaven.

4. Branch
Lastly, Let this make us weary of living in the world, for while we live we
sin, and sin brings us low. We eat the forbidden fruit, and then are sick after
it. How should this make us long to have our pass to be gone, and cry, O that
we had the wings of a Dove, to fly away, and be at rest. Then we shall shake
off those Vipers which leaped upon us, 1 Cor. 3.22. Death is yours. At death we
shall have an eternal Iubilee, and be freed from all encumbrances.

Sin shall be no more; Death smites a Believer, as the Angel smote Peter on his
side, and made his Chains fall off, Acts 12.7. So death smites a Believer, and
makes the Chains of his sins fall off.

Trouble shall be no more; This lower Region is full of Storms. Troubles and
vexations are some of the thorns with which the earth is cursed. But in the
Grave, a Believer has his quietus est; There the wicked cease from troubling,
there the weary are at rest, Job 3.17. God will shortly wipe away all tears.
Rev. 7.17. How should this make the Saints desire to be dissolved, Phil. 1.23.
Quisquis in Christum credit, ita debet esse animatus, ut ad nomen mortis caput
attollat, laetus nuntio suae redemptionis. Calv.
Isreal's being so often stung with Serpents, made them weary of the Wilderness,
and aspire after Canaan. The discurtesies a Prince meets with in a strange
Land, makes him long to be in his own Country, when the Crown-royal shall be
set upon his head. When we are with Christ, we shall be brought low no more. We
shall never be fixed Stars, till we are in Heaven.

O the felicity of glorified Saints; they have a full-eyed vision of God, and
those refulgent beams of Glory are darted from his blessed face, as delight,
yea, ravish their hearts with ineffable joy. Status gloriae, prae aliis (...)
foelicissimus, quando Deus humanos angelicosque Spiritus, in suo ipsius sinu
complectitur, and creati Spiritus ab increato refocillantur.
The Birds of the fortunate Islands, are nourished with Perfumes; after death
the Saints shall be for ever nourished with the Aromaticks and Perfumes of
their Saviors Love.

FINIS.

