ENGLISH CRETES, AND Atheistical CHRISTIANS DESCRIBED and INSTANCED: WITH
Directions for the Reformation of all; FROM St. PAUL'S Epistle to TITUS, the
first Bishop of CRETE. Wherein is Intimated the Sacred Order, and Supreme Power
of Episcopacy in the CHURCH, with the Inferior Ministry. Concluding all With
Supplemental Instances; AND A Lamentation of the Churches present Miseries.

Follow peace with all men, and holiness, without which no man shall see the
Lord. Heb. xii. 14. LONDON: Printed for Jos. Hindmarsh, at the Golden Ball over
against the Royal Exchange in Cornhil. 1695.

THE EPISTLE DEDICATORY; OR A LETTER TO AN Honorable Member of PARLIAMENT* TO
THE Honorable Sir W. T. Bar.
Ever honored Sir,
MAY I presume to lay this at your feet, with an humble congratulation of your
late honorable unsought for Election at too such distant Places, paying you
that meritorious esteem and regard, which the best of our Gentry, and Regular
Clergy unanimously bear you in that County, whereto you are so great an Honor,
and ever will be, in despite of Ignorance, Malice, Ill Nature, Self-Interest,
and Faction; however shamefully dividing us, etc. Your Orthodox Piety,
admirable Parts and Learning; your unbounded Charity, Meekness, Candor, and
unbiased Judgment and Integrity, which has no Interest to serve but the
Publick-Good, etc. We cannot but declare, as we love and value: this was
conspicuous to the Nation, while you were formerly our truly honorable
Representative with general applause: and will be now again. Therefore your
utmost Service for our true Episcopal Church (whose Zealous, Learned, Champion
your renowned Father was, likewise) and Clergy, we doubt not of. May all honest
tender Consciences be Tolerated, and Sufferers duly relieved: may Profaneness,
Atheism, and all manner of Licentiousness (so scandalous in, and dangerous to a
Christian State) be severely suppressed. May Sacrilege be shunned by all, and
(according to the Pious and Learned Sir Henry Spellman in particular) may the
Church's Divine Rights be well considered; or at least the Case of poor
Vicarages be justly and charitably Redressed, and secured from the base
encroachments, and oppressions of Hypocrisy, Pride, and Avarice insatiable,
etc. Or finally, were these things in such worthy Hands as yours: and would all
Live, and Act like you, for the Glory of God, and his Church: then might be
completed the just Wishes of

Your ever obliged humble Servant, T.W.

DEO TRIUNO, Aeterno, Incomprehensibili, Omnipotenti, Omniscienti,
Omnipresenti, Infinito Justitia, Miserecordia, etc. Super and in omnibus Gloria.
COnversionem Mundo;
Pacem Ecclesiae;
Fidem Principibus and regnis,
Tranquilitatem Angliae.
Salutem Benefactoribus,
Poenitentiam Inimicis,
Sincere Vivet and Optat,
Humillimus and indignissimus Servus, gaudens and solummodo confidens in Jesu
Christo ipsoque Crucifixo.
T. W.

Psalm. lxxxii. Out of Patrick's Meter.
THE Rulers of the world, that bear
God's name, and represent him here,
Know that this Judge among you sits.
If you enact unrighteous Laws,
Or Countenance a wicked Cause,
Your guiltiness no plea admits.
You act like God, when you defend
The Poor, and your assistance lend
To helpless men, that Justice crave.
Absolve the Innocent with speed,
Obnoxious only by their need,
And from the Oppressors power save.
They cry too often to you in vain,
Who Will know no other right but gain,
Whose Eyes are blind by Bribes you take.
Thus Justice cannot find its course,
But Laws neglected lose their force,
And all the Land's Foundations shake.
I said you are Gods, but you shall dye,
And fall, tho sons of the most High,
As other men, and King's have done.
Arise Great Judge of all, and Reign,
Fallen Justice then will rise again,
When God does sit upon his Throne.
ENGLISH CRETES, AND Atheistical Christians described, etc.
TIT. i. 16. They profess that they know God; but in works they deny him, being
abominable, and disobedient, and unto every good work reprobate, or void of
judgment. As it is in the Margin.


SAint Paul a Servant of God, and an Apostle of Jesus Christ, according to the
Faith and Truth, etc. ver. 1. having ordained Titus the first Bishop of the
Church of the Cretians; as he did Timothy of the Ephesians: he begins here to
show him, in a very solemn and blessed Style, for what end he thus left him in
Crete, ver. 6. As particularly to Ordain and Settle the inferior Ministry; the
due qualifications whereof he next declares, ver. 6. and then proceeds to set
forth the life of a good Bishop: manifesting the necessity of their
Faithfulness, Ability, and Zeal, because of Deceivers, and that the mouths of
those evil corrupt Teachers (who crept in Houses, and swarmed about the Church)
might be stopped, to ver. 12. Then he gives him some description of the people
whom he was set over, with admonitions concerning them, etc. Now these let us
briefly consider with parallel Instances of the great Numbers of pretended
false Christians among us, and the directions here for their reformation:
concluding with an earnest recommendation of all the Duties laid down in this
Epistle, as now required indispensibly both of Ministers and People.

First then, The Apostle begins his description of these Cretians with an
irrefragible testimony of one of their own Poets, ver. 12. one of themselves;
even a Prophet of their own said, the Cretians are always Liars, evil Beasts,
slow-bellies. ( i. e. deceitful, false, sensual, carnal, and earthly-minded)
which is plain enough, howsoever Poetical: and as St. Paul affirms in the next
verse this Witness is true; whence necessarily follows his admonition,
wherefore rebuke them sharply, that they may be sound in the Faith; not giving
heed to Jewish Fables, and Commandments of men that turn from the Truth. This
beastliness, or impurity of their lives (notwithstanding their Conversion to
Christianity) polluted and corrupted their Profession of the purest Religion,
which none but the pure can rightly understand and practice: and so continued
them sinful Brutes, and guilty Infidels still. For as it follows, ver. 15. Unto
the Pure all things are Pure, but unto them that are defiled and unbelieving is
nothing Pure; but even their Mind and Conscience is defiled: well therefore
might there be so many Heretics, Seducers, and Hypocrites among such filthy
Pretenders; yea and Atheists too, or worse: for so are they, who profess (as
St. Paul here concludes their Character) That they know God; but in Works they
deny him, being abominable, disobedient, etc. These are called Practical
Atheists, and are thus far worse than the Speculative, in that they act
contrary to their declared Principles; their Lives run contrary to their Creed:
O they do the greater dishonor to Almighty God. Now every customary habitual
Sinner particularly is such; and such are the common Profane, Unjust, Vicious,
and Uncharitable Wretches of this vilest Age, who fill our Church and Nation.
These unreformed Sinners who make up the generality of our People of all Ranks
and Degrees, are the English Cretians, and the Atheistical Christians: whose
Lives and Conversations prove their ignorance and denial of God, and of all
true Religion; whatsoever their Faith or Profession may be: as will be manifest
from a brief discussion of these Words with deductions of some few Instances:
They profess that they know God. Now to know God, is to understand as much as
Nature, Reason, and Revelation discover to us of his Being, or his Perfections
and Attributes included therein; and of that Worship and Service due to him
from us his Creatures, which we call Religion in general. Thus far as men ought
we to know God; but much more as Christians must we know him to be, not only
our Creator, Preserver, etc. but our great Lord and Judge, our merciful
Redeemer, Savior, and Sanctifier too, as well as Lawgiver, in his only
begotten eternal Son, and Holy Spirit. Yea, further must we thus draw near or
come unto God that we may please him, and in order thereunto we must believe
that he is, and that he is a rewarder of them that diligently seek him, Heb.
xi. 7. And then moreover, we must obey his Laws, live up to his Gospel of Grace
and Salvation, which is our Christian Profession; if we would truly and rightly
know him. Then, and not till then, we may well profess that we know God: since
hereby alone we shall know our selves that we know him, if we keep his
Commandments. Herein shall we be fully satisfied, when we thus endeavor to
love, adore, and imitate his infinite Perfections as his Laws direct; thus to
renew his Image upon our souls, and resemble him as far as we can to our own
sole happiness; purifying, following, and uniting our minds to the Divine. For
whosoever keeps his word, in him verily is the love of God perfected; yea, hereby
know we that we are in him; so he that professes to know him, or says, he
abides in him, ought himself also so to walk, even as he walked. But he that
says I know him, and keeps not his Commandments is a liar, and the truth is
in him. 1 John ii. 3, 4, 5, 6. But in Works they deny him, being abominable,
and disobedient, and unto every good Work reprobate: So to deny God in our
Works, is to allow our selves in any known wilful sin, that is hateful and
dishonorable to his Nature, and transgressing his most Holy, Just, and Good
Laws. To continue in any wicked Customs, sinful Habit, or any evil Course of
Life without timely Repentance and Amendment: to have hereby seared
Consciences, hardened Hearts, and stupify'd Wills, reprobate Minds, and corrupt
Judgments; ever prone to impiety, backward and unwilling to do good; perverse
and stubborn in acts of iniquity, following the bent and inclination of our
vile Lusts and Affections, and so easily yielding to the Devil's suggestions,
and the World's deluding Charms and Allurements; thus frequently and
notoriously Rebelling against God: to slight God's sacred Ministry, resist the
good motions of his Holy Spirit, disregard the most pious Instructions; and
neglect the means of Grace and Salvation ordained in Christ's Church Militant
here upon Earth. Thus do the many pretended Professors of a Deity, and Vaunting
Worshippers, and Religionists deny God, and all; by their common,
inconsiderate, foolish doings, by their devilish, sensual, earthly living, by
their secret sins, and avowed Crimes so odious in God's all-pure Eyes, and
nauseous to every good Soul. Hence they form such Notions of the Divinity, and
favor such Doctrines, and Interpretations of Scripture (which they read to
their own destrustion) as might raise their defilements in Mind and Conscience;
and please their Corruptions most: thus would they make God like one of
themselves, have his ways as their ways; or else they seem to set up the vile
Deities of the Heathens, to profess only by their Deeds a a cruel Saturn, a
wanton Jupiter, a thievish Mercury, and a drunken Bacchus: or with the grossest
Idolaters in Egypt to Worship Leeks and Onions, and make their Bellies their
Gods. What less do our Self-Contradictors, inconsistent, ridiculous Professors
manifest? Do not their Actions belie their Mouths? And are they not thus far
worse than the very Ethnicks, or Atheists, denying the only true God, whom yet
they affirm to own, etc. As for instance, to expostulate this Case with all
Rational People, and Christians: let us consider in the general, that those who
live and act contrary to the Divine Perfections, and Laws, do so far deny the
same: and such, who deny God's Attributes, which are essential to his Being, do
thus deny God. So in particular, this consider, first in relation to his
Holiness, Purity, and Goodness in the Abstract: does not all manner of
Irreligion and Profaneness plainly contradict the most Holy Being? Is not every
unclean Thought and Desire, every filthy Discourse, and lustful beastly Action
diametrically opposite to God's all-pure Nature? And is not all manner of
ill nature, and evil-doing absolutely contrary to the most lovely Essence, to
Goodness it self? If so, what are the common, false Swearers, and all the
guilty takers of God's most holy Name in vain? What are the Contemners,
Neglecters, and Prophaners of his holy Word, and Ministry; of his Sacraments,
and other Ordinances; of his true Church, and most pure Religion? What are the
Sacrilegious Robbers of Churches, Robbers of God in Tithes and Offerings,
greedy encroachers upon the Pastors Divine Rights, and bold Invaders of holy
Church's Patrimony; the proud Despisers of holy Persons, and domineering
Violaters of things Sacred, thus bringing a Curse upon the whole Nation? If so,
what are the Fornicators, Whoremongers; the Adulterers, and Adulteresses; the
Brutes, and Sodomites; what are the lascivious vile obscene Wretches, the
carnal and earthly minded Herds of Animals? In short, what are the selfish
Unrighteous, the wicked vicious ungodly sinful Livers? If so, what are any such
better than Atheists? Yea, are not they rather worse, and dot they more
shamfully deny, by these abominable Courses, that most holy pure and good God,
whom yet they profess to know.

So secondly, Consider this Point in reference to God's Justice, Mercy, and
Truth:

Can any thing more directly affront the Just and Righteous Judge of all the
World; than Rapine, Violence, and Oppression; than Fraud, Knavery, with all
sorts of Dishonesty, and Unrighteous Dealing?

What can bid defiance more to our most gracious long suffering compassionate
heavenly Father; than Cruelty, Tyranny, and barbarous Usage; than Malice, Envy,
dire Revenge, Hatred, and all manner of Uncharitableness? Can any thing more
impudently contradict the only Wise and True God; him, who is Truth it self:
than Falsehood, Dissimulation, Perjury, Skepticism, Infidelity; than Diffidence,
Deceit, Lying, with all kind of Guile and Hypocrisy?

So thirdly, In relation to God's infinite Wisdom, and Power; or his
Omnipotence, Omniscience, and Omnipresence: how bold Presumption on the one
Hand, and slavish Despair on the other, or distrust of Providence; with crafty
Designs, and secret Sinning, etc. does call these adorable Attributes into
question? Will not humane Strength and Policy, carnal or worldly Wisdom bend
and submit hereto? Shall not all Pride, Arrogance, Ambition, Avarice,
Intemperance and Sensuality tremble hereat? Upon these Considerations then, are
not all Cheats, Knaves, and Liars; all Robbers, Thieves, and Murderers; all
Tyrants, Usurpers, and devouring Oppressors: Are not all spiteful haughty
Conceits, all perverse Self-Lovers; all blood-thirsty encroaching Villains; all
sorts of Unbelievers and Hypocrites; all evil Contriving, Crafty, Sly or
Clandestine Sinners; all Debauchees, Gluttons, Drunkards, proud Boasters; with
all Covetous Persons, who are Idolaters, and whom particularly God abhoreth:

Are not all these, I say, with the others beforementioned, such abominable,
disobedient, and evil reprobate Wretches; by leading such wicked Lives, so
contrary to the whole Divine Nature, and to all True Religion; while they
profess to know God, etc. That they thus plainly deny their God and Savior;
and commence the worst of Infidels, and Atheists: whatsoever Faith, or
Knowledge they may pretend to? Now the like Instances may be made in reference
to all the Sublime Truths, and Injunctions of the Gospel, or all the Duties of
Christianity; from which the generality of its Professors so grossly vary; and
wherein so many do deceive, and are deceived: but these may be reserved for
another Season; and what has been said, may suffice at present for
demonstration of the matter in hand.

So we shall now proceed to the Apostles directions for the Reformation of all:
and especially for the management of those false Teachers, Scepticks, and
Seducers, whom he chiefly aims at, and describes here, ver. 10. and this he
lays upon his Bishop, particularly to convince such, ver. 9. Including withal
the Offices of the inferior Ministry: as I noted in the beginning of this
Discourse, and may regularly proceed upon: having hitherto only cleared the
Text at first proposed.

In all this Epistle it is evident, says a Divine Preacher, that St. Paul looks
upon Titus as advanced to the Dignity of a Prime Ruler of the Church, and
entrusted with a large Diocese, containing many particular Cities under the
immediate Government of their respective Elders; and those deriving Authority
from his Ordination, as was specified in ver. 5. And now looking upon Titus
under this qualification, he addresses a long Advice and Instruction to him,
for the discharge of so important a Function: it being the peculiar Office of
every Bishop within his own Jurisdiction, by Prayer, and Imposition of Hands,
(as the Apostles did) to order and separate Men for the Offices of Deacon, and
Elder, i. e. Presbyter or Priest in the Church of Christ: and in like manner to
Confirm all whom the Inferior Ministers admit Members of, or receive into the
Church Communion by that initiating Sacrament of Baptism, as our Savior
positively Commissioned all his Ambassadors, Stewards, or Ministers of his
Gospel upon Discipling the World: Mat. xxviii. 19, 20. And as Philip the Deacon
Baptized the Samaritans, and then came the great Apostles, Peter and John, down
from Jerusalem, to Confirm them with Prayer and Imposition of Hands, Act. viii.
And as our Bishops, the Prime Successors of the Apostles, after our
Infant Baptism, and Pious Education upon the Promises and Solemn Vows, and care
of fit Sponsors, etc. (as our Church most Charitably directs) have accordingly
practiced from the very Primitive times: which may sufficiently ease and
satisfy all Sureties, etc. both in their Duty, and discharge of their Trust:
and so might equally convince our Antipedobaptists, and all other Gainsayers to
the Laudable Ancient Apostolical Orders of Infant Baptism, Confirmation, etc.
Which, with our whole excellent Constitution, let us all duly and respectively
observe, under our Sacred Gospel Ministry, as true sound Members of the best
Established Church in the World: with particular Reverence of the highest Order
of Episcopacy, our Spiritual Hierarchy, whereto alone it belongs to Govern and
Preside over the whole Ecclesiastical Body. There is no one thing (says a
learned Writer) more clear and evident in the Christian Religion, than that our
Savior invested the whole Apostolical Order (not in St. Peter only, but all
the Apostles) with a Supremacy of Power over his Church; and that they in
pursuance of this his Divine Institution ordained Bishops to succeed them in
their Supremacy of Power through all following Ages. That the Apostles were
Superior to all other Officers in the Church, is out of question, and granted
on all Hands: and that the Bishops succeeded them, is as unquestionable from
all the clearest Records of Antiquity; their Succession, especially in the most
famous Churches, being derived by the most Ancient Writers from the Apostles
themselves, and was as easily and certainly know to those Men that have
transmitted it to us, as any learned Man may know the Succession of the
Archbishops of Canterbury from the Reign of Queen Elizabeth to this time. And
also it is evident, that they modeled the first Settlement of Churches
according to the then present State of the Roman Empire. But as this Power was
at first given to the Apostles, so was it equally divided among them; so that
every one exercised Supreme Power within the Bounds of his own Jurisdiction,
and all together in the Catholic Church: or as St. Cyprian states it, Epist.
52. that as there was but one Church Founded by Christ throughout all the
World, but this Church was made up of several distinct Members; so there was
but one Episcopacy, and that consists in the agreement, and unanimous care of
all Christian Bishops: so that the whole Body of the Church was governed by the
whole Body of the Apostles, and their Successors; but the several parts of it
were allotted to the Charge of single Bishops, who governed them with
particular care, but so as to have regard to the Peace and Unity of the whole.

This is the only Notion (says my Author) that this wise and good Man (than
whom there is not a more eminent example for both upon Record) seems in all his
Writings to have had of the Catholic Church; and so this he improves to the
utter Confutation of the Pope's Supremacy; and likewise of all our Dissenters
confused wild pretenses: resembling the Popish Legends, Superstitions, etc. All
whose presumptuous, covetous, Teaching, creeping into Houses, leading Captive
silly Women, deluding sinful weak Souls, 2 Timothy iii. 6. with all their
deceitful, hypocritical, or insulting, rigid, greedy, devouring ways, ought to
undergo such Episcopal Judgment and Rebuke, and be so silenced, etc. as these
Skeptical lying Cretes, and avaritious Jewish Deceivers; whom the great Apostle
here warns their proper Bishop of, that he may proceed against them sharply: or
as himself judged too obstinate Sinners, or Heretics and Schismatics, (as he
did the incestuous person before, 1 Cor. v.) wicked Hymeneus, and Alexander,
whom he delivered unto Satan, that they may learn not to blaspheme. 1 Timothy i.
20. This is the very power of true Excommunication, which with Absolution,
called the power of the Keys, our Savior delegated immediately to the Supreme
Governors of his Church. Matthew. xvi. 18, 19. John xx. 21, 22, 23. And thus was
Titus to manage the Stubborn, and Heretical within his Diocese; Chap. iii. 10,
11. A Man that is an Heretic, after the first and second Admonition, reject:
knowing, that he that is such, is subverted, and sins, being condemned of
himself. Yet these our Rulers must especially avoid all Pride, Ambition,
Tyranny, Idleness, Corruption, and Covetousness, with all Vice, Passion, or
Selfishness: wherewith the Princes of the World, and Civil Magistrates too
often exercise Authority, and Dominion: but we must all dischage our Sacred
Function, and do all things with the greatest humility, and in the true Gospel
Spirit of Meekness and Charity, strictly imitating our blessed Savior, and
giving good Example to all others. Matthew. xx. 25, 26, 27, 28. 1 Pet. v. 1, 2,
3, 4. And now thus must the Younger obey their Elders, etc. ver. 5. who may
thus rebuke with all, with the highest, i. e. Divine Authority; and let no Man
despise them; as St. Paul here sums up the Episcopal Office to Titus, Chap. ii.
15. which is the first direction for the Reformation of all: and particularly,
for the suppression of the many unruly and vain Talkers, and Deceivers, urging
the Commandments of Men that turn from the Truth, legendary Fablers, etc. Like
the bigoted Jews: whose Mouths must be stopped, who subvert whole Houses,
Teaching things which they ought not, for filthy Lucre's sake. Who (with the
rest before testified of, and described:) must therefore be rebuked sharply,
that they may be sound in the Faith, and become pure and undefiled, Chap. i.
10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15. That none may give heed to fables; nor regard needless
controversies, or any jarring disputes: but avoid foolish questions, and
genealogies, and contentions, and strivings about the law: for they are
unprofitable and vain, Chap. iii. 9. Thus comes in the next Directions, which
all should constantly observe, and so diligently mind and practice the sound,
grave, incorrupt, sincere Doctrine, which they are daily Taught under the true
Gospel Ministry in our excellent Communion. Then would aged men be sober,
grave, temperate, sound in faith, in charity, in patience. And the aged women
likewise would be in behavior as becomes holiness, not false accusers, (not
liars, or slanderers:) Not given to much wine, teachers of good things:
teaching the young women to be sober, to love their husbands, to love their
children, to be discreet, chaste, keepers at home, good, obedient to their own
husbands, that the word of God be not blasphemed. Then would young men likewise
be exhorted to be sober-minded Chap. ii. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. Then would servants
too, be obedient to their own masters, and please them well in all things, not
answering again. Not purloyning, but showing all good fidelity; that they may
adorn the doctrine of God our Savior in all things, ver. 9, 10. Then would
Christians in general remember their necessary Duties and Obligations signified
in the verse following, and elsewhere. For the grace of God, that brings
salvation, has appeared to all men, teaching us, that denying ungodliness, and
worldly lusts, we should live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present
world, looking for that blessed hope, and the glorious appearing of the great
God, and our Savior Jesus Christ, who gave himself for us, that he might
redeem us from all iniquity, and purify unto himself a peculiar people zealous
of good works. These things must we speak, exhort; and preach both in our life
and doctrine, ver. 7, 8. As thus too, Must our Bishops rebuke with all
authority, and let no man despise them. verse 15. And thus farther, Must they,
and we, and all be, as we put others in mind to be, subject to Principalities
and Powers, to obey Magistrates, whose Civil Authority, how great soever in
Church Matters, supposes the Spiritual Authority of the Church: and neither
should interfere with the other, etc. See Bishop Parker's Religion and Loyalty,
and Letter. Thus moreover ought we all to be ready to every good work, to speak
evil of no man, to be no brawlers, but gentle, showing all meekness unto all
men, Chap. iii. 1, 2. So finally thus is pressed on the general Reformation,
with these indispensible Duties both of Clergy and Laity, (here briefly
recommended) concluding all, verse 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. Wherein the Apostle
exemplifies the state of Unbelievers and Sinners before Conversion, and
regeneration; and their blessed condition after through Sanctification,
Justification, etc. For we our selves also were sometimes foolish, deceived,
serving diverse lusts and pleasures, living in malice, and envy, hateful, and
hating one another. But after that the kindness and love of God our Savior
toward man appeared, not by works of righteousness which we have done, but
according to his mercy he saved us, by the washing of regeneration, and
renewing of the Holy Ghost, which he shed on us abundantly, through Jesus
Christ our Savior: that being justified by his grace, we should be made heirs
according to the hope of eternal life. This is a faithful saying, and these
things (says St. Paul to his Bishop) I will that thou affirm constantly, that
they which have believed in God, might be careful to maintain good works: these
things are good and profitable unto men.

Wherefore (As it is in Heb. xiii. 16, 17, 18.20, 21.) to do good, and to
communicate forget not, for with such sacrifices God is well pleased.

Obey them that have the rule over you, and submit your selves: for they watch
for your souls, as they that must give account, that they may do it with joy,
and not with grief: for that is unprofitable for you.

Pray for us: for we trust we have a good conscience in all things, willing to
live honestly.

Now the God of Peace, that brought again from the dead the Lord Jesus, that
great shepherd of the sheep, through the blood of the everlasting covenant,
make you perfect in every good work, to do his will, working in you that which
is well pleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ, to whom be glory for ever
and ever. Amen.

Supplemental Instances of some notorious Sins, very dangerous in Church and
State: as to all Souls. Collected out of the brief Heads of Self-Examination,
especially before the Sacrament, in the Whole Duty of Man. With a Lamentation
of the Church's Calamities.
IN the black Catalogue of Sins, or Transgressions of our respective Duties to
God, our Neighbor, and our Selves, laid down by that incomparable Author from
this his first excellent Treatise, that best of Books, next to the Inspired:

These following Sins of Omission, and Commission are particularly enumerated,
viz.

1. Not believing in God, nor his Word Practically, so as to live according to
our belief.

2. Presuming groundlesly on his Mercy, while we go on in wilful sin.

3. Not loving God for his own Excellencies; nor for his Goodness to us, not
laboring to please him. Not desiring to draw near to him in his Holy
Ordinances. Not longing to enjoy him in Heaven.

4. Not fearing God, so as to keep from offending him. Fearing Man above him,
by committing sin, to shun some outward Suffering.

5. Not trusting on God in Dangers, and Distresses. Using unlawful means to
bring us out of them, etc. Not looking up for his Blessing on our Honest
Endeavors. Overcarking, etc.

6. Not acknowledging his Wisdom in choosing for us, but having eager and
impatient desires of our own.

7. Not honoring God by a reverent usage of the things that relate to him.
Behaving our Selves irreverently in his House. Robbing God, by taking things
that are Consecrated to him. Profaning Holy Times, the Lord's day, and the
Feasts, and Fasts of the Church. Placing Religion in hearing of Sermons,
without Practice. Breaking our Vows made at Baptism. Profaning the Lords
Supper. Profaning God's Name by Blasphemous Thoughts and Discourse. Giving
others occasion to blaspheme him by our vile and wicked Lives. Taking unlawful
Oaths. Perjury. Swearing in our Ordinary Communication.

8. Not Worshipping God. Omitting Prayers public and private. Not Praying in
Purity, Faith, Humility, Attention, nor Reverence.

9. Not Repenting, Fasting, Mortifying, nor solemnly Humbling, etc.

10. Placing our Love, and other Affections more on Creatures, than the
Creator, which is inward Idolatry.

11. Unthankfulness to our Benefactors, especially those that admonish us. Not
amending upon their reproof. Being angry at them for it. Not Reverencing our
Civil Parent, the lawful Magistrate. Despising our Spiritual Fathers, the
Bishops, and Pastors of our Churches. Not loving them for their Works sake. Not
obeying those Commands of God they deliver to us. Seeking, to withold from
them their Just Maintenance. Forsaking our lawful Pastors to follow Factious
Teachers. Not loving our Spiritual Brethren, i. e. our Fellow Christians.
Having no Fellow-Feeling of their Sufferings. Causelessly forsaking their
Communion in Holy Duties. Not taking deeply to Heart the Desolations of the
Church: which are now Calamitous and deplorable indeed:

12. Being puffed up with high conceits of our selves. Carnal and Spiritual
Pride, greedily seeking the praise of Men. Directing Christian Actions, as
Prayer, Alms, etc. to that end. Committing Sins to avoid the reproach of wicked
Men. Anger, Inconsideration, etc. Uncontentedness in our Estates. Greedy
desires after Honor and Riches. Seeking to gain them by sinful means. Envying
the condition of other Men. Not improving God's Gifts, outward, or inward, to
his Honor. Abusing our natural Parts, as Wit, Memory, etc. to Sin. Neglecting
or resisting the motions of God's Holy Spirit. Uncleaness. Intemperance.
Pampering the Body, not subduing it, etc.

13. Being Injurious, Unjust, Cruel, and Malicious to our Neighbor. Oppressing
by Violence and Force, or color of Law. Theft, Deceit, false Witness, Lying,
Ingratitude. Want of true Love and Affection in Husbands and Wives. Not bearing
with the Infirmities of each other. So in Friends. Tyranny, or Remisness in
Parents, and Masters. Disobedience, and Stubborness in Children, and Servants.
Ill Nature in all.

14. Want of Bowels and Charity to our Neighbors. Not heartily desiring their
good Spiritual, or Temporal. Not loving and forgiving Enemies. Taking actual
Revenges upon them. Professing Kindness, and acting none. Backbiting, etc.

15. Not loving Peace. Going to Law upon slight occasions. Bearing inward
Enmity to those we Sue. Not laboring to make Peace among others.

Now let this short dismal Catalogue, which is all a plain Contradiction to our
most Holy Christian Profession, with those Instances of Sins, and Contrarieties
to God, and all True Religion, beforementioned: be seriously considered,
bewailed, and reformed in every guilty Soul: then shall we soon be happy in our
public and private State here; and more hereafter.

THE LAMENTATION, etc.
BUT alas! Since Christendom continues the vilest part of the World, a Sink of
all those abominable Pollutions, which even Barbarians detest. Since our
Profession, and our Practice are always at so wide a distance. Since the
Disciples of the Holy and Immaculate Jesus, be of all others the most Profane
and Impure; and the Subjects of the Prince of Peace be of all others the most
contentious and bloody. Since the Church in general is become an Aceldama, a
Field of blood: and this particular true Catholic, Apostolical, Episcopal
Church, is so miserably dissected, so shamefully overrun with Blasphemy,
Sacrilege, Hypocrisy, Covetousness, and all manner of Profane, and beastly
Licentiousness, Uncharitableness, etc. is so maliciously undermined every
where, so cruelly oppressed, and insultingly trampled upon in one place, and so
fatally surrounded with Enemies on all Hands. Since her Sabbaths are Polluted;
her Ministry Contemned; her Sacred Ordinances Profaned and Slighted; her
Primitive Discipline Despised, etc. by her own sworn Members. Since many of
these are constant bosom Foes, the most treacherous, and irreclaimable,
sensual, and worldly; making no Conscience of religious Concerns and Duties;
much less of Defaming, Injuring, or Defrauding their own lawful Pastors,
especially the Inferior and most Laborious. As if they had neither Divine nor
Humane Right to their most reasonable Dues. As if neither Christ, nor his
Apostles had given any Orders about the Reception, Reverend Estimation, and
Maintenance of his Ministers; Matthew. x. 1 Cor. iv. 1. and cap. ix. 7. 11.14.
Heb. vii. to 10. As if Christians were herein allowed to be worse than either
Jews, or Heathens. As if Sacrilege were no Sin. As if the Curse of God did not
attend it, etc. though he cursed a whole Nation for the same. Mal. iii. 8, 9.
Since Christianity the best and purest Religion in the World is thus
notoriously and uncontroulably scandalized, even by the very Devote's, and
boasting Professors. Since Matters are at this dreadful pass among us, under
the best establishment too: What alas! Can become of us? What Judgments may we
not justly hear? What sad Calamities expect under such an universal decay of
Christian Piety, and all true Virtue, and good Nature? Yet shall we not mourn
for Sion? And pray for the Peace of Jerusalem? This seems to be all, left us to
do. O then let the Priests, the Ministers of the Lord, herein unite at least,
and weep between the Porch and the Altar; and cry, spare thy People, O Lord,
and give not thine Heritage to reproach. O Save, Cleanse, Enlarge, and Defend
thy Church good God. In all time of our Tribulation, in all time of our Wealth,
in the hour of Death, and in the day of Judgment. Good Lord deliver us. Amen.

FINIS.

