IMPRIMATUR.

Ex Aedibus Lambethanis Aug. 20. 1667. Tho. Tomkins R Rmo. in Christo Patri ac
Domino Gilberto divina Providentia Archi-Epipcopo Cantuariensi a sacris
domestices.

A Weeks Work: Showing the WHOLE DUTY OF A CHRISTIAN.

Laying down in seven particular heads for the practice of the seven Days of
the Week, what Prayer is, how to use it profitably, wherein is showed the true
Nature, Power, and Effects of Vocal and Mental Prayer; with advice and
Instructions (for such as be ignorant in prayer and spiritual duty) how to
attain to a true spiritual, effectual, and proficient way of praying.

Very useful and requisite to be read in Societies and Families.

To which is added seven Copper Plates, suitable to each days Exercise.

LONDON, Printed by E. O. for William Crook without Temple Bar, near
Essex-house, 1668.

TO THE READER.
AFter I had finished these Exercises, which I designed at first for a private
use only; but upon serious reflections of the great importance, some
considerations on this so needful a subject might be; I have here adventured to
present to the public these private Meditations, hoping that thou may find
as much comfort in the reading, as I have done in the writing hereof: I seek
not any honor or profit hereby, nor do I desire you to Job 6. 22.
Give a reward for me of your substance for these my Labors, but only and
earnestly desire these Instructions may come home to thy heart, and all that I
shall expect is from the Wise-man's mouth, Prove. 11. 18.
To him that sows righteousness shall be a sure reward: I desire thou would
bring with thee a heart void of prejudice, toward those Holy Duties that are
to be performed, that with a sincere and humble Elevation of the mind; you may
say with the Holy Prophet, Psalm. 109. 5.
I give my self unto prayer. It might possibly be expected here should have
been Forms of Prayers for proper occasions, but I thought it not so needful to
concern my self in a Task, that has been so often and so well performed by
able and Religious men, for all occasions both public and private, so that I
do not find there needed any more assistance by that want of prayers, but
(which was to much wanting) to quicken the coldness and dullness of prayer. I
have here endeavored to set down some motives to draw you to the more fervent
use of it: That so it may be more effectual and proficient to the saving of
your souls, and that your prayers may not be an offense to God as Judah's once
was: Isa. 1. 15.
When ye spread forth your hands, I will hide mine Eyes from you; Yea, when you
make many prayers, I will not hear. But rather that we may so pray that we may
hear the Holy Spirit sounding in our hearts from the mouth of the same Prophet,
saying, Isa. 38. 5.
Thus says the Lord, etc. I have heard thy prayers, and I have seen thy tears,
etc.

October. 26. 1667. G. V.

SUNDAYS Exercise.
Cain slaying Abel, offerings burning in background Cain Murders Abel. Gen: 4.
And Cain brought of the fruit of the ground. v. 3 And Abel brought of ye
firstlings of his flock etc: And the Lord had respect unto Abel. etc. verse 4.
but unto Cain etc. he had not respect. etc. verse 5. And Cain rose up against
Abel his brother and slew him: verse. 8.
CHAP. I. Of Prayer.
Prayer not well known.
attentive in it, and use it as they ought: And so we should have more Saints
then there are, and Heaven more Souls.

What prayer is.
to God; so, that if a man pronounce many good words with his Mouth, and seem
to Pray, not having this Elevation, it is no Prayer, by reason the Mind is not
elevated or applied to God. As for example, suppose a Child, required by his
Parents to read very Godly prayers in some devout and pious Book, either to
pass away the time, or know whether he can read, or no, he cannot, in so doing,
be said to Pray, though he reads the most devout Prayer that can be: Why so?
because he intended not to Pray, and the principal thing (which is the
application to God) is wanting: Therefore our Savior speaking to the
Pharisees, ye Hypocrites, did not Isaiah prophecy well of you, saying, This
people does praise me with their Lips, but their Heart is far from me. This he
said in the behalf of God; by which you may observe, our Savior does term him
an Hypocrite and Dissembler, who makes show of that which is not, moving his
Lips as in Prayer, but not applying his Heart to God.

Of Hypocrites.
and Hypocrites may be found this day, even among the best of Christians, that
make show of praying and serving God, their Hearts being far from him: We have
the Lord's prayer appointed The Lord's prayer.
by our Savior to be said, as the most excellent of all Prayer; we have our
Common Prayer, or The Common prayer.
Liturgy, composed by most pious and prudent Christians, established by the Law
of the Land, duly used in our Churches; we have many Godly books with Godly
books:
devout Prayers, all for the use and benefit of Christians, and though vocally
said, yet they are of great power in the sight of Good use of them all.
God, being well and attentively used, according to a sincere and devout
Application. Yet I am sorry, there be many, so worldly and negligent, that pray
no way, Neglect of prayer.
though in Christian duty obliged to pray; nay, there be some that scarce call
to mind whether there be a God, or no, which the Turks do not forget: So that
at their going to Bed, or rising up, before meat, or after, they give no
Thanks, but Not give thanks.
couch, and feed, as the brute Beasts do, or, as if they were not obliged
(being reasonable Creatures) to praise and give God thanks for their Being,
Life, Health, Food, Conservation night and day, from sudden Death, and other
Dangers, which as others they are subject to; and if by chance they go to
Church to hear Divine Service, they being thereunto bound by Law, they mind
more to gaze here and there, on this or that Body's Attire, or new Fashionable
Christians.
Fashion, or give their minds to wander on idle things, more than what they
ought to do in that place: And when they do begin their Devotion, they know not
what, or how they say it, they are Unattentive.
so much Destracted; their minds it may be in the Market, Tavern, or some worse
place; and if Prayers be but short, yet they seem so long to them, that they
are wearied, and think they will never end. And often they do not attend to the
end, but hasten their Body to the place where their Mind was all Prayer time.

The light of Faith darkened.
Christians; are not they in a poor case? What can they expect or hope for at
the hour of Death, from God, whom in their Life they did so little respect and
regard? For though his Divine Majesty be merciful, yet He is also Just, and
when his Mercy is God just.
not excepted, but abused, his Justice will in due time inflict condign
punishment; God's mercy is great, who endures with patience so many Years such
wrongs, and abuses, (as their grievous sins, and does not cast them suddenly
into Hellfire, as He did the Angels of Heaven for one sin) graciously
expecting their Conversion, and Repentance, which they think not off, putting
all of until they grow Old, or fall Sick, with a time enough to Repent, as if
time and repentance were in their power, Deathbed repentance.
and at their disposal: But what if they be short taken, and the thread of
their Life cut off by a sudden Death, (which does daily happen to many) What
will become of them? which they ought to consider. Others for a moment, wherein
they might have made use of God's mercy when they lived, (and did not) and
gained the Joy of Heaven by Repentance, which they neglected, they must now
endure (without Remission) the rigor of God's Justice, and suffer the Torments
of Hellfire, for all Eternity! O dear Christian, beware of this, and repent
whilst thou have time, not knowing but this very hour is Use present repentance.
the last of thy Life.

Confusion in devotion.
their Obligation to serve God; and thence they fear his punishments: Which
makes them sometime go to Prayer, and to those things to which they are bound;
their Prayers are not many, and in haste, thinking that to say them is enough,
and that they have done well, and a great matter too: But surely they also
Mistakes in Christians.
are mistaken, for what honor have they done to God therein, or what great
profit to themselves, that considered not for what, nor to whom they Prayed,
whereas they mind not God all the time of Prayer, but still mind when they
should end, to be gone away, which is a gross abuse of Prayer. Danger.
There are many of this sort, whose case is dangerous enough, and they are to
be pitied, instructed, and admonished by their Ministers.

Every day to Church.
Day to Church to Prayer, which is very laudable; but if they should truly
examine themselves, when all is done, perhaps they would find, that they were
thinking of their worldly affairs, most of the time, and did scarce reflect
upon such Prayers as was said, being smoothly carried away with Man deceived.
some thoughts which the Devil suggested according to their inclination, or
natural disposition, wherein they take such content, that they easily forget
what in Prayer they are saying: For he can fit every man's humor, yet by
reason, their first Intention was good, they are the more excusable, because
their Destruction Not intentional Impieties.
was not Intentional; yet they cannot be excused for their negligence, and
dis-respect to God, who is present, and to whom they ought in Prayer to direct
their Speech, with great Humility and Reverence.

Others there are, that have the Stint of prayer.
good custom of imposing upon themselves the Stint, keeping off set times to
Prayer, and when they have performed their task, they think they have done
much; but while they are at Prayer, their mind runs more when they shall end
their task, than how to please or praise God: Though this be a great abuse of
Prayer, yet it is of more importance than the other; for they have an intention
to go Intent of prayer.
to Prayer, to serve God, and to spend time to perform that task which they
have obliged themselves to, though afterward they are carried away with vain
thoughts. Another good it has, that they are never quiet until they have
performed their Stint of Devotions, which makes them mindful of God, when they
are about business.

speak of that matter, yet are as careless of their duty to God as Wilful
carelessness.
others, and perhaps more; they seldom Pray at home, and when they frequent
the Churches, they stand and gaze, they come to see and be seen, and often for
company sake rather than to Pray; as to attend this Nobleman, or Too much used
a custom.
that Lady, whom they led by the hand, more than for the love of God; and many
times to meet this or that Friend, with whom they have some business, on which
their mind is more busied than on their Prayers: But those young Gallants and
Damsels are worst of all, that prate, and laugh even Derision.
in Prayer time, taking notice of their Neighbor's attire, and fashion of the
Minister's behavior and Doctrine, etc. They go to Church, as if it were but a
bare ceremony to serve God, not minding that holy Action as they ought; and
they, whose Sex requires most modesty in the Church, where it ought to be most,
do show but Levity and Vanity, mixed with a small deal of Devotion, yet there
are many pious. In short, though these Gallants seem to be of some capacity
more than others, yet they so forget themselves, and their duty to God forgot.
God, that they may be without offense compared to the Jews, who, kneeling
before our Savior, adored him in scorn, and laughter, looking on each other;
in like manner these Pray carelessly, (which is, to undervalue our Savior)
Christ undervalued.
speedily turning faces about, prate, and smile at each other, (this
considered) is it not a foul abuse, a great irreverence, and dis-respect, to
that great God of Glory, their Creator and Redeemer.

Frequenting the Sacrament.
the Sacraments, that they may not be noted for cold Christians, nor indevout;
and many times when they see others of their quality, communicating without due
preparations, and examination of themselves, will receive the Sacrament for
company sake, this is a great abuse: A great abuse.
There are diverse other abuses in this kind, which I shall now omit, least I be
too tedious, but returning to what I said in the beginning, that whether the
Prayer be vocal, or mental, without the application to God, it is of little or
no profit at all.

Judge, dear Christians, whether wrong be not done to the King of Kings, and
Lord of all things, when by those that go to speak and petition to him, He is
not so much regarded as a temporal King, or worldly Man of mean degree; for
they scarce begin to pray, when most irreverently they turn (as we may say)
their back-^^^es to his Divine Majesty, who is there attending to give audience
to their request, their mind busily speaking with the World, and he left as a
Cipher, quite forgotten: Oh, foul abuse! Oh, great irreverence! Oh, unspeakable
ingratitude!

A Prayer.
MY God, how can thou endure it? My dearest Lord, how do thou bear with
such rude and ungrateful people? Verily thou art the God of patience and
goodness, the meanest Man of any fashion would not take the like affront at any
others hands, though somewhat beyond his degree. O true Lover of our Souls,
what can they expect by such Prayers, or rather by such Mockeries? for though
thou art most merciful and gracious, and very willing to receive our Petitions,
and grant what we desire, if we come to thee with that humble reverence, and
true confidence which is fitting, and all ought to have in thee; or with that
respect and attention which they afford even to thy Creatures, when thy great
goodness and mercy is not regarded, (but they dis-esteem it, and turn their
hearts and minds from thee) and when the Day of reckoning comes, Doubtless thou will turn thy blessed face from them, and they may hear to their cost, Depart
from me ye cursed into Hell for ever, which is an Exclusion from the Joys of
Heaven, and the sight of God's Glory Eternally.

I beseech thee therefore, my most gracious Lord, that thou will prevent this
my so great Evil, and grant us most frail Sinners, thy holy grace in this Life,
to forsake this great irreverence, and continual abuse of thy Divine Majesty in
time of our Prayer, which, through negligence and inconsideration, we commonly
fall into, that thy sweet face may not be turned from us at the hour of Death,
nor we be forsaken by thee for all Eternity.

Amen.
MUNDAYS Exercise.
animals entering Ark Noah enters the Ark Genesis VII.
And the Lord said unto Noah came thou and all thy house into the Ark. etc. v.
1. Of every clean beast take by sevens etc. v. 2. Of beasts that are not
clean and of fowls and of every thing that cre^peth. etc. v. 8 there went in
two and two. etc. v. 9
CHAP. II. Of profitable Praying.
Heavenly conversation.
Eloquence, subtilty of Wit, nor great Learning is requisite, but a plain,
humble, and simple Declaration of what you intend; for his Divine Majesty
understands our intentions, therefore it will be fitting, whenever we go to
Prayer, to have a certain intention, and to propose to thy self some end, for
which you intend then to Pray, that your Prayer may not be in vain. As for
example, I will go to Prayer, Example.
to give God thanks for his benefits bestowed on me, as for my Creation,
Redemption, and such like; and in token of gratitude, I will say such Prayers,
or spend so long time at my Devotions, and confess with unfeigned
unthankfulness, for the love which our Savior did bear toward me, coming from
Heaven to Earth, to suffer what he did, in his Life and Death, to satisfy his
Heavenly Father, for the sins of such a vile wretch as I am, and then purpose
through his Grace, to serve and love him ever after, with more fidelity and
sincerity than formerly, and crave his holy assistance and grace to that end
also, at other times to obtain true sorrow, repentance, and forgiveness of your
Sins, likewise amendment of your Life, or the overcoming of some vice or
passion, to which you are most inclined, or to gain some virtue, as patience,
humility, love of your Neighbor, chastity, etc. Moreover, you may employ your
Prayers for the conversion of Sinners, or any other thing that is commended to
your Prayers, or you intend to obtain of his Divine Majesty; for, surely it is
much simplicity and ignorance in any, to go to Prayer, and speak with this so
great a King, and gracious a Lord, and not know what about, nor considering to
what end.

and Earth) remember always Order of going to prayer.
to do, and direct it, for one of the former ends, or the like; which done, in
the place of Prayer, suppose in your Mind that God is there present, gloriously
(as truly he is) accompanied and attended with many Quires of Angels, that are
always praising him with unspeakable reverence and love: That he is there to
give you Audience, and know The presence of God.
your intent and request; after this great submission and humility, address
your Petition to his Divine Majesty, by devout Prayers, inwardly remembering
that you are speaking to him, always endeavoring to have your mind well
applied whenever you go to Prayer, and be careful to reflect on what you do,
and how you Pray; and if you find your mind wandering, and not applied as it
ought with humility, try God's mercy, for that irreverence. This manner of
proceeding in Prayer, no doubt, but does please the Almighty God, and he will
not deny what you desire, or grant you a better thing; for this is the true way
to pray with profit, and it will bring you with facility to Mental prayer: For
indeed, Vocal prayer so used is both Vocal and Mental, and certainly God does
concur particularly God's concurrence.
with those that give themselves to Prayer, granting them not only many inward
comforts and consolations, but also such an exemplary Life, that they are
observed, and beloved by most people, for the inward Grace cannot but manifest
it self in the outward works, so that you may see them often visiting the
Churches, delighting to hear Sermons, and Divine Service, frequenting the
Sacraments with much Devotion, spending long time in Prayer, with so great
inward feeling, that often outwardly the Outward sense of inward grace.
Tears abundantly flow from the inward sweetness: They read good Books to keep
in the little fire of Devotion; they are also full of compassion, works of
mercy, and charity, Spiritual and Corporeal; they endeavor as near as they can
to keep a clear Conscience, and are desirous to serve, please, and praise God
in all things: And thus they are inflamed in Divine love. I could heartily wish
there were many more of this sort than there are; however, do you your
endeavor to be one, for his Grace will never be wanting to a willing mind.

TUESDAYS Exercise.
Job with boils speaking to wife, estate burning in background Satan tempts
Job. Job. 2.
So went Satan forth from the presence of the LORD and smote Job with sore
boils, etc: v: 7. And he sat down among the ashes. v: 8. Then said his wife
unto him do thou still retain thine Integrity? curse God and die. v. 9.
CHAP. III. Of the dignity and profit of Mental prayer.
What Mental prayer is.
to one near to you, that gives ear to your Petitions, or as one familiar
Friend with another, in great privacy or secrecy: Vocal prayer is used often
without any particular attention, but Mental prayer requires the attention, and
a serious application of the Mind inwardly, or it is no Prayer; in this, when
the Soul gets within her self, she begins to discover the strange works of
God, which are in Man unknown, but to those that are by God illuminated; in
this, as in a Looking-glass, a Man discovers what he is, and comes to the true
Knowledge of himself, for there he sees how far he is from true Christian
perfection.

Foundation of spiritual life.
finds out what Vices and Passions do most domineer, and molest him, and the
causes why he does not Live in all things according to the Word of God, and the
right rule of Reason; and what Remedies to apply to this great Evil. Here all
the inward, sore Diseases, evil customs, inclinations, and disordered
affections are perceived: This is the School where we may be daily taught, and
instructed, how to cure those Sores, suppress those Vices, mortify those
Passions, regulate those Affections and Inclinations, gain Virtue, and please
our Heavenly Spouse.

World's vanity known.
sight of feeling than ever before, which causes the Soul to loath and contemn
the World, hate Vice, love Virtue, and seek after God above; and therefore she
resolves to change her Life, and be no more what formerly she was; her Eyes are
opened, she is illuminated, and taught, in this Prayer, how all things created,
can give her no true content, which makes her seriously desire, and aspire to
those things that are Eternal.

Tastes of Heaven.
Prayer, of the content and joy of Mind, which the true Servants of God enjoy
in Heaven; now she regards not the wisdom of this World, but that which does
consist in subjection, humility, and sanctity of Life.

The Devil and Natures deceit discovered.
Prayer, the wiles and deceits of the Devil, and the subtle and alluring
excuses of Nature are discovered, which are very hurtful to a Soul that
desires true perfection, which must be had by the way of Mortification, which
the Devil and Nature do little affect. Here the knowledge and love of God,
increases to a great height of the Soul, which His Divine Majesty does often
visit, and replenish with supernatural Graces, and Comforts; and by secret
Influences of His Holy Spirit, does Elevate her far beyond her self, to see,
know, and feel, with great content and joy, what Tongue cannot express.

A true vision of our wills.
Wills, with the Will of God, which is the highest we can attain to in this
Life, by our labor, and industry, through His holy Grace, without which we can
do nothing, though many has great Favors, Visions, and Revelations by his
special Gift. Oh what a happy thing this Prayer is! O what a sweet Invention
this is of our good God, to bring Souls to his Knowledge, Love and Familiarity,
(as is said in the beginning) that thereby, with more facility and security,
they may gain that Glory, for which they are Created: This all ought to love,
desire, and practice, that desires endless Felicity and Happiness.

Christianity not difficult.
impossible, or at least of great difficulty, to attain to, or gain this
blessed Prayer; but I do assure them, they are very much mistaken, though true
it is, that it cannot be had, without some Industry and Labor of ours; neither
can a Man learn any Art or Science, the first Day, be it never so easy: For
experience ^eacheth all, we see thousands of all sorts, and Sexes, given daily
(as we ought charitably to believe) to this Exercise, and practice of Mental
prayer, so that i^ you intend to go forward in this Holy Exercise, and acquire
perfection, you must not think i^ difficult, nor be dismayed, if presently you
gain it not; for every thing has a beginning, and nothing is had in the World
without labor.

or Corn in Harvest, and perhaps get little or none; and shall not we Labonr a
little to gain this benefit, or Art of Prayer, and reap thereby the Fruit of
Virtue, and Life Everlasting? Our labor is less in this then theirs, the fruit
and profit more certain than theirs, and of greater value without any
comparison than theirs.

Comfort offered.
and you shall see, and feel how sweet and pleasing our Lord is, to those, that
through Love do truly seek after him: For if you be in Darkness, come to him by
Prayer, and you shall be Illuminated; if Thirsty, there you shall drink
abundantly of Divine Nectar, springing as pure water from the Fountain of Life;
if Hungry, you shall eat there of the Celestial food of Angels, for there your
Beloved has his Table set with varieties of Dainties, for all comers, without
exception, and his Goblets of Wine of all pleasant and delightful tastes,
placed thereon.

Divine heat.
and ye shall be made warm, and comforted with the fire of divine Love: Come (I
pray) to this fair Garden, and Paradise of pleasure, and delight your self with
the Beauty, Varieties, and sweet Odours of virtuous Flowers, which there are
seen and had, for they to delight and ravish the Court of Heaven.

thy self in our Lord, (who Delight in Christ
is always present) and call to him, for he will grant thee the Petitions of
thy heart; Come to him, he does invite thee, be not afraid, nor ashamed, for
thy Face shall not be confounded, but much joyed in His holy presence, and
comforted with his sweet Conversation. In a word, they are happy, that give
themselves seriously to this most blessed Exercise of Prayer; but what it is,
and how to use and practice it, you may see in the following Chapter.

WEDNESDAYS Exercise.
angel placing coal in Isaiah's mouth with tongs Isaiahs vision. Isa: 6.
Then said I, woe is me, for I am undone because I am a man of unclean lips.
etc: v: 5. Then flew one of the Seraphims unto me having a live cole in his
hand which he had taken with the tongs from off the altar. v. 6. And he laid it
upon my mouth etc: v. 7.
CHAP. IV. What Mental prayer is, and the parts thereof.
Mental prayer explained.
it, is a familiar reverential Colloquy, Conference, or humble discourse of the
Soul with God, not by outward words, but inwardly in our mind, declaring our
necessities and wants, and craving such things as we stand in need off; this
Definition of Prayer, includes and supposes the other, which is an Elevation
or Application of the mind to God: For I must have a Man present, before I can
speak to him; even so, I must have God present, by the Elevation or Application
Elevation of the mind
of the mind to him, before I can discourse, or speak with him. But you may
inquire, how you may have God present; I say, his presence is framed by his
Understanding, as you shall think fit, or most convenient for your purpose: As
our Savior being a Child, shaking with cold in the Manger; or, as a Man
praying in the Garden, sweating with water and blood, or in any other form or
manner, that he Lived on Earth, is glorious in Heaven, or in the most blessed
Sacrament, where he is God and Man; or by Faith, supposing him to be within,
and without you, as truly he is, according to his Divinity, which is every
where in all things, and in the most inward substance of your Soul, and secret
of your Heart: Also when you are dis-heartned, or not well able to keep his
presence in your mind, you may Pray inwardly in your mind.

Method of mental prayer.
set down, by which you may dispose your self with due respect, to appear
before, and speak with so High a Majesty, and spend the whole time of Prayer
with ease and profit: This does consist in the use of the parts in order.

The parts of prayer.
to wit Preparations, Meditation, Thanksgiving, Oblation and Petition, every
part of these has its own Office, and is of great importance to be well
understood and observed.

business of her Salvation is, which requires a careful and diligent
application without Destractions.

For audience with God.
have Audience of his Prince or King, (which he much desired) about affairs of
great consequence, will somewhat before rid himself of all other Employments,
so to dispose himself without trouble; for that hour of Audience, it is not
enough that he rid himself of those occasions, if he did not recollect to
himself carefully to consider what he is to do, and what to say unto the King,
this is very plain and reasonable; he therefore, having set aside all
occasions, he retires himself to his Closet, giving directions to his Servants
not to let any come at him, least they disturb him; then he there applies
himself seriously, to consider the Greatness and Majesty of the Person he is to
speak with, the manner how to behave himself, and salute the King, and the
matter he is to speak off to him; in this the mind is totally applied in
Recollection.

^our ^er.
before that time, you must endeavor to put all Distractions and idle
Cogitations (as is said) of what kind soever out of your mind, for with those
you are often too much employed and busied; but shun company, retire your self
to your Chamber, and read pious and godly Books, which are great helps.

Consider God's dignity.
manner how, and the matter you must speak of: As thus, I am to have Audience,
and speak not with a worldly Man, but with the true King, and Creator of Heaven
and Earth, that great God Omnipotent, who gives Being and Life to all
Creatures, in whose presence the Angels, Cherubims and Seraphims, and all the
Celestial powers do tremble and shake; if then to worldly Kings, there must be
so many Ceremonies, Bowings, and Kneelings used before a Man can speak to them,
as we daily see: What must be done, and what ought I to do, going to speak with
my God, the King of so great Power, Dignity and Majesty, attended most
Gloriously with many Quires of Evangelical Spirits, whose Eyes will be
altogether upon me, observing what passes? Doubtless then I must come before
him with great humility, reverence, and respect, and so behave my self, that I
may do nothing displeasing to his Divine Majesty.

then feelingly Pray to that Great God, in this, or the like manner: Manner of
praying.
Come, O Holy Ghost, and fill our hearts with faithfulness and zeal, and kindle
them with the fire of thy Love; send forth thy Spirit, and they shall be
Created, and thou shall renew the face of the Earth. O what am I, or how dare I
presume to come to thy presence, my God, and King of infinite Majesty and
Glory; for I am nothing but Dust and Ashes, meat for worms, and which is worse,
a wicked Sinner, who have often offended thee, and deserve thy wrath and
indignation, rather than any favor, which makes me with fear and trembling now
appear before thee.

Lord of Sinners, as Just (having all Power over both, and art very desirous of
the good and Salvation of all thy Subjects, being infinitely merciful, and
can forgive more in an instant than I have done, or ever can commit) with an
humble and submissive heart; yea, with shame and confusion I do come to thee,
Oh most merciful and great God of Glory, being a grievous Sinner, yet desirous
to amend my Life, and never more offend thy Divine Majesty: Wherefore, I humbly
beseech thee, not to cast me from thy presence, but give me Audience, my dear
God, and incline thine Ears, and Heart, my most gracious King, unto my words,
and hear what I shall say, for I will not despair, but confide in thy mercy and
goodness; and do humbly beg of thee, to grant me thy Grace, that I may truly
open my Heart, and make the cause of my Soul known unto thee.

Reading.
your self of the quality of the business by Reading.

The second part of prayer being Meditation.
Meditation, by which you do consider that Matter or Subject with all its
circumstances, and conveniences, as how it was, is, or may be for your
Spiritual good, and profit; what, and how great a benefit it is to you, or you
may get thereby, and what Obligation it does cast upon you: For the end, for
which we Meditate, is, to move the Will to some good Affection, which once had;
Meditation or Discourse is needless, and will rather hinder than profit the
Soul, which remaining in any pious Affection, does spend the time very
profitably.

very great, but I am sorry that so few have a feeling of it, by reason they do
not try how sweet our Savior is to all that through Love do come to him.
Consider, that our Savior by his Suffering made satisfaction to his Heavenly
Father for our sins, and the great Torments that in Hell we were to suffer for
them, which is a great and special benefit, that ought to move you to take
compassion upon Him, to hate Sins, and to be very thankful for his Love, in
suffering for you: And consider your great Obligation to serve him, ever after
with more fidelity and sincerity, procuring your Salvation with so great pain,
merely of his goodness and love, without any merit or desert of thine.

Soul's own feeling.
thou be, my God, for all thy favors: I do acknowledge, and confess this to be
so great, that it does oblige me for ever to thy Love and Service. Oh Jesus!
how admirable, how excessive great is thy Love to me, Dust and Ashes, the worst
of Creatures, the greatest of Sinners! O Lord, thy Goodness is
incomprehensible, and thy Mercy is truly far beyond all thy Works; and thus
Meditations with Reason, is, to move the Will, to acknowledge God's benefits,
and to induce it to love and gratitude.

God's forbearance.
with thee, expecting thy repentance and conversion? if the pains of Hell be
considered, how often have you deserved them, by breaking the Laws of God, yet
this punishment was not inflicted? then when you were in Sin, and thereby the
Slave of the Devil, how many sweet inspirations, and remorses of Conscience,
had you from God, which, by the benefit of his holy Sacrament brought you to
Grace, and freed you from the power of Satan, which is no small favor? now do
not many thousands Rot in the filth of Sin, (and Sin, (and it is feared) will be
Eternally damned.

God's goodness.
prevented, though daily many others are suddenly Dead; and God knows in what
case: If you consider the Joys of Heaven, which you lost by Sin, and see that
it is recovered again, and purchased for you, with no less price, than the
precious Blood and Death of Christ our Savior; what a high Obligation does it
cast upon you, of some requital of Love? you see how all these, and what else
you can consider in Prayer, do plainly appear, to be great benefits of Almighty
God, to the knowledge and feeling, understanding of which, Meditation does
bring you, and consequently to be thankful, to love and serve his Divine
Majesty, with great sincerity and fidelity: I have written these Examples,
briefly to help you the better, to meditate and know what to conclude upon, out
of what you do consider.

The third part of prayer being Thanksgiving.
follows, is Thanksgiving; for when you perceive by what you have Meditated,
that you received a benefit from God, stands it not with reason, you should
acknowledge the favor; but also give him thanks in the best words and
expressions you are able, or can make your thankful mind known, which may be
thus done: O Lord my God, the true lover, and most faithful friend of my Soul,
when, or how shall I be thankful unto thee for all thy gracious favors, and
gifts, and for this particular benefit bestowed, and done unto me, poor wretch,
wholly unworthy of thy Love? Oh my dear Jesus, how shall I requite this thy
tender affection? Oh how shall I serve thee, or wherein can I please thee? Oh
how shall I praise thee, being what I am? Oh how shall I honor thee, my God,
who have so highly expressed thy love, and desire of my Salvation, in this great
benefit? Oh most loving Creator, how near and dear to thy sweet Heart the
Creature is? Rest in this, if you can, looking on him with a reverential and
loving Affection.

The fourth part of prayer being Oblation
part that follows, consequently consisting in this, that the party, who
received a benefit, would in what he could, not only in Word and Affection, as
in Thanksgiving, but likewise in Work and Deed, requite with some Gift the love
of their Benefactor or Friend; for a grateful Mind is never content, to be
thankful in words only, but it always thinks, and considers in what manner,
service, or gift, to requite the benefits or favor done, offering to God thy
good will, and affection, of a sincere Heart and Soul, ever to be employed in
the service of God, with a steadfast purpose and resolution to abhor, and
mortify what ever is displeasing to him, not forgetting thy darling or bosom
Sins, to repent in particular for them; for good resolutions and virtuous Arts
are acceptable to God.

The fifth and last part of prayer being Petition.
which is properly called Prayer, that is, Petition, for by this we beg and
ask, as being poor and needy, of that great God, rich, and powerful King,
(whom we certainly believe, both can and will grant us our desires) to help and
relieve us in our necessities, and bestow what we are in want of, (as thus.)

A Prayer.
MY Omnipotent, and most bountiful Lord, most merciful and gracious King,
(whose hands are always open to the needy, and whose willingness to assist the
distressed, is greater than their desire to be relieved, and without thee we
are (and can do) nothing) experience has made me to know my own weakness,
frailty and unconstancy in any good; for I often failed in performing virtuous
and godly Resolutions, formerly made for the amendment of my Life, which
causes me humbly to confess that of my self, I am truly nothing, and can do no
good: Therefore, my God, take compassion on me, leave me not unto my self,
grant me thy holy Grace, to be constant in my good purposes, otherwise I shall
slide away like water, whose steps are not perceived; my resolution will fall
to nothing, and I shall be as if I were not, having nothing whereby to subsist.

Therefore, I humbly beseech thee, and earnestly beg for thy goodness and
mercy, that thou will commiserate my case; and as thou have graciously inspired
those good purposes and godly Resolutions, (for they are from thee, and not
from me) so thou will be mercifully pleased, to grant and give me particular
assistance of thy holy Grace, that I may be thereby enabled to amend my Life,
and through thy true Love to execute and perform, what I have now purposed to
do for thy sake, and principally to overcome my evil inclinations, and utterly
to abandon and forsake this Vice of, ( here name thy bosom Sins) by which I do
most offend thy Divine Majesty, that hereafter, all my thoughts, words and
deeds, may be highly and purely to thy Honor, Glory, Endless praise, and my
own Souls Salvation.

Amen.
and other necessaries commended to your Prayers, or what else you please,
which are necessary wants.

THURSDAYS Exercise.
Nebuchadnezzar observing children in the furnace The three Children delivered.
Dan. 3.
Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego answered and said to the King etc: v: 16. If
it be so our God whom we serve is able to deliver us from the burning fiery
furnace etc: v: 17. Then was Nebuchadnezzar full of fury etc: v. 19 Then the
King was astonished, etc: v: 24 etc:
CHAP. V. Profitable advices concerning the use of Prayer.
Set hours of prayer not to be omitted.
certain hour for Prayer morning and evening, which you must never omit but one
great necessity.

Comfort in prayer.
long, before you taste the sweetness thereof; none can be perfect the first
Day in any Trade, time will perfect all: This makes men Labor with patience in
Winter, expecting the Fruit in Summer. Make no great account Distractions in
prayer.
of Distractions, and idle Thoughts, which many are troubled with in Prayer,
when they are not voluntary; but do you do your endeavor to cast them off,
when you take notice of them, for your resisting of them will be very
acceptable, though you did nothing else, because, to have these Thoughts, or to
go without them is not in our power; but when they come, to accept of, and
entertain, or resist and reject them, that is in our power: No man can have
good Thoughts, or be without evil Thoughts, when he please, but the one comes
from God, and the other from Satan, which does use to multiply them in time of
Prayer to vex us, and breed a disgust, that thereby we may perceive it a thing
very troublesome, and in a manner impossible to be acquired, that at last we
should omit it altogether: This is his aim, for he well knows, that by this
Prayer we do daily serve our selves, more and more from him, and his Wiles, and
draw nearer and nearer to God, which he cannot endure, and would hinder if he
could, and believe it your time is well spent, though you did but put off these
Thoughts in the time of Prayer; for in this you fight for God's cause.

the cause thereof, therefore with profound Humility prostrate before Remedy
for distraction in prayer.
His Divine Majesty, examine your Conscience, and likely you may find you have
committed some Sins, or not prepared your self for Prayer, or not performed
your good purposes, or not answered your Holy inspirations; and if you find
none of these, at least acknowledge it to be a just punishment, for the sins of
your Life past, and that you are truly unworthy of any Heavenly consolation, or
Heavenly visitation, being such, and so ungrateful a Sinner, and that you are
more then well dealt withal, to be admitted to his Holy presence; for this
Humility does highly please his Divine Majesty, and does often move him
instantly to give unto the humble Souls great comforts, benefits and graces.

The parts of prayer to be used in order.
the parts of Prayer in order, until you be practiced in them; by reason, in
time of Aridity, when you can have no Gust in one part, you may pass to
another, and so without trouble or loathsomeness you may spend the time of
Prayer, if not with content and comfort, yet with profit: For these parts of
Prayer are placed before the Soul, as so many Diversities of Meat, that if in
one she get no Gust, she may take of another, and so tasting of each, it is like
she will get content and satisfaction in some one of them, to please her Pallat,
and sweetly refresh her self after her long Labor taken in discoursing,
seeking to find that Spiritual food; and be sure to spend more time in the
Affective parts, then in the Preparative or Dispositive; but if in any part you
are moved to some pious Affection, remain in it without inward words, looking
on the Object, and affecting it as long as you can; be careful that your
Affection, through too much Fervor, does not drown or overcome the
Understanding; for when it is Vehement with too much sorrow, or joy of Spirit,
do not force or forward it, for that will stifle or choke the Spirit, but
either sweetly rest in it, or divert your Mind on some pious Object; for this,
as cold water cast in a boiling pot, will assuage or qualify that little pot
of your Heart, which is ready to run over with the too great heat of the Fire
of Love, which the Holy Ghost has left burning in the Soul; and Experience
teaches, that all Violence, or Force, hurts the Body, hinders the Soul's
spiritual profit, and causes her to fear, and loath to go to Prayer, by reason
of the pain she is put to in that forcing; for fain she would enjoy totally
what she loves, and she forces her self to this, which cannot in this Life be
had, by all our endeavor possibly, for it is not in our power, but must come
by God's holy Gift when he please.

your Desolation, with humility Desolation in prayer.
acknowledge your self unworthy of any favor, by reason it depends of the good
pleasure of his Divine Majesty, and is beyond our reach, to have those comforts
and feelings, and esteem it a special favor (as indeed it is) to be admitted
to his presence on any terms, to treat with him concerning your Reconciliation
and Salvation, having so often formerly offended, and wronged him, and give him
very great and hearty thanks, for this favor and benefit: This is the true
way, and must be observed.

Sins through weakness
or negligence, you fall or fail in the performance of your good purposes, or
commit some small Sins, or imperfections, be not impatient with your self, for
this afflicted many, troubles the Mind, disturbeth, dismayeth, and dejecteth
the Soul, makes her forsake Prayer, and keeps her from going on heartily in the
Service of God; a discontented and troubled Mind cannot Pray well: Therefore in
such Occasions, let not your Passion sway, but with all submission go to his
Divine Majesty, (who is a more loving Father than a rigorous Judge) confess
your frailty, and disability, of which he is very sensible, and well knows our
weakness, and will have us to understand, and acknowledge it, and that we of
our selves can do nothing, therefore must place our whole trust and confidence
in his Omnipotent goodness, who will give us the Victory over our selves, if we
be persevere in our holy Desires, and his Service, and not doubt of his
assistance and help; for he is so good, that seeing your fidelity and desire to
please him, he cannot but reward it abundantly, though he defers it for a
while. Children learning to go, do get many falls, by reason of their weakness,
yet crying to the Nurse, with her help they always rise again; even so you are
but a Suckling as yet, Learning to go in the way of Virtue, and perhaps you get
many falls, then cry to God, your good Nurse, and with his holy Assistance and
Grace you may rise again as often, until at length you may go without fear, or
any danger.

To take our Savior's pattern.
our Savior was sorely Tempted, and had many Crosses, inviting us to carry our
Cross and follow him; for he, who does not carry his Cross, and follow me,
(said he) is not worthy of me, that is, to be my Disciple, or gain my love, and
the favors I am wont to bestow on my true Servants: The way of the Cross is
the King's Highway to Glory, and the Cross is the Livery of Christ our
Savior, by this his true Servants are known, from the Servants of Satan, and
the Lovers of the World, who for human policy does dissemble and stop their
Passion without Merit; and others will not endure any trouble or cross for
Virtue, or the love of God, or Human respect, but must have their Humor,
though it be to fret in passion, and chafe themselves with raging words, and
revenging thoughts, to their ruin and undoing; but in the way of the Cross, the
Servants of God ever did, and still do follow him to his Kingdom of endless
Felicities.

Patience in afflictions.
Afflictions that shall occur as tokens of Love sent unto you by his Divine
Majesty; for whom he loves he chastises: Moreover, he knows best what is
convenient and fittest for every one, and therefore he gives to some sensible
Devotion, with many sweet Tears in Prayer, because they are weak Spirits, and
must be fed with those sweet Milk sops of Consolation; others like Hirelings go
to Prayer in expectation of a reward, of some Comforts and Consolations, which
now and then they felt in Prayer; and this does forward them in the practice of
Virtue, more than the love of Virtue.

Poor souls.
nothing to feed on, but the hard crusts of Temptations, yet they go on very
heartily; for they do not value those sensible Devotions, neither will they
serve for Hire, but as loving Children serve their Heavenly Father to please
him, by reason it is his business, and like faithful Subjects serve their
King, this is the Life of Saints; these we must imitate, if we desire virtue
and true perfection; these use the form of kneel in Prayer, resisting vain
Cogitations, and do not for want of Consolations depart from Prayer, or go not
to it, for they seek not their own content, but do the will of God, knowing
that all theirs is to please and honor God, conforming our will to his, happen
what may: They that go in the beginning this way, in the end will have
Celestial comforts.

Divert not your mind by outward objects.
do not suddenly divert your Mind, by applying it to outward affairs, but in
what posture see you are in, reflect strongly on what you did Pray, call to
mind the Benefits you thought upon, the good resolutions and promises you made,
for the amendment of your Life, and better serving of God ever after; and in
this you ought to be exact, because you passed your word to God.

FRIDAYS Exercise.
Jonah cast upon the sea shore Jonah is delivered from the fish. Jonah: (...).
Then Jonah prayed unto the LORD his God out of the fishes belly, v: 2: etc:
And the LORD spoke unto the fish and it, vomited out Jonah upon the dry Land

verse 10


CHAP. VI. Instructions for those that cannot Discourse, and therefore in
Prayer have no content.
Dull capacities.
nor Reasons to help themselves in Prayer: These when they go to Prayer, may
frame some thought of making reverence to God, in contrition for offending him,
of thanks for his benefits, and love to them, and praising him for his goodness
and mercy, and it will be acceptable to God, thus to pass the time of Prayer
without tediousness; also it will be requisite to have some devout Books to
read, as helps to Piety and Devotion, reading as often as they see themselves
carried away with any Temptations, shutting the Book after some time Reading,
and thinking upon what they have Read, that so they may be inwardly employed,
until God (seeing their diligent care) may visit them with his Holy grace.

Read the Life of our Savior.
Prayer, when they know not what to do to run over the Life of our Savior, in
a general manner, from his Infancy to his Death, to keep their mind employed in
good thoughts, and it is like that in some part they may have a feeling of
their Sins, or of his Love, or the like good Affection; it may do well to say
Mentally some devout Prayer, with great attention, considering the meaning of
every Petition as you think of them, yet you must not commonly give way to your
imaginations, to run upon many things, but for the most part meditate upon some
Mystery in Divinity, by reason the Soul is apt to gain a Custom thereby, and if
it be an evil one, it will hardly be well settled or recollected, which will be
a great Obstacle to Contemplation in Prayer; for he is scarce worthy of thanks
when he goes to Prayer, can pass the time with any vain or pleasing Discourse,
and differs little in the effect from he that goes to Prayer, with a repugnancy
and loathing of it.

Conscience kept pure.
keep purity of Conscience, sincerity of Affections, and we must often hear the
Word, and receive the holy Sacrament frequently, and practice Acts of Virtue,
as Humility, Contrition, Charity, Patience, etc. And in times of Barrenness,
these will inflame the Soul with godly desires, and at the end of Prayer leave
her with content.

SATURDAYS Exercise.
Daniel among the lions Daniel in the Lions Den. Daniel. VI.
Then the King commanded and they brought Daniel and, cast him into the den of
Lions etc: v. 16. Then the King arose very early etc. v. 19. And when he came
to the den he crye'd etc: v. 20. Then said Daniel etc. v: 21: My God has sent
his angel and has shut the Lions mouths etc: v. 22
CHAP. VII. Of the proficient way in Prayer.
The soul must understand what virtue is.
made understand what Virtue is, and how to bring it and preserve it, until it
come to perfection; you must observe, that some do (...) ^ake notice what it is
to go forward in due Order, in the way of Virtue and perfection; but before
they well know themselves, or what Mortification is, or how they ought to go in
the Exercises of proficient Prayer, their Passions being unmortified, their
Senses not heeded, or well governed, and consequently if they use Prayer many
years, they gain small profit, and little virtue by it.

Purged from the affections of the things of this world.
to proficient Prayer, until you are well and sufficiently purged from all the
affections to the things of this World, and so mortified in your Senses and
Passions, till you come to the knowledge of your own Insufficiency, Vileness
and Ignorance.

The souls step forward.
the Hedge from the foul miry way wherein she was, to a dainty Plain, from the
Winters night to a Summers day, and that the tempestuous operations of the
Passions are gone, the understanding in his Native light does begin to appear
more seriously to work according to reason, and the Sun of Justice casting his
Rays upon him, by which he is enlightened, that he plainly sees, the great
misery the Soul was in, and that only by the Exercise of Virtue she can be
preserved from returning thither again; then by degrees this Soul increasing in
purity, and gains a facility in Prayer.

The souls having the plain understanding.
and the Soul more plainly understands those things of God, which may induce
her to love him in a high degree, and makes her heart tender, and inflames it
with a great desire to imitate the Life of our Savior, and to reprint them
deeply in the Soul; for this is the true pattern of all perfection, it is not
in the understanding of any to conceive, nor in the Eloquence of any Tongue to
express, the comfort the Soul, that is come thus far, has in Prayer; yet it is
not sufficient to have renounced all things in the World, and use Retirements
outward and inward, and great Austerity to the Body, but you must examine and
mortify your Affections, even in Spiritual things, and withdraw your selves
from their Sensual delights.

The End.
A Table.
CHAP. I. OF prayer. page 2. CHAP. II. Of profitable Praying. p. 22. CHAP. III.
Of the dignity and profit of Mental prayer. p. 30. CHAP. IV. What Mental prayer
is, and the parts thereof. p. 41. CHAP. V. Profitable advices concerning the
use of Prayer. p. 66. CHAP. VI. Instructions for those that cannot Discourse,
and therefore in Prayer have no content. p. 82. CHAP. VII. Of the proficient
way in Prayer. p. 87.
FINIS.
Books newly Printed for William Crook nigh Essex-house in the Strand.
London, by E. Settle, Oxon.

Praxis Curiae, Admiralitatis Angliae Auctore, Fran. Clerk. A Book of great
use to all persons conversant in Civil and Ecclesiastical Courts, etc.

De Principiis and Ratiorinatione Geometrarum ubi ostenditur incertitudiuem
falsitutemque non minorem in esse scriptis eorum, quam scriptis Physicorum and
Ethirorum, contra Fastum professorum Geometriae Auctore, Tho. Hobbes.


