John Webb, alias, Hop-bodee-boody's LAST Will and Testament.

Who departed this Life at his Nurses House in Turn-Mill-street, in the 85th.
year of his Age.

With his Pretty Exploits, Character, Sayings, and Epitaph.



Printed for Richard Rosse, in the Year, 1674.

Hop-bodee-body's last Will and Testament, etc.
THe Famous Hopodeeboody, (whose Life we now intend to Write; for the
Information of the present and future Ages, and diverse other good causes and
valuable Considerations) was by birth a true Cockney, for so the Poet resolves
the point. Right Cockneys are all those whose Birth is found,
Where twanging Clapper of Bow-Bell does sound.


He sprouted out of the Parsley-bed, and drew his first breath on this Globe of
Mortality in Thames Street near Broken-wharf, a place where you may very
Comodiously be Landed from Cuckolds haven, and thence take Water again to
rights for the Bench in Southwark. His Nativity happened in the Year 1589. We
would give you the Scheme, but are loath to deprive the Body of Astrology of so
proper an Ornament. However, we find by it and a little Algebra, that it is now
above fourscore and five years ago since his Patents made use of the means to
beget him, and truly in that terrible sullen blustering year eighty eight (when
the Spaniard came with an Invincible Armado laden with Shovels and Pickaxes to
fling all England into the Sea) it was very comendably done of this honest
couple to be so kind one to another, and mind the work of Generation, some
affirm that his Mother when she was big with him was almost frighted out of her
wits by her Husbands going to Tilbury Camp, which by the power of Imagination
made such an impression on the child, that he never had the perfect use of
reason. True it is, that Mercury combust retrograde and inpitted degrees (bogs
of Heaven as one of his Cozens calls them) shows weakness in the
Intellectualls, but there is a critical minute for every one to be happy, and
Jupiter dignified in the 10th. assures us, that if he had not been ou^ of the
way, he might have been one of Tumble-down-Dick's Privy council.

He was a thriveing lusty child, till about seven or eight years of Age, at
which time by misfortune he happened to fall into the fire, which burnt and
disfigured him very much, and from thenceforwards he appeared more and more
like a Natural in his actions and deportment.

Some years after this both his father and mother dyed one soon after the
other; whilst they lived, they had all things comfortably about them, he being
by Trade a Lime-man and she a Laundress; but after their decease their poor
Orphan John Web, (for that was our Hopbodeeboody's right Name) Being looked
upon as a shiftlesse creature, is put out to a Nurse to look after him by the
Parish; With whom he had not been long, but an odd accident happens, which
proved not a little to his damage at present, and all his Nurses loss in the
sequel. Being one day wandering abroad, a charitable Gentleman comisserating his
deplorable simplicity gave him a groat, which he being overjoyed at, [for fools
are generally fond of money, and indeed it is a shreud sign of one to be so]
runs with it home and shows it to his Nurse, who thinking it too much for any
body to give him, fancyed he had stolen it, and in that conceit would needs go
to whip him, who having eat very liberally that morning of pease-porridge, and
thereby got a violent looseness, no sooner had she got up his coats, and made
his Breech smart, but fear opening his postern-gate, discharged a whole
shovelful of Marmalade into the old VVomans chops, half an hours respite she
was forced to take to wipe her mouth, and clear her eyes, but then shen came
upon him more fierce than before, and now it seems all his Ammunition was
spent, so that being wholly at her mercy, she whipped him beyond all measure. The
cruel Hagg so flogg'd his Buttocks Brawny.
She mixed the purple Gore with squitter'd Tawny.


So sore for a long time were his Haunches, that he could never forget it, for
from thenceforth to his dying day he would never take any money save Farthings
and Halfpence; and if any body proferr'd him a piece of silver he would not
touch it, but run away, and cry: No Groat, no Groat, Nurse Hipp'd me once for
t^king a Groat; so that he counted all silver, Groats, and never begged but in
this style. Pay for Dod's sake gi me one Fardin toten.

When he was about eighteen years of Age, in a very hard frost, seeing great
numbers of boys sliding and hopping upon the Ice at the sides of the Thames,
honest silly Jack would needs make one, but as he was hopping very pleasantly
to the great divertisement of the spectators, The Ice on a sudden broke, and in
dropped Peel-garlick all but the head, where he looked like a Monkey, doing
penance, or a Prickear'd fool holding forth in a Bucking-Tub, but roared so
loud one might have heard hi beyond High-gate, till at last he was taken out,
and because he seemed new Christened after the dippers mode, a new name was
bestowed upon him, for since this disaster was occasioned by hopping, and that
none of his body, but his head could be seen, when he was in, an Arch Pickled
Rogue that stood by, calls him Hopodeeboody, a Word whose strange sound took
extremely amongst the Boys and rabble: insomuch that he came generally to be
called so all his life time, so that the very children were wont to sing up and
down the streets. Hopbodeeboody with his long Locks,
Out of the Pillery, into the Stocks.


Others say that being much addicted to hopping in his youth, but so
unfortunate, that he always tumbled down with it, people called at first
Hopping Booby, which in time by corruption became Hopodeeboody, but which is
the true Etymology we must refet to the Antiquaries to determine and proceed.

By this time Hopodeeboody was attained to a legal age of 21. though not to the
years of discretion, and being now in his prime he plays a trick which we may
well call his Master-peice, coming one day in the Winter to Trigg-stairs,
gazeing on the River which was then at High Water, so near, that a strong lusty
Waterman fearing he would tumble in, to frighten him takes him up in his Arms,
and shook him over the water as one would a child, telling him he would drown
him, and asking often, Can you swim, sirrah, can you swim. Which made Hopbody
cry out monstrously, but being set down safe, he continues sneaking
thereabouts, still meditating a Revenge, at last seeing that Waterman stand on
the stairs heedlesly with his back toward him, he comes slily behind him, and
with a sudden thrust cants him into the Thames, crying aloud to him when he was
in. Can you whim, can you whim. And so laughing hoped away as fast as he could.
This is so fa^ from being any fiction, that there is scarce an Ancient Waterman
on the River but will justify it: several were present, by the same token one
that was going to Launch just as the fellow fell in, cried, Pox on him, he was
made such a hole in the Thames I know not how to get my Boat out.

He continued there with several Nurses till the time of the great Fire, and
then was removed to a Nurse near Clarken-well, where Jack Adams and he had
diverse interviews, and sometimes Wars like to be proclaimed, till their
mediating Nurses composed all sudes with half a dozen of nappy Ale, being so
very old he grew almost quite blind of late, and after a tedious sickness
departed this life at his Nurses in Turn-Mill-street, from whence his body was
conveyed in a Coach down to Broken-Wharf, and there entered in the Churchyard
belonging to that parish.

Hopbodeeboody's last Will and Testament.
To all and singular the College of fools, whether Naturals, Changlings,
Popps, Bubbles, Wiseacres, Codle-brains, Shuttle-skulls, Half-wits, Simpletons,
Ninnihamers, or others that shall buy these presents Hopbodeeboody of
Turn-Mill-street Gentleman sends greeting.
KNow ye that I the said Hopboddeboody, being wearied with carrying about an
useless bundle of bones for above fourscore years together, and being now of as
sound and disposing memory as I use to be, do make this my last Will and
Testament in manner and form following. Imprimis I bequeath my body to the
Pit-hole to be decently buried in Flannel, to prevent my catching cold for the
future, and a Whip in my hand to keep away the roguish Worms from devouring me.
Item my Muckendars, Bibbs, Half-shirts, and all other Linen of my vvardroab I
be queath to my dearly beloved Nurse to supply her with Lint and Tinder. Item
my Manor of Foolsbury Hall in the parish of St. Senseless, I bequeath to the
corporation of Gotham and their successors for ever. Item I give all my
Tenements in Knave and Fool Court, to the people called Quakers, on condition
that they shall maintain Lactures thrice a Week, in praise of folly, at their
sanctified new Theater by Gracious street. Item to all, and every person, or
persons that shall refuse Money when they may have it that shall be ashamed to
kiss a Wench the like, because she is fine, or will believe a Woman when she
swears to her dying husband that she will never marry again, I give and
bequeath all my Honors and Title of Hopbodeeboody to remain to them and their
heirs for ever. Item I make my trusty friend John Heart, Knight of the
Draw-Cart, and innocent Luke Executor of this my last Will and Testament, and
give and bequeath to them the sum of one pound to be received out of my
personal Estate when they shall respectively arrive at the Age of discretion,
published, declared, and sealed with a Farthing token, and Kitchinstuff, this
first Day of April. 1674.

His Character.
HOpbodeeboody was a creature that nature made in a a Hurry, and so turned him
over to fortune, who only took care to keep him from starving, alleging he had
not Knavery enough to be preferred with the rest of her Children, he was freer
by far of his blessings than the Pope is, for he would bestow them at any time
for a fardin token: his beard spoke him a Philosopher, but his Muckender
proclaimed him thrice a child. However the young Wenches loved him mightily,
first because it is more natural to them to love fools then wise men, for like
loves it is like, secondly because he returned them their own wishes, and said
those prayers aloud in the streets, that they are always muttering in their
closets, that God would send them handsome Rich lusty Husbands, fine clothes,
good victuals, strong drink, long sleeps, and no work. He would eat buttered
Fish with both hands at once, and cared not how dear Wine was if he might
but have a Gallon of Ale for a mornings Draught, he hated nothing but small
beer and a Groat, and knevv no Authority or punishment beyond his Nurses Wand,
whilst he lived he and she were inseparable Companions in the Day, whatever
they were in the night, and so fit one for another, that it is pity and thing
but a grave should part them.

Hopbodeebody's Sayings.
I'ITEMe tell you a good Jest, I had not thought, Say she, say she, And so says
he, Yours more than my own, Are you there with your Bears thought I, Cry
Mercy I took you for a Joynt-stool; Spend and God will send, I beg your
Diversion Sir. It Is better to buy off an Enemy than revvard a friend, Images
are ITEMay-mens books. She called you a whore, but did she say, she would
prove you a whore? Farevvell and be hanged that is twice good buy. Your humble
Trout Sir.
His Epitaph.
REader! under this heap of stones,
Lies old Hopbodeeboody's bones,
Who always begged for farthing token,
And with good Ale was always soaken:
Long time he lived, enough to see,
Most men do sillier things than he:
But now he is gone, it is never the worse,
For any Iknow but his Nurse.
Yet still to her his love appears,
For all his Bibbs and Muckenders,
He left to her as Legacies.
Wherewith to dry her bluber'd eyes.
FINIS.

