A PLEA FOR THE GODLY.

Wherein is shown the EXCELLENCY OF A RIGHTEOUS PERSON.

By THOMAS WATSON, Minister of the Gospel.

Isa. 43. 4. Since thou wast precious in my sight, thou have been honorable.

Isa. 60. 15. I will make thee an eternal excellency.

LONDON, Printed by A. Maxwell for Tho. Parkhurst, at the Three Crowns and
Bible in Cheapside, 1672.

THE EPISTLE TO THE READER.
Christian Reader,
HOliness is a glorious thing, it is the curious refining of the Soul: Take
away Holiness from an Angel and he is a Devil. True Piety sheds an Excellency
upon a Person, as the Sun imparts a luster to the Stars. The righteous man has
God's name written upon him, Rev. 3. 12. and partakes of the divine nature, 2
Pet. 1. 4. Which is not by a Transubstantiation into the Divine Essence, but by
a Transformation into the Divine Likeness.

This ensuing Discourse is intended as a Plea for the Righteous: I would wipe
off that obloquy and dis-repute which is unjustly cast upon the Saints in this
God dishonouring age: In false Religions, strictness is admired; a devout
Mohammedan, or Papist, are had in Veneration; but in the true Religion he who is
most zealous is most hated: As if the name of Protestantism were an honor, but
the practice of it a disgrace. The most serious holy men are misrepresented to
the world as indiscreet and factious (...). Greg. Nazian.
. The Prophet Eliah was counted the troubler of Israel, 1 King. 18. 17. and
Luther the Trumpet of Rebellion. The old Serpent spits his virulent poison at
the godly through the mouths of the Profane Dicimur infandi incestus r^i, etc.
Tertul. Apol.
. But there is a time coming when the Lord will reckon with men for their hard
speeches, Jude 15. What is the Chaff to the Wheat? How ignoble and contemptible
are the wicked compared to the Godly! the difference will more fully appear at
the last day, Mal. 3. 18. Then shall ye return and discern between the
righteous and the wicked (i. e.) In tempore Judicij, quantum diversa sit sors
Pii and impii. Grotius.
. Such as calumniate the Saints, would be glad to die their death, Numb. 23.
10. Let me die the death of the righteous, and let my last end be like his.

The Philosopher asking one, Which of these two he had rather be, Either rich
Croesus, or virtuous Socrates? He answered that in his Life he would be
Croesus, but at his Death Socrates. In like manner there are many would live
with the wicked, but die with the righteous; but they shall not have their
wish: They were offended at the sight and company of God's holy ones, and they
shall be as far parted from them, as Heaven and Hell are asunder. Oh ye Saints
of the most High, be not troubled at the groundless aspersions of the wicked
(...).
; they who are your Censurers shall not be your Judges. Lift up your Crests, be
cheerful to think what Christ has wrought for you by his Blood, and wrought in
you by his Spirit. He has dignified you above the rest of the World, The
righteous is more excellent than his neighbor. I shall not further exspatiate;
but bumbly imploring the blessing of the Almighty upon these few Lines, I rest,

March 27: 1672. Thine in all Christian Service THOMAS WATSON.

ERRATA.
Page 4. marg. for (...) read (...) p. 12. marg. for (...) read (...) p. 56.
marg. for (...). p. 68. line 24. for Sat. read Saint.

THE Righteous Man's Excellency.
Prove. 12. 26. The Righteous is more excellent than his Neighbor.
SOlomon was a man of Renown, he was the World's wonder; he discoursed of trees
from the Cedar-tree in Lebanon unto the Hysop that springs out of the wall 1
King. 4. 33.
. The Proverbs are profound and holy Aphorisms, indicted by the Spirit of God,
and penned by him who was both a King and a Preacher. A great part of this Book
is to set forth the difference between the godly and the wicked; the happiness
of the one, and the misery of the other. The Text is spoken in the elogium and
commendation of a righteous man. The righteous is more excellent than his
neighbor.

1. I begin with the first word, righteous (...). Septuag.
.] There is a twofold righteousness. 1. A Civil righteousness; and so he is
righteous, who is adorned with the Moral Virtues, Prudence, Justice,
Temperance; who keeps free from poenal statutes, and does not dash upon the
rock of visible scandal. This righteousness is valid, foro humano, in man's
court, but is insufficient to Salvation Sordet in conspect^ judic is, quod
fulget in conspectu operantis.
. Under the fair leaves of Civility, the worm of Unbelief may be hid. Many a
person decked with Morality is now descended into Hell; a Bull may be tied with
Ribbons, and wear a Garland on his Head, yet go to the slaughter. However for
the Honor of this Age, it were to be wished, that there were more civil
righteousness to be found in the world.

2. There is a Gospel-righteousness, which is first a righteousness imputed.
Imputata.
i. e. when Christ's righteousness is made over to us. In Adam we were criminal
persons, Romans 5. 12. In whom all have sinned (...).
. If the head plot treason, all the body is guilty; but Christ is made to us
righteousness, 1 Cor. 1. 30. Indeed it is this righteousness only, in which we
can stand before the Justice of God, Jer. 23. 6. This is the name whereby he
shall be called, The Lord our righteousness (...).
. This righteousness is a coat without seam, which does not only cover, but
adorn us; this is as truly ours to justify, as it is Christ's to bestow,

2. A righteousness imparted Impertita.
; which is the infusing the seed and habit of Grace into the Soul; the making a
person internally holy. And so he is said to be righteous who has a change of
heart wrought in him, and is transformed by the renewing of his mind, Rom 12.
2. Such an one, though he is not another man, yet he is a new man, 2 Cor. 5.
17. The faculties are not new, but the qualities; as the strings of a Viol are
the same, but the tune is altered.

Righteousness is extensive in the Subject Qualitates sunt in subjecto
extensive.
, it has a spreading virtue; 1 These. 5. 23. The God of peace sanctify you
wholly (...).
. A child of God is regenerate in every part, though but in part.

2. He is more excellent.] Excellency is the ennobling a person, or a gradual
elevation of him above others. The righteous man is more excellent, that is, he
is a better man; the word in the Hebrew and Italian for excellent, signifies
abundant; as (...)
if the Spirit of God had said, The righteous has more abundant worth in him,
more intrinsecal goodness

3. Than his neighbor Praestat proximo suo. Dru^.
.] Neighbor (...)
is not to be taken here strictly, for one that lives in a Vicinity, and is
nearly situated; but by neighbor is meant any one that is unrighteous, and
has not the fear of God before his eyes Excellentior est illo qui justus non
est, Cart. in loc.
.

The Text has two general parts.

1. The Subject, the Righteous. 2. The Predicate, he is more excellent than his
neighbor.
Solomon seems, as it were, to put the righteous and the wicked in a pair of
Scales; the one weighs as massy Gold, the other weighs lighter than the dust of
the Balance.

Doctrine. He who is truly righteous is far more excellent than any Doct.
wicked person in the world whatsoever. I say [truly righteous] to exclude the
Hypocrite, who has (...) a Form, 2 Timothy 3. 5.
and slight tincture of Deific^ Professio. Ambros.
piety, but knows not the grace of God in truth, Col. 1. 6. He has nothing of
religion but the name, Rev. 3. 1. and religion often suffers by him: But he who
is really righteous, is the excellent person, and has a superiority to all
others, I Sam. 15. 28.

For the illustrating of the Proposition, I shall do two things; I shall show

1. Wherein the righteous man is more excellent. 2. Why

1. Wherein a righteous man is more excellent than another. This appears three
ways,

In respect of 1. What he is. 2. What he has. 3. What he shall have.

1. A righteous man is more excellent than a wicked, in respect of what he is.

1. He is more richly endued with Wisdom; Pro. 4. 7.
he is of a dexterous sagacity, mixing the Serpents prudence with the Doves
innocence: I Cor. 2. 15. He that is spiritual judges all things: As the Soul
in the eye is the cause why it sees; so the Spirit of God in the mind is the
cause why it savingly understands. The anointing of the Holy Ghost is
irradiating; it clears a Christians eyesight: I Joh. 2. 27. The same Unction
teaches you all things De essentia salutis.
. The Saints are compared to wise Virgins (...) Chrysostom.
, Mat. 25. 2. Sensualists have often a greater reach in matters of the world,
but they have no insight into the deep things of God, I Cor. 2. 14. A Swine may
see an Acorn under the Tree, but it cannot see a Star. David being divinely
illuminated, grew wiser than his teachers, Psalm. 119. 99. A righteous man is
Wise,

1. To know himself: Take the most Mercurial Wit, the subtle Politician, who is
able to dive into the arcana Imperii, the mysteries of State, yet he is acute
obtusus, ignorant of his own heart: There are those Meanders and Sophisms,
those intrinsic pollutions, that he cannot find out; he dresseth himself by
the flattering-glass of self-love, he sees not that evil which is in him, nor
will he believe it Quo pejus se babet, mi^s sentit.
. Hazael could not imagine he should be so bad when he came to be King, 2 King.
8. 13.

But a Soul spiritually enlightened, sees that which the natural man does not;
he sees legions of vain thoughts; he sees how his grace is checkered with
corruption; his humility is stained with pride; his faith mixed with unbelief:
His very duties are but splendida peccata, shining sins Augustine.
. He sees so much of his heart that he dares not trust it.

2. A righteous man is wise to know Jesus Christ: The natural man hears of
Christ by the hearing of the ear, but he does not know him, Cant. 5. 9. What is
thy beloved more than another beloved? Those who journeyed with Paul, heard a
voice, but saw no man, Act. 9. 7. so the unregenerate person hears the Minister
set forth Christ as altogether lovely (...)
, he hears a voice, but sees no man; he sees not Christ's orient beauties.
Christ is a treasure, but an hid treasure. Id^o est Christi (...) incognita,
quic est (...). Calvin.
But a gracious soul has the vail taken off, he sees the amazing Excellencies
of Christ, 1 Pet. 2. 7. Unto you that believe he is precious, his Merits,
Graces, Benefits are precious: a righteous man has Christ's eye salve to see
his tried gold, Rev. 3. 18. Zeuxis having drawn a curious Piece, Nicostratus
fell into the admiration of it, and commended it; an ignorant man stood by and
asked him, what such rare Excellency he saw in that Piece? says he, If thou
could see with my eyes, thou would admire as well as I. So if a carnal man
could see with a spiritual man's eyes, he would wonder at those surpassing
beauties in Jesus Christ, which now he makes light of.

3. A righteous man is wise to discern the Times, 1 Chronicles. 12. 32. The Children
of Issachar were men that had understanding of the Times. The world cries out,
Glorious times! but a righteous man has an eye of discerning, he can see when
the wicked make Gods law, and when religion is crucified Psalm. 119. 126.
by such as cry Hosanna to it. He is wise to keep from the contagion of the
times. Rev. 14. 2. These are they which were not defiled with women, for they
are Virgins: A person divinely qualified is wiser than to run himself into
snares, or go to hell for company; he is wise to Salvation. Psalm. 111. 10. A
good understanding have all they that do his Commandments.

2. A righteous man is of a more excellent birth. Alexander fained himself to
be Son to Jupiter: every good Christian is Highborn; he is 1 John 3. 9.
born of God; and that is more than to come of Princes, and be of the Ob
indolem divinae similem. Grot.
blood royal: David thought it no small honor to be the Kings Son in law, 1 Samuel 18. 18. Oh what an infinite honor is it to be regenerated by the Spirit,
and enrolled among the first born of Heaven! the righteous man derives his
Pedigree from the Ancient of days, Dan. 7. 9. he gives the fairest Scutcheon,
the Eagle, and Isa. 40. 31.
^he Lion; he is near a kin to the Lion of the Tribe of Judah. Prove. 28. 1.


3. A righteous person is of a more excellent beauty. How is worldly beauty
courted by all, and what is it? Prove. 31. 30. Beauty is vain; the bravest
features of body, and the most lovely sanguine are no other than well-colored
earth: But a righteous person has a Celestial beauty shining in him Psalm.
110. 3.
; he is imbellished with knowledge, love, meekness, which are of such Oriental
splendor as allure the very Angels. A good Christian is (...), he has some
idaea and resemblance of that sparkling holiness which is in the Deity 2 Pet.
1. 4.
. Christ is infinitely taken with the spiritual beauty of his Church; Cant. 6.
4. Thou art beautiful, O my love as Tirzah, comely as Jerusalem. Tirzah was a
map of pleasure, Jerusalem was the Metropolis of Judea, Urbium totius Orientis
clarissima. Pliny.
the Star and light of all the Eastern world Ps. 48. 2.
This was Hieroglyphical, to set forth the radiancy of the Churches glory; And
Ver. 5. Turn away thine eyes from me, for they have overcome me; as if Christ
had said, Oh my Spouse, such a resplendent luster is in thy Visage, that I have
much ado to bear it: I am wounded with the delightful darts of thy beauty. One
eye of a Believer draws Christ's heart to it, Cant. 9. 9. Thou have ravished my
heart (...) Abstulisti cor m^um. Arias montan. Traxisti. Pagnin. Vulnerasti.
Hierom.
with one of thine eyes; A Saints beauty never withers, it out-lives death
(...). Eurip.
. True grace like colors laid in oil, cannot be washed off.

4. A righteous man's thoughts are more excellent: Thoughts are the firstborn
of the Soul; sinful thoughts arise out of a bad heart, like sparks out of a
furnace; an unsanctified fancy is Satan's Workhouse Animus scortatur
cogitatione. Maxim. Mon.
Mic. 2. 1. But, The thoughts of the righteous are right, (...) judicium.
Prove. 12. 5. A righteous man's thoughts have got wings and fled to heaven,
Psalm. 139. 18. When I awake I am still with thee. God is a Saints Treasure; and
where should his mind be but upon his Treasure? a righteous man is got upon the
top of Mount Tabor, solacing himself in Jehovah; he contemplates the beauty of
Holiness, the love of Christ, the felicity of Saints glorified; his Thoughts
are among the Cherubims. The Soul while it is musing on Christ, is filled with
holy and sweet raptures, it is caught up into Paradise, it is in Heaven before
its time Nil in hac vita dulcius sentitur, nil it a mentem ab amare mundi
separat, nil sic animam contra tentationes roborat, quam gratia
contemplationis. Bern. Medit.
: Psalm. 104. 34. My mediation of Him shall be sweet.

5. A righteous man's desires are more excellent. He spreads the sails of his
desire to receive the fresh breathings of Gods spirit; Cant. 4. 16. I deny not
but a bad man may have some faint Velleities after the best things. Those
deserters of Christ, cried, Lord, evermore give us this bread, Joh: 6. 24. But
a righteous man's Desires excel.

1. He desires Christ for himself; not only for his Jewels, but his Beauty, not
only as he is a Savior, but as he is the Holy One, Act. 3 14.

2. He is unsatisfied without Christ Quod ardentius desideras cares aegrius.
Bern.
, not the most rich Viands, not golden Chalices filled with Saphires or
Diamonds will content him without Christ. The two Mary's were not satisfied
with the Linen Clothes lying Joh. 20. 5.
in the Sepulcre, unless they had seen the body of Jesus: So it is not the
linen on the Communion Table, or the Elements of Bread and Wine, will satisfy
a Believer, unless he may meet with Christ whom his soul loves.

3. He desires still more of Christ, and would be swallowed up in the sweet
Ocean of his love Dulcissimo de o totus immergi cupit and inviscerari.
; Behold here a desire which God himself has raised in the Soul, and he will
open the breast of mercy, and satisfy it Psalm. 107. 9.
.

6. A righteous man's Discourse is more excellent Quando sapiens loquitur,
aulaea animi aperit.
. His tongue is tuned to the language of Heaven: What is the Discourse of the
wicked about? their wares and drugs; like the fish in the Gospel that had a
piece of money in its mouth Mat. 17. 27.
. He that is of the earth speaks of the earth, Joh. 3. 31. And too often
corrupt communication procceds from the Ephesians. 4. 29.
wicked; their mouth being like a Sink where all the filth of the house runs
out Lingua peccatoris ^stlubrica; and quecunque auim^ suo adlubescunt, temere
essutit.
; These Lepers had need have their lips covered Levit. 13. 45.
.

Sinners in their ordinary Discourse bring forth Scripture, as the Philistines
did Sampson to make sport, as if the Bible were the best Minstrel to play with,
and a jest were worth nothing, unless it were seasoned with the salt of the
Sanctuary. It Is a saying of Luther, Whom God has a mind to destroy, he lets
them play with Scripture: But in this sense the righteous is more excellent.
The tongue of the just is as choice silver, Prove. 10. 20 Docet Solomon quo
pretio habendus sit Sermo justi, and quam avide tanquam argentum septies
defoecatum captandus. Cartwr.
. Gracious words drop as silver from him to the enriching the Souls of others,
Eccl. 10. 12. The words of a wise man's mouth are gracious. In the Hebrew, they
are Grace (...)
. His words are not as Vinegar to fret, but as Salt to season others, Col. 4.
6. The roof of the mouth is called Coelum, Heaven; a godly man's mouth is full
of Heaven Verba sunt nuncia cordis. Bern.
; he speaks as if he had been already in Heaven: The holy conference of the two
Disciples going to Emmaus brought Christ into their Company, Luke 24. 15. While
they communed together, Jesus himself drew near and went with them; Such
savoury speeches drop from holy lips, that God has a Table Book to write them
down, Mal. 3. 16. Then they that feared the Lord spoke often one to another,
and God harkned, and a book of remembrance was written. It Is reported of
Tamerlain that he kept a Register of the Names and good Deeds of his Soldiers.
God registers the speeches of his People that they may not be lost.

7. A righteous man is of a more excellent Spirit, Dan. 5. 12. An excellent
Spirit was found in Daniel. Numb. 14. 24. My servant Caleb because he had
another spirit with him. A wicked man has the spirit of the world, 2 Cor. 2.
12. He is of an atheistical spirit; Lucian is his Old Testament, Machiavel his
New; but a person invested with Grace has choiceness of spirit in him: He is
of a

1. Sublime Spirit. 2. Noble 3. Invincible

1. He is of a Sublime spirit. Se cum sole in culmina coeli effert. Cic.
He savours the things of God; a person sublimated by grace, sets his feet
where others set their hearts; he being clothed with Christ the Sun of
righteousness, and crowned with the Graces as glittering Stars, has the Moon
under him; the world may have his Rev. 12. 1.
look, but Christ has his love; he dwells below, but trades in the Jerusalem
above. A true Saint is taken up about higher matters; getting the love and
favor of God; he aspires after Glory and Immortality; he looks no lower than a
Crown; he feeds as the Birds of Paradise on the dew of Heaven Hac iter est
superis, ad magni tecta tonantis, Kegalemque domum. Ovid. Metam. 1.
; he is employed about Angels-work, lifting up Gods name in the world; he is a
living organ of Gods praise.

2. He is of a Noble spirit; he has the spirit of an Heir, he scorns any thing
that is disingenuous and sordid; he can deny himself, but not disparage
himself; he can be humble, but not base; he knows not how to palliate the sins
of any, which were to wash the Devil's face: He cannot prostitute himself to
the lusts of men, or flatter to get Preferment, Job 32. 21. A righteous man
abhors to be biased from the truth for Secular advantage: It was said of
Luther, he cared not for Gold Melch. Adam.
; his spirit was more noble than to be bribed with money: A good man will not
purchase the liberty of his person by the insnaring of his Conscience; Heb. 11.
35. Not accepting deliverance.

3. He is of an Invincible spirit; he bears afflictions without fainting, or
fretting, Though the Archers Genesis 49. 23.
shoot at him, his Bow abides in strength. Such as want a Principle of Grace,
faint in the day of adversity Prove. 24. 10.
they cannot bear a frown from a great man, or digest a reproach: If the bough
of a Tree be rotten, the least weight hung upon it breaks it. But the righteous
has the heart of a Lion; he is not startled at the discourtesies of the world;
he looks upon reproaches for Christ, as Ensigns of Honor Christi insignia.
Thryverus.
, 1 Pet. 4. 11. When the Roman Catholics taunted at Luther for his Apostasy
from their Church, I confess (said Luther) I am an Apostate from you, but a
blessed one; I am such an Apostate as a Magician is when he renounceth his
compact made with the Devil, and betakes himself to Christ. Grace steels the
heart with courage, and fires it with zeal. Nazianzen said of Athanasius, he
was both a Loadstone and an Adamant; a Loadstone for the sweetness of his
Disposition, and an Adamant for the invincibleness of his Resolution. When the
Emperor Valens promised Basil great Preferment, if he would subscribe to the
Arrian heresy: Sir, said he, these speeches are fit to catch little Children,
but we who are taught by the Spirit, are ready to endure a thousand deaths
rather than suffer one syllable of Scripture to be altered. A righteous man is
willing to take the Cross for his Jointure, and with Ignatius wear Christ's
Sufferings as a collar of Pearl Si deprehenditur Christianus, gloriatar;
inter^ogatus velultro confitetur, damnatus gratias agit: quid hoc mali est,
cujus reus gaudet, cujus accusatio votum est, and poena foelicitas. Tertul.
Apol.
. Romans 5. 3. We glory in Tribulation, (...). St. Paul rattles his Chain, and
did glory in it as a woman (says Chrysostom) that is proud of her Jewels (...).
. It is to my loss, said Gordius the Martyr, if you bate me any thing of my
sufferings. Of what Heroic undaunted spirits were the Primitive Christians!
who could scorn Preferments, laugh at Imprisonments, snatch up Torments as
Crowns; and whose love to Christ burned hotter than the Fire Majora (...),
majora sequuntur praemia. Tertul.
; insomuch that the Heathens cried out, Vere magnus est Deus Christianorum;
Great is the GOD of the Christians.

8. The Prayers of a righteous man are more excellent Heb. 11. 4. Ab^l offered
a more excellent sacrifice, etc.
: Another may have more Elegancy in Prayer, he has more sincerity, Prove. 15.
8. The sacrifice of the wicked is an abomination to the Lord, but the Prayer of
the upright is his delight. A sinners praying is howling, Hos. 7. 14. but the
prayer of a righteous man is music in Gods ears, Cant. 2. 14. Let me hear thy
voice for sweet is thy voice. Maximinus a persecuter, being on his sickbed
craved the prayers of the Godly Eusebias.
. The excellency of a righteous man's prayer is seen.

by its 1. Noble Exploits. 2. Gracious Returns.

1. By its Noble Exploits. Luther's prayer recovered Theodorus Vitus of a
Consumption, after the Physicians had given him over for dead. The prayer of
the righteous has stopped the Sun in its full career Josh. 10. 13. It has
divided the Waters, Exodus 14 15, ^1. Overcome Armies Exodus 17. 11 (...) (...).
. Ca^t out Devils, Mat. 17. 21. Opened Prisons, Act. 12. 9. Shut Heaven, Jam 5.
17. Prayer has had power with God, Hos. 12. 4. The Tyrians tied fast their God
Hercules with a golden Chain; the great Jehovah is held by the prayers of his
people, Genesis 32. 26. I will not let thee go till thou bless me ^recibus su^
^quam vinculis ligatum tenuit Deum.
.

2. By its Gracious Returns: When the tree of the promise is shaked by the hand
of prayer, some fruit falls, Job 33. 26. He shall pray unto God and he will be
favorable unto him. Prayer is the Golden fleet the Saints send out to Heaven,
which comes home richly laden with mercy Oration s^ casta fuerit, coelos
penetrans vac^a no^ redibit. Aug in Sermon.
. Sometimes God gives his people the same mercy in kind that they beg, 1 Samuel
1. 27. For this Child I praid, and the Lord has given me my petition.
Sometimes God gives them that which is better than they ask; they pray for
Temporal things, and he gives them Spiritual; they pray for more health, and he
gives them more grace; they desire the venison, and instead of that, he gives
them the blessing; so he pays them in a better coin. That which makes the
prayer of a righteous man so excellent and available is,

1. Because his Affections are drawn sorth strongly in prayer; his eyes melt,
his heart burns: He is fervent in spirit, Rom 12. 11. It is a Metaphor alludes
to water, quae ebullit prae ardore, which boils over; a good heart boils over
with hot Affections in prayer; there may be powder in a Gun when there is no
fire; some may have good matter in prayer, but no fire of affection to
discharge it; Prayer without fervency, is like wine that has lost the Spirits;
Fervency (as Ambrose says) baptizeth a duty, and gives it a name Operi nomen
imponit.
; without this, prayer is no prayer: A righteous man is carried up to heaven in
a Fiery Chariot of Devotion: This holy Fervency is caused by the Spirit of God,
which both indites and inflames the Saints prayers. Romans 8. 26. The spirit
helps us with sighs and groans Implet Spiritus sanctus organum suum. and
tanquam fila chordarum tangit digitus Dei corda sanctorum. Prosper.
: Not only gifts, but groans; and surely the incense of a righteous man's prayer
with the holy Ghosts fire put to it, must needs ascend as a sweet perfume to
Heaven.

9. A righteous man's prayers are so excellent, because he sprinkles faith in
every prayer Jam. 5. 15.
; Psalm. 25. 1 2. Unto thee, O Lord, do I lift up my Soul, O my God I trust in
thee. Faith is the breath of prayer; as the body cannot live without breath, so
prayer cannot live unless faith breathes in it; Faith is the bullet which is
shot in Prayer; a believing Prayer can obtain any thing from God Non orar^m
niji cred^rem. Hierom.
: It is reported of a Nobleman of this Nati on, that the Queen gave him a Ring,
and told him that when he was in any straight, let him send that Ring to her,
and she would relieve him. To this Ring I compare Prayer, when a child of God
stands in need of any thing, he sends this Ring to God, and presents it by the
hand of faith, and has his desires granted, Mat. 21. 22.

3. A righteous man's prayers are so excellent, because Jesus Christ presents
them to his father: Prayer as it comes from the Godly is mixed with sin, but
Christ takes out the dross of their Prayers, and presents nothing but pure
Gold; he dips the Prayers of the righteous in his blood, and mingles them with
his sweet Odours Rev. 8. 3.
, and so they are to God most fragrant and aromatical: A weak Prayer being laid
upon Christ as the Altar, the Altar sanctifies it; Christ praying over a Saints
prayer makes it prevalent, both in respect of his office, as he is a Priest,
and his relation as he is a Son, and his merit as he is God.

9. The Tears of a righteous man are more excellent: Holy tears are the costly
gum which distills from the trees of Righteousness: Mary Magdalen stood at
Christ's feet weeping Luke 7. 38. Her Tears dropped as pearls from her eyes
Lachrymae Veniam non Postulant sed obtinent. Ambrose.
; the tears of the wicked are good for nothing, they are either carnal; they
weep for worldly losses; or spurious, they are more troubled for Hell than Sin;
Conscience is in an agony, there is water in their eyes, because there is fire
in their bones: But the tears of a true Penitent are more precious, they drop
from the eye of Hope, they are purifying Tears; the holy Mourner weeps out fin;
these tears are the Wine of Angels (...) Angelo. rum. Berr.
; Luke 15. 10. So precious they are that God bottles them, Psalm. 56. 8. Put
thou my tears in thy bottle: In the Hebrew it is, my Tear (...)
; to show that God takes notice of every Tear. Holy Tears though they are
silent, yet they have a voice Psalm. 6. 8.
.

-- Interdum lachrymae pondera vocis habent. -- Though they fall to the Earth,
yet they reach Heaven: Tears dropping from the Saints eyes are as sweet water
dropping from the Roses.

10. The life of a righteous man is more excellent,

1. For Spiritualness. 2. For Usefulness.
1. For Spiritualness; and that three ways:

1. He lives by a more Spiritual Rule than others. A sinner either lives by no
rule, or by a false; he walks (...), according to the course of the world,
Ephesians. 2. 2. But a righteous man goes by the Canon of Scripture, as a well made
Dial goes exactly by the Sun: Gods Word is the Oracle he consults with, it is
his pillar of Fire or Pole Star to direct him, Psalm. 119. 105. Thy Word is a
Lanthorn to my feet: The Word is a divine Pandect, it is a Model and Platform of
Gods mind (...). Irenaeus.
, to which a pious man conforms his actions, both Moral and Sacred; he will not
resolve his faith into Councils or Fathers Ti^bat fides, si S. Scripture
vaci^et authoritas, Aug.
, nor will he follow the Examples of the best men further than they follow the
Word.

2. A righteous man lives more Spiritually as he lives a life above others;
whereas they live no higher than Reason Nihil a^it ultra suam speci^m.
. The just lives by Faith, Heb. 10. 38. A righteous man moves in an higher
Sphere, he penetrates the Clouds, Moses saw him who is invisible, Heb. 11. 27.
Sense and Reason are too low of stature to see Christ; Faith climbs up, not
into the Tree as Zacheus, but within the Vail Heb. 6. 19.
, and there sees Jesus: An holy person sends out Faith as a Spy to view the
land of Promise; Faith unties difficulties, Romans 4. 18. Who against hope
believed in Hope: Against the hope of sense, Abraham believed in hope of the
Promise; faith anticipates future things, and makes them present: When God told
Abraham what a glorious Country he would give him Abraham looked upon it as if
it had been actually done, and he had taken livery and seisin Supersunt nobis
speranda multa quae sistit fides, ac veluti sub manum po^it. ^ac. Cappell.
: Faith can live upon God in the deficiency of visible comforts, Hab. 3. 17.
Although the Fig Tree does not blossom, yet I will rejoice in the Lord: A
righ^eous man believes that if God will save him from hell, he will save him
from want; if he will give him a kingdom, he will not deny him daily bread.

3. A righteous man lives more spiritually, as he shows forth more of the power
of Holiness in his life than others; he is a pattern of Piety (...). Menand.
, Psalm. 106. 16. Aaron the Saint of the Lord: his sancti^y adorned him more
than his M^tre o^ Linen Garments: a Mora^ may live as a man, but he who is
regenerate lives the life of Christ, Joh. 2. 6. Ver^ religio est, imitari quem
colu. Lact.
The Macedonians on the birthday of Alexander did wear Alexander's picture
about their necks, set with Gold and Pearl: So the righteous carry the lively
picture of Christ in their holy Example; they live so devoutly as if they had
seen the Lord with bodily eyes.

2. The life of a righteous man is more excellent for Usefulness Bonum sui
dissusiv^m.
: He is a blessing in the midst of the Land, Isa. 19. 24. He spends and is
spent for Christ 2 Cor. 12. 15.
; he had rather wear out, than rust:

Nec propter vitam vivendi perdere causam Dr. R^ynolds.
. The ^ives of the wicked are unprofitable, therefore compared to chaff, Mat. 3
11. and hurtful, therefore compared to thorns, Mica. 7. 4. But a righteous man
is like the Be or Silkworm, working for the good of others Sic^t se res habet
ad esse, it^ ad operari. Aquin.
: It comforts me (said worthy Jewel) that I have exhausted my self in the
labors of my Holy Calling. A good man hangs between these two as a Needle
between two Loadstones, longing to be with Christ, and love of doing service.

1. A righteous man is helpful to the bodies of others: He is a Temporal
Savior; he has one eye shut to wink at the failings of others, and another
eye open to spy their wants Manus pauper is est Christi gazophylac^um. Pet. Rav.
: He is like the Heaven diffusing his influence, and sending down his silver
drops of charity; he is a staff to the lame, bread to the hungry De cuius dono
nunquam vacuo sinu exivit egenus. Amb.
; he puts under a golden crutch to support others when they are falling. It is
reported of the young Lord Harrington, that he gave the tenth part of his
yearly Revenue to charitable uses: As Mary brought her sweet Ointments to
anoint Christ's dead body; so a gracious soul brings his ointments of Charity to
anoint the Saints which are Christ's living body: A good man judiciously
considers how he himself lives upon Contribution; the earth enricheth him with
veins of Silver, crops of Corn: One Creature brings him Wool, another Oil,
another Silk; and as every Creature conspires for his good, so he studies to
lay out himself for the good of others. Jam. 2. 17. Faith if it has not works
is dead: Faith sanctifies works, and works testify faith: A Believer with one
hand receives Christ's Merits, with the other relieves his Members; and he not
only gives to the necessities of the poor, but gives freely; Deuteronomy. 15. 10.
Charity drops from him as myrrh from the Tree. He does not put his Alms among
his desperate Debts; he is thankful that God has made him in the number of
givers, and not receivers Via coeli est eleemos^na; incipe erogare, si non vis
errare. August.
.

2. A righteous man is helpful to the Souls of others: He who pities his
Neighbor's Ox when it is fallen into a pit, does much more pity his Neighbors
Soul that is falling into hell; he does counsel the ignorant, confirm the weak,
reduce the wandering, Convert the sinner from the error of his way, Jam. 5. 20.

3. A righteous man is helpful to a Kingdom; He stands as a Screen between it
and the fire of Gods wrath, Psalm. 106. 23: Therefore he said he would destroy
them, had not Moses his servant stood before him in the breach to turn away
wrath from them. When a breach is made in the wall of a Cast^, Soldiers stand
in that breach till the enemy be beaten back; so when the wrath of God was
coming against Israel, Moses stood in the breach, and by his prayers kept it
off. The Saints are the Atlasses that bear up a Nation from sinking; the Poets
fained of Hector, as long as he lived Troy could not be demolished: Psalm. 75.
3. I bear up the Pillars: St. Ambrose was called the wall of Italy. Lot while
in Sodom, kept off the fire, Genesis 19. 22. Have thee, escape to Zoar, for I
cannot do any thing till thou be come thither. A wicked Nation is often reprieved
for the righteous sake: The Tares are spared for the Wheat sake.

11. The Death of a righteous man is more excellent: Death comes with an Habeas
corpus, Psalm. 89. 48. What man is he that lives and shall not see death? Grace
it self gives no charter of exemption from it (...). Menand.
; An earthen pot though full of Gold may break: The righteous who are earthen
vessels 2 Cor. 4. 7.
, though they are filled with the golden Graces are not freed from breaking by
death: but their death is precious, Psalm 116. 15.

Wicked men like Hawks are set high upon a perch, vervel'd with Jingling
bells, but then comes their passing bell and calls them away, and when they
die, there is no miss of them; their life was scarce worth a prayer, nor their
death worth a tear; the wicked die in their sins, Joh 8. 21. Death to them is
but Inferni porta, a trap-door to let them into hell.

But when a righteous man dies, his sins die with him; the pale face of death
looks ruddy, being sprinkled with the blood of the Lamb. When a Believer has
death in his Body, he has Christ in his Soul; the day of his death is his
Ascensionday to heaven Mors sanctis est meta laborum, depositio sarci^ae
peccatorum, and Transitus ad meliorem vitam Rivet.
: The death of a Saint is precious,

1. To God; The righteous are said to be gathered Isa. 57. 1. * a ^ner is
carried away in a s^orm Job 27. 20. (...)
the righteous is gathered as we gather precious fruit and candy it; So greatly
does God value the death of a Saint, that he makes inquisition for every drop
of his blood, Psalm 9. 12.

2. His death is precious to the Saints surviving; they follow his hearse
weeping, as David did Abner's, 2 Samuel 3. 31. Though they know that when a godly
man dies he is fixed in an higher and more transparent Orb, yet they cannot but
mourn at the fall of such a Star. It Is a lamentation when God cuts down the
Pillars of a Land; the great Cables and Anchors of a Ship being gone, there is
danger of a Shipwreck, it presageth a storm coming when God hides his Jewels:
After Austins death followed the sacking of Hippo by the Goths and Vandals.
After the decease of Paraeus, fell out the destruction of Heidelberg: Hence it
is that the Saints who are left behind, when they see such as are the Glory of
a Kingdom taken away by a stroke of death, cannot but cry as Elisha did, when
Elijah was parted from him, 2 King. 2. 12. My Father, my Father, the chariot of
Israel and the Horsemen thereof. The Saints living are affected with the loss of
the godly, and carry them to their grave with a shower of tears.

12. The Dust of a righteous man is more excellent: When the Bodies of the
wicked are laid in the grave, there lies an heap of dust to be tumbled into
hell; but the dust of a righteous man is part of Christ's mystical body; the
dust of a Saint is united to Christ while it is in the grave: And as the dust
of Believers is now excellent, so it will appear shortly in the sight of Men
and Angels: Trajan's ashes were honored at Rome; so the ashes of the Saints at
the Resurrection shall be honored when they shall be made like Christ's
glorious body Phil. 3. 21.
; in beauty, strength, agility, immortality.

2. A righteous man is more excellent than a wicked, in respect of what he Has.

1. He has a more excellent Name: God himself embalmed Moses name, and set a
garland of Honor upon his hearse, Josh. 1. 2. Moses my Servant is dead: The
Names of the righteous are registered in the Sacred Records of Scripture, Prove.
10. 7. The memory of the just is blessed (...). Chry^.
. The wicked leave their name for a curse, Isa. 65. 15. How cursed is the name
of Judas! what Christian would baptize his Child of that name? How odious are
the names of Nero, Domitian, Bonner? When their bodies rot under ground, their
names rot above ground: But by faith the Elders obtained a good report, Heb.
11. 2. How renowned was Moses for his Meekness; Cornelius for his Alms! their
Names send forth a fragrant perfume in the Church of God to this day Si quis
sanctorum memoriam vilipen dendam putaverit, anathema sit. Council. Gangren.
Can. 20.
. Psalm. 112. 6. The righteous shall be had in everlasting remembrance. It may
be said of a gracious person as once of King David, 1 Samuel 18. 30. His name was
much set by (...) Valde Ho^rificum. Arias Montan.
. A wicked man may leave a great Estate behind; A righteous man leaves a good
name.

2. A righteous man has more excellent company:

1. He has the Communion of Saints, Psalm. 119. 63. I am companion (...) Sept.
(...), Syrus.
to all them that fear thee; A good man delights in a companion of his own
Species; the Lamb cares not to be with the Wolf. If unawares a godly man lights
into the company of the wicked, he fears either pollution or scandal, therefore
makes haste as out of an infected house: A righteous man twists and
incorporates among the Saints, he is joined to Christ's body mystical, Act. 4.
23. And being let go, they went to their own company.

2. A righteous man has communion with God, 1 John 1. 3. Our Fellowship is
with the Father and his Son Jesus Huj^s (...), consummatio erit in ultima
contemplation^ beatissimae Trinitatis. Estius.
. A gracious soul has sweet intercourse with Heaven; he goes to God by prayer,
and God comes to him by his spirit; How happy is that person who has the
Angels to guard him, and God to keep him company!

3. A righteous man has more excellent promises belong to him; what a sinner
has, is rather by providence than by virtue of a promise; the Saints are
called Heirs of the promise, Heb. 6. 17. the Promises are precious, 2 Pet. 14.
Pollicitis dives quilihet esse potcst. Ovid. 1. Art.
they are the beams of the Sun of Righteousness the pleasant streams that run
in the paradise of Scripture: Behold a blessed promise Rom 8. 28. All things
shall work for good; but to whom? to them that love God: All mercies shall work
for their good; they shall be footstools to lift up their hearts higher to
Heaven, and all afflictions shall work for their good; the rod shall be a
divine pensil to draw Christ's image more lively upon their souls: and there is
another promise, Heb. 13 5. I will never leave thee nor forsake thee (...)
. This promise belongs to the heirs of Salvation; God will not leave his
people, either to their strong corruptions, or their weak graces; he will
counsel them in their doubts, supply them in their wants, defend them in their
dangers, when they are most assaulted they shall be most assisted. How can God
leave them? they are his spouse, will a man leave his spouse? Thus the Saints
have the Royal Charter of the Promises settled upon them: and these Promises as
they are sweet, so they Promiss^ Dei cadunt in debitum. Aug.
are sure: Men reckon their Wealth not always by what ready money they have in
their Houses but by their Bonds and Leases; a Christians Estate lies most in
bonds and bills of Gods hand sealed with his Oath Heb. 6. 17, 18.
: What better security can there be?

4. A righteous man has more excellent freedom, Psalm. 119. 45. And I will walk
at liberty: Another is capable of civil freedom; he may be a Roman born; but he
is still enslaved to his lusts ^sne dux and coryphaeus? Ubi te vitio scelcrique
dedisti, mancipium es; and si ita est, quid re^ert quis aut qualis sis, qui
tuus non sis? Mornaeus
; but a righteous person is Gods freeman, 1 Cor. 7. 21. his neck is out of the
Devils yoke; he is freed from the law of sin, Romans 8. 2. he has Gods free
spirit, Psalm. 51. 12. which makes him free and cheerful in his obedience; the
will is not compelled but changed; a regenerate person is drawn indeed by the
Spirit, but sweetly, as one is drawn into a garden of spices by the fragrancy
of their smell; he is drawn to Christ as one is drawn with another beauty; so
that while he is drawn he is free: a righteous soul chooses the ways of God,
Psalm. 11^. 30. and what greater act of freedom than an act of choice? And a
Saint cannot have his spiritual freedom taken from him; while he suffers in
prison, his conscience is most free; in short, he is made free of a Company,
the innumerable company of Angels, Heb. 12. 22.

5. A righteous man has more excellent food: Carnalists feed only on earthly
provision, he feeds on heavenly; He tastes how sweet the Lord is, Psalm 34. 8. He
feeds on Gods love, this is the hidden manna; he eats Christ's flesh, which not
only begets life, Joh. 6. 33. but prevents death, Joh. 6. 50. This is the bread
which comes down from heaven that a man may eat of it and not die (...), i. e.
i^ aeternum. Br^gens.
: That is, not die the second death; other bread may nauseate or cause surfeit,
but there is no excess here, we cannot eat too much of the bread of life, we
cannot have too much of Christ, as one cannot have too much health: Oh what
excellent food is this, God himself is in this cheer.

6. A righteous man has more excellent armor; viz. the armor of light, Rom
13. 12. this is armor of Gods making, Ephesians. 6. 16. and the Lord with his
armor gives strength: Alexander might give a coward his armor, but he could
not give him his courage; but God infuseth a spirit of magnanimity into his
people, with his armor he conveys strength Deus ipse in nobis pugnat. E^tius.
, 2 Cor. 12. 9. My strength is made perfect in weakness: A Christian having on
Gods armor, and going forth in the power of his might Ephesians. 6. 10.
, nothing can hurt him, 1 John (...). 18. That wicked one touches him not:
That is, Tastu lethali, with a deadly touch, says Cajetan: Grace is armor of
proof, it may be shot at, but it cannot be shot thorough; this spiritual armor
is not burdensome, a Christian may run his race in it as well as fight *: The 1
Cor. 9. 24.
armor of God, the more it is struck at the stronger it is; the more says is
assaulted, the more vigorous it is; the more zeal is opposed the hotter it is;
this excellent armor makes a Christian steadfast in Religion; Hypocrites wear
Christ's colors, but want his armor, therefore fall away: The righteous man
never gives over the Spiritual combat, till the trophies are hung up, and the
palm-branches are put in his hand in token of victory Viridesque coro^ae, Et
palmae pretium victorib (...). Virg. Aen. l. 5. carm. 110.
.

7. A righteous man has more excellent hopes:

-- Credula vitam Spes fovet, and melius cras fore, semper ait. -- A sinners
hope is in this life; he hopes to increase his Estate, he makes the wedg of
gold his hope; it is a perishing hope, Prove. 11. 7.

But the righteous man's hope excells, his hope is in Christ, his hope is both
an helmet, 1 These. 5. 8. and an anchor, Heb. 6. 19. while he is fighting with
tentation, hope is an helmet; while he is upon the waters of affliction, hope
is an anchor; the anchor of a Ship is cast downwards, the anchor of the Soul is
cast upwards in heaven; a Saints hope is a purifying hope, 1 John 3. 3. a
deathbed hope, Prove. 14. 33. Agatham Martyrem ferunt persecutori Quintiano (ex
cujus jussu praecisae sunt mamillae) dixisse, Annon te pudet tyrann^, membr^n
illud in me amputare quod in ^atre suxisti? Veri^m age, saevi quantum poteris,
duae tam^: super sunt mamillae quas nequis attingere, fidei una, spei alter^
Beyerlinck. Apothegm. Christian.
a Soul-comforting hope, Tit. 2. 13. Looking for that blessed hope, and the
glorious appearing of the great God, and our Savior. When Christ was in the
flesh, he appeared as a surety, now in heaven he appears as an advocate, and
when he comes in the Clouds he will appear as a Judge; a righteous man hopes for
this blessed appearing, when Christ shall vindicate his Saints from all unjust
calumnies, and openly acquit them in the Court.

9. A righteous man has more excellent joys: Religion does not restrain but
resine his joy; what is the joy of a sinner! he takes joy in corn and wine, he
sucks from the flower of pleasure; alas, what is this to the joy of the
righteous? Romans 5. 11. We joy in God (...)
. This joy arises from the pardon of sin, the first fruits of the spirit, the
praelibation and fore-tast of glory; the gleanings of this heavenly joy, are
better than the vintage of carnal joy: Plato told the Musicians, That
Philosophers could dine and sup without them, much more a Believer can be merry
in the Lord, without the supplement of worldly comforts.

1. It is a more inward joy, Psalm. 4. 7. Thou have put gladness in my heart
Salit mihi cor. Plau^.
. Other joy lies more in the surface, it pleases the senses, it is like the
Paradise the Turks dream of, where they shall have all dainty dishes served in,
they have gold in abundance, silken and purple apparel, and angels their
servitors bringing them red wine in silver cups; this delights the fancy and
the senses, but divine joy cheers the conscience Plena est gaudio anima mea,
jamque ad apertum video Coelum. Sam. Hieron. Cant
. Aecolampadius on his sickbed, when they asked him, if he wanted any light?
putting his hand to his heart, said, Hic sat lucis, Here I have light enough:
The Saints joy being inward sweetens affliction, it turns their water into wine
Act. (...). 41. (...) Chr.
; 1 These. 1. 6. Having received the word in much affliction with joy. Theodoret
when he was on the Rack, in the midst of his Torments said, He did find no
anguish; and when they took him down from the Rack, he complained they did him
wrong in so doing, for (says he) all the while I was on the Rack, I thought
there was one in white, an Angel stood by, which wiped off the sweat, and I
found much sweetness, which now I have lost.

2. It is a more unmixed joy. Worldly joy is usually spiced with some
bitterness; guilt eclipseth it, Prove. 14. 13. In laughter the heart is
sorrowful: One may drink wormwood in a golden-cup; but the joy of the righteous
like David's Harp drives away sadness; it gives honey without gall; it has no
allay or umbrage.

3. The joy of the righteous is more durable. Other joy is like a flower which
withers while you are smelling to it. I have read of a River in America, which
runs in the day with a full Torrent, but it is dry at nig^: The comforts of the
world run strongly in the day of health, and prosperity, but at the night of
death they are dried up; but as joy abounds in the godly, so it abides: Joh.
16. 22. Your joy no man takes from you. Divine joy is but begun in this life,
it is perfected in glory; here is but the tuning of the instrument, the sweet
consort is reserved for heaven; here the Saints do but sip of the cup, there
they shall drink of the rivers of divine pleasure for evermore, Psalm. 16. 11.

3. A righteous man is more excellent than a wicked, in respect of what he
Shall Have: He shall have a better reward; both righteous and wicked are
rewarded, but there is a vast difference; the wicked shall have a reward of
punishment, the righteous of mercy, Psalm. 58. 11. So that a man shall say,
verily there is a reward for the righteous: They shall be rewarded with a
Kingdom, Luke 12. 32. No^ caducum sed coeleste and perpetuum. Junius.
The height of men's ambition is a Kingdom; Earthly Kingdoms are corruptible.
What is become of the pride of Babylon, the glory of Athens, the pomp of Troy
Jam seges est ubi Troia fuit.
? they lie buried in their own ruins: But the Kingdom of Heaven cannot be
shaken, Heb. 12. 28. it runs parallel with Eternity: In that blessed Kingdom we
shall have a transforming sight of God, 1 John 3. 2. We shall be like him: As a
Pearl by the beams of the Sun becomes bright and radiant like the Sun; Gods
terror shall be then laid aside, Majesty in God shall appear, but Majesty
shining with Beauty, and sweetened with Love; This will be unspeakable and full
of glory.

And this reward is near at hand, Romans 13. 11. Now is our Salvation nearer than
when we believed. When Columbus his men were weary of their Voyage, he desired
them to go on but three days longer; they did so, and discovered America. While
the righteous sail upon the waters of Affliction, this may comfort them in
their Voyage, it is but going a little further, and they will see Heaven; there
the Tree of Life grows, and the crystal streams flow from Lebanon; the Saints
Salvation is now nearer than upon the birthday of their faith.

Thus I have beaten out this Gold in the Text into the Leaf, and shown you
wherein the Righteous is more excellent than his Neighbor.

2. The second thing is, Why a righteous man is more excellent than another?

The Reason is in respect of that near relation he stands in to Christ.

1. There is Consanguinity; he is brother to Christ, Heb. 3. 11. Christ
partakes of his flesh, and he partakes of Christ's Spirit.

2. There is Unity; a righteous man is one with Christ, as the members are one
with the head, Ephesians. 1. 22, 23. Then surely the righteous must needs have a
surpassing dignity. If Christ be a precious cornerstone, 1 Pet. 2. 6. those
lively stones must needs be precious which are built upon him.

Use 1. See from hence what it is that raises the price of a person, it Use 1.
Information. 1. Branch.
is righteousness; this puts a glory and excellency upon him. He that is
graceless is worthless, Prove. 10. 20. The heart of the wicked is little worth:
But righteousness makes the heart like the Heaven bespangled with Stars: The
Graces are compared to Chains of Gold, for their value, Cant. 1. 10. and to
myrrh and cassia for their fragrancy, Cant. 4. 13. As the precious stones did
shine upon Aaron's breast plate; so does righteousness shine in the eyes of God
and Angels. What made Christ admire the Woman of Canaan, but her Graces! Great
is thy faith, Mat. 15. 28. Christ was more taken with that, than with all the
goodly buildings of the Temple Luke 21. 5.
. God esteems not the better of any man because he is rich or noble, or
embellished with worldly Ornaments, it is righteousness advances him Summa
apud Deum nobilitas, clarum esse virtutibus. Hierom.
: Righteousness is to the Soul as the Diamond to the Ring, as Light to the
World, which bespangles and adorns it.

2 Br. Learn then that it is no disparagement 2 Branch.
to any person to be righteous, seeing it casts a splendour and renown on him,
and makes him more excellent than others: Some are loath to espouse Religion,
because they think it will be a stain to their reputation; but you see how
righteousness does emblazon ones Scutcheon, and give him a supereminency above
others. Novarinus relates of an ancient King who invited a company of poor
Christians, and set them above some of his Nobles; and being asked why he
showed so much respect to men of such mean birth and extract? he replied, I
must needs honor these as the Children of the high God, they will be Kings and
Princes with me in another world. Theodosius thought it a greater renown to be
Membrum Christi, than Caput Imperii; a Member of Christ, than the head of an
Empire. The righteous are highly in favor with God, and he has enrolled their
names in the Book of Life, Phil. 4. 3. It was a custom among the Romans to
write down the names of their Senators in a Book, therefore they were called
Patres Conscripti; this is the honor of the righteous, their names are written
among the Courtiers of Heaven. Believers in regard of their mystical Union with
Christ, have a kind of excellency above the Angels, the Angels are Morning
Stars, Job 38. 7. but these are Clothed with the Sun Rev. 12. 1.
: Can it be any shame to be listed among the Saints, when God is not ashamed to
be called their God? Heb. 11. 16.

3 Br. See what high thoughts 3. Branch.
God has of the righteous, he looks upon them more excellent than others, and
his judgment is best worth prizing (...)
; The Saints have low thoughts of themselves, they overlook their own worth,
like Moses who wist not that his face shined, Exodus 34. 29. The eye though
beautiful, does not see it self; yet as low thoughts as the righteous have of
themselves, God has high thoughts of them, Isa. 43. 4. Since thou wast
precious in my sight thou have been honorable (...) Te magni facio. Vatabl.
. The Lord puts away the wicked like dross, Psalm. 119. 119. The greatest man in
the world wanting holiness, is res nihili, like Naaman, who was Captain of the
Kings host, and a mighty man of valor, but he was a Leper, 2 King. 5. 1. A
wicked man may be higher than others in Nobility and worldly Grandeur Non debet
pr^ magno haberi honor, qui nullius est ponderis Fumus. Augde civ. Dei lib. 5.
: a dunghill is higher than other ground, but it is never the better, it sends
forth noisome vapors.

But God sets an high estimate upon the righteous, and that appears by
bestowing more excellent Titles upon them than upon any others.

1. God calls them his Jewels, Mal. 3. 17. he laid his best Jewel to pawn for
them: They are Jewels,

1. For their sparkling quality Splendors.
; they shine in Gods eye: The Saints have animas Angelificatas, a kind of
angelical brightness, as one of the Ancients expresses it Tertu^.
.

2. They are Jewels for their Price Pretio.
: Diamonds (says Pliny) were not known a long time but among Kings and
Emperors; the price of a Saint is above others (...). Septuag.
; Prove. 28. 6. Better is the poor that walks in his uprightness, than he that
perverteth his ways, though he be rich.

2. God calls the righteous his hidden ones, Psalm. 83. 3. they are hidden,
first, for their invisibility; their excellency is not known to many; the world
can see their infirmity, not their eminency; a Saint has that internal Glory
as cannot be beheld by a carnal eye; the fair face is hid under a vail. 2. The
righteous are hidden for their safety; Diamonds are hid in the Rock, so the
Saints life is hid in Christ, the rock of Ages, Col. 3. 3.

3. God calls the righteous the excellent of the earth, Psalm. 16. 2. Or the
magnificent, as Junius renders it; they are the spiritual Phoenixes, they are
the cream and flower of the Creation; they are purior pars mundi, the purer
part of the world, double-refined, Zach. 13. 9.

4. God calls them vessels of Honor, 2 Timothy 2. 21. though they are earthen
vessels, yet they have heavenly treasure in them; they are filled with the wine
of the Spirit, Ephesians. 5. 18. Though they are scowred with affliction, yet it is
to make them brighter, Dan. 12. 10.

5. God calls them the apple of his eye, Zach. 2. 8. Nihil charius p^pilla
oculi. Drusius.
The apple of the eye is the tenderest part of the eye, to express Gods
tenderness of them, says Salvian. God cannot endure to have his eye-ball
touched.

6. God calls them his Portion, Deuteronomy. 32. 9. (...)
as if his riches lay in them: A man seals a bag of Money for his use: so the
Lord seals his people as his portion with a double seal, the one of Election, 2 Timothy 2. 19. the other of assurance, Ephesians. 1. 13.

7. God calls them his Plant of renown (...). Plato.
, Ezekiel. 34. 19. he hedgeth in this noble plant with his protection, waters it
with the silver-drops of his Ordinances, blesses the springing of it, adorns
it with fruit, transplants it into the heavenly Paradise where it grows
continually in the sweet Sunshine of his favor.

8. God calls them joint-heirs with Christ, Romans 8. 17. Jesus Christ is a rich
Heir, Joh. 16. 15. He is Lord of all, Gal. 4. 1. Heb. 1. 2. and the Saints are
(...), they go sharers with Christ.

9. God calls them the Luminaries of the World: They give light by their
precepts and example; Phil. 2. 15. Among whom ye shine as Lights in the world:
Lot was a bright Star in Sodom; the world would be dark, were it not for the
children of light 1 These. 5. 5.
.

10. God calls them a peculiar people, 1 Pet; 2. 9. he has taken them out of
the world as out of the wild forest, and enclosed them to himself by a decree;
or, (as the Greek carries it) they are (...), a purchased people; the righteous
are the purchase of Christ's blood, he will not lose his purchase.

11. God calls them a (...) Quia fideles consecravit Deus, hinc fit ut
sacerdotes: and quia omnia subjec^ pedibus little, hinc fit ^t reges vocentur.
Cameron.
Kingdom of Priests, Exodus 19. 6.

1. They are Kings, they have their Throne, Rev. 3. 21. and white Robes, Rev.
6. 11. Robes signify their Dignity, and White their Sanctity.

2. They are Priests. The Priesthood under the Law was honorable, the Kings
daughter was Wife to Jehoiada the Priest, 2 Chronicles. 22. 11. In ancient times,
the Egyptians chose their Kings out of their Priests; the Saints are
consecrated to be Priests to offer up to God the Eucharistical sacrifice of
praise and thanksgiving in Heaven.

12. God calls them a crown of glory and diadem in his hand, Isa. 62. 3.
Quantum est illorum hominum gloria, ex quibus sui regnicoronam conficit Deus.
Forer.
that is (says a learned Writer) they are exceeding eminent and renowned above
other people; as the Crown is an Ensign of the highest state and honor; nay,
the Lord calls them expressly, his Glory, Isa. 46. 13. Israel my glory; as if
Gods glory lay in his people: All which shows what an high estimate God puts
upon the righteous, in giving them such illustrious Titles of honor. They are
Princes in all lands, Isa. 45. 16. Kings do minister to them, Isa. 60. 10. yea
Angels, Heb. 1. 14. the Lord will give whole Kingdoms to ransom them (...).
Chrysostom.
, Isa. 43. 3. I gave Egypt for thy ransom: That was when God destroyed Egypt
in the Red Sea for the saving of Israel; nay, God gave his own Son to die for
their ransom, 1 Pet. 1. 18.

And if God esteem so highly of his people now on earth, how much more will he
value them when they are in heaven? If when the righteous are afflicted, they
are so excellent, how much more when they are crowned? If when with the Emerald
they have their Naevi, their blemishes, they are precious Non semper pur^ and
limpida fulget in animis piorum gratiae sed exigua illa lampas variis
ignorauti^ nebulis implicita est. Rivet.
; then how much more when all their imperfections shall be done away, and they
shall be presented to the Father without spot and wrinkle! Ephesians. 5. 27. If
Gold be valuable in the wedg and the oar, then how precious is it when it is
fully refined! If wheat be excellent when it is mingled with chaff, then how
much worth has it when it is fanned and made pure! If God reputes the
righteous more excellent than others when conflicting with infirmities; Oh how
incomparably excellent and glorious will they appear in his eye, when they
shall be clarified from all lees of corruption, and shall shine with knowledge
as the air with light: If a man makes any account of his friend when he sees
him under distempers of body, which cause frowardness, how much more will he
prize him when he sees him in perfect health, and his spirit is calm and
sedate. If God esteem the righteous better than others in the present juncture
of time when they have their untoward passions, and fainting fits of unbelief,
what will he do when they shall be perfectly holy, and as the Angels of God?

4 Br. See the different esteem 4 Branc^.
that God has of the righteous, and that men have of them: The men of the
world esteem lightly of the Saints Apud mortales (...) quando computatio de
Pr^stantia hominum insti^uatur, Pietas a tergo re^citur, neque unquam veluti in
lancem assce^dit. Cartwr.
; they disdain them, and scarce allow them half an eye; they think, of all
things the people of God may be best spared. they look upon them as the burden
and reffuse of the earth, 1 Cor. 4. 13. We are made as the filth of the world,
and are the offscouring of all things unto this day (...). Tanquam sordes and
faeces. c. lap. Theodoret. Lustramentum. Ambrose. (...). Pulvis vestigiorum.
Laurentius. Graeca scholia dicant (...), esse reticulum vel strophiolum quo
sudantes se abst^rgunt. Hiero. interpretatur, Quisquilias.
. The Apostles who were the eyes of the World, the breasts of the Church,
earthly Angels; yet were counted by some like the Dungcart, that goes through
the City, into which every one throws his filth. The Saints are loaded with
invectives, and are not judged worthy to live in the world; Act. 22. 22. Away
with such a fellow from the earth, for it is not fit that ^e should live.

But God puts another guiserate and value upon the righteous; he thinks the
world is not worthy of them, Heb. 11. 38 Of whom the world was not worthy:
Hence it is he takes his children so fast away by death, and places them among
the Cherubims: God looks upon the righteous as his curious Needle Work wrought
with the finger of the Holy Ghost, as the (...), and glory of the Creation. He
would soon break up house in the World, were it not for their sakes. This
excellent esteem God has of them, will be best seen when he shall separate
between the Precious and the Vile, and shall say to the wicked, Go ye cursed;
and to the godly, Come ye blessed.

5 Br. See how dearly God loves 5 Branch.
the righteous, and how near to his heart they lie; They are more excellent;
the word [excellent] carries affection in it. Things we prize we love. The
righteous are Gods Treasure, Psalm. 135. 4. and where his Treasure is, there is
his heart: They are Gods delicious Garden, where he plants the flower of his
love, Psalm. 146. 8. They are the dearly beloved of his soul, Jer. 12. 7. (...)
They are his Hephzi-bah, or darling, Isai. 62. 4. (...)
He engraves them upon the palms of his hands, that they may be never out of
his eye, Isa. 49. 16. He rejoices over them with joy, and rests in his love,
Zeph. 3. 17. It is no ordinary affection that God bears to the righteous; the
Sun shining upon a burning glass, sets on fire only the object which is near
the glass; the beams of Gods love are more intensly enflamed toward them who
are near him by grace; these have the strength and spirits of his love
distilled; he loves them as he loves Christ, Joh. 17. 26. Indeed in one sense
Gods love to Christ and Believers is not alike; for Christ is loved purely for
his own sake, but Believers are loved for Christ's sake; yet in another sense
God the Father loves Believers as he loves Christ: It is the same love for the
quality, the same for the unchangableness of it; God will no more cease to love
Believers, then he will to love Christ.

6 Br. See from hence what a 6 Branch.
venerable opinion we should have of the righteous, they are to be prized by us
above others Honorandi sunt sancti, non adorandi. Aug. de vera relig. c. 55.
; Psalm. 15. 4. He honors them that fear the Lord. A Sa in rags is better
than a sinner in scarlet: We prize things that have an excellency in them; why
do we value Gold and Pearl, but because they excel glass-bugles? Oh then
esteem the righteous as most worthy, because of their intrinsic holiness,
whereby they outshine their neighbors. The righteous carry Christ about them
(...) Cbrys.
, Gal. 2. 20. Christ lives in me. Queen Cleopatra put a Jewel in her cup,
which contained the price of a Kingdom; how rich are they who carry the pearl
of Price about them? Despise not the Saints for their worldly Poverty Bonae
mentis sororest paupertas. Petron.
, but honor them for their Virtue; we esteem of a Ruby or Diamond, though it
be in the dust. John Baptist was girt with a leathern-girdle, yet he was more
than a Prophet, Mat. 11. 9. He was honored to usher in the King of Glory into
the World: John was so eminent a person, that doubtless Herod might have kept
his oath, though he had not beheaded him, for he swear to the Damsel to give
her what she asked unto half of the Kingdom, Mar. 6. 23. But John Baptist was
more worth than all his Kingdom. A Saints facing may be mean, but he has a
rich lining; the out side of the Tabernacle was Goats hair, but within it was
embellished with Gold; Psalm. 45. 13. The Kings daughter is glorious within.
Jesus Christ himself was outwardly mean, yet in him are hid all the treasures
of wisdom, Col. 2. 3. A Soul inspired by the Almighty, and beautified with
grace, does exceed others more than the light of the Sun does exceed the light
of a Taper.

7 Br. If the righteous are more 7 Branch.
excellent than others, then how severe will God be against those that wrong
them; the wicked are thorns in the sides of the godly; Saint Paul was scourged
by cruel hands, 1 Cor. 11. 35. Thrice was I beaten with rods; a^ if you should
see a Skullion whip the Kings Son; but shall not God avenge his Elect? Luke 18.
7.
Surely he will; Isa. 34. 6, 8. The sword of the Lord is silled with blood, for
it is the day of the Lords vengeance, and the year of recompenses for the
controversy of Sion. As if the Prophet had said, The time appointed is now
come sor Gods avenging Sion's wrongs. Jer. 50. 10, 11. Chaldea shall be a
spoil. says the Lord, because ^e were glad, because ye rejoiced, O ye
destroyers of mine heritage. Jer. 30. 16. All that prey upon thee, will I give
for a prey. The Saints are persons of Honor, they are God's firstborn; Oh how
enraged will the Lord be against such as offer injury to them; they trample
God's pearls in the dust, they strike at the apple of his eye. The righteous
are Gods royal diadem, Isa. 62. 3. Will a King endure to have his Robes spit
upon, and his Crown thrown in the dirt? What is done to the righteous, is done
to God himself. When the Kings favorite is struck at, the King himself is
struck at, 2 King, 19. 22. I know thy rage against me: The rage of Sennacherib
was against the person of Hezekiah, but (there being a league between God and
his people) the Lord took it as done to himself, I know thy rage against me:
Certainly it shall not go unpunished, Psalm. 105. 14. He reproved Kings for
their sakes. What became of Julian, Nero, Dioclesian? One of them had his
deathswound from Heaven, others of them had theit bowels come out, and died
raving. Charles the ninth of France, who had glutted himself with the blood of
so many Christians in the Massacre at Paris, was in such inward horror, that he
never durst be waked without Music, and at length blood issued out at so many
parts of his body, that he died bleeding Acts and Mon.
. These were set up as public Monuments of God's vengeance.

2 Use. Let us try whether we 2 Use. Exam.
are in the number of these righteous ones; then we are more excellent than
others.

1. A righteous man is an humble man (...). Orig.
; he who is proud of his 1 Trial.
righteousness, is unrighteous. Luk 18. 1. God I thank thee that I am not as
other men are, I fast, I give Tithes Non vulnera ostenditsed ^unera.
: Here was a Triple crown of Pride the Pharisee wore; Righteousness though it
raises the name, it depresseth the heart, Job 15. 10. If I am righteous, I
will not lift up my head. The Violet is a sweet flower, yet hangs down the
head; such a flower was Job. The righteous are like the Silkworm, while she
weaves her curious works, she hides her self in the silk In quantum virtute
sublimes, in tantum verecundia ^les. Cyprian.
: The righteous man is more in judging himself, than in playing the Critic
upon another. He shrinks into nothing in his own thoughts; 2 Cor. 12. 11.
(...), Though I be nothing. David cries out, I am a worm and no man, Psalm. 22.
6. Though a Saint, though a King yet a worm: St. Austin, Lord, I am not worthy
of thy love Non sum dign^ quem (...) diligas. August.
: Bishop Hooper, Lord, I am hell, but thou art heaven. One of the Martyrs
subscribed his Letter, The most hard-hearted-sinner, John Bradford. He who is
righteous puts a greater value upon others than upon himself, Phil. 2. 3. Let
each esteem other better than themselves. The higher Grace is, the lower the
Heart is; the more Gold you put in the Scale, the lower it descends; the richer
the Ship is laden, the lower it sails. When the Soul looks black in its own
eye, it is most comely; Isa. 57. 15. I dwell with him also that is of an humble
spirit. God has two Heavens, and the humble heart is one of them.

2. A righteous man is devoted to holiness: The Priests under the 2 Trial.
Law were not only washed in the great laver, but adorned with glorious
apparel, Exodus 28. 2. the emblem of a righteous man who is not only washed from
gross sin, but adorned with inward sanctity; he is what he seems; he has not
only holiness painted on him, but living in him. It Is said of Zachary and
Elizabeth, they were both righteous before God, walking in all the commandments
and ordinances of the Lord blameless, Luke 1. 6. A good Christian is Gods
Temple; his body is the outward Court of the Temple, and his soul the Sacrary,
or Holy of Holies: He is pure in heart, Mat. 5. 8. his work is to serve God,
and his end is to enjoy him: Man having a principle of reason, must not live as
a beast; and having a principle of righteousness, he must not live as a sinner;
he is now metamorphised; he lives (...), Godlily, Tit. 2. 13. Christ is not
only his Priest, but his Pattern: as he makes use of Christ's death for his
Salvation, so of Christ's life for his imitation.

3. A righteous man is 3 Trial.
just in his dealings Justitia unicuiqt tribuit quod saum est. Cicero.
, Psalm. 24. 3, 4. Who shall ascend into the hill of the Lord? He that has
clean hands, etc. He who is righteous has not only his heart purged from
unholiness but his hands from injustice Immunis aram s^ tetigit ma^us. Horat.
. He abhors all indirect ways, he will not defraud to grow rich, he will not
sell his conscience for a wedg of Gold. A good Christian is zealous for duties
of both Tables Quicquid propter Deum fit, aequaliter fit.
; He makes Piety and Justice kiss each other.

4. A righteous man serves God 4 Trial.
out of a principle of love: Grace does new bias the heart, and carry it
strongly toward God in ardent afsections Amor est vis animae, impetu quodam
and pondere serens eam i^ beatissimum Dium. Bern.
; a righteous man's serving God is not by constraint, but consent; it is his
Heaven to serve God: He mounts up in the fiery chariot of Love, and breaths
forth his Soul into his Saviors bosom: Love is the Shibboleth which
differenceth a righteous man from others. The carnal man says, What a
weariness is it to serve the Lord, Mal. 1. 13. The righteous man says, What a
pleasure is it! Romans 7. 22. I delight in the Law of God in the inner man. As
the Be delights to suck the flower, so does an holy person to obey God Amor
ipse sibi ^ulce satis Pabulum. Bern. sup. Cant.
; It Is amor elicitus, he does duty out of love to duty; he prays out of love to
Prayer: When he sings, he makes melody in his heart to the Lord, Ephesians. 5. 19.
Love lines the yoke of religion, and makes it easy, Mat. 11. 13. As a bride
delights in putting on her Jewels, as a Musician delights in playing on his
Voyal, so a gracious soul delights in obeying God: Love to duty is better than
duty; serving God with delight is Angelical: The Seraphims are described with
wings, Isa. 6. 2. to show as well their cheerfulness as their celerity in Gods
service.

5. A righteous man perseveres 5 Trial.
in Religion: He who gives over his work before he has finished it, is but
half a workman; and he that gives over in Religion before he has finished his
faith, is but half a Christian. The Promise is (...), To him that overcomes,
Rev. 3. 10. Who makes reckoning of Corn that sheds before harvest? It was the
glory of the Church of Thyatira, her last works were more than her first, Rev.
2. 19. Non pugnan^ sed vincenti dabitur Cor^na.
Perseverance carries away the garland; a true Christian does not only set out
in the race, but hold out a Carceribus ad nutam.
; Job. 15. 9. The righteous also shall hold on his way: Be the way what it
will, though strewed with thorns, though there be a Lion in the way, he is
resolved to hold on his way, Act. 20. 24. Bonds and afflictions abide me, but
none of these things move me. The troubles a godly man meets with for
Conscience, do by an holy antiperistasis, the more inflame his zeal: Sufferings
cannot make Christ leave loving the Saints, nor make the Saints leave loving of
Christ; Job though he lost all, held fast his integrity, Job 2. 3. Unsound
hearts when they see the swords and staves are up, leave Christ and shift for
themselves: A right-spirited Saint is made of metal that will not wear out.
Athanasius was the glory of his age, he had a counter-motion to the Times; he
kept his piety when the World turned Arrian. Melancthon, who was called the
Phoenix of Germany, was (as St. Ambrose says) like the Cypress-tree which
keeps its verdure and greenness in the winter-season. The Church of Pergamus
held fast Christ's name, though she dwelt where Satan's feat was, Rev 2. 13. This
is to be righteous to be faithful to the death Rev. 2. 10.
, and not suffer the breast plate of holiness to be shot thorough. Job 23. 11.
My foot has held his steps: his way have I kept, and not declined. And
whosoever is thus divinely qualified, is entitled to this privilege in the
Text, He is more excellent than others.

Use 3. If the righteous are thus Use 3. Exhort. 1 Bra^ch.
excellent, let it encourage us all to true Piety; no sooner do we become
gracious, but we become precious, Josh. 5. 9. This day have I rolled away the
reproach of Egypt from off you: That day we become righteous, our reproach is
rolled away from us. Faith raises our Fame; Righteousness exchangeth our
Fetters for a Crown, Prove. 4. 9. A Crown of glory shall she deliver to thee. By
espousing Godliness, we are better than others, Eccles. 7. 8. And richer, being
possessed of a golden Mine; i. e. The unsearchable riches of Christ, Ephesians. 3.
8. We have from Christ the riches of Justification, and Consolation, and
Glorification; we are as rich as the Angels; Oh then let this excite every one
to be godly; Righteousness puts a splendid excellency upon a man, as if you
should see a clod of dust turned into a Star.

2 Branch. If the righteous are 2 Branch.
so excellent in Gods eye, then let God be excellent in their eye: If they are
high in Gods thoughts, let God be high in theirs; let the Saints have adoring
thoughts of God; Psalm. 71. 19. Thy righteousness, O God, is very high. Psalm.
83. 18. Thou whose Name is Jehovah (...) nomen (...), q. d. aeterna essentia.
Zanchy.
, art the most high over all the earth. God is (...), the most super-eminent
blessing; Psalm. 106. 2. Who can show forth all his praise? God surpasses the
praises of the Archangels; He is incircled with Glory and Majesty, Psalm, 104.
1. He does infinitely out-vye all the Powers of the earth: Princes hold their
Crowns by immediate tenure from him; Prove. 8. 15. his Dominions are largest,
his Possession longest, Heb. 1. 8. Thy Throne, O God, is for ever and ever.
Those Excellencies which lie scattered in the Creature, are infinitely united
in God. S. Austin complains that men can admire the magnitude of the Stars, and
not admire him who is the father of lights. Oh esteem God most excellent.

1. Gods wisdom is excellent, Job 9. 4. He is wise in heart; he knows the
causes of things; yea, uno ^ntuitu, at one instant; the Angels light their
lamps at this Sun.

2. Gods Power is excellent. He is Elshaddai, Almighty, Genesis 17. 1. What cannot
he do that can create? His Power is as large as his Will: Job 23. 13. What his
Soul desires, even that he does: He bridles the proud waves, Job 38. 11. He
cutteth off the spirit of Princes, Psalm 76. 12.

3. Gods Holiness is excellent. This is the most sparkling Jewel of his Crown,
Exodus 15. 11. Glorious in Holiness Sanctitas D^o trib^itur, non solum quia
purus est ab omni inquinamento, sed maxim quia nulla vel moralis, vel
naturalis ci incidit imperfectio. Rivet.
. God is first Transcendantly holy, 1 Samuel 2. 2. There is none holy as the
Lord. The blessed Seraphims cover their faces, and cry holy, holy, but what
Angels can take the just dimensions of his Sanctity? they are too low of
stature to measure these Pyramids. 2. God is communicatively holy; Lev. 20. 8.
I am the Lord which sanctisie you. He is not only a Pattern of Holiness, but a
fountain: He empties his golden Oil through the Pipes of the Sanctuary. His
Holiness is imparted, though not impaired. 3. God is Unchangably holy; his
Holiness can no more cease, than his Godhead: He never lost a drop of his
Holiness; as he cannot have more Holiness, because he is perfectly holy; so he
cannot have less Holiness, because he is Unchangeably holy.

4. God's Love is excellent, Psalm. 36. 7. How excellent is thy loving kindness,
O God! This drops as the honeycomb; it dulcifies and sweetens the Waters of
Marah; it is better than life, Psalm. 63. 3. It has an Hyper-hyperbole in it;
it passes knowledge, Ephesians. 3. 19. Gods love may be felt, but not fathomed. Oh
then let the Saints have God-admiring thoughts; the Psalmist esteemed him above
the Glory of Heaven, and the Comforts of the Earth, Psalm. 73. 25. God is the
marrow and quintessence of all good Bonum in quo omnia bona. Aug.
: His beauty is amazing, his love is ravishing: all divine Perfections meet in
God, as the lines in the center. Let us then with St. Paul, count all things
loss for him; if God puts such a value and appretiation upon the righteous,
they are highest in his esteem, let him be highest in theirs.

3 Br. If God has so honored 3 Branch.
the righteous and made them better than others, let not the righteous debase
themselves, or lose any of their excellency; has God made them precious, let
not them make themselves vile.

1. Let them not debase themselves with Earth: An earthly Saint, is as great a
contradiction as an Orthodox heretic. It Is called (...), filthy lucre, 1 Pet.
5. 2. because it does so befilthy a person. Earthliness is an enemy to grace.
It Is Aristotle's observation, Dogs cannot hunt among sweet flowers, because the
smell of the flowers diverts the scent of the Hare: Those can scarce run after
Christ in the savor of his Ointments, who are diverted by the smell of earthly
delights; whom the Helena of the world kisseth, it betrays. It is below a
Christian, and does too much resemble Satan, to be always compassing the earth
(...). Possel. Apopth.
. Jer. 45. 5. And seek thou great things for thy self? As if God had said,
what thou Baruch? who art by thy new birth excellent, akin to Angels; by thy
Office excellent; a ^Levite; do thou seek earthly things? and what, seek them
now? I am going to pluck up, and art thou planting? the Ship is sinking, and
art thou trimming thy Cabin? Oh Baruch do not so degrade thy self of thy
honor! Seek thou great things, seek them not. Though the wicked like Eels
wrap themselves in the mud, yet let the birds of Paradise fly alo^t; the higher
grace is, the less earthly-minded should Christians be; the higher the Sun is,
the shorter is the shadow.

2. Let not the righteous debase themselves by sinful compliance: Such as
profess themselves to be regenerate, should not be malleable to every opinion
and humor; shall the excellent Cedar bend like the pliant Willow? Genesis 49. 14.
Issachar is a strong Ass, couching down between two burdens. Issachar was a
strong tribe, but wanted courage: You who are righteous, be not too Couchant,
do not choose iniquity rather than affliction, Job 36. 21. Do not so value your
liberty as to wound your integrity. God is a great God, dare not to offend him;
he is a good God, venture not to lose him; be not swayed with the evil examples
of others; dead fish only swim down the stream. The righteous do much lessen
both their esteem and reward by symbolizing with sinners. Let not the godly
force their Conscience; the dust will be wiped off this glass, and then it will
represent guilt. When Cranmer had with some renitency of mind subscribed to the
Popish Articles, he was afterward in great horror: his Conscience was like
Moses rod, turned into a Serpent; he could have no peace till he had recanted
his subscription: By sordid unworthy actions the holy spirit will be grieved,
the godly will be offended, the wicked will insult, and Conscience will accuse:
Conscience is like a Be; if a man does well, it gives honey; if ill, it puts
forth a sting.

4 Br. If the righteous be more 4 Branch.
excellent than others, let not them envy the prosperity of the wicked, Prove.
23. 17. Let not thy heart envy sinners. God has made you better then they; he
has given you his spirit to sanctify you, and his Son to save you. Envy is an
ill humor Pallor i^ ore sadet, macies in corpore toto.
; it is Vulnus occultum (says Cyprian) it hurts a man's self most; Envy drinks
its own venom; it corrodes the body as canker does iron,

-- Simul peccat and plectitur -- The first man born in the world was envious
(...) Bion.
. Theodoret observes, it was not so much Cains own sin troubled him, as to see
his Brother's offering accepted. It becomes not Gods people to feed this
fretting disease; it is bad to feed an enemy. What if God wring out the water
of a full cup to the wicked, it is but a sugared poison; Prosperity like Circe,
with its enchantments turns men into swine; it makes them grow worse; the Moon
never suffers an Eclipse, but when it is at the Full Id concedit Deus irat^s
quod ^egat Propitius. Aug.
. The world is given to the wicked in anger. When Belshazzar was in the midst
of his jollity, the hand of God was writing bitter things against him: The hot
day of Prosperity presageth thunder at night. Hamans banquet was but a Preface
to the Halter. O Christian, shake off envy, as Paul did the Viper. God has
made thee more excellent than others, he has given thee better riches and
Preferment; they have a Golden apple, thou have a Crown, 2 Timothy 4. 7. God keeps
the best wine till last; let this divine harp drive away the evil spirit of
envy and discontent.

5 Br. If the righteous be so 5 Branch.
excellent, let it persuade people to get into their company, and choose to be
of their acquaintance. Next to being good, it is wisdom to converse with them
that are so. Psalm. 16. 2. The excellent in whom is all my delight. Be not like
Swine (...)
which had rather lie in the dung, than in a fair Meadow. The righteous are the
light of the world, and it is prudence to follow them that carry the Light.
Seek for the Olive, but if the bramble take hold of thee, cast it away. There
is much good to be gotten in the society of the godly; their speeches edify,
their prayers quicken, their examples teach Sermo viv^ and effica^ exemplar
est. Bern.
. Graft among the Saints. A slip grafted into a good stock, partakes of the
virtue and influence of the root. The righteous are more excellent; be often
among these spices, and you will smell of them, Prove. 13. 20. He that walks
with wise men, shall be wise.

6 Br. It exhorts the righteous 6 Branch.
to walk worthy of the high honor which God has raised them to, Ephesians. 5. 8.
Walk as children of light. As you are more excellent by your high calling, so
be more excellent in your walking Cogita te esse (...).
; adorn religion by your prudent holy carriage; shine as lights in the world;
Phil. 2. 15. Some Antinomians of old taught, That whatever a man's life was, yet
he was justified, so he believed the Gospel; whom Luther confuted. Such as are
a Royal Priesthood should be a peculiar people. 1 Pet. 2. 9. The Lord has
dignified the righteous above the rest of the world, and they must not take the
same latitude which others do, Prove. 31. 4. It is not for Kings, O Lemuel, it
is not for Kings to drink wine, nor for Princes strong drink. It becomes not
them who are highborn to be intemperate. So it is not for you who are of a
sacred Pedigree, whom God has made superior to others, to be vain and loose in
your behavior. Alexander would have the Graecians known not only by their
Garments, but their Virtues. A child of God should be known by the
exemplariness of his life, 1 Pet. 1. 15. Be ye holy in all manner of
conversation In hunc fi^em vobis illuxit sol justitiae, u^ re^ulgeat vit^,
vestr^ Puritas. Calv.
. Christ has anointed his people with the Graces, as those Virgins were
purified with sweet odours Esther 2. 12.
; and he looks that they should send abroad a sweet perfume of Holiness.
Christians must observe the (...) that which is lovely, and of good report,
Phil. 4. 8. they had need walk (...), acurately Debent fideles ac si in
celeberrimo Theatro essent vivere, quia sub conspectu Dei and Angelorum vivunt.
Calv.
, Ephesians. 5. 15. because so many watch for their halting. If the wicked find any
thing in the people of God dishonorable to their Profession, they lay the
blame upon Religion; It is Salvian's note, What will the Pagans say, when they
see Christians loose and vicious? The Christians live so bad because Christ
taught them no better Christiani sancte vixissent, si Christus sanct^ docuisset.
: How should the righteous cut off occasion from them that seek occasion, 2
Cor. 11. 12? Daniels Piety sealed up the lips of his enemies, Dan. 6. 4. Martin
Bucer was Tantae Sanctimoniae vir, so unblameable in his life, that those who
did most malign him had nothing justly to lay to his charge. Oh Christians look
to your steps, when you have prayed against sin, then watch against temptation;
a spot in a Royal Robe cannot be hid; a dash os ink would quickly have been
spied in Aaron's white linen. If there be a blemish in a Professor every ones
eye is upon it; the sin of such a person causes blushing among the Saints; as
the Patriarchs could not choose but be ashamed when the cup was found in their
Sack. Oh that all who profess the name of Christ would depart from iniquity, 2.
Tim 2. 19. Dare not to blaspheme that Worthy Name by which you are called, Jam.
2. 7. Such as are more excellent than others, God expects some singular thing
from them; they should bring more glory to God, and by their exemplary piety
make Proselites to religion: Better fruit is expected from a Vineyard, then
from a wild Forest.

7. Br. Has God so enobled the 7 Branch.
righteous, and given them a superexcellency above others? Then let the
righteous be thankful, Psalm. 113. 7. He raises the poor out of the dust, that
he may set him with Princes. God has raised you out of the low estate wherein
you were by nature, and has made you more illustrious than others, that he may
set you with Angels, those Princes above. Oh let the high Praises of God be in
your mouth, Psalm. 149. 6. God has done more for Believers, than for all the
world besides. He has given them the holy anointing, the new name, the white
stone, which is the earnest of the inheritance; and at the day of judgment
Jesus Christ will confess their names before his Father and the Holy Angels
Rev. 3. 5. Promittit Christus se nominatim ^ujusque celebraturum Fidem and
constantiam in consessu sanctae Trinitat is and conspect^ Angelorum and hominum
quo gloriae gradu ni^il augustius excogitari possit. Paraeus.
. And their Souls and Bodies being reunited, shall be fully invested with
glory. And after their Session at Christ's right hand, it shall be proclaimed,
Thus shall it be done to the persons whom the King of Heaven will honor. Does
not all this deserve thankfulness, Psalm. 100. 1. Make a joyful noise unto the
Lord J^bilate domino. Musculus.
. In the Hebrew it is, Sound forth his praise as with a Trumpet (...)
: Praise God with the best instrument, the Heart; and let it be scrued up to
the highest Peg; do it with the whole heart. You who are righteous, speak well
of God, and tell others what he has done for you. His Blessings bestowed are
Legacies, not Debts. Praise is a glorifying of God, Psalm. 50. 23. and will not
you cheerfully pay this Pepper-corn? Will you not do it constantly? Psalm. 146.
2. I will sing praises unto my God while I have any being. The Carthaginians
used at first to send the tenth of their yearly revenue to Hercules; but by
degrees, they grew weary and left off sending. Christians fail much in their
thank-offering: Be not like them that play a fit or two of Music in a year,
and then the Viol must be hung up. Be often upon Mount Gerizim, blessing God.
Consider, Thankfulness is the work of Heaven; you who shall have Angels reward,
do Angels work. Sound forth the Memorial of Gods Holiness, and celebrate his
Fame; Praise is the Music of Heaven (...) Zenoph.
, let not God want his Music. While others murmur do you bless. Wait and long
for that time when you shall be called up to the heavenly Mount, and placed
among the glorious Cherubims, where your employment to Eternity, will be to
breath forth love, and sound forth Praise.

Use 4. Consolation to the righteous, Use 4. Comfort.
who are under dejection of spirit. God esteems them more excellent than
others. It is comfort,

1. When they are humbled by sin, they have mean thoughts of themselves, and
see so much corruption, that they think they have no grace: I, but here is
comfort, God sees an excellency in them, though they can see none in
themselves; he can distinguish between the grace in them, and the infirmity;
and he judges of them, not by their worst part, but by their best Subjectum
acnominatu^ a praestanti^ part.
. God prizeth his people, notwithstanding their failings; a man values his Corn
though it be mingled with Chaff.

2. It is comfort when the righteous are humbled by affliction, Lam. 3. 16. He
bath covered me with ashes. My outward comforts are as it were in the grave,
and have ashes thrown upon them; the godly are apt to mistake and think God
does not care for them, because he afflicts them (...). Thucyd.
; Judge. 6. 13. If the Lord be with us, why then is all this befallen us?

But let not the righteous be troubled, or cast away their anchor; still God
makes great account of them: and though they are more afflicted than others,
yet they are more excellent. God esteemed highly of Hezekiah on his sickbed,
he heard his prayer and bottled his tears isa. 38. 5.
. Job when full of boiles and sores, was dear to God. Job on the dunghill was
more excellent than Pharaoh on the throne. God boasts of Job to Satan, Chap. 2.
3. None like him in the earth. The Lord esteems not the worse of the righteous,
because he makes them pass under the Rod. A Goldsmith esteems his Gold though
it be in the furnace; God sees an excellency in the Saints, when they are
bleeding under their sufferings. A piece of Plate is of great value though it
be battered. Grapes are precious though they are in the Winepress. Jesus Christ
was on the Cross, yet proclaimed to be Gods beloved Son by a voice from heaven,
Mat. 3. 17.

3. It is comfort when the righteous are humbled by desertion; Job 6. 4. The
arrows of the Almighty are within me. The Hebrew word for arrow (...) comes
from a radix that signifies to cut; to show that the poisoned arrow of
desertion cuts to the heart. Heman cries out, Psalm. 88. 7. Thy wrath lies hard
upon me; like a mountain of lead it even sinks my spirits; in this for^orn
state, the Saints think God esteems them vile, and has cast them off, Psalm.
88. 14. Lord, why castest thou off my soul? God holds his deserted ones as it
were over the fire of hell, and they think they are ready to drop in. But
Christian, thou may be sorely deserted, yet God may judge thee excellent. Sion
thought she was quite forsaken, Isai. 49. 14. Sion said, the Lord has forsaken
me. But at that time God had a dear respect for her, Ver. 16. I have graven
thee upon the palms of my hand. God may have the face of an enemy, yet the
heart of a father. The Lord deserts his people, (...), for their profit, Heb.
12. 10. While he is humbling them, he is healing them; he seems to put them
away from him, but it is to draw them nearer to him, he would exercise their
faith and prayer the more. God is all this while preparing the Saints for the
sweet embraces of his love. Desertion is like purging-physick; the Lord will
purge out some ill humor of sin, and afterward will manifest his love to his
Children. The Cordial is kept till the working of the Physic is over.

The Conclusion.
THus (Good Reader) I have, with all convenient brevity, endeavored to
vindicate the true Saint, and take him out of the fogg. I have set before thy
eyes a child of light. Mark the perfect man Psalm. 37. 37.
, and imitate him: If notwithstanding all this surpassing excellency of the
righteous, any shall be so wicked as to persist in unrighteousness, they love
death, Prove. 8. 36. If they shall glory in their unrighteousness Phil. 3. 19.
, it is as if beggars should boast of their sores: If they shall disparage
Holiness, it is like a blind man's reproaching the Sun; let the righteous bi^d
reproaches as a Crown about their head Qui meliora sperat, levioribus non
fra^gitur. Ambrose.
, and be no more troubled, then they would be to have mad men laugh at them,
Psalm. 37. 7. Rest in the Lord, and wait patiently for him. The time is shortly
coming, when God ^ill clear the innocence of his Servants; after he has wiped
off tears from their eyes, he will wipe off reproach from their name Isa. 25.
(...)
: and then this Text shall be universally subscribed to, The righteous is more
excellent than his neighbor.

FINIS.
Books to be sold by Thomas Parkhurst, at the Bible and three Crowns in
Cheapside.
A Commentary on the Hebrews. By John Owen, D. D. fol.

Mr. Sedgwick's Bowels of Mercy. fol.

Tho. Taylor's Works, the first vol. fol.

2. An Exposition of Temptation, on Matthew. 4. verse 1. to the end of the
eleventh.

Forty-nine Sermons upon the whole Epistle of the Apostle St. Paul to the
Colossians^ in three parts. By that famous Minister of the Reformed Church in
Paris, Mr. John Daille; Translated into English by F. S.

An Antidote against Quakerism, wherein these following questions, are opened,
the truth concerning them proved, the contrary arguments examined and confuted.

1. Whether the Scriptures or the light in every man be our rule to heaven.

2. Whether the Light in every man be a saving Light; here something also
concerning immediate teaching.

3. Whether Perfection, viz. a state free from all sin be attainable in this
life.

4. Whether Baptism with water be an Ordinance of Christ binding us.

5. Whether the Supper be an Ordinance of Christ binding us.

6. Whether Justification be by the Righteousness of Christ imputed. By Stephen
Scandret, Minister of Gods Word.

These Treatises next following are written by Mr. Tho. Watson.

The Doctrine of Repentance.

Heaven taken by storm.

The mischief of sin, it brings a person low.

A Divine Cordial.

A word of Comfort for the Church and people of God.

A Plea for Alms, in a Sermon at the Spittle.

The Holy Eucharist, or the Sacrament of the Lords Supper briefly opened. All
Seven by Tho. Watson.

The Immortality of the Soul explained, and proved by Scripture and Reason. To
which is added Faith's Triumph over the fear of Death. By Tho. Wadsworth.

The Child's Delight, together with an English Grammar. By Tho. Lie.

The Practical Christian; or a summary view of the chief heads of Practical
Divinity, By J. Bartlet of Exeter.

The inseparable Union between Christ and a Believer, opened in a Sermon at the
Funeral of Mrs. Dorothy Freeborn: By Tho. Beck.

The Life and Death of that eminently learned pious and painful Minister of the
Gospel, Dr. Samuel Winter, sometime Provest of Trinity College near Dublin in
Ireland.

Pathway to Prayer and Piety: By R. Hills.

The Royal Robe; or a Treatise of Meekness: By J. Barker.

Comfortable Crumbs of Refreshment, by Prayer, Meditations, Consolations and
Ejaculations, with a Confession of Faith, and sum of the Bible.

The difference between the Spots of the Godly and Wicked, in four Sermons: By
J. Buroughs.

FINIS.

