METALLOGRAPHIA: OR, AN HISTORY OF METALS. Wherein is declared the signs of
Ores and Minerals both before and after digging, the causes and manner of their
generations, their kinds, sorts, and differences; with the description of
sundry new Metals, or Semi-Metals, and many other things pertaining to Mineral
knowledge. As also, The handling and showing of their Vegetability, and the
discussion of the most difficult Questions belonging to Mystical Chemistry, as
of the Philosophers Gold, their Mercury, the Liquor Alkahest, Aurum potabile,
and such like. Gathered forth of the most approved Authors that have written in
Greek, Latin, or High Dutch; With some Observations and Discoveries of the
Author himself.

By JOHN WEBSTER Practitioner in Physic and Surgery.

Qui principia naturalia in seipso ignoraverit, hic jam multum remotus est ab
art nostra, quoniam non habet radicem veram, supra quam intentionem suam
sundet.

Geber. Sum. perfect. l. c. 1. p. 21. Sed non ante datur telluris operta subire,
Auricomos quam quis discerpserit arbore foetus.
Virg. Aeneid. l. 6. LONDON, Printed by A. C. for Walter Kettilby at the
Bishops-head in St. Paul's Churchyard. MDCLXXI.

To his Highness PRINCE RUPERT, Count Palatine of the Rhyne, DUKE of BAVRIA And
CUMBERLAND, EARL of HOLDERNESS, etc. Constable of the Royal Castle and Honor OF
WINDSOR, And KNIGHT of the Noble Order OF THE GARTER.
May it please your Highness,
I Have not presumed to present this mean and slender Collection of Minerals
unto your Highness view, forth of confidence of its own worth, though there may
be some things in it not unfit for the knowledge of so High and Noble a Person:
But rather in respect of the transcendent worth of the Subject it treats of,
being the most abstruse and most excellent part of all Natural Philosophy;
being hereunto especially moved by two reasons. One is, That your Highness
being a Member of the Royal Society (one of the happy fruits of His Majesty's
blessed and miraculous Restoration, and that which will speak him glorious to
all succeeding Generations, beyond all his Royal Progenitors) stands thereby in
some measure obliged to be an encourager, and cherisher of all attempts (though
of the lowest and meanest persons) that tend to the advancement of Experimental
Philosophy. This (may it please your Highness) did heighten my hopes, that I
might receive the same candor (in some measure) that your Highness seems to
have afforded to all. Another is the propension, and inclination that (as I am
informed) your Highness bears in a particular manner to this worthy and
commendable Science of Minerals and Metals. The only thing (besides the
craving pardon for my boldness) is, that I humbly beg of your Highness, that if
your spare hours will allow, you may sometimes make a perusal of it, and if
your Highness be pleased to put to your helping hand, that this kind of
knowledge may be more heedfully sought into, and promoted, and that others of
far greater abilities, may communicate some part of their knowledge, it is all
that is desired by

Your Highness's most humble and devoted Servant, Io. Webster.

The PREFACE.
COurteous Reader, Expect here no flourishing Frontispiece to allure thee to
the buying of this untrim'd and unpolished piece, no not so much as the Authors
Picture, who never yet was so far in love with his earthly Tabernacle, as to be
at the charges to have the resemblance of it drawn, or cut in Copper. Thine own
desire after this kind of knowledge, and the plainness of the Subject, are the
greatest motives that I have to lay before thee, to move thee either to buy, or
read. The style is low, and plain as the nature of such a subject would bear,
whose harsh and unusual terms, suitable for the most part for the Miners
themselves, could not well have admitted of Rhetoric, or more polite Language,
had I been furnished with any such. And though sometimes I am forced to use
more nice and subtle expressions, they are such as the matter in hand did
necessarily require, and cannot but be agreeable to such Readers, whose
understandings are capacitated to comprehend the matters treated of.

What Opinions soever I offer, whether of mine own, or taken from other
Authors, are not to impose upon the judgments of any, who am my self no lover
of Dogmatizing, and have long wished, and am now most glad to see a way set up
for the promoting of Experimental Philosophy, that Men's judgments may no longer
be fettered in Scholastic Chains, nor kept always in the Prisons of Academick
Opinions. Though I would not here be understood to condemn those Systems, and
Methods of Arts and Sciences, that are necessary to the instructing of Youth
therein, but that they are laudable and allowable, and have their proper and
peculiar uses and benefits, but not so far as to set a stop to farther
Discoveries by Experiment and Observation, especially in Natural Philosophy;
for all the knowledge (doubtless) that is yet had, is but a small part of that
which may be known, and lies yet undiscovered, or found out.

There are two main things that I have aimed at in this Work. 1. The one is,
that seeing there is little extant in our English Tongue, concerning Metals or
Minerals, the signs of finding, and discovering of them, or of their
Generations, Growth, Properties or Differences, nor of many other things
pertinent to this kind of Knowledge: I thought it might be both an acceptable
and beneficial matter to communicate publicly what either by reading I had
collected, by converse learned, or by observation found out, concerning Mineral
or Metallic Knowledge, unto our English Miners and others that have a desire
to understand these things, and yet are not capable of the Latin or German
Tongues, in which the greatest part of this Knowledge is written. And this
being as it were the chiefest of mine aim, I hope my Countrymen will take it
thankfully, and in good part, though it be wonderfully far short of what may be
desired and expected about this subject.

2. Another main end that I have had in publishing of this poor piece of
collected Learning, is simply (as far as I am able) to promote Metallic
Knowledge, and especially to excite others that have had far better and greater
advantages to instruct and inform themselves, than I that have always lived in
a private, obscure, and troubled condition; and doubtlesly know much more than
ever I can justly challenge or appropriate to my self; which if it may
occasion, or gain this end, I have a great part of my wished desires.

I have also discussed some things of the highest pitch about mystical
Chemistry; which if I be censured for, I am contented, and shall use no other
defense but silence and patience: For I too well know how that kind of Learning
finds entertainment in the World: But there are none that are blessed with any
measure of that noble, true, and most true Science, but they have learned
little to weigh the Judgments and Censures of the ignorant and envious. And
however others may judge, they that do understand will be satisfied with what
particulars I have declared; and that is all that I desire or wish for.

But if any object, and say, that this is little, but only a Collection and
Transcription of what others have written upon this subject: We shall confess
it; for it is not possible that one private person that has been no great
Traveller, nor seen any Mines but those of his own Nation, and not the most of
them neither, should be able experimentally to comprehend all that is necessary
to this kind of Knowledge. Yet has the Reader two benefits hereby: one is,
that those things that lie dispersed in many and several Authors, are here as
it were contracted, and for the most part brought to their heads or kinds,
whereby with less labor and pains, and the sparing of much cost in buying many
Authors, the Reader may come to some measure of Mineral Knowledge. Secondly,
Another benefit is, That the Reader may find the marrow of what other Authors
have written in other Languages, represented in his Mothers Tongue: as also,
here are many things of my own Observation that may be conducible to advance
this kind of Learning.

Again, I have here given an enumeration of the most considerable Authors that
have written of Metals and Minerals, with a moderate Censure upon them; whereby
the Reader may be enabled to make his choice of such of them as he likes best,
and may be indifferently instructed how to judge, or account of the most of
them; which is a matter of no small concern.

If any seem offended that I have given too great Commendations to Paracelsus,
Helmont, Basilius, and some other of the Adeptists, they may know that it is
not without just cause, though they understand them not: for chewed meat must
not always be put into men's mouths, let them study to find forth the depth of
the meaning of those Authors, and then they will judge as I have done, and will
confess that far less praise is given unto them than they have justly deserved.

I have also sometimes given the Authorities quoted in the Language and words
of the Author; sometimes have rendered them into the English, not so much
regarding the Grammatical Order, as the sense of the Author; and for the most
part the Book and Folio noted in the Margent: so that however, if the Reader
doubt or dislike, he may have recourse to the Authors themselves, and consult
them in their own words, or in other Translations, if there be any.

Lastly, I have mentioned diverse sorts of Ores, that possibly some of them
might be found in England or Scotland, as of Antimony, Tinglass, Spelter, Talk,
and Cinnober; which if the diligent Miner would seek carefully after, the ways
of refining and purifying of them might easily be found forth, and thereby no
small advantage be brought to the Nation in general, and to the poor Miners in
particular. And this is all that I think good to offer by way of Preface, the
Work may speak for it self without further Commendation. And I hope the Reader
will take it in good part, at least until some abler Pen shall publish
something concerning this subject in our English Tongue, that may be of greater
worth and utility. Farewell.

A Register of the Chapters.
Chap. 1. OF the usefulness and excellency of the knowledge of Minerals and
Metals; and of the Antiquity of the melting, refining, and accommodating of
them to humane use; and the cause of the non-proficiency of metallic skill,
especially in his Majesty's Dominions of Great Britain. Page 1. Chap. 2. Of the
Authors that have treated of Metals and Minerals. p. 26. Chap. 3. Of the
Generation of Metals, and whether they grow, and have vegetability, or not. p.
50. Chap. 4. Of the causes assigned by the most approved Authors for their
Generations, both efficient and material, and the manner thereof. p. 61. Chap.
5. Of the uncertainty of the division of Fossiles, their definitions or
descriptions, and number. p. 84. Chap. 6. Of the signs and discovery of Mines
and Ores, both in general and in particular. p. 93. Chap. 7. Of the Minerals
that are said to be of affinity to Metals, as those they call Cachimiae,
Marchasites, Pyritae, or Fire-stones. p. 111. Chap. 8. Of the several sorts of
Gold according to the mystical Authors; also of the Primum Ens of Gold, and of
some other things of the like nature. p. 118. Chap. 9. Of the sorts of common
Gold, as they are produced by Nature, and in what manner they are severally
found. p. 131. Chap. 10. Further, of the Stones, Rocks, and Flints of Gold, and
the striking passages wherein it is found; as also of the several sorts of it
mentioned in Scripture, and elsewhere. p. 141. Chap. 11. Of the description of
common Gold according to some Authors, and of the properties thereof; as also
of some ways of beating, sifting, and washing the Ores thereof. p. 153. Chap.
12. What may be thought of common Gold, whether it be an ingredient into the
Philosophers Tincture or not? What may be said of Aurum Potabile, or the
Tincture of Gold? And what of the white Body when the Tincture is taken from
it? and something of the Alkahest. p. 161. Chap. 13. Of the description of
Silver, and the several ways that the Ore of it is gotten; and of its Mines,
Conditions, and striking passages. p. 199. Chap. 14. Of Silver found pure by
Nature that needs no refining by fire. And of those sorts that must be
purified, their colors, mixtures, and several Coats wherein they lie. p. 207.
Chap. 15. How they refine Silver Ore at the Indies, and of some other such
things. p. 227. Chap. 16. Of the description of Copper, of its Ore, stones,
operation, and striking passages. p. 235. Chap. 17. Of some signs where Copper
Ore may be found, as also of its several sorts, and the diverse preparations it
undergoes ere it be pure. p. 241. Chap. 18. Of native and factitious
Orichalcum; of Corinthian Copper or Brass; and of some other Compositions that
Copper undergoes with other Metals or Minerals; and of the Medicines prepared
forth of it. p. 248. Chap. 19. Of the descriptions of Iron, its Ore or Mine,
Operations, Stocks, Floats and Passages. p. 261. Chap. 20. Of the several sorts
of Iron-stone or Ore, and of Medicines prepared forth of the Metal. p. 265.
Chap. 21. Of the description of Lead, its Ores, Mine, condition and striking
passages. p. 270. Chap. 22. Of the several sorts of Lead Ore, their Coats and
Matrixes; and of Medicines prepared forth of this Metal, and of such things. p.
277. Chap. 23. Of the description of Tin; of its Ores, Operation, Stocks,
Floats, Fallings and striking Passages, and the like. p. 286. Chap. 24. Of the
several sorts of Mercuries, according to the mystical Philosophers or
Adeptists. p. 293. Chap. 25. Of the description of Quicksilver, of Cinnober,
and its several Ores and Passages, and how it is gotten and refined in diverse
places, and the like. p. 308. Chap. 26. Of several sorts of Medicaments
prepared forth of common Mercury, both by the way of vulgar Chemistry, as also
by the mystical way; and of the Praecipiolum of Paracelsus and Helmont. p. 318.
Chap. 27. Of Antimony or Stibium, of Wismuth, Bismuth, or Plumbum Cinereum, or
Tinglass of Zinetum, Zinck, or Spelter; of Cobaltum. And of their Qualities,
Ores and Medicaments prepared forth of some of them, and of native Electrum. p.
330. Chap. 28. Something more of Galena, Lapis Plumbarius, native Cadmia, etc.
As also of Chrysocolla or native Borax, Caruleum native Blue, Aerugo native
Green, Talk, Magnes the Loadstone, Haematites the Bloodstone, Schistus the
Lazul-stone, and of metallary stones, and the like. p. 376. Chap. 29. Of the
Transmutation of Metals. p. 356.
METALLOGRAPHIA: OR, An HISTORY of METALS.
CHAP. I. Of the usefulness and excellency of the Knowledge of Minerals and
Metals, and of the antiquity of the Melting, Refining, and accommodating of
them to humane use, and the causes of the non-proficiency of Metallic skill,
especially in his Majesty's Dominions of Great Britain.
THe usefulness and excellency of the knowledge of Minerals is fully described
by that learned and industrious person Josephus Acosta, Histor. Jud. lib. 3. c.
2. p. 205.
who says, The Wisdom of God has made Metals for Physic, and for defense,
for ornament, and for instruments for the Work of men. What great benefit the
Mineral Kingdom does yield in the Art of Medicine, for the curing both of
internal and external diseases, the Authors (as Dioscorides and Matthiolus)
that have written largely de materia Medica, as also the whole Band of the
Chemists, both mystical and vulgar, do sufficiently testify. So that some have
thought that an whole Apothecaries shop might be furnished forth of Vitriol
alone; and Helmont (quoting Paracelsus, which he seems to approve of) that 200
Diseases (perhaps) might be cured with Preparations made forth of Lead. And for
the other benefits that this knowledge has brought to mankind, both for War
(which since corruption entered the nature of man, could not be eschewed,
either in the offensive or defensive part) and Peace, are so many and so great,
that there are none so ignorant that are not sensible thereof. So that in a
manner the wellbeing of mankind would be much deficient if this Mineral skill
had not been found out, exercised, and improved; as almost all Trades,
Artificers, and Families can sufficiently testify.

And therefore we find this Skill was (necessity compelling) found forth in the
first Ages of the World, Genesis c. 4. v. 22.
Moses testifying that Tubal-Cain was an instructor of every Artificer in Brass
and Iron. And as Iunius and Tremellius render it, qui erudivit omnem fabrum
aerarium and ferrarium: and Sebastian Castalion gives it, omnis aerarii and
ferrarii opificii fabricatorem: and the Vulgar Latin renders it, qui fuit
malleator and faber, in cuncta opera aeris and ferri: and Arias Montanus gives
it, acuentem omne opificium aeris and ferri: And the learned Piscator seems to
incline to render it acutorem (seu politorem) patrem (sive auctorem) omnis
fabri aerarii ac ferrarii. I have given these several Translations, because
some would have Tubal-Cain not to have been the first that discovered Mines and
Metals nor to have found forth that part of Chemistry that teaches the fusion
and refining of them, but only to have been the Inventer and Teacher of making
instruments forth of Brass and Iron; and then the discovering, digging up, and
purifying of Metals must have been before his time, and so more ancient. Others
ascribe unto him both the discovery, digging up, and refining of them, as also
the framing of sundry instruments forth of them (which is most probable) as our
Countryman Joshua Silvester in his Translation of The Divine Weeks and Works of
the learned Du Bartas, Part. 4. Week 1. p. 289.
who sings thus, While through a Forest Tubal with his Yew
And ready Quiver did a Bore pursue,
A burning Mountain from his fiery vain,
An Iron River rolls along the Plain.
The witty Huntsman musing, thither hies,
And of the wonder deeply can devise.
And first perceiving that this scalding mettle
Becoming cold, in any shape would settle,
And grow so hard, that with his sharpened side,
The firmest substance it would soon divide.
He casts an hundred plots, and ere he parts,
He moulds the ground work of an hundred Arts. etc.
For now the way to thousand works reveald, Vid. Libanii Alchym lib. 1. c. 1.

Which long shall live, maugre the rage of Eld.
In two square creases of unequal sises,
To turn two iron streamlings he devises.
Cold, takes them thence: then off the dross he rakes,
And this an Hammer, that an Anvil makes:
And adding Tongs to these two instruments,
He stores his house with iron implements, etc.
So that whether way soever it be taken, it is apparent that the discovering of
Mines and Metals, their digging up, refining, and sundry uses of them are very
ancient, if not more then many other Arts now extant in the World. And though
it be not mentioned in Holy Writ, that in those days Medicines were prepared
forth of them, yet it is no solid consequence to affirm that they were not, for
many things were both invented and used, of which there is no positive mention
in the Scriptures. And however Couringius with all his bitterness, the
Catholic Transcriber and Rhapsodist Athanasius Kircherus, with all his querks,
and Guibertus with his ignorance and malice may imagine, it is manifest that
Chemical or Hermetick Physic was very ancient, as we in a few arguments
(though digressively) shall prove and evince.

1. The great question is, Whether the Egyptian Learning was anciently in any
great request, especially in this point of curing Diseases. 2. And whether
Chemistry was not ancient in respect of preparing Medicines forth of Metals and
Minerals.

1. That the Egyptian Learning in Physic and Metals appears thus. 1. We find
Genesis c. 41. v. 42. these words: And Pharaoh took off the ring from his hand,
and put it upon Joseph's hand, and arraied him in vestures of fine linen, and
put a gold chain about his neck: from whence it is plain that the Egyptians in
that time had either the knowledge of finding of Metals, or had them brought
from some other Countries, but however had the skill of melting of them, and
curious framing of them, else they could not have made (as may rationally be
supposed they did) such valuable, and choice things as Rings and Chains of
gold. And this Art could not in a moment or on the sudden be learned of them,
or arisen up amongst them; for nothing is invented and perfected at one and the
self-same time; and this sufficiently proves that they had skill in that part
of Chemistry that teaches the fusion and purifying of Metals.

2. A second Argument is, Genesis c. 50. v. 2, 3, 26.
in this Text, And Joseph commanded his servants the Physicians, to embalm his
father: and the Physicians embalmed Israel. And forty days were fulfilled for
him (for so are fulfilled the days of those which are embalmed) and the
Egyptians mourned for him threescore and ten days: and Joseph was embalmed
also. From whence it is apparent that they had Physicians thus anciently in
Egypt; and that they had no other skill but only to embalm, were absurd to
imagine, or to think they were not versed in curing diseases, and so were
furnished with medicines both from the Animal, Vegetable, and Mineral Kingdoms.
If their Learning had not been great in this point as well as in Politics,
Arithmetic, Geometry, and Astronomy, the comparison betwixt Solomon's wisdom
and theirs had been fondly asserted by the Text that says, 1 King. c. 4. v. 30.
And Solomon's wisdom excelled the wisdom of all the children of the East
country, and all the wisdom of Egypt. From whence we may note, 1. That the Text
would not have said that Solomon's wisdom had excelled the wisdom of the
children of the East, and all the wisdom of Egypt, if the wisdom of the East,
and of Egypt had not then been accounted the greatest wisdom known in the
world. 2. This wisdom of the East and of Egypt was not such as like a Mushrom
must start up in a night and an age, but must necessarily in reason be supposed
to have had a beginning, an increase long ere it could come to that height to
be esteemed the greatest in the world, and then must needs have been of a long
and large antiquity before the days of King Solomon. 3. And that it should be
then accounted the greatest wisdom in the world, and yet to be defective both
in that part of the Theory of Natural Philosophy, which of all is the most
noble; and especially in that part of the Practick, the Art of Medicine, or
Curing Diseases, and meliorating of Metals, were indeed to mutilate the wisdom
of Solomon, and to make him not only ignorant in the most secret and noble
parts of natural knowledge, but also to have been most miserable, in not being
able to cure the infirmities of the body; which cure being wanting, the comfort
of all other earthly joys does vanish and fly away. 4. And what should
Solomon's skill have been accounted to excel theirs (for the excellency is
chiefly put in his knowledge of natural things) being so knowing in the nature
of all Vegetables, that he was able to dispute of all Plants and Trees, 1 King.
c. 4. v. 33.
from the Cedar of Lebanon even unto the Hyssop that springs forth of the Wall:
And to know the nature of all living Creatures, as Beasts, Fowls, creeping
things, and Fishes: if by all this he knew not to preserve health* and cure
diseases, and especially to be ignorant of the nature of the things contained
in the Mineral Kingdom; or understood not the great Arcana's and Medicines that
might be drawn from them, and lay hidden in them: 2 Chronicles. c. 1. v. 15.
and if he excelled them in all these (as doubtless he did) then the knowledge
of the children of the East, and of the Egyptians in all these things, was not
little or of small account. 5. Why should Solomon send to Ophir for gold, and
to make at Jerusalem silver and gold as plenteous as stones: if it were for
nothing but for vain glory and covetousness; what wisdom was this, any but that
which was earthly, sensual, and devilish? and not that which as a blessing was
given to Solomon by the Almighty. 6. But if we may believe that piece (though
reckoned among the Apocrypha) called the Wisdom of Solomon, Wisd. c. 7. v. 7,
8, 9, 17, 21.
we may hear him thus confessing: Wherefore I prayed and prudence was given me,
I prayed and the spirit of Wisdom was bestowed upon me. And he esteemed gold in
comparison of it, as sand: and acknowledges that by it he had innumerable
riches, and that thereby he knew the framing of the World, and the virtue of
the Elements, and whatsoever was hidden and manifest, that he knew. From whence
it is plain that he was not ignorant of the most secret virtues both of things
occult and manifest, and so could not but understand the nature and virtues of
the Mineral Kingdom, otherwise he had not excelled the children of the East,
nor the Egyptians, whose skill could not be little in these things.

3. Another Argument appears from the Text. And Moses was instructed (or
instituted from a child) in all the learning of the Egyptians. For though Moses
after his nursing was brought to Pharaohs daughter, and brought up as her son,
yet was it well known unto his Mother who had nursed him, that he was her own
child; and therefore it is not rational that she, his father, and the rest of
the Hebrews would suffer him to be brought up so with Pharaohs daughter, as
thereby to destroy the principles of his Religion (in which no doubt they had a
special care to instruct him) being therein as zealous as any people under
heaven. And therefore his being instructed in all the Learning of the
Egyptians, it is in reason to be conjectured, Her^^. Medic. c. 11. p. 97, 98.
that it was not in vain superstitious Magic (wherewith as Couringius
labors to prove, they were much infected) but in the laudable Sciences of
Arithmetic, Politics, Geometry, Astronomy, and their Hieroglyphick learning,
which doubtless contained natural and lawful Magic (such as those Magicians
were partakers of, Mit. c. 2. v. 1, 2.
that came to worship Christ, Vid. D. Thom. Aqu. Catenam auream super loc. cit.
whose learning all the Fathers and ^^terpreters do justify to be good,
natural, and law^^l) the Art of Medicine, and knowledge of natural ^^d
artificial things, as in the next Branch we shall more at large make appear.

2. We shall now prove that Chemistry is (though p^^haps not under that name,
for of the Original of the title we may justly doubt) but in its nature and
pro^^rty, as an Art that taught the preparing of Medicines forth of Minerals as
well as other things, thereby to cure diseases, and to preserve health.

1. And first it is sufficiently proved that the Learning of the Eastern
Nations, and of Egypt, was great; to which we shall add some more testimonies
from such ancient and approved Authors as are of the greatest authority and
veracity, and then urge the Consequences, and answer the main Objections. De
Coelo lib. 2. c. 12. p. 286.


Concerning some part of the great Learning of the Egyptians, hear Aristotle;
who says, speaking of the Stars: Similiter and de caeteris stellis Egyptii and
Babylonii dicunt, qui plurimis jam annis ante haec observaverunt, and a quibus
multa fide d^gna de singulis stellis accepimus. And in like manner of the rest
of the stars the Egyptians and Babylonians have spoken, who had many years
before observed them, and of whom we have received concerning all the stars,
many things worthy of credit.

The next Authority we shall urge, De Fin^bus lib. 5. p. 153.
is the Testimony of Cicero; who says, Quid de Pythagora? Quid de Platone aut
Democrito loquar? a quibus propter discendi cupiditatem, videmus ultimas terras
esse peragratas? What shall I say of Pythagoras? what shall I say of Plato, or
Democritus? of whom, for the earnest desire of Learning, we have seen the
furthest Lands traveled over. Tuscul. quaest. lib. 4. p. 236, 237.
And again, Philosophiae denique principes ipsius, nunquam in suis studiis,
tantos progressus sine flagranti cupiditate facere potuissent; ultimas terras
lustrasse Pythagoram, Democritum, Platonem, accepimus. Ubi enim quid esset,
quod disci posset, eo veniendum judicaverunt. Lastly, The Princes of Philosophy
it self, never could have made so great progresses in their studies, without a
burning desire. We have received that Pythagoras, Democritus, and Plato had
viewed the farthest Lands: for where there was any thing to be learned, they
have judged it fit to go thither.

Another Testimony take from Macrobius, Macrob. lib. 1. Saturnal. c. 15.
who says, That Egypt was the Mother of all Arts. And again, That the
Egyptians were the Parents of all the Disciplines of Philosophy: which is
confirmed by Strabo, an Author of unquestionable verity; by Herodotus, and by
Diodorus Siculus. Geog. lib. 17. Herodot. l. 2. Diod. Sic. l, 1.
To these add the words of Philo Iudaeus in his Book De vita Mosis: who says,
that their Learning consisted in Arithmetic, Geometry, Music, and
Hieroglyphical Philosophy; vid. Iamblic. de vit. Pythag. l. 1. c. 29. Diog.
Laertium, p. 182. and Orig. Sacr. p. 122. etc.

From all this we shall only draw these Deductions:

1. That if the Learning of the children of the East, and the Wisdom of Egypt,
were in Solomon's time accounted the greatest that then was known, and that
Solomon's excelled them both; then it cannot rationally be conceived that
either of them were defective in the most noble parts, either of Natural
Philosophy, or the Art of Medicine drawn from the Mineral Kingdom, nor the Art
of Transmutation, but that they understood both.

2. Aristotle, (accounted the Prince of Learning, and of as much Antiquity as
the most Authors we have) would never have so much commended the Egyptians and
Babylonians for the truth of their Doctrine concerning the Stars; but if they
were so well versed in the nature of things so remote as the Stars, they must
(in all probability) be as much (if not better) skilled in the knowledge of the
nature of the subterraneous Kingdom.

3. Cicero, a person that writ above 1600 years since, would never have so
remarkably taken notice of Pythagoras, Democritus, and Plato for traveling
into the remotest Regions, and especially into Egypt, they knowing the height
of the Grecian Learning, and being therein, by the account of all Authors, the
chiefest Masters, if there had not been some excellency in the Egyptian
Learning that they were ignorant of. And what could that be except the Art of
Transmuting of Metals, and of curing diseases in a more perfect way then the
Graecians knew; amongst whom notwithstanding the Aesculapian Family had been
famous many hundred years before the time of Pythagoras, and those that
followed him and their going down into Egypt?

4. And if Egypt was (according to Macrobius and the rest quoted before) the
Mother of all Arts, and the Parent of all the Disciplines of Philosophy; then
surely they could not be ignorant of that which is the most noble of all Arts,
the Transmutation of Metals, and the curing of all diseases by an universal
Medicine, which is no where to be had but forth of the Mineral Kingdom.

But their chief Objection is, that Chemistry (about which name we do not
contend, but about the Art it self) is but of late invention; and that the
learning attributed to Hermes Trismegist, is but of late years standing, and
both the Author and it but forged and feigned. To which we answer,

1. Couringius (the most bitter Enemy that ever the Hermetick Learning,
Couring. de Herm. Medic. c. 9. p. 77.
or that Hermes had) does confess, that from most ancient Times the Art of
Medicine was had in esteem in Egypt; and says, That the Art of Medicine had
been in most high esteem with the Egyptians, seeing it was manifest by the
testimonies of their own Country and of others, greater then all exception. For
that in the Age of the Patriarchs Jacob and Joseph, there wanted not
Physicians, by whose care their dead bodies were (being embalmed) preserved
from putrefaction; but that afterward the same was practiced by others, as
might be gathered by those things that are related of the Egyptian Funerals, by
Herodotus and Democritus. By whose confession it being granted that the Medical
Art was so anciently practiced there; and that according to Pliny, they
affirmed that the Art of Medicine was invented amongst them, Plin. lib. 7. c. 56
and all their Arts commonly attributed to Hermes; then it must of necessity
follow, that Hermes (though there might be, and by the testimony of Cicero were
diverse of that name) was not a feigned Author, nor the Art forged, but was of
such antiquity, that no vain Arguments can easily overthrow.

2. The Testimony of Suidas, though undervalued by Couringius and Guibertus,
Libanii lib. Alchym. Trans. Defens. 2. p. 214.
is not of the least validity: who relates, That Dioclesian had caused to be
gathered all the Books that treated of Chemistry amongst the Egyptians, and
caused them to be burned, lest growing rich by the Art of Transmutation, it
might encourage them to rebel. Now Dioclesian came to the Empire, or reigned
about the Year of Christ, 288. or as some, 287. or as Baronius, 284. and Suidas
lived about Ann. Christ. 1214. so that the Name and Art of Chemistry must needs
have been both known before the time of Suidas writing. And Coelius Rhodigines,
an Author of great authority and general Learning; the Collegium Conimbricense
are persuaded that he writ the truth. And this testimony Demetrius
Chalcocondyles gives of the Writings of Suidas. This Book, to wit of Suidas,
does not only bring manifold profit to young Students, but also great fruit
and pleasure to persons of every Age. For neither does he only interpret the
words of Historians, Libanii ibi^. p. 217.
Orators, and of all sorts of eloquent Authors, but he also comprehends many
and various Histories, that are not easily to be found elsewhere, because the
Books of the Graecians, Romans, and Hebrews, from whence they were taken, are
lost and perished. Which Testimony of the Writings of Suidas, the concurrent
Opinion of all learned men for above the space of 400 years, is a far greater
evidence then ever the authority of Guibertus, or Couringius is able to
invalidate.

3. Couringius and Guibertus both do confess that Julius Firmicus the
Astrologer, Libanii ibid. p. 217.218.
who lived in the time of Constantine the Emperor, about the year of Chirst
320. did attribute a good or bad Constellation in Heaven to the Professors of
Alchymie. By which it is plain that the Profession of that Art must have been
long known before; Couring. l. de Herm. Medic. p. 62, 93, 137.
for it is a rule, that Rei non existentis, aut incognitae nulla est
assignatio; That of a thing not existing, or unknown, there can be no
assignation. And seeing that Firmicus was a most ancient Astrologer, and that
Astrological Observations do arise from long Experience; it must necessarily
follow, that Alchymy must needs be both Re and Nomine, of far greater antiquity
then the days of Firmicus.

4. Guibertus himself brings an example forth of Cedrenus of one Professing
Chemistry, that was a Magician (in the worst sense he means.) Now Cedrenus
writ in the time of Anastasius the Emperor, who reigned about Ann. Christ.
491. Liban. at supr. p. 242.
And if then there were some that professed Chemistry, then it must needs have
been of a more ancient standing. For there is no Profession that upon a sudden
does get root, and pass into an habit; but must have a time of its invention,
increase, and perfection; so that it is plain that both the Art of Chemistry
and the Name was very ancient. And to this might be added, That the Writings of
Hermes Trismegist were long extant in the World before the Times of
Christianity, otherwise it could not be imagined that the Christians for the
advancement and defense of their Religion, should have forged supposititious
pieces under Hermes his name, but that his Reputation and Learning had been
long, and then was of great account amongst the Heathens themselves.

5. Also it is manifest that Chemistry was ancient, because it had flourished
long before the times of Avicen, Bulcasis, Mesue, Rhasis, and the rest of the
Arabians, who could not have mentioned it, if it had not had a beginning before
their Age and Time. Liban. ut supr. p. 217.
To this I shall only join the Testimony of Morienus a Roman Hermit, whose
Writings were translated forth of the Arabic Language into Latin, Ann. Chapter
1182. who learned the Art of Transmutation, or of the great Elixir at Rome of
Adfar an Alexandrian, and a Christian. And afterward Morienus taught it to
Calid or Evelid, the son of Gizid the second, who was King of Egypt about the
year of Christ 725. which doubtless Adfar had learned forth of the Writings of
Hermes Trismegist; which do all plainly prove that Chemistry, for the Hermetick
Learning was of sufficient antiquity, and Hermes himself no feigned Author.

6. I shall only add the judgments of four or five Authors of unquestionable
credit and veracity. D. Sennert. Tom. 1. c. 1. de Not. Chym. p. 754.
1. And first the most learned Sennertus, a great Chemist and Galenist, a person
generally approved of by all, (though otherwise a most virulent adversary of
Paracelsus) does confess in these words; Fuit enim haec ars (nempe Chymia) jam
usque ab Hermete Trismegisto sacerdotibus Egyptiis familiar is, and nota. This
Art (to wit, Chemistry) was even from the time of Hermes Trismegist, familiar
and known to the Egyptian Priests. What can be more clear and manifest for the
antiquity of this Art, and for Hermes himself, then this Testimony of so
learned a person? And again, after a long discourse of the antiquity of
Chemistry, and of Hermes himself, who he conceives to have lived about the year
of the World 2000. because that Diodorus Siculus writes, Id. Tom. 3. lib. de
Cons. and dissens. Gal. and Chym. c. 3.710.711.
that Isis had engraven in the Pillar of her Sepulcher, that she was instructed
or taught by Hermes; he concludes thus, Chymiam ipsi (sc. Hermeti) notam
fuisse facile concedimus: quid tamen in ea praestiterit, ex historiis non
patet. We easily grant that Chemistry was known to Hermes, but what he
performed therein is not manifest from Histories. 2. The second we shall
commend unto the Curious, Jo. Lang. Ep. Med. l. 2. p. 522 and p. 550.
is the learned and approved John Langius, who in that Epistle of his of the
Original of the Art of Medicine amongst the Egyptians, Chaldaeans, Graecians,
and Arabians; as also in his next concerning the Libraries of the Art of
Medicine, of the Ancients and of other Faculties, does (in this point) give
most ample and full satisfaction. 3. The third that I shall name, Jo. Heurn l.
1. Inst. Medic. c. 1. p. 1.
is the judicious and learned John Heurnius; who says, that the Art of
Medicine was said first to spring up amongst the Egyptians: and reason agrees
thereto, because the chief axioms of the Art of Medicine did flow from them:
Fr. Patric. l. Herm. Trism.
and quoteth the Testimonies both of Hippocrates and Aristotle; unto which for
brevity, I refer the Reader. 4. The two last I shall only name, Mich. Mayer.
Symb. Aur. Men's. l. 1. p. 56. etc.
and those are Franciscus Patricius, and Michael Mayerus, both solid and
learned persons, and have written so much (in this point) as may satisfy any
unbiassed and impartial Reader.


Now though the knowledge of Metals be of such benefit to the well-being of
mankind, and the invention of so great antiquity, yet has it amongst the
generality of the Learned, found no great entertainment, nor has been brought
on to any great perfection. For but that since and about the time of Paracelsus
it has been revived and restored, and now begins exceedingly to flourish;
otherwise before it either was by Tradition (especially the mystical part)
delivered over from hand to hand, and so kept locked up in the breasts of a few
mystical Authors or Adeptists; or in their Writings delivered so darkly and
obscurely, that the most were deterred from taking pains to read or study them:
and of those few that bent their labors that way, scarce one of a thousand did
perceive or understand their manner of Aenigmatical and Parabolical Writing and
Expressions; so that for the most part, until the time aforesaid, the knowledge
of Chemistry lay buried in the Cells of the Friars and Monks, and so came to no
great improvement nor perfection.

And the Reasons of the non-proficiency of the knowledge of Minerals and Metals
in general, we conceive to be these principally.

1. That whereas the Animal and Vegetable Kingdoms, in their Generations,
Growth, Operations, and Properties, lay visible and obvious, that every
diligent Observer and Searcher might dive thereinto; yet has the knowledge of
all those particulars not yet attained to any such degree of perfection, but
that the most necessary and substantial points are yet undiscovered or not
found out. Now the progress of Nature in the generation of Metals and Minerals,
their properties and alterations, being a thing that lay hid in the bowels of
the Earth, whereinto the senses of few men could pierce; and so exceeding
difficult to observe or understand, that it is no great marvel that so little
progress is made into that kind of Knowledge; for where obviousness and easiness
are awanting to know the Subject and the Properties thereof, men commonly have
no incitements or encouragement to search after the knowledge of such matter,
and therefore must needs be a great remora or stop to the progress therein.

2. Again, Though most Countries that are not extremely barbarous, do produce
within the compass of some circuit of years, Men learned, and studious of the
secrets of Nature; yet every Region does not produce such store of Minerals, as
may afford either a fit subject, or opportunity for such disquisitions, and
therefore searching minds, either diverted themselves to inquire into other
parts of Nature, more near and easy to be observed, or else betook themselves
to general contemplation; and so framed Systemes according to their own
fancies, rather drawing Nature to follow their Conceptions, then by travel,
labor, long toil and experimental Observations, to order their speculations
according to the truth of Natures operations; or else fall down with that
scantling of knowledge in these things that they found written by other
Authors, that had preceded them. So that thereby this kind of Learning was
brought to a stand, and had its ne plus ultra set upon it. And it had stood so
still, had not some persons of more insatiable desire of the knowledge of the
secrets of Nature, and especially of her Mineral Kingdom, with Herculean
boldness, and undaunted resolution, broken through all difficulties, and
adventured great dangers and long peregrinations for attaining the same, more
(perhaps) then Jason for the Golden Fleece. And such appears plainly Basilius
Valentinus, Bernardus Trevisanus, Johannes Pontanus; and of late Johannes
Agricola to have been, and especially that indefatigable person Paracelsus,
Nelm. Tartar. Histor. p. 334.
who when under the twentieth year of his age (having seen all the Mines in
Germany) traveled through England, Scotland, Swedeland, Denmark, Norway, and
into Russia, and from thence into the Borders of the Tartars; where being taken
prisoner, and carried to the Great Cham, was from thence conveyed to
Constantinople, and from thence returned home through Arabia, and so to Venice.
So little does any danger fright a noble and resolute mind, when armed with the
ardent desire of gaining knowledge, while other idle Lubbers that dare not
adventure from the air of their own Countries, nay scarce from the smoke of
their own fires, think themselves fit Judges of the labor of others, as
competent Judges as Midas was of Apollo's Music.

3. Another Reason I shall offer is, That the way and means to discover the
Nature of Minerals, is not only difficult and dangerous, but in it self is so
sordid, base and troublesome, that the most men of parts, will hardly adventure
themselves into the Pits or Shafts where Ores are usually gotten; nor can
endure to stay there so long, that they can rightly inform themselves of any
thing that may be satisfactory to their Inquiries. And the Miners or Workmen
(for the most part) being but people of the most indigent sort, and such as
whose knowledge and aims reach no higher then to get a poor living by that
slavish Labor, regard to inform themselves of no more then what may conduce to
such a poor and servile kind of living; by which means they are little able to
give any learned man satisfaction to those necessary Inquiries that might tend
to enable him to judge rightly of the Nature of the things in that
subterraneous Kingdom. And to this you may add, That the Miners (or Bergmen, as
the Germans call them) have as well as the Schoolmen, Logicians, nay,
Mariners, and other Artificers, their peculiar Idiom or Dialect, which none but
themselves, or those that have long conversed with them, are able to
understand; it being for the most part like Heathen Greek, or terms of
Conjuring to others: and therefore no marvel if this skill have had no greater
progress.

Now for the small progress that is made in Mineral things, either to profit or
knowledge, within His Majesty's Dominions of Great Britain, is not because they
do not abound with diverse sorts, both of Metals and Minerals; though according
to the Vulgar opinion, they lying so far in Northern Latitude, might be thought
not to yield any great store; it being commonly imagined that the Southern
Climates are most fertile of them; but some other special reasons we shall show
anon. For it plainly appears by the learned Antiquary Camden, Camden Brit. p.
148.
that Cornwall and Devonshire have from Ages long ago abounded with most
excellent Ore of Tin, which has stored a great part of Europe with that Metal,
accounted generally the best in the World, except that of Corinthia or
Villacum. For speaking of Cornwall, he says, Stannum enim non sine uberrimo
fructu, Diodor. Sicul. l. 5. c. 8. p. 142.
admiranda copia effoditur, ex quo vasa domestica ducta apud omnes Europaeos in
mensarum usu argenteis fulgore comparantur. Incol^ passim nigros lapillos ex
quibus stannum conflatur, vel effodiunt, vel ex arenis lotis eximunt, quod in
continentem a Britannis priscis navigiis vitilibus corio circumsutis devehi
solebat. For Tin is dug up in a wonderful quantity, not without great
benefit, of which are made household vessels for the use of Tables through
Europe, comparable to Silver vessels in brightness. The Inhabitants do every
where gather little black stones, out of which Tin is melted, or dig them up,
or gather them forth of them: which was wont to be carried by the ancient
Britains into the Continent in Wicker Boats covered with Leather.

Camden. Brit. p. 692.
And in his Des^ription of Cumberland, he declares plainly the store of Copper
Mines that were there, which were conceived to hold something of Gold and
Silver, as also a Mine of Black Lead, for which we yet want a Latin name, but
that of late Dr. Merrett has given it the title of Nigrica. And also that in
Darbyshire not only plenty of Lead was found, Ibid. p. 497.
but also the Ore of Antimony, which the aforesaid Dr. Merrett confirms; Plnax
rer. not. Britan. p. 208, 209.
and so of Tin, Lead, Silver Ore, Copper Ore, Black Lead, and diverse other
Minerals. And if we may believe Holingshed (no contemptible Author) there has
not wanted the Ore of Gold, Silver, Tin, Lead, Copper, Steel, Iron, and other
Minerals. Descript. of England, c. 11. p. 237.
And Dr. Jorden in his learned Treatise of Natural Baths and Mineral Waters,
says, In Scotland, three miles beyond Berwick, I found a red stone, Ibid. c.
8. p. 39.
which I take to be Minium nativum, seeing Agricola makes mention of it in
Scotland; but by a mischance could not try it. And I my self know two places
in Craven, in the West Riding of Yorkshire, where formerly good Silver Ore has
been gotten: Hist. 1.
the one is a place called Brunghill Moor in the Parish of Slaidburn, where
betwixt 50 and 70 years since, Sir Bevis Bulmer got good store of Silver Ore,
that held about 67 pound per Tun, as Walter Basby an expert Essay or
Test-Master informed me, who was a person of at least 76 years of age, and had
(as an expert Artist) been in the time of King James sent to the Emperor of
Russia to setle the standard of his Coin: where he remaining diverse years, and
going down to the Borders of Tartaria to view the Mines there, was taken
prisoner by the Tartars, and after redeemed by the Russian Emperor, and sent
over into England. Where after about the year 1655. he was again brought down
with some Londoners, that then had a Patent for Mines. But they being men
neither of free purses to follow such a Work, nor of skill or government fit to
manage such an Enterprise, they at last deserted the poor old man, whom I
entertained for three quarters of a year, and got some of the Ore picked forth
of the old Rubbish of the Works that Sir Bevis Bulmer had left (with whom the
said old Mr. Ba^by had been an Essay-master) and caused him to make several
Trials; which yielded near to the quantity of Silver in a Tun, as is before
specified, though it were none of the best Ore.

The other place was within the Township of Rimmington in the Parish of
Gisburn, Hist. 2.
in Craven, in the aforesaid West Riding of Yorkshire, in a field called
Skelkorn, belonging to one Mr. Pudsey an ancient Esquire, and owner of Bolton
Hall juxta Bolland; who in the reign of Queen Elizabeth, did there get good
store of Silver Ore, and converted it to his own use (or rather coined it, as
many do believe, there being many shillings marked with an Escalope, which the
people of that Country call Pudsey's shillings to this day.) But whether way
soever it was, he procured his pardon for it, and had it, as I am certified
from the mouths of those that have seen it. And while the said old Basby was
with me, I procured some of the said Ore that had been formerly left, of which
(I looking on) he made several trials, and I am sure that I was not imposed
upon by him, nor deceived, but that it yielded in the Tun about 26 pounds. And
since that time there has been good store of Lead Ore gotten in the same
place: but by all the interest and means that I could use, I could never get
from the Workmen any such Ore as had been formerly gotten there; so cunning are
the Miners, that if they find any Vein of Ore that may contain so much of
Silver as would make it a Mine Royal, they will not let it be known, but
presently beat it, and mix it with their softer Ore, pre^ending the o^e will
not melt without the other^ being with them a common trick, lest their work
should be taken from them. As also I can show the most several sorts of Ore of
most Metals (except Gold:) besides great diversity of other Minerals, Stones,
and Earth, some known, and some not known, whereby it may sufficiently appear
that it is not want of Minerals or Metals in his Majesty's Dominions, that has
hindered the growth of this knowledge, but some other reasons, which we shall
now show.

1. The end that commonly men aim at in digging for Minerals and Metals, is
gain and profit: and the impulsive cause that moves them to that end, is
generally Poverty, Want, Indigency, and consequently Necessity. Now the most
part, if not all of his Majesty's Subjects of Great Britain having wherewithal
to get a comfortable and sufficient livelihood, as by Pasturage, Tillage,
Professions, Arts, Trades, or Manufactures, have no such necessity put upon
them as to seek for a sustentation by such slavish and drudgery Work, as men
must undergo that work in those dangerous and darksom undertakings, as is
necessarily performed in the Mines: and therefore it is clear, that in His
Majesty's Dominions, few will undergo such servitude, that have a better means
to live upon.

2. Another reason is, the small encouragement that Undertakers, or Workmen
have in our Nation, to proceed to undergo such pains and hazards, as
necessarily they both must run that meddle with such matters. For if the Mines
be Royal, then for the most part, they are carelessly followed, as too much
experience has often verified: and if they belong to particular Lords, then
the conditions are for the most part so hard, that the Undertakers and Workmen
can get little profit by them, which causes them often to be deserted and
left. For it is usual with the Workmen, that if they can hear of another place
where they may find better Wages, both to leave the Work and their Masters. And
often it happens that either diverse Lords are at variance about the same Mine,
or that diverse pretend several Grants, that while they are trying their titles,
the Work is neglected, and the Workmen betake themselves to some other Work. Or
that where a Mine is discovered, that may lessen the price of the Mineral or
Metal that another gets; the Workmen of the one is hired away by the other, or
some other sinister means used betwixt them; as often is the overthrow of the
one or other, if not of both: Hist. 3.
of which I shall only give two instances. Sir Bevis B^lmer (before named)
having brought the Mine at Brunghill Moor to great perfection, and getting
great store of Silver Ore (as many men yet living can testify) a controversy
rose about the said Mine with Sir Gilbert Houghton, or his father, about the
title, that grew to that height that Sir Bevis Bulmer was forced to give over
pursuing the labor, and so caused the Workmen to throw in the Works; which
have been often since attempted and wrought in, but the same rich Vein could
never since be found. Another is, Hist. 4.
that Sir Richard Houghton, had set up a very profitable Mine of Allom, near
unto Houghton Tower in the Hundred of Blackburn, within these very few years,
where great store of very good Allom was made and sold; but whether some
persons that had Works of the same nature in other places, found that the store
gotten there, would bring down the price of that commodity; as it had all about
near unto those parts; or for what other cause I know not, a contention was
raised against him about the same Mine, so that he was either compounded with,
or otherwise forced to give it over; so that it is now quite left, to the loss
of the Nation in general, and to the damage of many a poor man in particular,
that got their living by working there.

3. A third reason is, The common Disease or Condition of the English Nation,
that are accustomed too much to dote upon foreign Commodities, and imported
Wares; which makes them negligent in looking into, or improving their own
native commodities, and such things as their own Country yields. Which has
stirred up the vigilance and industry of our neighbors, especially the Dutch,
who can make greater benefit of our homebred Commodities then we our selves,
and therefore they have for many years last past brought up and transported all
the Lead Ore they could possibly buy; and as I, and many other persons have
been credibly informed, did refine the same Ore, and thereby got no small
profit. And the Mine of Black Lead (or Kellow, as we call it here in the
Northern parts) that is in Cumberland, and opened but once in 8 or 10 years, is
commonly all bought by those industrious people, of whom ^caliger says, animas
in digi^is babentes, so exceeding active are they in all manual performances,
while we English lie ^upine and idle.

CHAP. II. Of those Authors that have treated of Metals and Minerals.
IF the Authors that have written of the Mineral Kingdom were to be considered
according to their number and multitude, then a man would think that this kind
of Learning had already attained its height and Zenith. But if we come to
balance them by their substance and weight, we shall find them for the most
part but light, and their writings to contain very much Chaff, and but a little
Corn. For a great many of them have framed large Volumes of this knowledge, and
the other parts of Nature, which had no other foundation to stand upon, but
only the notions and fancies of their own brains; others were only
Transcribers of what others had written before them, but had little or no
further experience, and so only added to the bulk of those kind of Writings,
but not at all to the substance or matter. Others that experimentally knew
something in this occult Science, yet delivered their knowledge so darkly, that
few were thereby instructed or bettered; and some few were painful and
experienced men in these matters, and did as freely communicate their
knowledge. And therefore amongst so great a multitude and variety, that the
Reader may in some sort receive satisfaction, and know by which of them he is
most like to profit, we shall propose some few (for it would be endless to
enumerate all) and those we shall rank into these three orders: 1. Speculative
Authors. 2. Mystical Writers, or Chemists. 3. The Authors that were
experimental Observators.

1. By Speculative Writers I understand such, who by their deep contemplations,
notions, and working of their brains, thought they had catched Nature in a Net,
and so kept her, that they were able to understand all her operations, bot^ hid
and open, and so framed large Volumes of the whole operation of Nature, as
though they had been skilled in all things, when the least individual may
afford matter to stagger and baffle the greatest of Philosophers, of which we
shall name some, not in the due order of the times they lived in, but as they
occur to our memory.

1. We shall first begin with the Graecians, who though they were accounted the
great Masters in all kind of Learning, yet has there flowed down to us but
little scantlings of this kind of knowledge. For Plato, one of the most knowing
amongst them, in all his Works (which are pretty large) I do meet with little
concerning Metals and Minerals, except some little where he speaks of their
generation; which we shall have occasion to mention hereafter; for he was more
frequent in confuting the Opinions of others, then in asserting his own; and
rather adhered to dubitation then to positive affirmation.

2. As for Aristotle accounted the Prince of Learning, and one who would seem
to be (almost) ignorant of nothing, yet what he has written in this kind of
Learning, is but in general; and far short from giving satisfaction to
searching spirits, concerning all the particulars of Mineral knowledge, and
that which in general is handled by him concerning their generations, is not
received by the most learned, nor will hold good with Experiment and
Observation. And therefore I cannot but mind the Reader of that ingenious
Confession of Zabarell concerning Aristotle's writing of Minerals; Jac. Zabar.
l. 1. c. 30. p. 84.
where he says, Non sum enim in eo communi errore, ut putem necesse esse
Aristotelem ita perfectam tradidisse naturalem Philosophiam, ut nihil quod ab
humano ingenio inveniri, aut cognosci queat, praetermissum ab eo potuerit. For
I am not in that common error, that I should think that it is needful that
Aristotle should have delivered natural Philosophy so perfect, that nothing
which can be invented, or known by the wit of man, was praetermitted by him.

3. Hippocrates, a most famous Physician, yet in all those Works that have come
down to our Age, there is little or no mention made of Minerals or Metals, so
that we cannot understand what his knowledge was in these things. Gal. de Comp.
Med. lib. 3. p. 1162. Id. lib. De Antidot. page 1280.
And as for Galen, though he were a most learned and laborious person that
spared no pains to come to the knowledge and attainment of good Medicaments;
for it seems that yearly forth of every Nation, he took care to have the most
excellent Medicaments brought unto him: as also for the same cause that he
traveled into Syria, Cyprus, and Lemnos, and left a learned Piece behind him,
of the nature of Simple Medicines; wherein he describes the nature of many
Minerals, as to their use in Physic, and did know diverse that were
artificially prepared; yet for any deep knowledge that he had in the generation
and production of them, Id de Simp. Med. lib. 9. p. 1125.
it is not manifest, seeing he took Quicksilver to be prepared by Art, and not
produced by nature; and whether it would kill, being taken inwardly, or applied
outwardly, he had not tried.

4. Dioscorides, an ancient and learned Greek Author, writ six Books, De re
Medica. Upon which Matthiolus has made a large and learned Commentary: in the
fifth of which there are very good descriptions of Metals and Minerals, and
their Virtues; by which a diligent and heedful Reader may gain much worthy
knowledge, and especially by those clear expositions that the laborious
Commentator has made upon the Text. Yet it is to be noted that the Author
Dioscorides, had been more conversant in the Refining Shops then in the Mines,
as speaking but little of the generation of Metals in the bowels of the Earth.

5. I must by no means omit C. Plinius Secundus, who collected and writ a Book
which he calls his Natural History; a stupendous and laborious Piece, where in
the 33. and 34. Book, he treats of Metals and Minerals, according to what it
seems he had gathered from the Ancients; and declares many notable things of
them, hardly elsewhere to be found in any that preceded him; and may yield
singular instruction to an heedful Reader. Yet are not the things he treats
of so clear, but that later Observations have discovered diverse defects in them
(if not errors) which our search and industry ought rather to amend and
perfect, then to censure and condemn.

6. As for the numerous, and almost innumerable rabble of the Schoolmen,
Expositors, Commentators, and followers of Aristotle, they have all of them
(except in some small trivial points) danced after his Pipe, and added little
or nothing of new discovery, but rested satisfied in following his tract. And
for Fuchsius, Brasavolus, Baccius, and such like, they have not much deviated
from the rest; though in their Writings there be some things worthy of note,
and may much better the understandings of such as be ignorant, if they take
care to try before they trust, and not to take every thing for a truth that
they may find in them.

7. I cannot but rank Hieronymus Cardanus and Scaliger together; who (excepting
their niceties, quibbles, Encyclop. Phys. par. 4. p. 487.
and disputes) have many things in them that may conduce to the improvement of
this kind of learning: though neither of them, in my judgment, have showed any
great solidity gained by experience or observation. Only I shall not forget
Johannes Henricus Alstedius, in that little Piece of his of the Mineral
Kingdom; which, both for method and matter, may serve for an Introduction to a
Learner or Beginner. I cannot but here also remember, and commend the Book De
Metallicis, set forth by Andreas Caesalpinus, because it is a pretty
compendious Piece, comprehending most Metals and Minerals that were then known;
and seems to be a good Collection of what had been formerly written in the
common way; though it have little of later Observations in it; nor tastes not
much of experience or trial.

8. The Jesuit Bernardus Caesius writ a Voluminous Piece of Minerologie, or
Natural Philosophy; wherein, though he expatiated too far to fetch in all
things that might seem any way of kindred to that kind of knowledge; and that it
was but a mere Collection and heap stolen from other Authors, and hardly any
thing except notions; yet is there something in it (especially concerning the
signs of discovering Mines and Ores) that may advantage such a Reader, as
either has the skill, or will take the pains to sever the Tares from the
Wheat, and separate the gold from the dross. But I must by no means pass in
silence that universal Scribler and Rhapsodist, Athanasius Kincherus, who after
a great many huge and barren Volumes, did promise the World a Work, by him
styled Mundus Subterraneus, which put all the Learned into great expectations
of some worthy and solid Piece of Mineral knowledge; but, alas! when it
appeared, every Reader may soon be satisfied, that there is but very little in
it, except the Title, that does answer such conceived expectations, or fulfill
such great promises. For excepting a few Queries sent to the Emperors Officers
in Hungary and Germany, and Answers unto them, there is neither any solid, or
new discovery of any thing material, tending to advance Mineral knowledge; but
it is fully stuffed with Scandals and Lies against Paracelsus, Arnoldus, and
Lully, whose Art of Transmutation or Maturation of Metals he labors to prove
to be false; of which he knows no more then a blind man does of Colors.

2. As for Mystical Writers or Chemists, I put them in two ranks. 1. Those that
knew and writ of Vulgar Chemistry. 2. Those that knew and writ of the Mystical
part of Chemistry.

1. And for the first, I shall only reckon some few, as Quercitanus, Mylius,
Beguinus, Sala, Faber, and such like, who though they have written much in the
way of preparing Minerals for Medicaments by Chemistry, yet have they done
little to the discovery of the Nature and Generation of Metals: but yet some
few things are here and there interspersed in their Works, that may be worth
the taking notice of, and may be of very considerable use to an intelligent
person, of which, in some places hereafter, we may have occasion to speak.

2. As for Libanius, though he would seem very knowing, and a great Chemist,
yet it is manifest to all that understand aright, that though he was a great
Broyler in Gebers Kitchen, yet he never came to enter the Closet of
Philosophic Secrets: yet has he (though a bitter and sworn Enemy to
Paracelsus) gathered some very true and profitable things from the Writings of
other good Authors, which are worthy to be regarded. For it is discretion in
every Student and Reader, to choose the good in any Writer, and to leave that
which is bad: for there are few Authors that have not some mixture of both.

3. I cannot but commend to the studious of Mineral knowledge, the Naturae
sanctuarium of Henricus Nollius, who amongst other things, has methodically
comprised the Doctrine of Metals and Minerals; wherein there are many neat and
witty things very worthy to be observed. I might here add to these a great
number of the like, but these are sufficient.

2. As for the Mystical Authors that have treated of the Nature and Generation
of Metals, though they have written so obscurely, that the darkness of their
Writing might deter the most earnest desirers from reading or studying of them:
but they must remember that, Difficilia, quae pulchra; and that, Dii sua bona
laboribus vend^nt; and that the kernel is not had, but by removing the husk and
breaking the shell. And I must assure them, that they above all others have
written most truly, and experimentally of the Nature of the Mineral Kingdom,
(as perhaps we may show hereafter) and whosoever shall come truly to know the
Nature and Generation of Metals and Minerals, will then understand that they
have not written Lies.

1. And first those that I shall commend unto the Reader of them that were more
ancient, are Morienus Romanus, Arnoldus de V^lla nova, Albertus Magnus, and
Raymundus Lullius; these, if rightly understood, will give thee a great light
and entrance into the knowledge of Metals and Minerals. Neither are our
Countrymen, Roger Bacon, Thomas Norton, and George Ripley, any way inferior
unto them. And to these may be joined Rosarius Philosophorum, and all the
Authors contained in the Musaeum Hermeticum, to which might be added many
others.

2. There are none more excellent (especially in declaring the root and
seminary power of Metals) then the learned Bernardus Trevisanus, who in his
Book of Alchymy, and his learned Epistle to Thomas de Benonia, does fully and
clearly discover the hidden nature, generation, root, and properties of Metals,
so that nothing can be wished for more of an intelligent Reader; though he must
note, ut perspicuus apparet, it^ profundus delitescit. To whom I may adjoyn the
subtle Philosopher Michael Sendivogius, who in his Novum lumen Chymicum, and
his Book De Sulphur, has heartily opened the secrets of the Metalline
Kingdom; though as he advises, he be to be understood, not according to the
syllables, but sense; and all things are to be interpreted according to the
possibility of Nature. Neither is the acute and learned man Michael Mayerus, in
the most of his Writings of less value and esteem; having in many places
unlocked those secrets of the Mineral Kingdom, that lay close covered in the
Aenigma's and Parables of others; but to be often read, and pondered upon with
sober heed, and careful attention.

3. The next (who above all of this sort of Authors) I do most approve of and
commend, is the Friar Bafilius Valentinus; who besides his many Writings of
Metals and Minerals, and of the rare Medicines, and secrets contained in them,
has written an elaborate Tract of all the particulars that any way may pertain
to Minerals. A work so absolutely complete, that I know not any that may justly
be compared unto it. And though it was written in the German Tongue, and but
lately translated into English; and that he altogether uses the terms of the
Workmen, or Miners, which renders it more difficult to be understood; yet he
that will learn this knowledge must forbear no pains, but must labor about the
Pits and Groves where Metals and Minerals are got, and converse with the
Laborers as well as with Books, for else their Terms and Language will not be
understood; the want of which, has caused no small stop to the progress of
this knowledge.

4. I come now to that much wronged, though most experienced person,
Theophrastus Paracelsus, who (notwithstanding the malice of Erastus and all his
followers) did really understand more of the nature, generation, and properties
of Metals, (which we shall make good in the ensuing Discourse) and of the Art
of Medicine, then all those his malignant Enemies, or many hundreds besides:
And had taken more pains, and made more dangerous peregrinations, even from his
Cradle (being brought up under a learned Father, and the most knowing men that
Germany in that time produced) to attain this knowledge, then any other person
we know or read of; and doubtless knew and had seen more several Mines, then
any one that his Enemies are able to name; as we shall have occasion to show
hereafter.

5. Let us close up this Class of Authors with that late learned, and deeply
experienced person Johannes Baptista van* Helmont; who though he left no
Treatise (that ever came to light) that was purposely written upon this
Subject, yet has he enriched his Writing with much deep Mineral knowledge. So
that it is to me no small wonder, that seeing his Writings are so much read,
and studied, that now an Helmontian seems to overtop a common Chemist,
Paracelsian, and Galenist, that none has taken the pains to gather up those
Pearly drops of Mineral learning, wherewith here and there he has watered his
polite and pithy sheets; unless it be because that the most of his Followers
and Readers are drawn, with too longing a desire, to obtain his Arcana's and
great Medicines, thereby to purchase profit and honor, that they little regard
the advancement of the Commonwealth of Mineral knowledge and learning.

3. The third sort of Authors that were mentioned, where those that I termed
Experimental Observators, as the most of those were that I shall now recite;
for either they were such as attended the Mines, or went thither to converse
with the Workmen to inform themselves, or bore some Office about those places,
or were those that either for curiosities sake, or to enrich their knowledge,
did gather together all the Minerals they could, or used the most of all these
ways to gain understanding. And therefore I commend these above all the rest
before named, to be read and studied of all Officers and men belonging to any
Mineral or Metallic Works; and of all young Students and Beginners that seek
after Mineral knowledge: because these Authors speak not altogether by Opinion,
Fancy, and Conjecture; but forth of their own experience, and the experience
of those that were conversant about the Mines, and getting of Ore, and
purifying and refining of them; and therefore more certain to be relied upon
for Leaders and Teachers. And more, because they have written what they knew,
openly and plainly as the Subject would bear; and not in Parables, and
Aenigmatical expressions.

1. The first I shall offer (and not one of the least in worth) is Georgius
Agricola, a person of great experience and laboriousness^; who being born in a
Country (as Melchior Adams asserteth) that was exceeding fertile of all sorts
of Minerals, Melch. Adam. in vit. Agricol. p. 84.
was thereby the better enabled to make a good progress toward the attainment
of that kind of knowledge. To which he added industry and diligence; for coming
to live in the Valley of Ioachim, he was thereby better fitted for such a
purpose: and the forenamed Author says, That what time he had to spare from
curing the sick, in attending his health, from his domestic affairs; he
bestowed all that partly in inquiring of persons that were skillful in the
Metallic Art, partly in reading the Writers, Greek and Latin, who had
committed any thing to memory concerning Metals. But when he saw that very few
things of that nature were extant, and that more were lost, he determined to
write of subterraneous things; that which he had read or learned of such as
were skillful in Metallic knowledge, or which he had seen in the Mines, or
Workhouses.

This Author therefore had all those advantages that might enable a man to be
sufficiently furnished to write of Mineral knowledge. As first, his reading of
what others had left upon Record. Secondly, His learning from those that were
experienced in matters belonging to Fossiles and Minerals. Thirdly, That which
he had seen and observed, either in the bottom of the Pits and Mines, or in the
Workhouses or Shops where the Metals and Minerals were prepared, separated,
and refined; three such advantages as seldom concur to promote the knowledge of
one person.

2. Another that I shall name, is Johannes Mathesius, who giving his mind to
this piece of Learning, and living in the Valley of Ioachim, where were store
of Metals and Minerals; came thereby to be enabled to leave behind him that
learned Piece, which he called Sarepta, which he writ in the German Tongue; it
being an Exposition of all those places of holy Scripture, where any mention is
made of Metallic matters. A Work of that worth, for declaring experimentally
the nature, generation, increase and decrease, ascension and descension,
perfection and decay, and other properties of Metals, that I know few can
equalize it, except Basilius Valentinus.

3. A third is Johannes Kentmannus, who writ an excellent Treatise, which he
styled, A Nomenclature of such Fossiles as were especially found in Misnia, and
also in other Regions. A Book that shows not only the Authors learning, but
diligence and veracity; he chiefly writing of those things that were to be
found in his own Country: and therefore he the easilier might come to the
certain knowledge of them. Melch. Ad. in vir. Jo. Kent. p. 128.
Wherein it appears that he was most painful, having gotten a Repository
furnished (besides many things else) with Gold, Argent Vive, Copper, Metallic
Cadmia, Plumbago, Pyrites, Plumbum nigrum, Cineraeum, and Candidum, Antimony,
Iron, and Steel, that is doubtlesly the Ore of all these.

4. In the next place I shall name Caspar Schwenckfeldt, who writ a Catalogue
of the Plants and Fossiles of his own Country Silesia; a Work by many much
commended, (for I have not seen the Book) and is of much affinity with the
Author foregoing. Also Christophorus Eucelius writ a Book, De re Metallica;
wherein there is much of truth shown, and seems to have proceeded from a candid
mind, and was in part the product of his own experience. A Piece for its method
and brevity, very fit for a Fresh-man in these studies. Andrea^ Soleas may well
also be remembered, who is exceedingly commended by Mayerus; but I shall say the
less of it, because I have not had the happiness to peruse it. But Sebastianus
Munster in his Book of Geography, has many things concerning Metals, which are
very well worth reading, and a serious consideration. I should have inserted
Gabriel Fallopius with those of the first rank, but had forgot him; yet must
now commend him to the studious, as one that has toyled sore by Arguments to
promote Mineral knowledge.

5. I had almost forgot that famous Chemical Physician Martinus Rulandus; who,
besides his excellency in the Medical Profession, and his good fortune in
curing diseases, being a Master of many rare Arcana's; has also taken no small
pains to enrich his mind with the knowledge of Minerals and Metals: as his most
learned Book, called by him Lexicon Alchymiae, may witness. Wherein, besides
his great reading in all foregoing Authors that had written of that Subject, he
has manifested extraordinary pains in getting the knowledge of most (if not
all) the several Ores of Metals and Minerals, that were contained within the
large Territories of the German Continent, and the names of the places where
they were gotten. A Work truly worthy of eternal commendations, and of that
singular use, that no person studious of Mineral knowledge, can well be expert,
without the perusal and understanding thereof.

6. Lastly, I shall commend unto all diligent inquirers into the knowledge of
Metals and Minerals, the Writings of that learned Chemist and great Traveller
Johannes Agricola, his two Volumes upon Humerus Poppius Book of Antimony;
wherein is contained many rare observations about the generation of Metals,
that are hardly elsewhere to be found or read. As also those curious pieces
concerning Chemical preparations, and the nature and properties of Minerals,
written by Johannes Pharamundus Rhumelius: wherein is contained the description
of the primum ens auri, and of some other rare Minerals that scarcely any other
Author has named, or made mention of. And though both these Authors were
written in the High Dutch Language, and not yet (that I can understand)
translated, yet I thought good to mention them, because it may stir up some
others (of more abilities then my self) to procure and peruse them, and perhaps
of rendering them into our English or the Latin Tongue.

To these may be added that Elaborate Piece of Olaus Wormius which he calls his
Musaeum; wherein is not only contained many rare Ores of Metals and Minerals,
but a succinct History of all that belongs to the Subterranean Kingdom.

CHAP. III. Of the generation of Metals, and whether they grow, and have
Vegetability, or not.
IT is the general Opinion, not only of the Vulgar, but also of most of the
Mine-men that I have conversed withal, (which have been no small number) that
Metals do not grow in the Earth, but were all at once created of God; and so
have no seminary principle to propagate themselves by. Which foolish Conceit
the most part of learned men have rejected; nay, even the Collegium
Conimbricense it self; and therefore it is needless to waste time in the
confutation thereof.

Now though the whole stream of Mystical Authors, or Adeptists, have asserted
the generation and growth of them; yet have they rather left it as a Principle
to be granted, and believed of their Disciples, or handled it so darkly, that
few have been able thoroughly to understand it. And therefore (as a point most
material and necessary) we shall labor as much as in us lies, to make it
clear, both by reasons, and observations from credible Authors.

Our learned and ingenious Countryman Doctor Jorden, Reas. 1.
gives this Reason for the generation of Metals: and says, L. of Na^. Bath.
etc. c. 11. p. 51.
It appears in Genesis. that Plants were not created perfect at first, but only
in their seminaries: for Moses, Chap. 2. gives a reason why Plants were not
come forth of the Earth; scil. because (as Tremellius translates it) there had
as yet neither any rain fallen, nor any dew ascended from the earth, whereby
they might be produced and nourished. The like we may judge of Minerals, that
they were not at first created perfect, but disposed of in such sort, as they
should perpetuate themselves in their several kinds. No. lum. Chym. tract. 6. p
30.
And to this same purpose the profound Sendivogius says, Et quam prerogativam
vegetabilia prae metallis habent, ut Deus illis semen inderet, and haec
immerito excluderet? nonne ejusdem dignitatis metalla apud Deum cujus and
arbores? Hoc pro certo statuatur, nihil sine semine crescere, ubi enim nullum
est semen, res est mortua. And what prerogative have Vegetables above Metals,
that God should put seed into them, and undeservedly exclude these? Are not
Metals of the same dignity with God that Trees are? This may be set down for
certain, that nothing does increase without seed; for where there is no seed,
that thing is dead.

A second reason is also given by the last named Author; Reas. 2.
who says, Necesse est ergo, ut vel quatuor elementa creent semen metallorum,
vel ea producant sine semine: si absque semine producuntur, tunc perfecta fieri
non possunt, Ut supr.
siquidem res omnis sine semine imperfecta est, ratione compesiti. Therefore it
is of necessity, that either the four Elements should create the seed of
Metals, or that they should produce them without seed. If they be produced
without seed, then they cannot be made perfect; seeing every thing is imperfect
without seed, in regard of the Compound.

A third reason I take to be this, Reas. 3.
To prove that Metals are generated: That whosoever has diligently considered
the manner how most Metals do lie in their wombs, or beds, which for the most
part are hard Rocks, Cliffs, and Stones, or things equivalently as hard as
they, as lank and spare, must necessarily conclude, that they could never have
penetrated the Clefts, Chinks, and porous places of such hard bodies, but that
before their entrance into those cavities, they were in principiis solutis,
either in form of water, or vapors, and steams. And then were those steams, or
that water produced before their induration into a Metalline form, and after
concocted and maturated into several forms of Metals; which is an analogous, if
not an univocal generation; otherwise they could never be found in such
straight passages, and narrow cavities, as all experience does testify they
are.

Reas. 4.
The last reason, though some may account it light, yet I hold it (and so will
all persons that understand the Philosophers grand Secret) to be very cogent;
and that is, that either the maxims of the great Masters of abstruse
Philosophy, is false; as that Natures ultimate labor is in time to bring all
Metals to the perfection of Gold: which she would accomplish, if they were not
unripe and untimely taken forth of the bowels of the Earth; or else it is false
that Metals do not grow, and have vegetability. For those unripe ones, as
Quicksilver, Lead, Tin, and others, have been by the ocular testimony of
Helmon^, who confesses that he had diverse times had the Gold-making powder in
his hands, and of other Authors of unquestionable veracity, and some others yet
living, have been maturated into Gold; which must of necessity be false, if
Metals, by reason of their Analytical Homogeneity, which in all is Mercurial,
had not an intrinsecal power of vegetability; for then Art (which is nothing
but by its help, an acceleration of the work of Nature; and performing of that
in a short time, which Nature only, without the help of Art, could but
accomplish in many years) could never bring to pass. For though that the
producing of Glass forth of Sand and Ashes, be done by Art, and the force of
the fire, and so is as it were the product of Art, and in a manner a new
creature; yet if Nature intrinsecally had not contained it in its power, Art
could not have produced that effect. So that it is clear, that either Metals
have an analogous kind of vegetability in them, or else the Art of
transmutation of Metals is false, and all the grounds of the more abstruse
Philosophy, without verity.

Now we shall prove by the observations of Authors of credible veracity,
Observe. 1. Of Not. Boch. etc. c. 11. p. 51, 52.
that Metals have growth and vegetability. And first we shall begin with our
Countryman Doctor Jorden, who says thus, Our Saltpeter men find, that when
they have extracted Saltpeter out of a floor of earth one year, within three
or four years after, they find more Saltpeter generated there, and do work it
over again. The like is observed in Allom and Copperas.

And for Metals, our Tinners in Cornwall have experience of Pits which have
been filled up with Earth, after they have wrought out all the Tin they could
find in them, and within thirty years they have opened them again, and found
more Tin generated. The like has been observed in Iron, as Gandentius Merula
reports of Ilna, an Island in the Adriatic Sea, under the Venetians, where
Iron breeds continually, as fast as they can work it; which is confirmed also
by Agricola and Baccius. The like we read of at Saga in Lygiis, where they dig
over their Iron mines every tenth year. And of Ilna it is remembered by Virgil,
who says, Ilnaque inexhaustis Chalybum generosa metallis. In S^r^pt. Conci.
3.11. etc.
John Mathesius gives us examples almost of all sorts of Minerals and Metals,
which he had observed to grow and regenerate. Alchym. magn De Metallis p. 17.
and 19.
The like examples you may find in Leonardus Thurnisserus; Erastus affirms that
he did see in S. Ioachims dale, silver grown upon a beam of Wood which was
placed in the Pit to support the Works; and when it was rotten, the Workmen
coming to set new timber in the place, found the silver sticking to the old
beam. Also he reports that in Germany there has been unripe and unconcocted
silver found in Mines; which the best Workmen affirmed would become perfect
silver in thirty years. The like Modestinus, Facchius, and Mathesius, affirm of
unripe and liquid silver; which when the Workmen find, they use to say, We are
come too soon.

And in the same place before quoted, I find Erastus to have this relation. I
have (he says) two stones of Iron, one of an Ironish color, the other of the
color of the shell of a ripe Chestnut; altogether soft and fatty, that they may
like butter be wrought with the finger; from which notwithstanding, hard and
good Iron was extracted by the fire.

Observe. 2.
And to confirm this that Dr. Jorden has said, we know certainly that in many
places of this Nation where persons make a kind of a trade to draw forth
Saltpeter, they keep Earth (sit for that purpose) in Cellars, where once in
three or four years (though formerly all the Saltpeter has been extracted) it
will renew it self, and be fully impregnated with more Salt, as is most likely,
from the Atoms of Salt dispersed in the air, or ether, which some hold to be
nothing else but pure volatiz'd Salt.

It is also common in the Northern parts of England to dig up certain sorts of
bituminous earth to burn, which is much of their firing where there is want of
Wood and Coals, and they commonly call them Peats, being dug two or three
yards, and sometimes less or more deep, forth of the ground; which places they
call Peat-pits and Mosses, of which they have diverse. And when they have dug
some, that there is no more of that sort of bituminous Earth left, they usually
leave one depth of a Spade-graft of that Earth, and so cover them with the
soil, or first grassie Earth that they cut up, and so leave them for certain
time, as twenty or thirty years, and they will be filled, and grow up with the
same sort of Earth again. And though it may be said, that the being filled up
again is no great matter, because the wind blows dust, and the rain does bring
down mud and sand from the higher places, by which again they are soon filled.
Yet this will not solve the business, for what should turn the dust, mud, and
sand into that kind of bituminous Earth, that when they dig there again, they
find them as good as before, and as fit for burning; so that doubtless that
kind of Earth does grow, and is generated. And it is as plain that stones do
grow and increase, Gabr. Fallop. de re Metal. c. 6. p. 276.
and though they may allege, that it is but by juxtaposition (as Fallopius
feigned the term) if they mean by aggregation and apposition of Atoms, or small
corpuscular particles we shall concede; for so we imagine the most of those we
call generations (which indeed are but accretions and augmentation of small and
minute bodies, already framed in their several seminaries, matrixes, or
seed-husks) to be brought to perfection. But if they mean merely by apposition
of more to that which was already gathered, only an increase in the bulk, and
nothing else, then it is false; for in Vegetables there is a seminal spirit,
vapor, or steam, that does transmute, and assimilate the juice of every Plant
into this or that individual, as of Pear into that kind of Plant, a Rose into
that kind, and so of the like: and in stones there is a petrifying quality,
vapor or steam, that does turn the matter aggregated, into the nature of this
or that stone; as in flint, to flint; in greet, or freestone, to the like. And
that the generation of all sorts of those stones we call sand-stones, is such,
by some liquor, vapor, or ordor, coagulating, (or as Avicen learnedly speaks)
conglutinating the small sandy particles together, Avic. de congel. and congl.
lapid. in l. Art. Aur. p. 240.
is manifest in those soft red greetstones that they build their houses with,
at and near Chester; for the sand there is of the same color and nature: and
the stones may even with ones hands be crumbled to sand and powder; and often
with the said greets may be observed great numbers of small pebbles (silices)
far more hard, and of another nature in the coagulation, cemented and enclosed
in them. Which may be also noted in our freestone (which is of a far harder
nature, and smoother grain) in the most of the North parts of England. So that
if Earth renew it self with Salt regenerated; and that bituminous Earths have
their increase, and stones their growth and augmentation, we may well believe
that other Minerals and Metals have the like; and from hence Sendivogius does
draw this conclusion: Inde sit quod hodie reperiantur minerae in locis, Nov.
Lum. Chym. Tract. 4. p. 314.
ubi ante mill annos nullae fuerunt. From hence it come to pass that Minerals
may be found in places, where before a thousand years since, there have none
been.

And that Metals do grow even like other Vegetables, Observe. 3.
is manifest from diverse examples. For the honorable Mr. Boil from the
testimony of Gerhardus the Physic Professor, Scept. Chym. p. 360.
tells us in these words; In valle Ioachimaca (says he) argentum graminis
modo and more e lapidibus minerae velut e radice excrevisse digiti longitudine,
testis est D. Schreterus, qui ejusmodi veras aspectu jucundas and admirabiles
domi suae aliis saepe monstravit and donavit. In the vale of Ioachim, Dr.
Schreter is a witness, that silver in the manner and fashion of grass, had
grown out of the stones of the Mine, as from a root, in the length of a finger,
who has showed these Veins very pleasant to behold, and admirable at his own
house, and given of them to others.

And Rulandus telling of silver that is found pure, Lex. Alchym. p. 56.
quod statim suum est, as is their proper distinction of it from other sorts,
says; Sed hoc argenium purum tenuissimis bracteis amplectitur lapidem.
Interdum etiam praese fert spec^em capillorum, interdum virgularum, interdum
globi fert speciem, quasi filis convoluti candidis aut rubris: interdum praese
fert speciem arboris, instrumenti, montium, herbarum, and aliarum rerum. And
this pure silver does embrace the stone with most tender leaves, plates, or
spangles. It sometimes also bears the shape of hairs, sometimes of little
twigs, sometimes it bears the shape of a globe or round ball, as though
wrapped about with threads white, or red. Sometimes it bears the shape of a
Tree, mountains, an instrument, herbs, and of other things.

De^ad. 3. c. 8. p 139
To these add that most remarkable passage of Peter Martyr, Counselor to the
Emperor Charles the fifth, who relates thus: They have found by experience
that the Vein of gold is a living Tree, and that the same by all ways spreads
and springs from the root, by the soft pores and passages of the Earth,
puts forth branches, even to the uppermost part of the Earth; and cease
not until it discover it self unto the open air: at which time it shows forth
certain beautiful colors in the stead of flowers, round stones of golden Earth
in the stead of fruits, and thin plates in stead of leaves. These are they
which are dispersed throughout the whole Island (he is speaking of Hispaniola)
by the course of the Rivers, eruptions of the Springs out of the Mountains, and
violent falls of the floods. For they think such grains are not engendered
where they are gathered, especially on the dry land, but otherwise in the
Rivers. They say that the root of the golden Tree extends to the center of
the Earth, and there takes nourishment of increase: for the deeper that they
dig, they find the trunks thereof to be so much the greater, as far as they may
follow it, for abundance of water springing in the Mountains. Of the branches
of this Tree, they find some as small as a thread, and other as big as a man's
finger, according to the largeness or streightness of the rifts and clefts.
They have sometimes chanced upon whole Caves, sustained and born up as it were
with golden pillars, and this in the ways by which the branches ascend: the
which being filled with the substance of the trunk creeping from beneath the
branch, makes it self way by which it may pass out. It is oftentimes divided
by encountering with some kind of hard stone; yet is it in other Clifts
nourished by the exhalations, and virtue of the root.

Now these signal observations seem fully to evince, that it is no feigned
fable of the Mystical Philosophers, nor (however Ignorants may scoff and snarl)
of that profound and learned Poet Virgil, that there is a gold-bearing and
metallic Tree, as he famously has sung, -- Latet arbore opaca Ae^eid. l. 6.
p. 345.

Aureus and foliis, and len^o vimine ramus.


And after, -- Primo avulso non deficit alter
Aureus, and simili frondescit virga Metallo.
The deep and serious consideration of which, Jo. Aur. Augurel. Ch^ysop. l. 2.
p. 36.
as also that learned description that the profound Chemist Augurellus gives of
that noble Mineral or metallic Tree, called by him Glaura, so well known unto,
and whose sulphur above the sulphurs of all other Minerals, is so much extolled
by the experienced Helmont; I faithfully commend unto all the cordial lovers of
Mineral knowledge, to seek for, and inquire after. And shall shut up these
testimonies with that golden sentence of the golden Tree, mentioned by
Paracelsus; where speaking of the sulphur of gold, Par. l. de Min. Tr. 1. p.
347.
he says, Hoc sulphur, si quale in aurifera arbore, and ad hujus radicem in
montibus est, Alchymistae invenire and adipisci possent, esset certe, de quo
effuse gauderent. This sulphur, if the Alchymists could find out and attain, as
it is in the gold bearing Tree and at the root of it, in the Mountains, it
would certainly be a thing of which they might fully rejoice.

Observe. 4.
Further (besides what to the same purpose has been showed above) it will
appear that Metals may be (and have often been) found in a soft and liquid form
or substance; as the forementioned honorable and worthy person Mr. Boil has
instanced from Gerhardus, Scept. Chym. p. 360.
in these words: Item aqua caerulea inventa est Annebergae, ubi argentum adhuc
erat in primo ente, quae coagulata, redacta in calcem fixi and boni argenti.
Also that at Anneberg a blew water was found, where silver was yet in its first
being or ens, which coagulated, was reduced into the powder or calx of fixed
and good silver.

Theatr. Chym. Arcae Ar^an. p 318.
The Author Arcae Arcan. from Lully and Mathesius tells us this: Materiam,
priusquam in metallicam formam congelatur, esse instar lactis coaguli butyri,
quae in butyrum diducitur, quam Gur vocat, quam ego quogue in fodinis in quibus
natura plumbum paravit inveni. That the matter ( viz. of Metals) before it be
coagulated into a metallic form, is like unto Butter made of the Cream of
milk, which may be clamed or spread as Butter, which he (he means Mathesius)
calls Gur; which I also (says the Author quoted) have found in the Mines,
where Nature has produced Lead. Hist. 1.
To ratify this, and to put it forth of doubt, I shall relate what I my self
have found, and now have some pounds of it by me. Inquiring after this Gur of
all persons that I could hear of that wrought in Mines, there could some of
them tell me, that often in the sudden breaking of some stone, there would a
liquor spurt forth bright and shining, which they regarded not, because they
knew no use nor benefit to be made of it, nor knew how to save or keep it. At
last, meeting with an ingenious young man, whose Father had all his days been
experienced in working in the Mines of Lead in Darbyshire, and he therein also
had been trained up from his young years: one whom I had formerly much employed
in seeking and procuring for me, several sorts of Oars, Minerals, Stones, and
Earths, wherein I had found him very faithful and diligent; and discoursing
with him about what liquid juyces or waters he had ever observed in digging in
the Mines, and instructing him in all that I understood of such things,
according as I had read in Paracelsus, Helmont, or other Writers, he thought
the thing might be feasible. So according to my directions, providing himself
of some wooden dishes to take with him, it was not very long ere he brought me
a large quantity, found in a trench; where then he got good store of Lead Ore,
such as the Miners account the best for their purpose; that is, such as will
most easily run, or melt, and yield the most Lead: the description of which I
shall here give as fully as I am able. It was (as he most faithfully affirmed)
when he first broke the hard stone in which it was enclosed, some of it
especially very thin and liquid, so as he could hardly preserve it; and the
other as soft as Butter, and the inmost part of that he brought was as soft as
Butter, to my touch and feeling, and the outside more hard; for the longer it
lay to the air, the harder it grew. It was of a greyish or whitish color, and
would spread with ones finger upon a table, or smooth piece of wood, as like
Butter as could be, but not so fatty, or greasy: and as Helmont says, was
like unto soft soap, but most of it something harder, for he had brought it
near two miles to me, and though he had made haste, yet it had hardened by the
air in the way. He also brought diverse of the pieces of the hard gray stone, in
whose holes and cavities it lay, and some of it in the midst, little pieces of
Lead, bright and pure Ore. So that if a man may give any reasonable conjecture,
one would verily imagine that the piece of Lead enclosed in this soft matter,
did in continuance of time change, or ripen it into its own Nature; which I
will not positively affirm, but commend it to further trial and inquiry, for
there had need be many careful experiments, before an Opinion be raised from
them. But I remember that the Colliers and those that seek for Coal-mines, do
usually before they find the Mine of Coals, find in their boring or other
working, such matter as they call Crow-stone, Coal-stone, and Soap-stone; the
last of which is a black substance like fat Clay, and will (as the Gur) spread
like Butter, but will soon harden in the air, into an hard matter that will
hardly be cut with a knife, and somewhat harder then the other will do, which I
take to be true Gur; and this as a common thing I do but only name, to
illustrate the other by: which both makes me more and more admire the skill and
knowledge of Paracelsus and Helmont, and to wonder at our ignorance in these
things.

An observation agreeable to this (as I conceive) that I have related of mine
own experience, is that of Helmont, which he gives us thus. Non raro nempe
contingit, quod metallarius in fodinis, saxa diffringens, dehiscat paries and
rimam det, unde tantillum aquae subalbidae virescentis manavit, quod mox
concrevit instar saponis liquidi (Bur voco) mutatoque deinceps pallore
subviridi, Intg. oport. p. 157.
flavescit, vel albescit, vel saturatius viridescit. For it often happens
that a Mine-man in the Pits breaking stones, the wall is opened and shows a
chink from whence a water has flowed of a somewhat whitish greeness; which by
and by has thickened, like soft Soap (I call it Bur) and forthwith the somewhat
greenish paleness being changed, it grows yellowish, or whitish, or more
fully greenish. This I would have the Reader to consider seriously of, in
comparing it with the former relation; and to note, that whereas he calls it
Bur, I suspect the Print is false, and that it ought to be read Gur.

Now we shall come to what Paracelsus has left written in relation to this
very particular, wherein I must needs say, that in despite of all gainsayers,
or ignorant haters of him, it will appear to all judicious persons, that he
truly knew more then the most of all those that went before him: and first
special notice may well be taken of that remarkable passage, where he says;
Rer. Nature. l. 9. p. 113.
Sciendum est, metallum quodvis, quamdiu in primo ente adhuc latet conditum,
peculiaria sua astra habere. Quamprimum autem ad suam perfectionem venerunt,
and in fixum metallicum corpus coagulantur, ab illorum quolibet sua astra
recedunt, and corpus suum relinquunt mortuum. It is to be known that every
Metal, whiles yet it lies hid in its first being, or ens, has its peculiar
stars. But as soon as they come unto their perfection, and are coagulated into
a fixed metallic body, their stars do go back from each of them, and leave
their body dead. Vid. Para^. l. de Rev. and Restaur. p. 43, 44, 45. and Chir.
mag. p. 243, 244, and 117.
He likewise in other places (that I shall not recite at large, because I shall
have occasion to do it more fully in another place) does make mention of the
first being, or the primum ens auri, in form of a red water, and to be had
before it be coagulated into an hard metallic body; as also of Antimony and of
Quicksilver; to which I refer the Reader, for brevity sake.

Observe. 5.
We shall now go to prove the growth of Metals from a fuller testimony of that
honorable and learned person Mr. Boil, who says: And as for Metals
themselves, Scept. Chym. p. 357, 358.
Authors of good note assure us, that even they were not in the beginning
produced at once altogether, but have been observed to grow; so that what was
not a Mineral or Metal before, became one afterward: of this it were easy to
allege many testimonies of professed Chemists. But that they may have the
greater authority, I shall rather present you with a few borrowed from more
unsuspected Writers. Sulphuris mineram (as the inquisitive P. Fallopius notes)
quae nutrix est caloris subterranei sabri seu Archaei fontium and mineralium,
infra terram citissime renasci testantur Historiae metallicae. Sunt enim loca e
quibus si hoc anno sulphur effossum fuerit, intermissa fossione per
quadriennium, redeuni fessores, and omnia sulphur, ut antea, rursus inveniunt
plena. Pliny relates, In Italiae insula Ilna, gigni ferri metallum. Sirabo
multo expressius; effossum ibi metallum semper regenerari. Nam si effossio
spatio centum annorum intermittebatur, and iterum illuc revertebantur, fossores
reperisse maximam copiam ferri regeneratam. Which History not only is
countenanced by Fallopius, from the Income which the Iron of that Island
yielded the Duke of Florence in his time; but is mentioned more expressly to our
purpose, by the learned Cesalpinus. Vena (says he) ferri copiosissima est in
Italia, ob eam nobilitata Ilna Tyrrheni maris insula incredibili copia, etiam
nostris temporibus eam gignens. Nam terra quae eruitur dum vena effoditur tota,
procedente tempore in venam convertitur. Which last clause is therefore very
notable, because from thence we may deduce, that Earth by a metalline plastic
principle latent in it, may be in process of time changed into a Metal. And
even Agricola himself, though the Chemists complain of him as their adversary,
acknowledges thus much and more; by telling us that at a Town called Saga in
Germany, they dig up Iron in the fields by sinking Ditches two foot deep; and
adding that within the space of ten years the Ditches are dug again for Iron
since produced. As the same Metal is wont to be obtained in Ilna. Also
concerning Lead, not to mention what even Galen notes, that it will increase
both in bulk and weight, if it be long kept in Vaults or Cellars, where the air
is gross and thick, as he collects from the swelling of those pieces that were
employed to fasten together the parts of old Statues. Not to mention this, I
say Boccacius Certaldus, as I find him quoted by a diligent Writer, has this
passage touching the growth of Lead. Fesularum mons (says he) in Hetruria
Florentiae civitati imminens, lapides plumbarios habet; qui si excidantur.
brevi temporis spatio, novis incrementis instaurantur, ut (annexes my Author)
tradit Boccacius Cer^aldus, quiid compotissimum esse scribit. Nihil hoc novi
est; sed de eadem Plinius, lib. 34. Hist. Nature. cap. 17. dudum prodidit,
inquiens, mirum in his solis plumbi metallis, quod derelicta fertili^s
reviviscunt. In plumbariis secundo lapide ab Amberga dictis ad Asylum
recrementa congesta in cumulos, exposita solibus pluviisque paucis annis,
reddunt suum metallum cum foenore.

Observe. 6.
The last thing that I shall observe to prove the generation of Metals, shall be
from the quotations of Libanius, Liban. Alchym. Transmut. def. p. 207.
which I do not so much for the credit that I give unto him, as to the Authors
that he cites; of which I shall cull forth some, and give their meaning in
English, that I may not be too tedious. The same (of which he had spoken
before) he says Maiolius does record, colloq. 19. Tom. 1. Canicul. and is
confirmed in the history of Pannonia. In Pannonia, near the City Firmicum, hard
by the Vines, in the Spring, golden Sprigs do shoot forth themselves, and of
them for that cause money is much coined there. Also Fulgosus (he says) does
bring ocular witnesses, lib. 1. Fabricius ex 4. Genealium dierum Alexandri
Neapolitani.

The same Alexander has found by certain and faith-worthy Authors in the
nearer Germany between Danubius, that there are Vines, which do sprout forth
little branches, and for the most part whitish leaves, of pure gold, which are
given to Kings and chief Commanders for a rare gift, etc. Further, He says
that Kentman does deliver, that of the recrements of Iron, divided into heaps,
or banks made of them that are ancient, that a new Iron is excocted forth of
them, Agric. lib. 5. de ortu subterraneorum, cap. 1. That Metals are generated,
Iron is an instance, that in the Metals of Ilna, the most approved Writers have
committed to memory, that it does grow again. For that to the same Lead set in
a moist place there is increase, of which thing Galen is witness. Certainly
those Lead coverings, with which we see the roofs of the houses of Noble men to
be overlaid, they find to be much more heaviy after certain years, then before,
when they had tried their weight; and so far forth that they are very often
forced to change them for brazen ones. Mathesius Concion. 3. Sareptana proponit
and deducit tria. 1. That Metals even in his time, and then, did increase in
the Veins and Mines. 2. That one Mineral in time, did change into another that
was better. 3. That a perfect Metal, unless it be dug up, is consumed of the
subterraneous fumes and heat.

There is another remarkable observation quoted by the forementioned Mr. Boil,
Observe. 7.
which I shall give you in his own words, Scept. Chym. p. 361, 362, 363.
which are these: The other two relations I have not met with in Latin
Authors, and yet they are both very memorable in themselves, and as pertinent
to our purpose. The first I meet with in the Commentary of Johannes Valehius
upon the Klein Baur, in which that industrious Chemist relates with many
circumstances, that at a Mine-town (if I may so English the German Bergstadt)
eight miles or leagues distant from Strasburg, called Maria Kirk, a Workman
came to the Overseer and desired employment; but he telling him that there was
not any of the best sort at present for him, added that till he could be
preferred to some such, he might in the mean time, to avoid idleness, work in a
Grove or Mine-pit thereabouts, which at that time was little esteemed. This
Workman after some weeks labor, had by a crack appearing in the stone upon a
stroke given near the wall, an invitation given him to work his way through;
which as soon as he had done, his eyes were saluted by a mighty stone or lump,
which stood in the middle of the Cleft (that had a hollow place behind it)
upright, and in show like an armed man; but consisted of pure fine silver
having no Vein or Ore by it, or any other additament; but stood there free,
having only underfoot something like a burnt matter: and yet this one lump
held in weight above 1000 marks, which according to the Dutch account makes 500
pound weight of fine silver. From which and other circumstances my Author
gathers, that by the warmth of the place, the noble metalline spirits
(sulphurous and mercurial) were carried from the neighboring Galleries or
Vaults, through other smaller cracks and Clefts, into that cavity, and there
collected as in a close Chamber or Cellar, whereinto when they were gotten,
they did in process of time settle into the forementioned precious mass of
Metal.

The other German relation is of that great Traveller, and laborious Chemist,
Johannes (not Georgius) Agricola; who in his Notes upon what Poppius has
written of Antimony, relates, that when he was among the Hungarian Mines in the
deep Groves, he observed that there would often arise in them a warm steam (not
of that malignant sort which the Germans call Shwadt, which (says he) is a mere
poison, and often suffocates the Diggers) which fastened it self to the walls;
and that coming again to review it after a couple of days, he discerned that it
was all very fast and glistering. Whereupon having collected it and distilled
it per Retortam, he obtained from it a fine spirit; adding that the Mine-men
informed him that this steam or damp of the Mi^e (retaining the Dutch term)
would at last have become a Metal, Ib. p. 3^1.
as Gold or Silver. And afterward he adds, I remember that a very skillful
and credible person affirmed to me, that being in the Hungarian Mines he had
the good fortune to see a Mineral that was there dug up; wherein pieces of
Gold of the length, and also almost of the bigness of a humane finger, grew in
the Ore, as if they had been parts and branches of trees. p. 364, 365.
And does make full recital of Earth renewing it self with Saltpeter; as also
of the Ore of Vitriol growing into Vitriol it self. Sebast. Muast. Geogr. p. 7.
Add to this that which Munster tells us, that Nature does figure pure silver
into the form of Trees, Rods, or Hairs, etc.



I have been the more large in this point, to prove the growth and vegetability
of Metals and Minerals, because it is not of the least concern in the promoting
of Mineral knowledge: and I could have added more testimonies, but these being
from most approved Authors, I hold to be sufficient: Only I shall commend some
particulars deduced from hence, to be inquired of by all persons that love
metallic knowledge, and have opportunities and abilities to search after the
same. As also to all those that travel where any Mines are, and especially to
all ingenious persons that are Overseers of Mines, or employed about them, or
work in them, to take notice of these few Inquiries.

1. To observe whether Earths, of any sort, or Stones do grow and increase, and
after what order and fashion? 2. And that all those in our own Nation, or
elsewhere, that work about Allom and Vitriol, would observe how their Ores do
lie and are found, and whether they increase or not? 3. And seeing our Nation
has store of Tin and Lead Mines, that they would observe, whether their Ores
grow, or not, and in what manner? 4. And in Tin and Lead Mines, and all other,
as of Copper, Silver, Gold, Quicksilver or Cineber, and of Iron, whether any
such liquid matter may be found as the Germans call Gur, or not; and of what
colors and qualities, as it seems the water found at Anneberg that yielded
Silver, was blew; and that which Paracelsus calls the primum ens auri, was like
red water; and that of Quicksilver he calls blood, or not? 5. That inquiry may
be made whether any steams arising in Mines, do grow into a metalline
substance, or not? 6. Lastly, and to inquire, whether where Ores are wrought
out, that they do after some years renew and grow again, or not?
CHAP. IV. Of the Causes assigned by the most approved Authors for their
generations, both efficient and material, and the manner thereof.
FOr the material and efficient causes, and manner of the generation of Metals;
We shall enumerate some opinions of the chief Authors, and leave the Reader to
choose which he judges most probable, or most true; because we mean not to
dogmatize nor impose upon any, but rather to move all men to a diligent search
after the things of this nature, that (if possible) the truth of their
generations may be found forth, and discovered.

In the first place we shall give the opinion of the Aristotelians, and to
eschew tediousness, shall transcribe what Dr. Jorden has written in that case,
with his censure upon it, and his own opinion adjoined; because that little
Tract of his may be in few men's hands, Of Not: Bath. etc. c. 11. p. 53, 54, 55,
56, 57, 58, 59.
and hard to be got; who relates it thus:

For the manner of generation of Minerals, although it be alike in all, yet it
differs from the generation of animate bodies, whether animals or vegetables,
in this, that having no seed, they have no power, or instinct of producing
other individuals, but have their species perpetuated, per virtutem seu
spiritum semini Analogum, by a spiritual substance proportionable to seed,
which is not resident in every individual, as it is in animals and plants, but
in their proper wombs. This (says he) is the judgment of Petrus Severinus,
Cap. ^.
however he does obscure it by his Platonical grandiloquence. And as there is
not vacuum in corporibus, so much less in speciebus; for that the species are
perpetuated by new generations, is most certain, and proved before: that it is
not out of the seeds of individuals, is evident by this, that if Minerals do
not assimilate nourishment by attraction, retention, concoction, expulsion,
etc. for the maintenance of their own individual bodies; much less are they
able to breed a superfluity of nourishment for seed. And how can they attract
and concoct nourishment, and expel excrements, which have no veins nor fibers,
nor any distinct parts to perform those Offices withal? Moreover they are not
increased as Plants are, by nourishment; whereas the parts already generated,
are extended in all proportions by the ingression of nutriment, which fills and
enlarges them: But only are augmented externally upon the superficies by
superaddition of new matter concocted by the same virtue and spirit into the
same species.

The matter whereof Minerals are bred, is much controverted; Erastus. Ca^erius.
Caesalpinus. Martinus. Moresinus. Fachius. Magyrus. Libanius.
Aristotle makes the humidity of water and the dryness of earth, to be the
matter of all Minerals: the dryness of earth to participate with fire, and the
humidity of water with air; as Zabarella interprets it: so that to make a
perfect mixed body, the four Elements do concur: and to make the mixture more
perfect, these must be resolved into vapor or exhalation, by the heat of fire,
or influence from the Sun and other Planets, as the efficient cause of their
generation: but the cause of their congelation to be cold in such bodies as
heat will resolve.

This vapor consisting partly of moisture, and partly, of dryness; if all the
moisture be spent, turns to earth, salt, or concrete juices, which dissolve in
moisture. If some moisture remain before congelation, then it turns to stone.
Meteor 3 c. ^lc. Caesalp. l. 3. c. 1.
If this dry exhalation be unctuous, fat, and combustible, then Bitumen,
Sulphur, and Orpiment are bred of it: if it be dry and incombustible, then
concrete juices, etc. But if moisture do abound in this vapor, then Metals are
generated, which are fusible and malleable. And for the perfecting of these
generations, this exhalation is not sufficient; but to give them their due
consistence, there must be the help of cold from Rocks in the earth, to congeal
this exhalation. Liban. de Not. Metal. c. 14. Caretius. 178.
So that here must be two efficients, heat and cold. And for the better
effecting of this, these exhalations do insinuate themselves into stones, in
the form of dew or frost, that is, in little grains: but differing from dew and
frost in this, that these are generated after that the vapor is converted to
water; whereas Minerals are generated before this conversion into Water. But
there is doubt to be made of frost, because that is bred before the conversion
of the exhalation into Water, Septal. in Hyp. de aere, aqu. etc.
as may appear, Meteor. 1. According to this assertion, there must be two
places for the generation of Minerals: the one a matrix where they receive
their essence by heat, in form of an exhalation; and from thence they are sent
to a second place, to receive their congelation by the coldness of Rocks. And
from this matrix come our Mineral waters, and not from the place of congelation.

This is the generation of Minerals, according to Aristotle; but it is not so
clear, but that it leaves many scruples, both concerning the matter and
efficients. For the matter, it seems not probable that water and earth should
make any thing but mud and dirt; for you can expect no more from any thing then
is in it, the one is cold and dry, the other cold and moist; and therefore as
fit to be the matter of any other thing, as of particular Minerals. And water,
whereof principally Metals are made to consist, is very unfit to make a
malleable and extensible substance, especially being congealed with cold, as we
may see in Ice. But some do add a mineral quality to these materials, and that
simple water is not the chief matter of Metal, but such as has imbibed some
mineral quality, and so is altered from the nature of pure water. This
assertion does presuppose Minerals in the earth before they were bred,
otherwise what should breed them at the first, when there was no mineral
quality to be imparted to water? Again, this mineral quality either gives the
water, or the vapor of it the essence of the Mineral; and then it is not the
effect of water, but of the mineral quality, or the potential faculty to breed
it. If the essence, then this metalline water or vapor, must have the form of
the Metal, and so be fusible and malleable. If it have only the power and
potential faculty, then the generation is not perfected, but must expect
further concoction. This concoction is said to be partly by heat, and partly by
cold; if by heat, it must be in the passages of the exhalation, as it is
carried in the bowels of the earth. For afterward, when the exhalation is
settled in the stones, the heat is gone. Now if the concoction be perfected
before the exhalation be insinuated into the stones, as it must be, if it be
like dew, then it is perfect Metal, and neither is able to penetrate the
stones, nor has any need of the cold of them to perfect the generation. If by
cold, it is strange that cold should be made the principal agent in the
generation of Metals, which generates nothing; neither can heat be the
efficient of these generations. Simple qualities can have but simple effects,
as heat can but make hot, cold can but cool, etc. But they say that cold does
congeal Metals, because heat does dissolve them. I answer, the rule is true,
Valesius Sac. Philos. c. 49.
if it be rightly applied; as we see Ice which is congealed by cold, is readily
dissolved by heat. But the fusion of Metals cannot properly be called a
dissolution by heat, because it is neither reduced to water or vapor, as it
was before the congelation by cold; nor is it permanent in that kind of
dissolution, although after fusion it should be kept in a greater heat then
cold could be which congealed it. For the cold in the bowels of the Earth
cannot be so great, as it is upon the superficies of the Earth, seeing it was
never observed that any Ice was bred there. Wherefore this dissolution which is
by fusion, tends not to the destruction of the Metal, (but does rather make it
more perfect) as it should do according to the former rule rightly applied. And
therefore this dissolution by fusion, does not argue a congelation by cold:
which being in the passive elements, does rather attend the matter then the
efficient of generations: for it is apt to dull and hebetate all faculties and
motions in Nature, and so to hinder generations, rather then to further any. It
is heat and moisture that further generations, as Ovid says, Quippe ubi
temperiem sumpsere humorque calorque concipiunt.

Singularium, l. 1. part. 1.
And thus much, he says, for Aristotle's generation of Minerals; where the
vapors or exhalations do rather serve for the collection or congregation of
matter in the Mines, then for the generation of them, as Libanius does rightly
judge. Agricola makes the matter of Minerals to be succus lapidescens
metallificus, etc. and with more reason, because they are found liquid in the
earth. Gilgill would have it ashes, Democritus lime: but these two being
artificial matters, are no where found in the earth. The Alchymists make
Sulphur and Mercury the matter of Metals; De not. Metal. c. 10.
Libanius Sulphur and Vitriol. But I will not stand upon discoursing of those
materials, because it makes little to my purpose. It is enough for my purpose
to show the manner of these generations; which (says he) I take to be this.

There is a seminary spirit of all Minerals in the bowels of the Earth, which
meeting with convenient matter, and adjuvant causes, is not idle, but does
proceed to produce Minerals, according to the nature of it, and the matter
which it meets withal: which matter it works upon like a ferment, and by its
motion procures an actual heat, as an instrument to further its work, which
actual heat is increased by the fermentation of the matter. The like we see in
making of Malt, where the grains of Barley being moistened with water, the
generative spirit in them is dilated, and put in action; and the superfluity of
water being removed, which might choke it, and the barley laid up in heaps, the
seeds gather heat, which is increased by the contiguity of many grains lying
one upon another. In this work Nature's intent is to produce more individuals
according to the nature of the seed, and therefore it shoots forth in spires;
but the Artist abuses the intention of Nature, and converts it to his end; that
is, to increase the spirits of his Malt.

The like we find in Mineral substances, where this spirit or ferment is
resident, as in Allom and Copper as Mines; which being broken, exposed, and
moistened, will gather an actual heat, and produce much more of those Minerals,
then else the Mine would yield; as Agricola and Thurniser do affirm, and is
proved by common experience. The like is generally observed in Mines, as
Agricola, Erastus, Libanius, etc. do avouch out of the daily experience of
Mineral men, who affirm, that in most places, they find their Mines so hot, as
they can hardly touch them. Although it is likely that where they work for
perfect Minerals, the heat which was in fermentation whilst they were yet in
breeding, is now much abated, the Minerals being now grown to their perfection.
And for this heat, we need not call for the help of the Sun, which a little
cloud will take away from us; much more the body of the Earth, and Rocks; nor
for subterraneal Fire. This inbred heat is sufficient, as may appear also by
the Mines of Tin-glass, which being dug, and laid in the moist air, will
become very hot. So Antimony and Sublimate being mixed together, will grow so
hot as they are not to be touched. Carer p. 212.
If this be so in little quantities, it is likely to be much more in great
quantities and huge rocks. Heat of it self d^ffers not in kind, but only in
degree, and therefore is inclined no more to one species then to another, but
as it does attend and serve a more worthy and superior faculty, such as this
generative spirit is. And this spirit does convert any apt matter it meets
withal to its own species by the help of heat; and the Earth is full of such
matter, which attends upon the species of things. Fachius. Martinus. Morisius.
Magyrus. Libani. Velcurio. Yalesius. Car^rius. Erastus, etc.
And oftentimes for want of fit opportunity and adjuvant causes, lies idle,
without producing any species: but is apt to be transmuted by any mechanical
and generative spirit into them. And this matter is not the Elements
themselves, but subterraneal seed placed in the Elements; which not being able
to live to themselves, do live unto others. This seminary spirit is
acknowledged by most of Aristotle's Interpreters, (and Morisinus calls it
Elphesteria) not knowing how otherwise to attribute these generations to the
Elements. And this is the cause why some places yield some one mineral species
above another. Quippe solo natura subest. Non omnis fer^ omnia tell us. The
seminary spirit has its proper wombs, where it resides, and forms his species
according to his nature, and the aptness of his matter. But as Severinus
affirms of animal seeds, that they are in themselves Hermaphroditical, and
neither masculine nor feminine, but as they meet with supervenient causes. So
it is in these Mineral seeds and species, which in one womb do beget diverse
sorts of Minerals, either according to the aptness of the matter, or the vigor
of the spirits.

Thus far this learned Author, whose reasons we shall not censure, nor confute
his opinion, which may pass with as much probability as any others; but leave
every one to his own liberty in judging. Only we shall note one thing to the
Reader to be considered of; and that is, where he makes Plants to be nourished
and augmented by the ingression of nutriment, which fills and inlarges them;
but that Minerals are only augmented externally upon the superficies, by
superaddition of new matter concocted by the same virtue and spirit into the
same species. Of this we shall offer these things:

1. As for Plants we take it for a probable truth (though some may look at it
as a new fancy and paradox) that the true and proper generation of the most
(if not of all) Plants, is in the former generant Plant that did produce the
seed in its husk or covering; and that the seeds contain in them a Plant of its
own kind, as that was of that did produce the seed, though not to be discerned
by our senses, nor, perhaps, by the best microscopes, because in many the
little Plant contained in that husk or covering, is in so extreme minute parts,
and artificial means not yet found forth, to cause them to open themselves; nor
due observations had from time to time as they open and display themselves in
their several wombs in the Earth. And that after they are fallen, or cast into
fit wombs in the Earth, that the warm and moist vapors, or steams of the
Earth, as an external and adjuvant cause, does soften and dissolve the husk,
covering, or shell, and excite and stir up that heat in the seed, or little
Plant (which is the true agent and efficient cause of its increase and growth)
that before lay as it were idle, and asleep; by which means that little embrio
does open and expand it self, and receives in by its pores, or cavities of
those parts ordered for roots (whether by attraction, or propulsion of its heat
and moisture by the steams of Earth and its saline atoms, I shall not here
determine) the fit warm vapors, and assimilates it to its own nature. And as
this is (as we conceive) the growth of Plants, though commonly called their
generation; so we commend this to be inquired of by all industrious persons,
that if Nature (as is most probable) contain in her Cabinet the secret seeds of
Minerals, then why may she not, meeting with fit matter and adjuvant causes,
have those small seminary particles stirred up and put into motion, grow and
expand themselves in the manner of Plants, and by taking in new matter grow and
increase. This I only offer as fit to be noted and considered of.

2. The other thing that I would note is, That though Plants when young, may
receive their nutriment, by the matter having ingression by their pores; yet
when they are grown older, and their truncks great and hard, it is probable
that then their growth is by superaddition of more matter to their outward
parts, and assimilating it into their species. For it is generally in the North
parts of England (especially in old Oaks) that yearly great store of sap
arises betwixt the bark and the trunck, which afterward hardens into wood,
like unto the other: and if this be a truth, as all our Carpenters, and buyers
of Timber affirm, if Metals do but increase by addition of new matter to the
superficies, then in some sort it differs not from the increase of Trees when
grown great and old. But if the relation given by Galen, Gal. de Simp. Med.
fac. p. 2124.

Ag^ic. de ort. and cause. subter. p. 519.


and approved of by Agricola, be true; that Lead being placed in a moist Cellar
or subterranean rooms, where the air is gross and turbid, will be increased
both in bulk and weight; then it must probably be by taking in some parts of
that gross air, or the mineral particles contained in it, by which it makes
protrusion of its parts, and gets an increase in weight. By all which we may
learn to observe: 1. That it may be that the seeds of Metals rising in steams,
may sometimes, finding a fit room or vault, setle together, and in time become
an hardened and metalline substance. 2. Or that other-sometimes those mineral
seeds may become settled in some holes and cavities of rocks, in the form of
water, or of that thicker substance that the Germans call Gur, and so in
continuance of time grow to be a Metal. 3. Or that after they be hardened into a
metalline substance, if the place will give leave, may protrude it self further
and further (as the roots of Vegetables do in hard Rocks and old Walls) by
virtue of the mineral steams, piercing from the root, through insensible pores,
or at least may ripen from one degree of perfection to another; as from Lead to
Silver, and the like. For my self and diverse other ingenious persons have
observed, that in the late Wars, when many Castles and other old buildings were
dismantled or demolished, that the Leads that were taken from off them, would
have sold dearer then any other Lead; and I have heard diverse persons of credit
affirm, that it would yield very considerable quantities of silver, and the
longer it had laid, the more. Which (if true) is an evident argument, that
either by long lying, the Lead being the softer part, wasted away with the Sun
and Weather, and so left more of silver in the same bulk of matter, then the
same bulk of Lead contained, when newer and fresher; or else that the Silver in
the Lead (as all Lead contains some more or less) did maturate some part of the
Lead into its own more noble Nature, or got increase from the beams of the Sun,
or particle in the Air, or both. And these noble hints I only give, as worthy
to be considered of, and inquired after.


Now we shall come to the other opinion of the causes and manner of the
generation of Metals, which is that of the mystical Authors, learned Chemists,
and expert Mineralists, which we shall handle fully and at large. And for order
sake, we may consider: First the matter, of which they hold they are generated.
Secondly, the efficient cause of their generation. Thirdly, the manner how they
are generated.

1. The ancient Chemical Philosophers held, that the matter out of which the
Metals were generated, were Sulphur and Mercury; but Basilius Valentinus,
Paracelsus, and the later Chemists have added Salt as a third; which
notwithstanding though they seem to make them three in number, and properties,
yet they intended but one Homogeneous substance or essence; and the most of
them joined Salt with the Sulphur, so that in effect they held but two. And
this Sulphur and Mercury they did not mean of those that are vulgar, as the
most of their adversaries have too grossly mistaken; and therefore it will be
necessary in the first place, to clear what they understand by Sulphur, and
Mercury, and how those two are first generated.

No. lum. Chym. Tr. 3. p. 309*
1. Their Sulphur and Mercury they variously describe, as Sendivogius says:
Prima materia metallorum, and principalis est, humidum aeris caliditate mixtum,
hanc Philosophi Mercurium nominarunt, qui radiis solis and lunae gubernatur in
mari Philosophico. The first and principal matter of Metals is, the humidity of
the Air mixed with calidity; this the Philosophers have named Mercury, which is
governed with the rays of the Sun and Moon in the Philosophers Sea. Ibid. ut
supr.
Secunda est terrae caliditas sicca, quam vocarunt Sulphur. The second is the
dry calidity of the Earth, which they have called Sulphur. And again he says,
Quatuor elementa in prima operatione naturae stillant per Archaeum naturae in
terrae centrum vaporem aquae ponderosum, Ib. Tr. 6. p. 320, 321.
qui est metallorum semen, and dicitur mercurius propter ejus fluxibilitatem,
and uniuscujusque rei conjunctionem, non propter essentiam, assimilatur
Sulphuri propter internum calorem, and post congelationem est humidum radicale.
The four Elements in the first operation of Nature, do distill by the Archaeus
(or Workman) of Nature, into the center of the Earth, a ponderous vapor of
Water, which is the seed of Metals; and is called Mercury, because of its
fluxibility and its conjunction with every thing, not because of its essence;
it is likened to Sulphur because of its internal heat, and after congelation is
the radical moist^^e. Trevisan defines Sulphur thus: Alchym. p. 766, 767.
Sulphur enim aliud nihil est, quam purus ignis occultus in mercurio, qui longo
successu temporis excitatur, atque movetur motibus corporum coelestium,
digeritque frigiditatem and humiditatem in mercurio pro varietate graduum
decoctionis, and alterationis in diversas formas metallicas, etc. For Sulphur
is nothing else then pure fire hid in the Mercury, which in long continuance of
time is excited, and moved by the motions of the celestial bodies, and does
digest the coldness and humidity in the Mercury, according to the variety of
the degrees of decoction and alteration, into diverse metallic forms. Elsewhere
he has called Sulphur the masculine agent fire and air, which in the metallic
seed does maturate and digest the two feminine passives of Earth and Water:
because that heat is an intrinsic and essential part of the Mercury it self;
to wit, the two more active elements in it, that is to say, the Air and Fire.
And again, Vid. Correct. Rich. Augl.
because Sulphur is no other thing then the pure act of the Air and Fire making
hot, digesting, or decocting the Earth and Water proportionable to it self, and
Homogeneous in the Mercury. And Geber says, it is nothing else but light and
tincture; and others call it the most ripe part of the Mercury. And the
ingenuous and candid Nollius defines it thus: Phys. Herm. p. 308.
The Sulphur, with which Argent vive is impregnated, is not the vulgar Sulphur,
but fire placed in the Argent vive, by which it is excocted into a Metal in the
Mines by the intervening of Motion.

Ut supr.
2. These two are not distinct, as though Mercury were one thing, and Sulphur
another, as extraneous bodies one to another. For Trevisan says, Sulphur is
not something separate by it self, without the substance of the Mercury,
neither common Sulphur; otherwise the matter of Metals should not be
Homogeneous, which is repugnant to the opinion of all Philosophers. Likewise
Morienus and Aros say: Our Sulphur is not vulgar Sulphur, but sixth and not
volatile; of the nature of Mercury, and not of any other thing whatsoever. Ib.
ut supr.
And Trevisan again says: Some persons do judge amiss, that in the procreation
of Metals some Sulphurous matter does intervene; but it is manifest on the
contrary, that Sulphur is included in his Mercury when Nature does operate.

3. Now for the generation of their Mercury or viscous fatness, they describe
it thus: Aethereus mundi spiritus, Noll. Phys. Herm. l. 8. c. 3. p. 313.
quem animam appellitant, duo elementa aquam and terram inter se committit,
atque ex utrisque conjunctis spiritum quendam prolicit unctuosum, eumque in
centrum terrae demittit, ut ex eo sursum elevetur, and in matricem deferatur
debitam, ac in ea in argentum vivum sulphur, and sale naturae impraegnatam
concoquatur. The Ethereal spirit which they call the soul, does commix betwixt
themselves the two Elements, Water and Earth; and of them both being conjoined,
does draw forth a certain unctuous spirit; and does dimit it down into the
center of the Earth, that from thence it may be lifted upwards, and be carried
into a fit matrix, and in it may be concocted into Argent vive impregnated with
the sulphur and salt of Nature. And Sendivogius thus: No. lum Chym. Tr. 6 p.
320.
Res omnes nasci ex aere liquido vel vapore, quem elementa perpetuo motu in
viscerae terrae stillant, hunc postquam naturae Archaeus accepit, per poros
sublimat, and unicuique loco sua sagacitate tribuit, and sic locorum varietate,
res etiam proveniunt, and nascuntur variae. Quando enim ex terrae centro
sublimatur vapor ille, transit per loca vel sicca, vel calida. Si igitur
transit vapor per loca calida and pura, ubi pinguedo sulphuris parietibus
adhaeret, vapor ille quem Philosophi mercurium Philosophorum dixerunt,
accommodat se and jungitur illi pinguedini quam postea secum sublimat, and tunc
fit unctuositas relicto nomine vaporis, accipit nomen pinguedinis. That all
things do grow of the liquid air or vapor, which the Elements do distill by a
perpetual motion into the bowels of the Earth, which after the Archaeus (or
Workman) of Nature has taken, he does sublime it through the pores, and does
distribute to every place by his sagacity; and so by the variety of places,
various things do come and grow. For when this vapor is sublimed from the
center of the Earth, it passes by places either dry or hot. If therefore the
vapor pass by places hot and pure, where the fatness of Sulphur does cleave to
the walls, that vapor which the Philosophers have called the Mercury of
Philosophers, it accommodateth it self, and is joined to that fatness; which
afterward it sublimes with it self, and then it is made an unctuous thing, the
name of vapor being lost, it receives the name of fatness.

Now having described their Sulphur and Mercury, and how they are generated,
and how they differ only in property, and not in homogeneal essence, which they
hold to be the matter of the generation of metals. We shall more distinctly
handle it in order, and from what is already said, and to be showed, deduce
their fuller meaning.

They make the matter of the Minerals threefold.

1. The most remote matter, which they call the first; and this Nollius does
call the Ethereal spirit, which does commix the two elements of Water and
Earth, and draws a certain mineral spirit forth of them. And Trevisan says it
is the four Elements. Etenim elementa quatuor aeque sunt ad informationem asini
vel bovis apta, ac ad metalla. For the four Elements are equally fitted for the
information of an Ass, or Ox, as they are for Metals. And Sendivogius says,
that the Elements do continually distill down into the center of the Earth, a
ponderous vapor or water, which is again sublimed into diverse matrixes.

2. The remote matter they establish to be this vapor mixed with the Sulphur
that stuck to the Walls, growing into a middle substance like to fat or
glutinous water.

3. The third is the proxime, or next matter of Metals, and that is this fat
and glutinous substance, grown more thick, and may be that which before we have
named Gur: which Trevisan thus excellently defines. Apprime sciendum materiam
primam esse rem ipsam, in quam immediate specifica forma introducitur, uti
prima hominis materia, est utrumque viri semen and mulieris. First of all we
are to know, that the first matter (to wit of Metals) is that very thing, into
which immediately the specific form is introduced, as the first matter of a
man, is both the seed of the man and woman. And this is it they call their
metallic seed, in the nearest power; for after it be conceived and brought to
this, it cannot then be changed into any thing, but into some kind of Mineral.
From all which, we may note these things.

1. That the sperm of Metals (to wit in its first production) is not different
from the sperm of other things, to wit, an humid vapor.

2. This metallic seed is not like the animal and vegetable seed, easily to be
known or had; for they say of it: No. lum Chym. T^. 6. p. 319.
Semen minerale vel metallorum creat natura in visceribus terrae, propterea non
creditur tale semen esse in rerum natura, quia invisibile est. Nature does
create the mineral or metallic seed in the bowels of the Earth, therefore it
is not believed that there is such a seed in the Nature of things, because it
is invisible. And again, The Mineral seed is known of the Philosophers. And
lastly: Semen autem metallorum filii tantum doctrinae noverunt. But the Sons of
Art have only known the seed of Metals.

3. This metallic seed is but one, and not diverse; Ib* Tr. 4. p. 313.
for so he witnesses, Sunt qui opinentur, Saturnum habero aliud semen, aurum
quoque aliud, and sic consequenter metalla reliqua, sed vana sunt ista, unicum
tantum est semen, idem in Saturno, quod in Auro invenitur, idem in Luna, quod
in Marie. There are those that imagine that Saturn has one sort of seed, and
Gold another; and so consequently the rest of the Metals: but these are vain,
there is only one seed, the same in Saturn that is found in Gold, the same in
Luna that is in Mars. Elucid^t. of the 12 gates, p. 117.
And Basilius Valentinus, far more fully, says thus; Therefore observe and
take notice, that all Metals and Minerals have only one root, from which
generally their descent it; he that knows that rightly, needs not to destroy
Metals to extract the spirit from one, the sulphur from a second, and the salt
from a third. For there is a nearer place yet, in which these three, Spirit,
Soul, and Body, lie hid in one thing, well known, and may with great praise be
gotten. He that knows exactly this golden seed, or this magnet, and searches
thoroughly into its properties, he has then the true root of life, and may
attain unto that his heart longs for. Wherefore I entreat all true lovers of
Mineral Science, and Sons of Art, diligently to inquire after this metallic
seed or root, and be assured that it is not an idle chimaera or dream, but a
real and certain truth.

Sometimes (and perhaps not untruly) they affirm the Metals to be generated of
the element of Water; as Helmont, who proves not only that metallic bodies,
but also all other Concretes to have their rise from thence, and demonstrateth
the immutability of elemental Water, as well as of the homogeneous Mercury of
Metals: Progym. Meteor. p. 70.
Who says, Estque ideo in ipso Mercurio, prout in elementis, ratio propinqua
indestructibilitatis. There is therefore in Mercury it self (meaning metallic
Mercury) as in the Elements, the nearest cause or reason of indestructibility.
Timae. Plat. p. Graec. 488. Latin. 718.
And that Metals were generated forth of the Element of Water, I find Plato
holding that opinion, who says, Aquae genera duo sunt praecipua, unum humidum
(...), alterum fusile (...). There are two chief sorts of Water, one moist, the
other fusile, or to be poured forth. And a little after, he speaks thus of
the Water he calls fusile: Ex his vero quas aquas fusiles appellavimus, quod
ex tenuissimis levissimisque fit densissimum, uniforme, splendidum, flavumque,
pretiosissima res est, aurum florescens per petram compactum est. But of these
waters which we call fusile, (or to be melted) gold flowering through the Rock
is compacted, because it is made of most tenuious, most soft (or tender)
things, most dense, uniform, splendent, yellow, Lib. de Miner. Tr. 1. p. 342.
and is a most precious thing. The rest may be seen more fully in the place
quoted. And that Paracelsus was of opinion that Metals had for their material
cause Water, is manifest; for he says, Sic ergo mirabili consilio Deus
constituit, ut prima materia naturae esset aqua, mollis, levis, potabilis: and
tamen foetus seu fructus ipsius est durus; ut metalla, lapides, quibus nihil
durius est. So therefore God has ordered by a wonderful counsel, that the
first matter of Nature should be Water, soft, gentle, potable. And
notwithstanding the offspring or fruit of it is hard; as Metals, Stones, then
which nothing is more hard.

And that Water was the matter out of which Metals and all other mixed bodies
were framed, seems not altogether disliked by that honorable and learned
person Mr. Boil, Scept. Chym. p. 118.
who says; Yet thus much I shall tell you at present, that you need not fear
my rejecting this opinion for its novelty; since, however the Helmonti^ns may
in complement to their Master, pretend it to be a new discovery; yet though the
Arguments be for the most part his, the opinion it self is very ancient, as
there he further proves at large: to which for brevity sake, I remit the
Reader.

But no Author (in my judgment) has more fully, plainly, and truly described
the matter, manner, and order of the generation of Minerals, then that learned
and most experienced Chemist Helmont has done; and therefore we shall give you
his opinion at full, though some part of it has been recited before; who
says: Magn. oport. p. 157.
Non raro nempe contingit, quod metallarius in fodinis, saxa diffringens,
dehiscat paries and ^imam det, unde tantillum aquae, subalbidae virescentis,
manavit, quod mox concrevit instar saponis liquidi ( Bur voco) mutatoque
deinceps pallore subviridi, flavescit, vel albescit, vel saturatius viridescit.
The English of it you have before. And from thence he draws these
conclusions. Sic enim visum est, quod alias intus absque saxi vulnere fit. Quia
succus ille interno efficiente perfi^itur. Est ergo prima seminis metallici
vita, in condo, sive promptuario loci, homini plane incognita. Ac ubi semen in
lucem, liquore vestitum prodit, and Gas incoepit sulphur aquae inquinare, vita
est seminis media, ultima vero cum jam indurescit. So that it seems, it is
made otherwise within, without the breach (or wound) of the stone. Because that
juice, or liquor, is perfected by an internal efficient. Therefore the first
life of the metallic seed is in the cup, hole, or little cellar of the place,
altogether unknown unto man. But when the seed does appear unto light invested,
or clothed, with the liquor, and the Gas has begun to stain, or corrupt the
sulphur of the Water, it is the middle life of the seed; but is the last life
when it begins to harden. To this we shall only add the opinion of the
Author of the Arcae Arcani artificiosissimi apertae, who says thus. Theatr.
Chym. Vol. 6. p. 305.
Which, because it is large, I shall only give in English. Therefore it is to
be known, that Nature has her passages and veins in the Earth, which does
distill Waters, salt, clear and turbulent. For it is always observed by sight,
that in the Pits, or Groves of Metals, sharp and salt Waters do distill down.
While therefore those waters do fall downwards, (for all heavy things are
carried downwards) there are sulphurous vapors ascending from the center of
the Earth, that do meet them. Therefore if the waters be saltish, pure and
clear, and the sulphurous vapors pure also; and that they embrace one another
in their meeting, then a pure Metal is generated; but in defect of purity, an
impure Metal: in elaborating of which, Nature spreads near, or about a
thousand years, before that she can bring it to perfection; which comes to
pass either by reason of the impurity of the salt Mercurial waters, or of the
impure sulphurous vapors. When these two do embrace one another, shut up
close in the rocky places; then of them a moist, thick* fat vapor does arise
by the operation of natural heat, which takes its seat where the air cannot
come (for else it would fly away) of which vapor then a mucilaginous and
unctuous matter is made, which is white like Butter; which Mathesius does call
Gur, which may be clam'd like Butter; which I (says this Author) can also
show in my hand, above the Earth, and forth of the Earth. The Laborers in the
Groves do often find this matter which is called Gur; but of it nothing can be
prepared, because it is not known what was the intention of Nature in that
place; for a Marchasite, as well as a Metal, might equally have been made of it.

2. In the next place we come to the efficient cause of their generation; which
Aristotle and his followers have made external, some of them hot, and some of
them cold, and some both; vainly holding that the efficient cause in natural
generations, did not enter the compound, being seduced (as is most probable) by
the similitudes taken partly from artificial and manual operations, as the
Painter, or Statuary, being the efficient cause of the Picture or Statue, were
external and separate from them, after they were wrought and finished: Not
considering that these, and the like, make no alteration intrinsecally in the
compound, but only are conversant about the figuring, and altering the
dimensions of quantity: partly from humane, animal, and vegetative generations,
wherein they conceive the male and female to be efficient causes of generation,
and so to be external and separate from the thing generated. Which is merely
false, for the male and female are but instrumental, or artificial causes of
moving and ejaculating the seeds into the due matrix (...) which seeds being
joined together, become agent, and patient (being excited by the heat of the
matrix, as an adjuvant cause) and the intrinsecal efficient cause is contained
in them, which we call the Archaeus, or seminal Idaea that does form and
organize the body, according to the species from whence it was derived, if the
matrix be proper, and of due kind for it. And the male and female in this do no
more then the husbandman that ploweth and tilleth the earth, and then casts
in the seed, (only Nature has prepared and provided seed intrinsecally in the
male and female, which the husbandman must have elsewhere provided by Nature
for him ab extra) being no intrinsecal; or efficient cause of its generation or
growth; but only that particle of vital air or ether within it. Which being
the Faber or Archaeus, and excited with the hot and moist vapors in the Earth,
or matrix, does produce its like; or as the Holy Writ words it, gives to every
seed its own body.

But to come to the true efficient cause of the generation of Metals (though
what has been said might suffice) the substance seems to be this. That the
Solar particles, celestial spirit, or internal and incombustible Sulphur (which
is the true fire of Nature) hid in the viscous matter or mercury, and excited
and stirred up by the motion of the celestial bodies, central sun, or
subterraneous fire or heat (which we shall not take upon us to determine, but
leave it to the judgment of the learned Reader) does generate, perfect, and
ripen Metals; as most of what has been said before, does sufficiently
testify. And all do consent that Sulphur is the efficient cause, or father,
and Mercury the passive or mother of all Metals.

Now for the manner of their generations, there has been so much related in
the passages of this Chapter, that we shall but only add this short
collection. That the Water being sharp and salt, and falling down in the
subterraneous caverns and passages of the Earth, does meet with the dry,
sulphurous, and warm steams that rise from the lower pa^ts of the Earth, do
join together, and so becomes unctuous and fat, which settling in close holes,
and cavities of Rocks where the air cannot enter, Vid. No. Lum. Chym. p. 314,
315.
as in a close womb, is in length of time thickened into a soft substance, which
they call Gur; and after by the warmth of the place, or womb, and its own
internal fire, sulphur, or heat, is concocted into a metallic body, pure or
impure, according as the steams were, when they joined together, and the place
in which they are generated.

CHAP. V. Of the uncertainty of the division of Fossiles, their definitions, or
descriptions, and number.
THe reason why I begin here with the divisions of Fossiles, is, because I mean
not to determine, but to propose, and the things being yet so far from being
certainly known, that I dare but Sceptically treat of them, and recite what the
opinions of Authors are in these particulars.

1. And first, That things may be plain to the Reader, as far as we are able to
lay them open, by things dug forth of the Earth, commonly called Fossilia,
we understand all elementated, and perfectly mixed bodies, growing, found, and
had either in the bowels of the Earth, or in the superficial parts thereof,
brought to the knowledge of our senses by any means whatsoever; thereby not
intending subterraneous animal, vegetables, nor any of their parts. Which are
so variously divided by Authors, that a man cannot well tell which of them to
pitch upon, as the most perfect, but some of the chief of them we shall here
recite, and leave the censure to others.

And first the learned Wormius does thus define Mus. Worm. c. 1. p. 1.
Est autem fossile, corpus perfect mixtum inanimatum, vitae expers, peculiari
forma, and virtute seminaria a deo in prima creatione dotatum, ut sibi simile
procreare, suamque speciem propagare possit. But a Fossile is a body perfectly
mixed, inanimate, void of life, endowed with a peculiar form, and seminary
virtue of God in the first creation, that it might procreate a like to it self,
and might propagate its species. And after does divide them into three sorts.
1. Into middle Minerals; which have a middle nature, as it were betwixt stones
and Metals; and of these he makes four sorts. 1. Earths. 2. Salts. 3.
Sulphurs. 4. Bitumens. 2. Into stones, of which he makes two sorts. 1. Stones
less precious. 2. Stones precious. 3. Into Metals, by which (he says) he
understands metallic bodies, meaning as well the Metals properly so called, as
also those bodies that are of kin or nearness to the Metals. Which I confess to
me seems as comprehensive a division of Fossiles as any other Author that I
have read.

Secondly, Eucelius divides them all but into two De re metal. l. 1. c. 1. p. 6.
that is to say, 1. Into the greater Minerals, which have their original from
Sulphur and Mercury, and that these are all ductible and liquable. 2. Into the
middle Minerals, or remote, which are not properly metallic bodies, as those
that draw their original from a very weak Mercury and Sulphur, or those that
consist of argent vive, or sulphur alone, as subventaneous eggs, or a Mole.
This division I leave as but defective, and to be censured by others.

Caesius, who writ a huge Volume of Minerals, but grounded upon very little
experience; in which notwithstanding a curious fancy may find many nice and
speculative questions handled, and according to his notions resolved. It being
the custom of those kind of men to seem ignorant of nothing, when indeed
experimentally they scarce know any thing. He relates that Avicen quoted by
Albertus, Min^^olog. l. 1. c. 8. p. 129.
Agricola, and others, do divide Fossiles into four kinds; as Stones, Metals,
Sulphurs, and Salts. And others likewise into four, to wit, remarkable Earths,
concrete Juices, Stones, and Metals. These and other divisions he shows, and
seems to approve of them all, in these words. I say that the before-alledged
divisions are all useful, for they fitly enough do distribute the whole into
its parts, which is the office of a good division. Therefore Fallopius and
Raynandus do rightly commend the divisions of Aristotle, Theophrastus, Galen,
Avicen, and Albertus; and that the said Fallopius does rightly prefer the
fourfold division of Agricola, into Earths, Juices, Stones, and Metals, as more
clear then the rest. Ibid. l. 2. c. 1. p 141.
And afterward he forth of Agricola, does enumerate six sorts; which, with the
rest, I commend to be considered of.

Aureus Tract De Lapide Philosophico, P. 24.
divides them into four sorts, to wit, Stones, amongst which the matter of
every kind, and Earths are understood Salts of all sorts, the middle Minerals,
and Metals.

Trevisan, Epist. ad Tho. Bovon.
not so much regarding the exactness, as usefulness, which he makes fourfold.
The first he calls of the first imposition, which are vulgar and common Stones,
in which there is a bare compaction of the Elements. 2. The second are the
media mineralia, or lesser Minerals, as Salts, Aloms, Tackles, Auripigments,
Vitriols, Sulphurs, etc. 3. The third are the metallic bodies, or mineralia
majora. 4. Of the fourth sort are gems, and precious stones.

Now for the definitions and description of what a Metal is, to distinguish it
from other Fossiles and compound bodies, we find the Authors as different in
their opinions; and therefore the most learned and expert in Mineral knowledge,
have for the most part omitted it, as too nice a difficulty and fruitless
speculation, as Paracelsus, Lib. coel. Phil. p. 126.
who gives this; and yet however, thought of it as good and true as the best
of them; who says, He that goes about to know what Metals are, and from
whence they arise; must understand, that our Metals are no other thing, then
the best part and spirit of common stones, that is to say, pitch, grease,
fatness, oil, and stone. For so hardly are the things of Nature to be known,
that they are more easily to be known by similitudes then Logical definitions.

This definition is given by an Aristotelian thus: Metallum est corpus perfect
mixtum, Jo. Magyr. Physiol. Peripatet. l. 5. c. 1. p. 321.
and inanimatum, ex sulphur and argen^^ viv^, mixti^ and temperatis in terrae
v^nis, natum. A Metal is a perfect mixed body, and inanimate, arising from
sulphur and argent vive, mixed and tempered in the veins of the Earth. And
first he thinks the definition to be good, as consisting of a genus and
difference. The genus he makes corpus, because a Metal does consist of three
dimensions: and the difference he makes fourfold. 1. It is called a body
perfectly mixed, to difference it from meteors; because there is not so light a
concourse of the Elements in Metals as in Meteors. 2. It is called inanimate,
to difference it from animate things, as Plants and Animals. 3. The matter of
Metals is set down to be sulphur and argent vive, as the father and mother of
Metals. And when they are said to grow of sulphur and argent vive mixed and
tempered together in the veins of the Earth, by which the efficient cause, and
place or matrix of generation is signified.

Wormius gives this modest definition of a Metal. Metallum est corpus perfect
mistum, Mus. Worm. Sect. 3. c. 1. p. 113.
non vivens, sed viventi aemulum, a Deo in venis creatum, ex terra
subtilissima, and halitibus pinguibus ex terra and aqua, per calor^m mistis, ut
inde sulphureum and mercuriale semen fiat, ex quo metalla generari possunt:
quae accedente salino principio concrescunt, and incrementa capiunt, donec
pura, and perfecta reddantur, igne fusilia, ictuque in longum and latum
ductibilia. A Metal is a perfect mixed body, not living, emulating life, created
of God in the veins, of a most subtle earth, and steams being fat, from the
earth, and water, mixed by heat, that from thence a sulphurous and mercurial
seed may be made, from whence Metals may be generated: which do join together,
and take increase, by a saline principle coming to them, until they be made
pure and perfect, being fusible by fire, and by force to be drawn into length
and breadth.

3. Schroderus gives this description: Metalta sun^ corpora dura, Pharm. Med.
Chym. l. 3. c. 9. p. 42.
ductilia ex succo salino sine Mercurio, vi sui sulphuris in terra coagulato.
Metals are hard bodies, to be drawn (or ductible) coagulated of a saline juice
or Mercury, by the force of sulphur, in the earth.

There might be many more definitions, or descriptions given of Metals, from
many other Authors, but so defective, or imperfect, that I have only instanced
in these, to show how lame this piece of learning is concerning Metals, that
all ingenuous persons may be stirred up to a farther search into the nature and
properties of them, to help to lead this knowledge toward perfection. And
therefore we shall only mention three particulars that may be observed from
what has been spoken before. 1. That if we take a Metal in the sense of the
first definition of Magyrus, then it may comprehend both those that are
strictly called Metals (not excluding common argent vive to be one) and those
that are also called semi-metals, as Autimony and the like.

2. But if we take a Metal strictly to be, a perfect mixed, constant and Mineral
body, fusible, ductible, or malleable, arising or generated of Sulphur and
Mercury: and so the special difference of a Metal from all other Minerals to be
its abiding the hammer, and per se, or of its own nature, without commixture of
any other, to endure extension into length and breadth by force. Then
quicksilver must be none of them, nor those that are accounted semi-metals, as
Antimony, Bismuth, or Tin-glass, and the like; which of themselves will not
extend under the hammer, but with the commixion of some others will easily do
it. For they make a semi-metal to be a perfect mixed body, less constant,
fusible not ductible per se, compounded of a less perfect Mercury and Sulphur
then the former. Its difference from other Minerals, to be its metallic
color, and fusion; and from a Metal, that it will not (without mixture of some
other) extend under the hammer, but proves brittle and frangible.

3. But if a metallic body be taken in the largest sense, then it sometimes
comprehends not only those that are malleable per se, but those called
semi-metals, that will not extend under the hammer without commixtion of some
other, and those other Minerals that some Authors call Cachimiae and
Marchasitae; of all which we shall have occasion to speak hereafter.

In the next place we come to speak of the number of the Metals, which commonly
are accounted seven, according to the number of the seven Planets, which we
shall let pass, as a thing assumed by Analogy and similitude, more then by
certainty and truth; but because they have been most anciently and commonly
known more then others, they have got that repute and esteem, which we shall
not labor to take from them.

Concerning this point we may take the judgment of Paracelsus, Lib. do Miner.
p. 346.
in stead of all; whose experience in Mineral knowledge was inferior to none;
who says: But understand further of the generation of Metals, that there is a
great number, and a diverse variety of them. For a Metal is that which the fire
can tame, and the Workman frame an instrument of; of which are Gold, Silver,
Iron, Copper, Lead, Tin. For these are accounted Metals of all men. But
furthermore, also there are certain other Metals, which are not accounted
Metals, either in the Writings or Philosophy of the Ancients, or by the vulgar,
and notwithstanding they are Metals. Hitherto does belong Zink, Cobalt, which
are tamed, and forged or stamped by force of the fire; as also certain Granates
(so used to be called) of which there are many kinds, and these are Metals. But
there are many others besides these, that are not yet known unto me: as are
many differences in Marchasites, in Bismuths, in other Cachimies, which yield
Metals, but not yet known or discovered. For the chief Metals are only known,
that are more ready, and commodious for use, as Gold, Silver, Iron, Copper,
Tin, Lead: The rest are for the most part neglected through a certain
slothfulness; neither is there much care taken about their properties. For
neither the Smith, nor Artist that works in Iron, or Tin, or Copper,
regards them: and yet they are Metals for other Artificers not yet sprung up;
for none labors to learn, except by one way and one Art. And a little after he
says: Ibid p. 3^7.
But this Chapter of Metals does teach that there are six Metals in number
known unto me, which also I have reckoned above: to which yet a few more are to
be added, to wit, three or four, also known unto me; whose number and species
do hereafter follow. But it is of likelihood to me, that yet a great number of
them remains behind unknown. For by the probation or essaying of Metals,
manifold trials or essays do offer themselves, which are of a metallic nature,
that is, they are verily estimated according to the nature of the (known)
Metals, but notwithstanding they do not altogether agree with it; that from
hence I conjecture that there remains a great number of Metals undiscovered.
For every Mineral may be rightly known and discerned, if it be tried or tested,
by a just proof or examination. And to this purpose Georgius Agricola tells us,
That he would show them a certain kind of Mineral, Berman. p. 692, 693.
which was in the number of the Metals, but (as it seemed to him) unknown to
the Ancients, which the Germans called Bismuth. And thereupon they reply,
Therefore according to thy opinion, there are more then the vulgarly and
commonly known seven Metals. To which he replies: I judge there are more, for
this which even now I told you our Countrymen call Bismuth, you cannot rightly
say it is either white Lead (that is Tin) nor black Lead (that is, De n^tur.
Fosse. l. 2. p 575.
that Lead which is commonly called so) but differs from them both, and is a
third kind. And again he tells us; That there are said to be six Metals in
number, distinct in kind, to wit, Gold, Silver, Iron, Copper, Lead, Tin; but
that indeed and truth there are more. And that also Quicksilver is a Metal, and
that which the Germans call Bismuth. Therefore (he says) that Ammonius had
written well, that there are many species of Metals to us unknown.

CHAP. VI. Of the signs and discovery of Mines and Ores, both in general and in
particular.
NOw we shall relate the signs of Mines and Ores, as we could promiscuously
gather them from the best Authors we have, or could meet withal; and add some
few of our own experience and observation. And first take these from Caesius,
Minerol. l. 1. c. 7 p 123. etc.
who tells us thus: That they are either found forth by chance, or by Art and
search.

1. Sometimes Mines are found forth, without the industry of men; as when
torrents and great floods do make them bare, as happened at the Silver Mines at
Friberg. 2. By eradicating the Trees that grew over the veins of the Ore, by
the force of winds. 3. By the falling out of stones forth of the Mountains, by
the force of large Showers, Earthquakes, Thunderbolt and Lightning, the rolling
down of Snow, or the force of winds. 4. By plowing, or accidental digging; as
Gold was found in Galecia, as Justin reports. 5. By the burning of Woods, as
happened in Spain, in showing Silver Mines, as Diodorus Siculus writes. 6.
Lastly, Any other force may discover Ores, as the hoof of a Horse (as it is
said) at Goselaria.
Again, they may be discovered by Art, and probable signs before digging, or
searching.

1. The heads of Springs and Fountains are to be carefully observed, and their
Waters to be tried, because they cannot be far from the Vein, as having their
rise or passage near them.

2. The pieces or fragments of Veins are to be marked, that the force of
torrents has laid open; for if they be smooth, it is a sign that the Vein is
far off, but if fixed in the Earth, or rough, it is a sign that the Vein is
near at hand.

3. The site and position of the place is to be noted, for that may be the
cause that the Veins are more or less hidden in the Earth, and the pieces
thrust farther off.

4. The Frosts sticking to the Grass are to be marked, which commonly are white
and hoary, except they which grow over the Veins of Minerals, because they
breath forth hot and dry steams, which hinder the concretion of the Frost;
therefore where the Grass is moist, and not congealed with the Frost, as other
Grass near the same place is, there the Vein is probably under it, and the
Grass short, and of a languid and pale color.

5. The signs of hidden Veins, are the leaves of Trees, which in the Spring
time are livid and something bluish, the boughs (especially the highest)
infected with blackness, or some less unnatural color, and the stock or trunck
chinked, all caused by metalline vapors.

6. The tops of Mountains which tend toward the South, and their bottoms
toward the North, do afford an Argument of Metals, and especially of silver,
and those most abounding which tend directly from the East toward the North.

7. The color of the Mountains, Stones, and Earth, is to be regarded, for
these do not only discover Metals, but also show of what sort they are, as a
green color Copper, a black Silver or Gold, a Purple a Fire-stone, or
Marchasite, livid and wan Lead and Iron, lurid or very pale Vitriol, Copperas,
or such like Juices, ashie and obscure Sulphur.

8. The smell or odor also may be reckoned amongst the signs of Mines or Ores;
as when two stones of the same Mountain are rubbed hard together, if there be
Metal, they will greatly smell of Brimstone.

9. Barren Mountains are also a sign of Metals, because the humor is wasted
within, and the evil vapors destroy the young Plants and Grass.

10. The stones or earth being heavier then ordinary; are a certain sign of
Metals.

11. If the stones shine more then ordinary, or be very solid shining but
little, Vid. Agric. l. 1. de re Metal. p 25, 26.

Card. de Subt. l. 5. p. 158.


it is a sign of Metals. And if thou flux or melt the stones, thou shall not
only discover the Metal, but the kind, and quantity of it.

12. The Waters afford signs, for if they have any strange smell, or color,
they show some Metal. The mud and sand in the bottom of Rivers and Brooks, are
diligently to be examined; for something in the length of time must needs be
washed from the Veins in their passage. And where there are unusual and strange
Plants, where they do not thrive, but their truncks are little, leaves and
branches withered, etc. are sometimes signs of Metals.

Rer. Nature. l. 9. p. 112.
To these we may add what Paracelsus says, That coruscation, or scintillation,
is a certain sign of Metals that are unripe, and yet in primo ente; and
according as sparkling or fire is carried, so the Veins lie. And that this
coruscation, or sparkling of fire, is to be seen in the night, as if Gunpowder
were sprinkled in a long line, and then fired; so it goes along, and shines,
and does glissen, and glimmer even as Gold or Silver upon the Test or Cupel,
when the Lead is separated from it. And if this glimmering show whitish, it is
a sign of white Metals, as Tin, Lead, Silver, etc. if red, a sign of red
Metals, as Copper, and Iron; if yellow, yellow Metals, as Gold, etc. That this
coruscation being thin and subtle, is the best sign; and shows subtle, and
excellent Metals; and the contrary denotes the contrary. And as long as these
glimmerings appear, whether of this or that color, little or great, so long
the Metal is immature, and as yet in primo ente, as the sperm of a man in the
matrix of the woman. But Basilius says, Last Will and Test. c. 17. p. 38.
Seeing this stuff which this coruscation seizes on, is found often in a place
where no Metals are, therefore it is very deceitful; however commonly, and for
the most part of a metalline breath.

For the signs of Metals, in or after digging, to seek them, take these:

1. If the Miners happen into a fat clayish earth, which discovers a Vein of
pure and fresh Metal, it is a very good sign, certainly showing, that the Metal
of which it is a Vein, is not far off.

2. If the earth dug up have no Metal in it, but be very fat, and be of a
white, black, yellow, red, green, or a bright blue or Azure color, it is also
a good sign of some noble Metal there. For the Mine-men have especially a
regard unto noble, neat, and prime colors, as green Earth, or Chrysocolla,
viride aeris, Lazure, Cinnabar, Sandaraca, red Arsnick, Auripigment, Litharge
of Gold or Silver, etc. For every one of these does for the most part show its
peculiar Metal and Mineral. So viride aeris, Chrysocolla, Green Earth, do for
the most part show Copper, or a cupreous Metal. So Lazure, or white Arsnick, or
Litharge of silver, do for the most part show the Metal of Copper. So Cinnabar
and Sandaraca, or red Arsnick, do sometimes denote Gold, or Silver, or both
mixed together. So Auripigment, red Sulphur, or Litharge of Gold, for the most
part do po^tend Gold. So where Chrysocrlla with Lazure, or Lazure with
Chrysocolla and Auripigment, are found mixed and confounded together, for the
most part they show a most excellent and rich Mineral. Where stones or earth
are found of an Iron-like color they certainly show an Iron mineral.

3. It is to be noted, that sometimes the Archaus of the Earth does thrust out,
or vomit forth, by some hidden passages, from the lower Earth, some Metal; and
that is a good sign that the Miners should proceed, because there is certain
hope of a noble metal hid there.

4. Moreover, Rer. Nature. l. 9. p. 111, 112.
If thin leaves of metals like to Talck do stick to the pebles, or stones, it
is a good and certain sign. Thus far Paracelsus.

Now we shall show the signs from that laborious and experienced person, De re
metal. l. 5. p. 76.
Georgius Agricola, which are these; very well worth nothing.

1. There is often found pure Gold, Silver, Copper, and Argent vive; seldom
^ron, or Plumbum Cinereum, or Bismuth, seldom ever Tin, or Lead. But the little
black Stones, and the rest, do not much differ from pure Tin, which is melted
by blast forth of them; and the best lapis plumbarius, or Lead Ore, from which
the Lead is melted, differs little from the Metal it self.

2, Then after pure gold, that is, statim suum, that which is called rude, or
unwrought; whether it be greenish yellow, or yellow, or purple, or black, or
red without, and inwardly of a golden color, it is to be reckoned as a rich
Vein, because the gold does exceed the stone, or earth in weight. Also every
Vein of Gold, whereof an 100 pound weight does contain more then three ounces
of Gold, is rich. All the rest of the Veins of gold are to be esteemed as poor
ones.

3. Earth, whether dry or moist, sometimes contains gold; but in that which is
dry, for the most part there is more, if in the Furnace it give any good sign,
or do not want little spangles like cat-silver. These Juices for the most part
contain Gold, caeruleum, or a kind of blue Sand, Azure, Chrysocolla, native
Borax, or green Earth, Auripigment native, yellow Arsnick, Orpiment, or Orpine,
Sandaraca native, red Arsnick. Also pure or unwrought gold does sometimes stick
or cleave, sometimes less, sometimes more in the sand, gravel, or grittle of
flints, little pebles, slates, or cleaving stones and marble. In Fire-stones
sometimes it is found, but very rarely.

4. But the richness of a silver Vein is thus discerned; If in 100 l. weight of
the Ore, there be above 3 l. weight, it is rich, 'otherwise it is poor, as is
that which consists of unwrought silver. Whether the color be leaden, red,
white, black, ash-colored, purple, yellow, liver-coloured, or of any other
sort; such also sometimes is the Vein of flint, slate, and marble, if much do
adhere unto them. Sometimes in Fire-stones, Cadmia, Ore of Brass, Lead Ore, and
Ore of Antimony.

5. But in the other sort of Metals, though their Veins may be rich, yet unless
they be plentiful also, they are seldom worth labor. But if it happen that any
kind of gems or precious stones be discovered, they are diligently to be sought
after; as Cements, Marbles, Lapis Haematites, Lodestone, which is usually
found in the Iron mines; Smiris, or as commonly called by Mechanics Emery, in
Silver mines; the Lapis Iudaicus, Trochites, and the like, in Quarries, or
elsewhere. Neither ought they to neglect the several sorts of Earth, whether
found in the gold, Silver, Copper Mines, or others: nor should they neglect the
several concrete, or hardened Juices, found in the metallic passages, or in
their proper Mines.

6. If a yellow Earth offer it self, in which the raments or shavings of any
Metal, pure or unwrought, do appear, it is a good sign: For the Metallic
matter from whence the shavings are separated, must needs be at hand. But if it
offer it self void of all Metallic matter, but be fat, and of a white, green,
bluish, or such like color, the Workmen ought not to give over, so they have
the signs spoken of before.

7. But if any dry Earth offer it self to the Miner, which contains pure and
unwrought in it self, it is a good sign, If yellow, red, or black, or any other
notable color, which has no Metal in it, then it is no bad sign, and
Chrysocolla, Caeruleum, Aerugo, Auripigmentum, Sandaraca being found, are good
signs.

8. Also where a subterranean Spring casts forth some piece of a Metal, we
ought to pursue it; for it shows that that piece was separated from some
greater part of the Metal. Likewise when very thin spangles of some Metal do
cleave to the Rock or Stone, they are to be numbered among the good signs.
Furthermore, Veins which forthwith do consist partly of flints, partly of
clayish and dry earth; if being mixed together with fibers, and descend low
into the earth, it is good hope that there is metal. Vid. Achan. Kirch, Mund.
subter. tom. 2. l. 10. p. 180.
But if the fibers afterward appear not, and little or no metallic matter
offer it self, they ought not to give over digging.

9. But if a brown, black, horn-like, liver-coloured flint appear, for the most
part it is a good sign; but white is sometimes good, sometimes not; but the
sand or grittle of marble, appearing in the depth of the Vein, is not good. And
those sorts of stones that do easily melt in the fire, although they be
transparent, are to be numbered amongst the middle signs, if other good signs
appear, they are good; if not, they are no good signs. And they are of some
hope which above and below (or at the covering or bottom) have a flint or
marble, and in the midst clayish earth, etc. In like manner, where the top (or
as our Miners call it, Cooping) and the bottom have an Iron-like earth, and in
the midst fat and clammy earth. So where the top and the bottom have that which
the Miners call Armaturam (the harness or arming) and in the midst black earth,
or like to burnt earth, these yield some hope.

10. But the proper sign of Gold, is Auripigment, natural yellow Orpiment, or
Orpin. Of Silver, Plumbum Cinereum, Bismuth, and Antimony: of Copper, natural
Verdegrease, pared off from brass stones, out of which it grows; Melanteria,
or black Earth; Sorry, a poisonous black pory Earth; Chalcitis, the Copper
stone, or red Vitriol; Misy, a kind of Vitriol now not known; Altramentum
sutorium, green Vitriol, Shoo-makers black. Of Tin, the pure black stones, out
of which the Metal is melted, and things dug up like the spume or froth of
silver. Of Iron, Ferrugo, Iron stone. The common sign of Gold and Copper, is
Chrysocolla, green Earth, or native Borax, Caeruleum, Azure, or blue sand. Of
Silver and Lead, Plumbago Fossilis, Lead Ore, in which is always silver, less
or more; and is also called Galena, Molybdena, and Lapis plumbarius. But
although the Miners do rightly call Plumbum cinereum Bismuth, Wismuth, or
Counterfein, the cover (or cooping) of Silver; and that the Copper fire-stone,
or pyrites aerosus be the common parent of Atramentum su^orium, Melanteria, and
the like: Yet notwithstanding sometimes these have their proper metals; as also
Auripigment and Stibium. And amongst good signs are slate stones of a
pale-blue, or black color; and also Lime-stones of any color. But a good sign
of Silver, are little black pebles, forth of which Tin is drawn, especially
when the intervein is made of such like. And thus far this noble Author.

The signs to discover where Metals are that the expert Miners have informed me
of, and that I have observed in these Northern parts, where the Ores that they
either get or look for, are commonly Lead, and but rarely any Silver Ore, are
these.

1. The Hills and Mountains from whence they are dug, are for the most part
barren and squalid, having but little Grass, and that short, dried, and (as it
were) withered; few Trees, Plants, or Shrubs, growing upon them; and those they
have, little, dwarfish, livid, and ill-coloured, very rocky and stony at the
tops, with earths of sundry colors, but most commonly something reddish. 2.
The stones that by the Land-flouds and Torrents are brought down into the
Valleys, are very ponderous, flinty, grayish, or horn-coloured, and oftentimes
pieces and fragments of Cauk, and pure white, and other colored Sparr; and
good store of small gray, black and white Silices, or pebles, which are found
to be good, and for the most part certain signs that there is metalline Ore in
those Hills or Mountains. 3. There are commonly found upon the tops of the
Hills where they find Lead Ore, many sorts of fire-stones, or pyritae; which
rubbed hard or smitten together forcibly, do not only give sparks of fire, but
smell most strongly of Brimstone, whether they yield fire or not. And sometimes
store of little yellowish and reddish stones, and these prove very good signs
of Metals. 4. Sometimes there is found fragments of very bright and shining
marchasites of a golden color, or like Copper in show, wrought forth of the
Hills by Rains, and Floods, that together with some other signs named before,
give great encouragement to Miners, and seldom deceive them. 5. Some expert
Workmen (which I my self have diverse times seriously marked, and sought for)
have found in the chinks and holes of the stones washed from the tops or sides
of Mountains; a blue kind of Sand or Earth, being (as I conjecture) the native
Caeruleum or Azure; as also a pure green Earth or Sand, which might be the
natural aerugo or verdegrease that Agricola mentions: and where these were
found they always proved good signs. 6. But the most certain sign that all our
Miners rely upon, is to find some fragments of Ore washed down from the sides
of the Hills; or by careful walking over the tops of the Mountains (whose
barrenness, and some other such like signs, have moved them to search) and
prying into the clifts, irruptions, or crevises of the Rocks. And this they
find never to fail them. 7. After they have dug, the most of the signs that
does encourage them, is gray or bluish stones, flints, or slates, red or
yellow clay or earth, or that which appears of many colors; but especially to
find some pieces of such Ore as they call loose and shaken Ore; or some small
twigs of a Vein of Ore, for then they think that there cannot but be greater
store, if they can find the right way to it. 8. I have specially noted that
near where Metals are (especially near Brunghill Moor, where Silver Ore was
formerly gotten, and at a place called the Syks) there the Stones being for the
most part of a greyish, or bluish color, are very thick interspersed with the
small Atoms, or grains of Metal, as little as small Pin heads, or almost Needle
points, and will exceedingly shine and glister upon a Sunshine day, and also
are very ponderous.
Now to conclude this Chapter, I shall only mind the Reader of a remarkable
passage of Paracelsus; which though twice repeated in his Works, and (as I
judge) of great weight, and full of honest and plain instruction to a
Mineralist, yet has been little regarded by any one that ever I yet conversed
withal; which is this:

Coel Philos. p. 126.
Whosoever therefore does search after Minerals, it is fit that he be endowed
with such reason and discretion, that he have not a regard alone to vulgar and
known Metals, which are found only in the depths of Mountains. For very often
such a Mineral is found in the very superficies of the earth, that no such, or
none so good is found in the hidden deeps. Id. de contract. Tract. 2 p. 119.
Therefore every stone that comes into our view, whether it be great or little,
whether it be a small peble, or a whole stone, is most diligently to be looked
into, and to weigh the nature and property of it, with an exact examination.
For many times a vile flint or peble, contemned and thrown away, is better then
any Cow. For here the dominion of Heaven prevails. And all over earth, dust, or
sand is offered, which has with it much of Gold, or Silver, which thou shall
mark and take notice of.

It may be perhaps here expected that I should say something of the Virgula
divinatoria, as by many judged to be a sure way to discover where the Ores of
Metals lie; of which I find that some of our credulous Miners have a great
opinion but none of them that ever I could meet withal, had made any certain or
exact trial of, so as to verify the truth of the experiment. Neither indeed is
it much used by any in these Northern parts. But yet notwithstanding I shall
give you the opinion of some of the best Authors, both against the certainty of
it, and for the verity of the Experiment.

1. And first Agricola, De re metal. l. 2. p. 26, 27, 28
a very sober person, far from superstition, and doubtless that had seen the
fallaciousness of it, and that it happened to show where Metals lay but rarely;
and after a long discourse about the verity or falsehood of it (to whom I refer
my Reader) does conclude against charms and incantations used about it, but
that the natural use of it may be allowed, in these words: Virgula igitur, in
inveniendis venis, viro bono, gravique usui esse potest. Therefore the rod for
discovering of Veins of Metals, may be used by a good and grave man. But not in
choosing the figure, nor using charms: non enim valet virgulae figura, sed
incantamenta carminum. For the figure, of the rod prevails not, but the charms.

2. The second I shall name, De signat. rer. l. 9. p. 112.
is Paracelsus, one whom his enemies would brand with most gross superstition,
and favoring or practicing of unlawful and cheating Magic: as commonly all
that pretended Magic that is practiced, and counted Diabolical, is but the
cheats of crafty and cunning Knaves; or as Cardan said, Carnales Daemones,
ipsis daemonibus callidiores. Incarnate Devils, more cunning then the Devil
himself. He (I say) does so clearly, plainly and honestly disclaim all
superstition, charms, and enchantments, as none can do more; and also
confesses the deceitfulness of the use of this Divinatory rod, in these words;
which for brevity I give in English. Therefore care is sedulously to be taken,
that ye suffer not your selves to be seduced by the Divinations of uncertain
Arts. For they are vain and frivolous, especially the Divinatory rods, which
have deceived many Miners. For if they once show any thing rightly, they on the
contrary deceive ten times. In like manner, we are not at all to trust to other
fraudulent signs of the Devil, which are done and appear against Nature upon
the night, and at inconvenient time, as Apparitions, Visions, and the like. And
in another place he says; Philos. Occult. p 490.
For the Divinatory rod is fallacious; as also the other Visions in Glasses,
and Crystals.

3. The great Kircherus does reject it, and that upon his own trial, Mund.
Subter. Tom. 2. l. 10. Sect. 2. p. 180.
in these words: Cente ego saepius hujus rei supra metallica corpora auri and
argenti, experimentum sumens, semper spe mea frustratus sum. Certainly I very
often making an experiment of this thing upon the metallic bodies of Gold and
Silver, was always frustrated of my hope. And concludes, Atque luculenter
adverti manifestam esse non daemenis, sed virgam tractantis illusionem. But I
have clearly observed, that the manifest illusion is not of the Devil, but of
him that handles the rod. From whence observe,

1. That there have been, and are many things that are performed by true
natural means, though hid, and secret; as also by sleight, nimbleness, and
cunning, that wiser heads, and cunninger wits, have used charms, spells,
strange words, or incantations to, thereby to keep them veiled from the Vulgar,
and to deceive others. Which has occasioned many inconveniences, and therefore
not to be used by an honest and conscientious Christian; Vid. Rog. Bac. de mi^.
pot. art. and nature.
but we are carefully to mark what is natural Magic, which is both lawful and
laudable, what may be done by Art, which is often strange and wonderful, and
what is done by Diabolical means, if it be a truth that there is any such
matter; of which the most learned do not causelessly doubt.

2. That in trying such nice experiments as this, there had need be
extraordinary care, and caution, both in time, and in every minute circumstance
thereof; and though one should often miss about it, it is not safe to conclude
generally, and negatively: for an experiment (especially when it depends upon
Nature more then Art) may fail at some times and places, for peculiar reasons;
and yet when all circumstances necessary and suitable are added, may prove
effectual: and therefore notwithstanding the authority of Paracelsus and
Agricola, it may be doubted, whether their trials were accompanied with all the
exact circumstances that were requisite for such a matter, for we know they
were men, and might err; and it is too manifest, that in many things they did
err, and it is the common frailty, that no man, as mere man, has been
privileged from.

3. For Kirchers trials often made with the rod upon the metallic bodies of
gold and silver, which I suppose were the Ores of those Metals, he does not
mention of what kind of wood his rod was; or whether he had tried with rods of
all those several woods that he names; which if not, he left it short, and
concludes not safely. Again, the great question is, whether if the rod will
move when it is over the veins of Metals, that it will do so at any distance,
which is not probable to be supposed, for the Loadstone will no work beyond the
sphere of its activity, and therefore there may be great store of Metals in the
Mountain where it is used; and yet they not lying near enough the superficies
of the earth, may frustrate its effects, though if they had been within the
compass of its virtue, it may be that it would have showed them. Further the
great Quaery may be, that it will discover Mines at some times and degrees of
their concoction, when they send forth strong steams, but not when they send
forth little or none. And much may be in the manner and skill of using the rod.

A discovery of subterranean treasure, p. 11.12.
1. Now first for those that affirm the experiment of the rod to be true, I
shall give what Mr. Gabriel Platte delivers us upon his own trial, who says:
The operation with the Virgula Divina, is thus to be performed: some observe a
set day and hour, with certain words and ceremonies at the cutting up of the
same, which I have found to be little to the purpose. Thus I wrought about
Midsummer in a calm morning, I cut up a rod of Hasel, all of the same Springs
growth, almost a yard long; then I tied it to my staff, in the middle with a
strong thread, so that it did hang even, like the beam of a balance: thus I
carried it up and down the Mountains where Lead grew, and before Noon it guided
me to the orifice of a Lead Mine, which I tried, having one with me with an
hack of Iron and a Spade, and within two hours we found a vein of Lead Ore;
within less then a foot of the Grass. The signs that it shows, is to bow down
the root end toward the Earth, as though it would grow there, near unto the
orifice of a Mine. When you see it do so, you must carry it round about the
place, to see that it turns in the string still to the place, on which side
soever you stand. The like Story to this I have seen in an unnamed Author, but
shall here omit it, because I know not of what credit he was.

2. The second I shall give you is, Theatr. Chym. Vol. 4. p. ^71.
from the Author of the Nova disquisitio de Helia artista; who affirms it of
his own knowledge thus, which I give you in English. Let a two-forked rod be
cut of one years growth, of Hasel or of Oak, whose Forks or two twigs must be
equal, and without fault. Some think it ought to be cut down before the Sun
rise, especially the Moon increasing, and that above all about the day of the
Annunciation of Mary. But we observed none of these. This being done, let the
two ends be taken into the opposite hands, the fingers compressed upwards
toward Heaven; to wit, that on both sides the ends of the twigs of the divided
branch, or fork, may hang forth out of the hands at both the thumbs pressed to
the hands. But the root of the forked branch must bend outwardly between the
two hands. Which if any having silver buttons fixed to his doublet, that cut end
of the root, although with all thine endeavor thou compress the rod in both
hands, will make a circle by moving by it self, and will turn it self inwardly
toward thy doublet, even to the buttons. But if, having no Metal at all about
thee, thou lay silver or gold upon the earth; then holding it fast, and being
unwilling, the cut part of the root will bend outwardly, until with a strong
motion it smite the Metal. That there are many exceptions may be made against
these two experiments, is plain; but I shall omit them, because those that are
curious may easily be satisfied with trials of this nature.

Last Will and Test. c. 23.
3. Basilius Valentinus has a large discourse about several kinds of rods, but
I confess to me so dark, that I dare not adventure to meddle with them, nor to
say that I understand any thing of them, only I shall give you these two
passages. First he says; Though the stirring of the rod is fallen into abuse
among many people; however it is a fundamental way to know, and to bring forth
the Metals, if duly and naturally used. Again, he says: Therefore if you take
such a rod, especially of a Hasel, or of a Kray Tree whose sap is full, and
bears a pleasant and sweet fruit; it draws the same downwards, that the rod
must sink and stick; it will suck out the juice when the rod stands right on
its passage, this holds from above unto this station, where the rod stands
still, that place they call the Ores station, standing as straight as a line. I
shall say nothing, but refer all to experiment; for some have believed too
much, and some too little.

CHAP. VII. Of those Minerals that are said to be of affinity to Metals, as
those they call Cachimiae, Marchasites, Pyritae, or Fire-stones.
WE shall speak something of these, because the difference, and diverse kinds of
them are little known or regarded by our common Miners, because they can make
no profit of them, nor other use, except as signs to discover where metalline
Ores are. And what is convenient to our purpose we shall give you, what we
account material forth of some choice Authors, and also what we have noted and
observed our selves.

1. And first of those they call Cachimiae or Kakimiea, for it is printed both
ways; but whether the word be Arabic (as most judge) I being not at all
skilled in that language, or of some other tongue, I cannot certainly
determine. For I find nothing either written by Toxites, Rulandus, or our
Countryman Johnson, but what they seem to have taken forth of Paracelsus, but
have either grossly mistaken, o^ wilfully perverted the sense of that learned
and experienced Author; for they make a Kachimia to be Immatura metalli minera,
Tox Onom. 2. p 447. Ru and. Lex. Alchym. p 270. Johnson Lex. Chym. p. 117.
vel semiperfectum metallum, and nondum a natura absolutum, quod adhuc in primo
suo ente, ut infans in utero suae matris delitescit. Ejusmodi Kachimiarum
species triginta reperiuntur hactenus cogni^ae. It is the immature Ore of a
Metal, or an half perfect Metal, and not yet completed of Nature; which as yet
lies hid in its first being, as an Infant in the womb of the mother. And that
there are thirty sorts of these Kachimies found that are known. This is indeed
the description of his primum ens of Metals, or of the volatile spirit of
Metals, whilst it lies hid in Kachimies, Marchasites, and the like, as a child
in the womb of the Mother, but not of a Kachimy, as we shall show hereafter.
And he does not say that there are thirty sorts of them, but that of
Marchasites and Kachimies there are about thirty sorts comprehended under those
two names, not under the one of them. But his description is thus, both of a
Marchasite and a Kachimie; for speaking of Marchasites, Lib de Elem. Aq. Tract.
3. de Miner. p. 280, 281.
he says; Nihil autem sunt aliud, quam superfluitas metallorum, hoc est
materia, in metallis abundans, quam metalla intra se far, ac continere, aut
in suam formam vertere nequeunt. But Marchasites are no other thing then the
superfluity of Metals; that is to say, a matter abounding in Metals, which the
Metals cannot bear, or contain within themselves, or change into their own
form. And that a Kachimy is of the same sort, to wit, bred of the superfluity
of the Metals, he thus declares: Sic ergo Marchasita nihil est aliud, quam
superfluitas abundans in prima materia metallorum in Ares, quae per Archaeum
separatur in Yliadum, unde postea Marchasitae, and Kachimiae generantur
triginta circiter generum and formarum, quae tamen omnia duobus istis nominibus
comprehenduntur. Quod vero illae multiplices sunt, nec unius formae, licet ab
una materia descendant, causa est haec, quia scilicet inaequaliter concurrit
trium primorum pondus, uno altero abundantius sese conferente. Vid. Schrod.
Pharm. l. 3. number. 5. p. 124.
Hinc formas enasci varias necesse est. So therefore a Marchasite is nothing
else, then the superfluity abounding in the first matter of Metals in the Ares,
which is separated by the Archaeus into the Yliad; from whence afterward
Marchasites and Cachimies are generated about thirty of diverse sorts and forms;
which notwithstanding are all comprehended under these two names. But, that
they are manifold, and not of one form, although they descend from one matter,
the cause is this, because the weight of the three first principles do meet
together unequally, one bestowing it self more abundantly then another. From
hence of necessity diverse forms do arise. From hence it is plain that Cachimies
and Marchasites are bred and generated of the same matter; to wit, the
superfluity of the Metals; and are both about thirty in number, of diverse forms
and colors. Ibid. p. 28^
And for the difference betwixt them he makes it this: Est autem Cachimia
fixior, and constantior Marcasita, propter sal fixum ex quo constat. But a
Cachimy is more fixed and constant then a Marchasite, because of the fixed
salt, of which it consists.

Again, he enumerateth eight sorts of Cachimies that were known unto him; to
wit, Marchasitae Merchasites, Pyrites Fire-stones, Antimonia Antimony, Cobalta
Cobalts, Talka Talks, Auripigmenta Auripigments, Sulphura Sulphurs, Arsenicalia
Arsnicks. Now it seems he makes both Cachimies and Marchasites to be the
superfluity of Metals, only that a Cachimy is more fixed then a Marchasite;
and so seems to make Cachimia the Genus to the other eight, and then every
Marchasite is a Cachimy, but not on the contrary; but how this should stand
with the rules of Logic, I understand not; nor that Antimony is a Cachimie,
being in some respects a Metal, or at the least a semi-metal. But it was usual
with this Author not only to neglect, but to despise the Art of Logic; and if
he did but certainly know the several sorts of Minerals, and their nature and
properties, he little regarded the ordering of them according to those strict
rules. Therefore I should commend this particular to be seriously considered
of, and due observation to be made thereof, that what is defective may be
supplied, and what is amiss may be rectified.

Mus. Worm. l. 1. Sect. 2. c. 3. p. 39.

De not. Fosse. l. 10. p. 658. De metal. l. 2. c. 54. p. 148. De re metal. l. 1.
c. 14. p. 25.


2. As for Marchasites and Pyritae Fire-stones, Paracelsus makes them to differ;
and so Wormius seems to do, showing that some of them may better be referred to
the sorts of Metallic bodies, then merely to the kinds of stones. But others
make them both one, as Agricola, Caesalpinus, Eucelius, and most of the rest.
And some think them called so, by reason of yielding forth sparks of fire; and
some because of their shining and fiery color. We may take them under these
considerations. 1. Those that have the splendor and color of Metal, and also
contain some Metals in them. 2. Those that have the splendor and color of
Metals, and contain no Metal in them. 3. Those that yield fire by striking, and
those that yield none.

1. Those Marchasites or Fire-stones that contain Metal in them, are in general
of diverse sorts, and colors. Agricola reckons these, Agric. de nature. Fossil.
l. 10. p. 658.
that at Reithestein in Lygiis (that is within Germany) there were found those
that yielded silver and gold; and at Cotteberg in Bohemia those that yielded
copper and silver, and those that yielded lead and tin, copper and silver at
Goselac in Saxony; only copper in those that are found at Cuperberg in
Bohemia, and in many other places: But that of Breitebren in Misnia, none at
all; which is also confirmed by Wormius. Mus Worm. l. 1. Sect. 2. c. 3. p. 134.
Lex Alchym. p. 394, 395, 396, etc.
Rulandus does number six sorts that yield Metal of one sort or another, that
are very ponderous and yield sparks of fire. 1. One of a silver color, that
yields silver. 2. One other of almost a golden color, forth of which copper is
melted. 3. One of a full golden color. 4. One like the Ore of silver or
Galena, that like the former, holds silver, and some gold. 5. One of an
ash color that holds gold and silver. 6. One of of an Iron-like color, but
what it holds he tells not.

2. He reckons four of a silver color, that hold no metal, nor yield any fire:
and six others of a golden color, that have no Metal in them: And other five
of a golden color, that hold no metal, nor yield fire: And ten more of an
ash color, that hold no metal in them, nor yield fire.

3. He names four of other colors, forth of which fire is smitten; and so of
diverse others that do yield fire, and those that do not yield fire: and
numbreth ten several sorts that are fertile of Metal; to which I do refer the
Reader.

They also seem to attribute to every one of the six Metals its proper
Marchasite, but have not been so free to tell us which were they, nor what they
in this sense meant by a Marchasite. Last Will and Test. c. 24. p 49.
For Basilius says; For what is the Marchasite of Iron? Is it not the Magnet?
what is it of gold? is it not Lazul? and so forth of the rest. And Antimony
that they call the Marchasite of Lead, but for the other three, we are at a
loss, except we can make it forth from some passages in Paracelsus, Rer. not.
l. 8. p. 104.
where he seems to grant thus much, that the primum ens, or spirit of silver
is in a white Marchasite, white Talk, etc. In Zink and Cobalt the spirit of
Iron, of Copper in Zink, Vitriol, etc. In Zink or Bismuth, etc. the spirit of
Tin, and in Cinnabar the first ens of Quicksilver. But this makes but a
slender conjecture; for if every matter, as Stones, Clays, Earths, Juices,
Cauk, Sparr, Marble, Plaster Ore, or Quarry, in which the Metals are commonly
contained and mingled, be Marchasites, then the Ore of every Metal is its
proper Marchasite. But we may as roundly say, that the Lapis Lazuli is the
Marchasite of Gold; of Silver, Talk or Galena; of Lead, Antimony; of Tin,
Bismuth; of Copper, Zink; of Iron, the Lodestone; of Quicksilver, Cinnabar.
But of this enough.

Now I shall say something of Marchasites or Pyritae, of mine own experience.
We have in our Coal-pits in these Northern parts great store of the said
Marchasites, some of which are of a very bright shining golden color, and some
of them of a pure bright silver splendour, and some of them so curiously
intermixed with diversity of colors, that are very delightful to the Eyes;
these are something soft and will not strike fire, but being laid in a cold and
moist place, will dissolve; and then any one may perceive that they hold store
of Vitriol; but being fired in a melting pot, do yield store of fumes that
smell strongly of Sulphur, by which we may be assured that they contain both
Brimstone and Copperas. There are also other sorts found, that are some of them
bright, and of a metalline color, and far more hard then the former, which by
striking will yield sparks of fire.

Also I have diverse sorts of them that are very smooth and shining, as bright
as Flanders metal, Orichalcum or Brass, which is found in the Quarries of
Stone, Slate-pits, or where they get flooring-stones for paving of houses, in
the clifts betwixt the Stones, but contain no Metal in them, but being fired do
smell strongly of Brimstone. Some few I have had that held some little Copper
in them, of an hard substance, and not very bright but ponderous; but I have
found none that held any Silver, Gold, or any other Metal in them. Many other
sorts I have of diverse and sundry colors, some of a golden, some of a
silver-like, and some of a copper-like, or brass-like color; some of them
found near the Lead Ore, and some of them in their proper Mines, some of them
in confused lumps, or interspersed in Stones, Cauk, or Sparr; some triangular,
some of them quadrangular, like to the Ludus of Paracelsus or Helmont; some
sexangular, and some of them of other figures; but all of them sulphurous, and
to be fired away to nothing, but an unprofitable black Earth. One sort there is
found in some of our Lead Mines near the Ore, that is ponderous, black, and
glissening; but by several trials I could find no Metal in it, neither any
great store of sulphurous fumes; and it is not that which the Germans call
Blend, and our Miners blue Blind ache; because that is brighter, more shining,
and liker a metallic body. I therefore entreat all Miners to inquire of these
particulars.

1. What sorts of Fire stones or Marchasites they find, and near what sorts of
Metals. 2. Of what colors, forms, and figures, that they may get them tried,
to see what sort of Metals they contain; or if they hold Vitriol, Sulphur,
Alom, Salt, or any other sort of Mineral. 3. To make exact observation what
difference there is to be found amongst them, either as to color, shape,
taste, smell, or any other qualities that appear in them, and if possibly their
number.
CHAP. VIII. Of the several sorts of Gold according to the mystical Authors;
also of the primum ens of Gold, and of some other things of the like nature.
NOw we shall come to the Metals themselves, and first of those that have been
commonly and anciently accounted so; to wit, the known seven, and afterward to
those that some esteem as Metals, that have been more lately discovered, or at
least by others are acknowledged to be semi-metals. And first of that most
noble metal of all others, Gold; of which Paracelsus makes three sorts: Lib.
Vexa^. Canon. 7. p. 123.
saying, Aurum est in essentia triplex, Gold in essence is threefold, 1.
Coeleste, and est solutum, celestial and loosed. 2. Elementare, and that is
fluid. 3. Metallicum, and that is corporeal. I confess the place is very dark,
and hard to understand; but I thought good to commend it to the curious
searcher of Natures secrets; for there is more of truth in it, then at the
first sight any one would imagine; and that which follows will make it more
plain.

Comp Herm. c. 18. p. 54.
Rhumelius a German Author of good account and experience, whose Works are not
translated that ever I could hear of, says thus:

There is no greater strife amongst the Physicians, then about the subject out
of which the matter of the Elixir vitae is to be taken and prepared. And it is
found in the final conclusion, that in Gold alone the medicament is to be
sought and found, because that Nature alone does consist in the spirit of Gold,
that drives away all diseases, and brings in health; and this all Philosophers
with one voice confess. It is found also in Philosophia adepta, and naturae
thesauro, that in rerum natura there are four sorts of Gold. 1. Astralish. 2.
Mineralish. 3. Metallish, 4. Elementallish.

1. Astralish is, and is called that very thing which as yet lies in primo
ente, and therein is as yet imperfect. Frater Basilius calls it, the Star of
the Sun, because the stars as yet have their influence and first operations
therein. And from this spiritual-like matter (says he) from whence the
beginnings of Gold does grow, may be made Aurum potabile, more perfect and
better, then from the perfect common gold it self; which first must be opened,
and made spiritual, ere forth of it drinkable gold can be prepared.
Theophrastus calls it, Electrum immaturum, and primam compositionem solis,
because therein Nature does yet work her first composition; and it is there
likewise called aurum immaturum, unripe or immature gold. Aureum Vellus calls
it, primum ens solis, and Rosarius, gold and silver in posse. Turba
Philosophorum calls it leonem viridem, the green Lion, while it is yet green,
crude, immature, and imperfect. Moreover, this matter is entitled by the
Mine-workers, and named with its proper Teutonick or German name; which in this
place cannot be remembered without prejudice.

2. Aurum minerale, or Mineralish gold, is that very thing, which as yet do^
stick in its Earth-ore, or Berg-stuff, until it be melted from thence, and
brought into a pure and clear Metal.

3. Aurum metallicum, or Metallish gold, is that which being freed from its
Schleck and raw mineralish Ore-stuff, and with great force of fire is driven
forth of it, and then may be called a pure and clear Metal. 4 Aurum Elementale,
or Elementalish gold, is any Earth, Mineral, Stone, or the like, wherein the
spirit of gold does lie hid, and may be drawn forth by the Spagyrick Art. And
he from hence concludes that the Astralish gold, according to the experience
and the testimony of all Philosophers, is the best and most profitable of all
these four.

From whence we may note, 1. That Mineralish gold, as it lies undrawn from its
Ore, Marble, Earth, Sparr, Stone, or the like; is commonly known, and easily to
be had, there being diverse sorts of gold Ore, of sundry sorts to be gotten from
many places.

2. That Metalish gold is that which is purified and refined, and is commonly
known, and to be had.

3. That Elementalish gold, being that which lies hid in many Earths, and
Minerals, may by a laborious and skillful Chemist be had and obtained. As
Wormius relates of the Terra sigillata Silesiaca, Mus. Worm. l. 1. c. 4. p. 13.
or Strigonensis, which is found in the gold Mines near Strigonium, amongst the
hard Rocks. And was first invented by Johannes Montanus, a most famous
Physician, who published a Book of the same. Wherein he sets down that it is
gold by the provident ordination of God and Nature transmuted into a most
excellent prepared medicament, profitable against poison, no less then the
medicaments prepared with great charges forth of Hungarian Gold; and (says)
that the Chemists call it Axungia Solis. Pharm l. 3. c. 2. number. 3. p. ^.
Of this also Schroderus tells us, that that which was gotten and prepared at
Striga, a Town of Silesia, was called Medulla vel axungia Solis, because it was
believed to be impregnated with the sulphur of gold. And that Earth called
Lignicensis, was termed Axungia Lunae, because it was mixed with the sulphur of
Silver. And this, or such like, it is probable that was which Paracelsus
calls Axungia Solis, Chir. mag. c. 3. p. 33.
which he prescribes against the poisonous bite of a Salamander, used both
inwardly and outwardly.

4. But the Astralish gold is the great secret, and therefore may be questioned
whether it may be found in a liquid and soft form, or hard, or both; and of the
former we shall say thus much.

1. We shall give the testimony of Paracelsus, and leave it to censure; who
says thus: The first ens is an imperfect compound, predestined unto some
certain end, and corporeal matter. And because it is not perfect, therefore it
can alter any body with which it is incorporated, as Mercury, which is like
this imperfect ens, according to its imperfection. But we speak of the first
ens, which is perfect to renew and restore the whole body, as is the first
being or ens of Gold; and that for this cause, by reason it altogether
possesses the spirit of gold, and is most subtle, and far more subtle then
the true body of Gold it self. Also from hence it comes to pass that the first
ens of Sol or Gold, is penetrable, even as Mercury in Metals; and does not
contain in it self the spirit of Salt, by which it may be coagulated. For the
spirit of Salt the first coagulating ens, receives so great forces, that Gold
for the hundred part, is not so potent in its virtues, as the primum ens of it
is. Further, it is to be known that the first ens, that is to say, the first
composition of Gold, which as yet remains a liquor not coagulated, does renew
and restore whatsoever it takes; not only men, but also all Peasts, Fruits,
Herbs, and Trees. From hence we may note these things.

1. That if this Author be to be credited, then in rerum natura there is such a
thing as the primum ens of Gold, and this as a liquor not coagulated. To the
search and enquiry of which, I humbly and heartily entreat all ingenious
persons, and Sons of Art, to use their industry, and ultimate endeavor, and
not to think it a Chemical Chimaera. Scept. Chym. p. 360.
For if the quotation of that honorable person Mr. Boil (who uses not to
cite Authors of small credit or veracity) may be trusted, from Gerardus the
Physic Professor (a man of great learning and Chemical experience, and whose
fidelity is not questioned by any) that at Anneberg a blue water was found,
where silver was yet in primo ente, which coagulated, was reduced into the calx
of fixed and good silver. Then it may be as possible and probable, that the
liquor of Gold may likewise be found uncoagulated, especially if we consider
that all the Adeptists do seem to acknowledge a twofold way of the generation
of Gold; one when the mercurial and sulphurous steams (of which Metals are
bred) being pure before and at their conjunction, do meet with a pure matrix,
that has nothing of impure sulphurous faeculency, nor other earthly or
waterish uncleanness to mix with them, and to pollute them, then pure Gold, and
no other imperfect metal is generated: and in this way only I conceive, that
the pure primum ens auri, is to be had liquid, and not otherwise. Another way
there seems to be of the generation of Gold, and that is when the mercurial and
sulphurous steams, either before, or at their conjunction, are commixt with
some impurities, or meet with an impure matrix, or both; then this liquor being
the first ens of Gold, cannot be had; but yet that impure substance containing
in it the true seeds and principles of Gold, will in time work it self through
the degrees of the imperfect metals into Gold, as Nature's ultimate and finite
end; and therefore in some respects (though perhaps not to be found liquid)
contains in it the primum ens auri, which I wish may be noted.

For it is the unanimous consent of all the Adeptists (as we have sufficiently
proved before, where we showed the vegetability of Metals) that Natures intent
was to bring all metals to the perfection of Gold, if she had not been hindered
by the adventition and mixture of extraneous matter; and so that metals do not
specifically differ one from another (as Erastus and many other Authors,
ignorant of, and unexperienced in the true manner and order of Natures way of
producing of Metals) but only gradually, some of them standing in an
intermediate way, and wanting the due height of concoction and maturation. For
as Petrus Bonus Ferrariensis says, Ad aurum reliqua metallae ordinantur
tanquam ad finem: For the seed of all Metals are but specifically of one
nature: for as Trev^san says, Nature has nothing in the bowels of the Earth,
whereof it may generate Metals, but only a mercurial substance, in which is
included its quickening sulphur, as its agent. And there is Sulphur and Mercury,
equally perfect in the rest of the Metals, as well as in Gold; only it is in
the imperfect Metals infected, or contaminated with terrestrial faeculency, or
combustible Sulphur, which are extraneous and adventitious unto it, and not of
its homogeneous and constitutive principles. For the Metals become more pure,
or impure according to the wombs where they are produced; a pure matrix yields
a pure metal; and so on the contrary, for Nature always aims at the most
perfect work, though sometimes by accident she may be hindered; and perfection
in the inferior Metals is attained, when either by Nature or Art, they are
brought into Gold; the one of which all experienced Miners know, the
demonstration of the other remains with the Adeptists. And to this purpose we
may take serious notice of another passage in Paracelsus, Rer. nature. l. 9. p.
113.
who says; Primo sciendum est, metallum quodvis, etc. First we are to know
that every Metal, as long as yet it lies hid in its first being, or ens, has
its peculiar stars. So Gold has the star of the Sun, Silver has the star of
the Moon, etc. But so soon as they are come unto their perfection, and are
coagulated into a fixed metallic body, their stars do recede from every one of
them, and leaves its body dead. From whence it follows, that all their bodies
are from thenceforth dead, and inefficacious; and the invincible star of the
Metals does overcome them all, and convert them into its nature, and make them
all so to be Astral. Whereby we may perceive that when the Ore of Lead is from
its liquid and soft substance, coagulated into an hard metallic body, then the
star of Saturn does leave it, and so of the rest; but it must be understood,
that when the star of an imperfect Metal has left it hardened, that yet the
star of or may operate in it to a greater perfection.

I may add to this purpose what Trevisan says, De Alchym. Thea. r. Chym. Vol.
1. p. 754.
That vulgar bodies, to wit, Metals perfected by Nature alone in the Mines, are
dead, that they cannot bring imperfect bodies to perfection. So that thereby it
is granted, that before they were perfected in the Mines, they had life and
vegetability. And Basilius says, that therefore all things are found more
perfectly in the star of the Sun, then in the rest of the Metals, if it be
brought to its maturity by the benefit of the fire.

2. We may note, D^ Renovat. and Restaur. l. p. 45.
whether this primum ens auri, in its liquid form, be to be had or not: and
that this Author does affirm, saying; And although we cannot so well take these
prima entia, as we have written; or have them in the same essence, as we have
demonstrated before; nevertheless that thing is notwithstanding possible unto
us: for if we know where a Mine of Gold lies hid, we shall also find its primum
ens there, if we shall come before its perfection. And to make the thing more
feasible, he adds the signs how we may know when it is in primo ente, saying:
So verily while it is yet in its first being, it makes the Trees fruitful, and
the Earth fertile, it renovateth old Trees that of twenty years have brought
forth no fruit. For when the first being of Gold has taken hold upon them, or
their roots, they begin again to live and flourish as before. And a little
after he says; But where flames, or scintillations have been seen; it is to be
judged, and noted, that a Metal is then made ex primo ente.And to confirm this
in another place, speaking of coruscations, or scintillations seen in the
night; which he says are certain signs of a latent Metal, Rer. not. l. 9. p.
112.
that is not yet come to perfect maturity; but as yet in its first being. And
that further it is to be known, that as long as those effulgescences or
glimmerings appear, whether great or little, whether of this or that color;
that then that Metal is not yet perfect and ripe in its Mine, but as yet is in
its first being, no otherwise then the sperm of a man in the matrix of a woman.
Also he concludes that Gold does grow ex primo ente auri, De Renovar. p. 45.
from the first being of Gold, to such a form from its beginning of Gold, that
in touch it is like to red Water, and is moved and exalted like Gold.

3. And the more to illustrate this, we may call to mind what we have in this
Chapter spoken of Elementalish Gold, Rer. not. l. 8. p. 104.
that the steams of Gold may be had in diverse Earths and Minerals; as Paracelsus
confesses, it may be drawn forth of Marchasites, Granates, Cachimies, red
Talk, Lazure, and the like, by the degree of sublimation. And further says:
But it is to be noted of this primum ens, that it is a fugacious spirit, as yet
consisting in volatility, as an Infant lies hid in the womb of the woman; and
is sometimes likened to liquor, sometimes to Alcool, or Atoms.

Ut supr. l. Rer. not. p. 104.
And for the obtaining of this volatile spirit, he gives this caution.
Whosoever therefore goes about to get and separate the primum ens of every
such like body, does stand in need of much experience, and knowledge in the
Spagyrick Science.

2. We may now consider whether this primum ens auri may be had in an hard and
coagulated form or not. And it appears plainly that it may; for the
Philosophers that sought after that great secret of Nature and Art, the
Physical Tincture, or Grand Elixir, do certainly affirm it. And they, though
they writ darkly, yet it was truly that there is such a metallic subject that
has in it the seminal principles of Gold and Silver, in vegetability, which
was the only true substance forth of which they accomplished their great work,
both as to transmutation, and the universal medicine. And to prove this, we
shall quote some few pertinent particulars from unquestionable Authors. And
first that learned Author of the Rosary of Philosophers, Art. Aurise^. p. 195.
says thus, Tale sulphur non reperitur supra terram, nisi in quantum existit
in is it is corporibus, sole and luna, and in alio quidem est illud, quod nulii
dicitur, nisi ex part Dei sibi reveletur. Such a Sulphur is not found above
the earth, but in as much as it exists in those two bodies of Gold and Silver;
and truly it is in another body, which is declared to no man, except God upon
his part may reveal it unto him. From whence we may note, that this Sulphur
they speak of, is not a combustible Sulphur; for their maxim is, that no
combustible matter enters their work, but that vivifying and incombustible
sulphur that is. Natures true fire and agent, which is hid in the metallic
Mercury, and is to be found most perfect in Gold and Silver. Theatr. Chym^,
Vol. 2. p. 132.
And that it is also found in another subject, which none will openly declare;
and this is it that is so carefully to be sought after. Agreeable to this is
that saying: Datur in rerum natura corpus metallicum quoddam, facilis
solutionis, facilisque putrefactionis; si ejus praeparationem nosti, felix
medicus eris, totis conatibus, in eo votum tuum dirige. There is a certain
metallic body in the Nature of things, that is of an easy solution and
putrefaction; if thou know the preparation of it, thou art an happy
Physician, direct thy desire with thy whole endeavors in this thing. Elucidar.
12. Keys, p. 118, 119.
Basilius says, having spoken of common Gold, Those that dive deeper in this
Art, will meet in the same place with a more easy and better known matter,
which almost was named and set down, of an effectual quality. And after he
says, In this known and despicable matter and mineral substance, is found a
Sulphur and Tincture more effectual, and more worthy then the best Gold can
afford which is fluid and open, and its mercurial spirit also; and its mystical
salt is free, and open, whose virtues may with less pains in a visible manner
be drawn from it. This is a very remarkable passage, and worthy to be seriously
weighed and considered of.

Art. Aurifer. p. 112.
I shall only add another Testimony, which is this; Materia nostra non est
mercurius quilibet, sed ille circa quem natura suas primas operationes incepit,
and eas primas operationes determinavit ad naturam metallicam, sed imperfecte
r^m illam reliquit. Non est res plane perfecta, nec penitus imperfecta. Sed
ipsa est res media inter corpora perfecta, and imperfecta. Our matter is not
any sort of Mercury, but that about which Nature has begun her first
operations, and has determinated those first operations unto a metallic
nature, but has left the same thing imperfectly. ^t is a thing not plainly
perfect, nor altogether imperfect: But it is a middle thing, betwixt bodies
that are perfect and imperfect.

To these we shall add what Rhumelius says, Antidot. Chym. 261.
where he speaks of the virtues of his Medicine, which he calls, Aurum
Vitae. The matter forth of which it is prepared, is a pure shining Mineral;
which in its first coagulation is found red, and was to be had in the Gold-mine
hills of Hungaria and Siebenburg, and in the terra rubea, the terra Adamita,
and the red Lion, the Electrum immaturum, the primum Ens Solis, the Axungia
Solis, or the goldish Saturn of the Philosophers.

Further he says, I prepare mine aurum potabile two manner of ways; the one
forth of perfect Gold, that is to say, common and perfect fine Gold: the other
ex auro imperfecto, Ibid. p. 248.
vel e radice solis, vel primo ente solis, and are both potable; and therefore
may not unfitly be called Aurum potabile. My Tincture (he says) of Sol, is an
extraction as well forth of a Rubie-coloured, red, through-shining, or
transparent, golden Ore; as also from several other sorts of Metals and
Minerals, wherein the Sulphur and Tincture of Sol (as Frater Basilius
remembereth) even as well as in Gold, does stay and inhere.

Lastly, He says it is found by true experience, and the sentence of all
Philosophers, that the true aurum potabile of the Philosophers, Ibid. p. 239,
245.
is impossible to be had forth of perfect Gold: because the Astra do forsake
Gold, when it is perfect and coagulated into an hard body, which they do not,
while they lie in primo ente. Therefore that aurum potabile that is had ex
primo ente, is far more perfect, more excellent, and more operative, then that
which is made forth of the Metal it self.

I may perhaps be condemned, and derided for quoting those Authors, and urging
this point so far, especially with those that judge every thing a Chimaera that
they themselves know, or understand not. But let such know, that I only write
to the ingenious and inquisitive persons, that pursue this Mineral knowledge;
and for the censure of the rest, I neither care for, nor regard.

And all that I would from hence mind the diligent searchers of Mines and
Minerals of, is carefully to inquire and search for what sort of Minerals may
be found, that are either red, or transparent, or both; besides the Ore of
Sulphur (that some Authors say is red) and of Argent vive, that all knowing
Miners understand to be of that color; and Quercitan mentions some Cinnabar
that is found red and transparent; for doubtless besides these, there are
others that are red, and some transparent; which is the chief matter I would
have inquired after.

CHAP. IX. Of the sorts of common Gold, as they are produced by Nature, and in
what manner they are severally found.
THere are two sorts of Gold produced by Nature. 1. That which is called Native
Gold, that is statim suum, pure, and unmixt with any heterogeneous matter,
which the Germans call Gedygen Goldt. 2. That which is decocted, or melted with
the ^orce of fire forth of several matters wherein it lies, which is commonly
called refined or purified Gold.

That Gold that is Native, and found pure, unmixed, or that needs no refining;
is found, according to Eucelius and Rulandus, De re Metal. c. 4 p. 14. Lex
Chym. Geogr. de auro.
four ways: and that the Spaniards call Palacas. 1. In Rivers, as in Tagus,
Albis, and Sala, which they call Wash-Gold. And Munster says, That there is
much more pure Gold found, then mixed with Earth or Stones, as these Rivers
witness, Ganges in India, Pactolus in Lydia, Hebrus in Thrace, Tagus in Spain,
Padus in Italy, Albis and Rhenus in Germany. S^rab. Geogr. l. 3. p. 137, 138.
And Strabo tells us, That Gold is not only dug forth of the Pits, or
Mines, but also the Rivers and Torrents do afford a Golden sand; and that by
digging of Pits, diverse other Artifices, and washing the sand, they get much
Gold; and that more did get Gold this way then by Mining. And that amongst the
sparks or crumbs of Gold, there are sometimes found clods, or masses of Gold of
the weight of half a pound, that need little purifying, which they call Palas,
quae sunt massulae auri. 2. Native and pure Gold is found in the Mountains of
Arabia. 3. In Mines, or Pits, partly alone, partly its little sparks do as it
were cleave to a certain white kind of stone, which in the German Tongue is
called Quartz; of which there was store at Cottenheyden. 4. In the heads of
fishes, which we call Florellas, which some do account to be the Burn, or
Beck-Trout. Of th^se we shall speak in order more at large, from some approved
Authors.

1. And first of that which is native and pure, Apyron, not having tried the
fire; of which the Honorable person Mr. Boil gives us this account. Scept.
Chym. p. 372.
But that is nothing to what our Acosta subjoyns, which is indeed very
memorable; namely, that of the morsels of native and pure Gold, which we lately
heard him mentioning, he had now and then seen some that weighed many pounds.
To which I shall add, that I my self have seen a lump of Ore not long since
dug up, in whose stony part there grew, almost like Trees, diverse parcels
though not of Gold, yet of (what perhaps Mineralists will more wonder at)
another Metal which seemed to be very pure, or unmixt with any heterogeneous
substances, and were some of them as big as my finger, Histor, na^. and mor of
the Indies, c. 4. p. 212.213.
if not bigger. But let us hear Acosta himself, who says. They draw Gold in
those parts, after three sorts; or at least I have seen all three used: For
either they find Gold in grains, in powder, or in stones. They do call Gold in
grains, small morsels of Gold, which they find whole, without mixture of any
other Metal, which has no need of melting or refining in the fire; and they
call them Pippins, for that commonly they are like to Pippins, or seeds of
Melons, or Pumpions: and that whereof Job speaks, Job 18.
leve illius aurum, though sometimes there be greater, and such as I have seen
weighed many pounds. It is the excellency of this Metal alone (as Pliny
affirms) to be found thus pure and perfect. Plin. l. 3. c. 5.
To this purpose I my self have seen some grain or sand-gold, that a Gentleman
sent forth of Guinea, some twenty years ago, to his Sister for a token, that
was pure native Gold, and had not felt the force of fire; many of the grains as
big as the ordinary pippin of an Apple, and some smaller; and one morsel half
as long as my little finger, and as thick.

Peter Martyr, a person neither suspected to be guilty of ignorance nor
falsity, in naming some Rivers in the Indies says: Decad. 1* l. 2. p. 16.
In the sands of all these Rivers is found great plenty of Gold, which the
Inhabitants of the same Island which were with us, gathered in this manner:
making holes in the sand with their hands, a cubit deep; and taking up sand
with their left hands from the bottom of the same, they picked out grains of
Gold with their right hands, without any more Art or cunning; and so delivered
it to our men, who affirm that many of them thus gathered, were as big as Tares
or Vetches. And I my self saw a mass of rude Gold (that is to say, such as was
never molten) like unto such stones as are found in the bottom of Rivers,
weighing nine ounces, which Hoieda himself found. Decad. 1. l. 3. p. 19*
And further he says, The Admiral declared, that if they would bring Gold,
they should have whatsoever they would ask. Forthwith turning their backs, and
running to the Shore of the next River, they returned in short time, bringing
with them their hands full of Gold. Amongst all other there came an old man,
bringing with him two Peble stones of Gold, weighing an ounce, desiring to have
a Bell for the same. And a little after he says, Beside this old man, there
came also diverse other, bringing with them Peble-stones of Gold, weighing ten
or twelve drachms, and feared not to confess, that in the place where they
gathered that Gold, there were found sometimes stones of Gold, as big as the
head of a child. Decad. 1, l. 4. p. 26.
He further says, There was a certain King, which gave them a mass of rude
Gold as big as a man's fist, weighing twenty ounces. This Gold was not found in
the bank of this River, but in an heap of dry Earth, like unto the stone
called Tophus, which is soon resolved into sand. This mass of Gold I my self
saw in Castile, etc. Again, he says of another place: As the Miners dug the
superficial, Decad. 1. l. 4. p. 29.
or uppermost part of the Earth of the Mines, during for the space fo six
miles; and in diverse places sifted the same on the dry Land, they found such
plenty of Gold, that every hired Labourer could easily find every day the
weight of three drachms.

We shall add but one instance more from this Author, which though it may seem
incredible, yet we shall leave the censure to others. These regions (he says,
Decad. 1. l. 10. p. 56.
meaning Hispaniola) are very large; in the which, in many places, here and
there are found sometimes, even in the upper crust of the Earth; and sometimes
among the stones, certain round pieces or plates of Gold, sometimes of small
quantity, and in some places of great weight: Insomuch that there has been
found round pieces of three hundred pound weight, and one of three thousand
three hundred and ten pound weight, which was sent whole to the King, in that
Ship in the which the Governor Boadilla was coming home into Spain; which Ship
was cast away. Of the West Indies, p. 190.
And this Gonzales Ferdinandus Oviedus seems to confirm, saying thus:
Sometimes there are found grains of Gold, of great quantity, and great weight
above the Earth, and sometimes under. And the greatest of all other that was
found to this day in the Island, was that which was lost in the Sea, about the
Island Beata, which weighed three thousand two hundred Castellanes of Gold.

2. For pure native Gold being found in Arabia, I find nothing asserted of the
places, or manner how it is found, and therefore shall pass on to the next.

3. Besides this pure native Gold found in Rivers, Sands, or Earths, there is
sometimes some found pure dug forth of the Mines, that needs little or no
force of fire, or refining; and sometimes it lies interspersed in the clefts of
the stones, like thin plates, or spangles, or like threads or hairs, or the
small and tender sprigs of Plants and Herbs, which are usually called
metallorum efflorescentiae, the flowers of Metals; but most commonly mixed with
Earth, Stones, Marchasites, or other Minerals and Metals; of which we shall
speak promiscuously, as they occur to our memory, without regard of any strict
order.

Rulandus reckons these in general: Alchym. Lex^ p. 91.


1. Out of a Fire-stone of an ash color, and forth of Galena, or Silver Ore.

2. Out of a purple-coloured Earth so tempered with the vapor and steam of the
Earth, that it is very fruitful of Gold; (...)pr. p. 246.
from which in the Furnace Gold is drawn in many places.

3. Out of ^ Chrysocolla, natural Borax or green Earth; and this he says is
dug up in Hungary, Burgundy, and at Goldtberg in Silesia, from whence Gold
is drawn.

4. Out of the Caeruleum or Lazure, in which sometimes Gold is contained.

More particularly he tells us: 1. That Gold is found in the Carpathian
Mountain, quod statime est suum, pure and perfect.

2. Pure Gold dug up in the same Mountain in Iron-stone.

3. In the same Mountain in a white hard flint.

4. In the same Mountain out of the stone called Lapis Armenius.

5. That it is found mixed with other Ores, as of Copper, Silver, and the like.

But now we shall give more full testimonies of these sorts.

Scept. Chym. p. 371, 372.
1. Mr. Boil relates these two Observations. The first thus. I remember (he
says) that a very skillful and credible person affirmed to me, that being in
the Hungarian Mines, he had the good fortune to see a Mineral that was there
dug up; wherein pieces of Gold of the length, and also almost of the bigness
of a humane finger, grew in the Ore, as if they had been parts and branches of
Trees. Secondly, He says, And I have my self seen a lump of a whitish Mineral
that was brought as a rarity to a great, and knowing Prince; wherein there grew
here and there in the stone, which looked like a kind of a Sparr, diverse little
lumps of fine Gold (for such I was assured that trial had manifested it to be)
some of them seeming to be about the bigness of Pease.

2. Besides what we have before proved concerning the vegetability of Metals in
general, this from so honorable, and experienced a man as Mr. Boil does
confirm it very much, nay even to the growth and increase of Gold: to which
therefore we shall add more testimonies. And I my self have likewise seen and
handled a piece of whitish Metal sent to a great person, (of which I yet retain
a small piece) which being fluxed, was most pure Gold. The Coat in which it was
contained, was like white Marble, or our white Plaster Ore, or Stone; and the
Metal grew in it like a thin crisped Plate, or like many threads joined close
together; and some of it like two twisted threads one with another, and might
have with a little crushing of the stone, been separated from it.

And further to prove this germination and sprouting of Metals like Vegetables,
Ut supr. p. 94.
even of Gold. Rulandus tells us, That in the exterior Pannonia thin leaves,
and sparks of most pure Gold were found in a white and hard stone. And
Athanasius Kircherus gives us the like answer to this very question; from those
Mine-masters, to whom he had sent, from Schemnitz, to his second Query
concerning the efflorescence of Metals, Mund. subter. l. 10. Sect. 3* p. 183.
he has this answer. 'That sometimes in the Mines do occur Crystals wrapped
about with most tender silver threads like hairs, and the rest like. The former
years there was found a pure grain of silver in lapide fatuo, in a fool-stone
(in the German Tongue Taubenstein) in a certain white matter like Chalk, which
is called lapidea medulla, stonemarrow, as though it had been there laid up on
purpose, and weighed two pounds. Again to the same question from Herrengrundt
in Hungaria, from John Schapelman^ he receives this answer. There are sometimes
found in this Mine, the flowring that are Cupreous, of pure Copper, even as
flowers and herbs grow above the Earth. U supr. p 185, 186, 187, 188, 189.
Thirdly, to this question he has this answer from George Schuiz: That in the
Silver Mines there are often found silver flowerings, where the bright Silver
thrusts forth it self in form of a thread, or hair, out of the Metallic stones.
And that there are found shavings ( ramenta) of pure silver, the thickness of a
finger, though black, and as it were of a leaden color, etc. Lastly, Memorable
is that passage from Father Andrew Schaffer, in these words. I send here a
Mineral altogether precious, seeing any thing like, more rare is not to be
found. Where you may see pure Silver flowring into its threads; that which
shines yellow, is most pure gold; that which is blackish, is silver mixed with
gold.

Genesis Dier. l. 4. ^ 9. p. 198.
These are memorable proofs of the Vegetability of Metals, and may make us give
the more credit to the Story of Alexander ab Alexandro, that in Germany there
were Vines that brought forth little branches, and whitish leaves, of pure
Gold, which was given to Kings and great Captains, together with the sprig or
branch of the Vine, with a chinked bark.

Mind. S^bter. U^supr. p. 188.
3. We shall now show some other substances wherein Gold is found, and by the
force of fire drawn forth, and separated from them. Kircher tells us, that in
the Hungarian Mines, there was an Ore found that contained Copper, Silver, and
Gold: as also a silver Marchasite, which had mixed with it gold. Also shining
Lead Ore, or Plumbago, which contained Gold and silver; that likewise there was
a Mine of Antimony that held in it some Gold. Mus. Worm. l. 1. Sect* 3. c. 2.
p. 114.
The learned Wormius tells us, that 1644. the noble John Sigfridus being
general Overseer of Metallic matters, found a Mine of Gold, the Ore being
black and like Talk, shining with frequent grains; which when he had tried, an
hundred weight of the Ore yielded thirty eight marks of pure Gold. That a mass
of another Vein 1646. did, being purified, yield six drachms of pure Gold,
contained in one pound. This Ore shined with lesser grains then the former, and
more tending to redness. Likewise that there were other Ores brought from the
same place, that were like Talk, and pregnant with frequent granates, which
many thought, did abound with Gold, etc. And although before I had omitted it,
Biblioth. l. 2. c. 12. p. 65.
I shall here insert what Diodorus Siculus delivers of the Arabian gold; who
says, There is Gold dug up in Arabia, which is not melted with the fire, as
is accustomed amongst others. But as soon as ever it is dug up, it is found
like to Chestnuts, and is of so lucid a color, that it makes the precious
stones included by Artificers in Gold, Lib. 3. c. 11. p. 73.
most ^plendent. And that in that part of Egypt that lies toward Aethiopia
and Arabia, there are places that are very fertile of Metals; and from whence
with great cost and labor they draw forth Gold, from a most pure white shining
Marble.

But of this we shall say no more but refer it to the next Chapter.

4. But for Gold found in the heads of Fl^rella's or Beck-trouts, we find
little in particular, but only that they affirm it in general. And Kircher
tells us, that Ficus Mirandulanus (but he quotes not the place) relates, That
in his time gold was found in the stomach of Partridges; Mund. subter. l. 10.
Sect 4. p. 200.
and adds his reason, that it was no marvel, for that Hens, Partridges,
Ducks, and the like, do much desire metallic bodies; and therefore finding the
raments or small shavings of Gold commixt with the sand, do swallow them; which
after by the heat of the stomach do flow into one mass, which is a rational
conjecture. And says, that they report that Goats that are called Ibices were
seen, whose teeth were spread over with a golden color, especially in that part
with which they did pluck up the grass; which without doubt did happen from the
tincture of Gold-bearing spirits, wherewith the grass was imbued. And also
tells us, that Albertus relates that Gold was found in an humane scull; which
if it were truth, happened from no other cause then the steams of gold, when
melted do arise, and no otherwise then quicksilver was coagulated in the
brain. A reason I confess more probable then what Sendivogius and others have
given of it. Hist. 1.
And I my self can affirm by experience and sight, that here in these Northern
parts, where Sheep are bred upon barren mountains and hills (likely enough to
contain metallic Ores) that their teeth are often (if old) at the roots of
them, covered with a thin tincture of a very bright shining and golden color.
Hist. 2.
And I had some years since brought me by a friend two or three of the molares
or grinding teeth of an old Cow bred upon such barren hills, and killed for
Beef, which near the roots were covered with a crust thicker then our common
Groat, with a fine shining gold-coloured substance, which for the rarity of it
I keep by me, and did not scrape it off to try if it contained any metalline
matter. Which doubtless had gathered there, by the steams either of golden
Marchasites, Copper Ore, or Gold it self, while yet in primo ente. Of which I
hope to enquire more, that I may be able to make a trial of it, and thereby to
satisfy my self and others, whether it contain Metal or nor; for the Proverb
is true, All is not Gold that glisters.

CHAP. X. Further of the Stones, Rocks, and Flints of Gold, and the striking
passages wherein it is found: as also of the several sorts of it mentioned in
Scripture, and elsewhere.
THe reason why I am so large in this particular is, to mind all ingenious
Mineralists to make a more diligent search how all Ores lie, and in what wombs,
coats, or substances, then hitherto has been used; and especially about the
Ore of Gold: and to this end we shall transcribe what we find most material to
this purpose.

And in the first place we shall give the Reader an account of what Basilius
Valentinus has discovered in this particular; a person of vast experience in
these matters, Last Will and Test. par. 2. c 3. p. 84, 85, 86.
who writes thus.

This noble gold-stone and Ore is sometimes mixed, and on its outside there
sticks some obscure and dark matter, having annexed to it some slates and
other spermatick matter, which detracts from the goodness of its own nature.
And though the Creator has endued it with great virtues, yet does it humble it
self, and suffers it self to be found in despicable Mineral stones, where it
loses much of its tincture; as is apparent by the Touchstone, where the
mixture of Copper, Silver, Tin, and others, is seen; all these mixed impurities
can be separated from it with artificial manuals; and with little ado it may be
brought into a perfect state. Gold Ores naturally are wrought thus; that the
Gold stands in it close, compact, firm, and good; which is found sometimes in
the cross passages. Its fixedness is found in the deepness under ground, where
it has its greatest power; and it is found also sometimes in a speckled
Jaspis, full of eyes, and mixed with flints in its passages; where many times
Vitriol flint is found abundantly, which Vitriol is the best among all other
sorts of Vitriol. The Hungarian Vitriol has the precedence before all the
rest, which is sufficiently known in their proofs, and examens, as may be
demonstrated to the eye. In its passages are found sometimes fluxes of several
colors, which are interlined with gold, and must be forced with fire. To that
purpose it is requisite that it be dealt withal with such fire, as you heard in
the first part: commonly Zwitters and Zirn stones are such, which must be
stamped, and beaten, and drawn to a narrowness, and fined.

Gold is wrought also in standing passages, and on level ground; the Ores and
such passages are yellowish, rocky, and of a iron shot-sand in clifts, as it is
on-grown compactly. And generally it is found near Flint works, sometimes it is
found in a Flint, or in a liver-coloured Jaspis, sometimes in white pebles,
that gold that is in it is of a white color, like silver, or in white Copper
Ore, where it sticks hoary and rugged: It is found also in brittle
limestones, where it stands curled with black specks unsprinkled, is granulated
like drops found in the subtilest firm stones, spotted with iron-molds, or
spots; and are protruded in fair yellow flowers, and are a black exhalation
thrust forth. It is found also in streaked slate-work in pure passages, mixed
with a blue horn-stone, and slate; in flinty glittering passages it is found
hoary, and compactly wrought. There are found also flat Marble floats, wherein
in all your clifts is wrought inherent gold, mixed with green grit, and iron
spots. Sometimes it is found also in square iron shots, or porous marble
Marchasites, but for the most part in grits. Sometimes gold Ore is found also
compact, and firm, in black passages. Some gold Ores and gold passages are
found also to be of Minerals, and of Vitriol; and Miners in Hungary especially
can discourse of it, because gold Ore is found in that manner in those parts.

These seem to me to be excellent discoveries and directions to find out the
Ore of this Metal; and though the terms seem harsh and difficult, our English
not so properly suiting the German Tongue, especially about this subject; yet
doubtless may be familiar to experienced Miners, and artifici in sua art
credendum est.

Acosta likewise tells us, Histor. not. ^ mor. of the Indies, c. 4. p. 214.
Gold is commonly found mixed with Silver or with Copper, but that which is
mixed with Silver, is commonly of fewer Carats then that which is mixed with
Copper. If there be a fifth part of silver, ^lim. l. 3. c. 4.
Pliny says, it is then properly called Electrum, which has the property to
shine more at the light of the fire, then fine gold, or fine silver. That which
is incorporate with copper, is commonly of a higher value.

Mul. Veronen^. Sect. 4. p. 436.
Franciscus Calceolarius tells us, that in his Musaeum he had three sorts of
the Ore of Gold.

1. One brought forth of Pannonia, in which there was a white color, like
silver. 2. Another arising with silver, forth of a stone heavy enough, of much
what an ash color, brought from the Mines of Bohemia. 3. An Ore flowing forth
of a stone of a very red color, in which was seen Copper growing, shining with
an inset color from the same Mines.
Denat. Fossil. l. 8. p 640.
Agreeable to what is here related may be ^ound in Agricola, to whom I refer the
Reader: and only shall add a passage or two more from Basilius, who says:
Last Will and Test. l. r. c. 8. p. 18.
To distinguish Metals by colors, is a curious skill, as red-gold-glass,
mine-green, black Ore; however their working is not so exactly known that way.

And a little after he says: Hither belong all mixed Ores, which at separating
are parted asunder, and not before, as the custom is. As in Hungary there is
had every where gold-silver (that is, in it there is gold) which in its color
and ponderosity is pure, has lost nothing, and is still in its working
quality, and if it had not been interrupted, and dug up unseasonably, then
the silver would have been turned into pure gold.

Lib. 2. p. 41.
Lazarus Er^ker, that was chief Mine^master to Maximilian the Emperor, tells
us; That Gold is found in a white stone like marble, the Germans call it
Quartz; as also in a blue and yellow horn-stone: likewise in a blue slate,
iron, slats, yellow and of a subtle flaming; and sometimes in corn, tin, and
iron-stone.

And once more Paracelsus tells us, Rer. Not. l. 8. p. 102.
(speaking of the separating of Metals forth of their Ores, and one from
another:) These sorts of Ores sometimes will contain more then one Metal; as it
often happens, that Copper and Silver, Copper and Gold, Lead and Silver, Tin
and Silver, etc. may be found in one Mineral.

Now for the gradual differences of Gold, they may be, and doubtless are many;
for in fineness and purity there may be much disagreement; and therefore
Basilius offers us a notable passage, Last Will and Test. par. 1. c. 11. p. 25,
26.
thus. And take notice that Nature loves to keep her own ways orderly, and
keeps together two, and sometimes three sorts of Ores in their ascension and
descension, whereby she intimates a way unto the after-work; but men in their
fancies think upon other means, though to no purpose. View all the Mines which
are in Europe, you will find no other Ores but impure ones, that is, a mixture
of them; for their Nature makes them so, as much as ever I could learn. If you
can show me the contrary, I will assent unto it.

And again he says; Ibid. c. 12. p. 27, 28.
Who could tell what gold and silver were, if they were not known in their
perfection; for when they are perfect it appears, when they have their
color, their weight, their malleableness, their flux and hardness. And this
perfect Metal Nature has produced compactly and purely: for such perfect,
pure, and compact gold is found in Hungary, in the white marble, which
presently may be broken: as also silver and copper. The difference betwixt the
perfect and pure is, because Metals are not pure before they are perfect, and
so there may be a perfect Ore which is not pure, which defect is found in many
of our Metals, which come to their perfection as soon as in any other Foreign
parts, but in their perfect purity they are defective sometimes. And this we
commend to the Reader to be seriously considered of.

Now from hence we may gather, that even one sort of gold, as it is gold, may
be more fine and pure then another. And the Scripture does show us, that in
those days gold was found to be, and esteemed, one sort better and purer then
another; of which we shall now speak something largely for diversion sake, and
to stir up all ingenious spirits to a more narrow scrutiny after these
curiosities.

1. And first it mentions the gold found in the Land of Havillah, Genesis 2.11,
12.
and says; And the gold of that is Zahab to'b, that is good: intimating
plainly that there was other gold that was worse, and not so good. But where
that gold was found, is something doubtful; though Tremellius makes Pishon
there to be the River Tygris that runs all along the Inland into the Sinus
Persicus, Not. in Genesis 10.7.
and takes it to be the Country of the Susians in the edge of Persia, and
calls it aurum praestans, that is excellent gold, and the Vulgar Latin calls
it aurum optimum. And as to the place, Piscator does agree; which I leave to
others to be disputed of. Castalio calls it aurum proba^issimum; but that it
should be the best, agrees not exactly with the Hebrew word to'b, which
implies not the superlative degree, and therefore the Septuagint renders it
(...), good gold. And Luther renders it, that is precious gold. And so do the
French and Italian Bibles translate it good gold, not the best.

2. Though Zahab be the primitive word, the Hebrews most commonly use for Gold;
and that some Lexicons take it to be meant of raw and unwrought Gold, yet
sometimes they add some other word or Adjective unto it, that does specify
some notable degree of the goodness of it, or some other quality: and in many
places Sagur of the Verb Sagar clausit, which Montanus where the Text speaks
of Solomon's covering the Oracle, 1 King. 6.20, 21.
he says, auro concluso, or purissimo; but Tremellius (whose reason for this
is the likest in this place) gives it; auro asservato, meaning the gold that
David had preserved for that purpose of building the Temple; and it is not
likely that David for a work of that nature, would not have kept any Gold, but
that which was most pure; and in this sense that Tremellius gives, I find no
place to contradict it.

3. They use the word Kaethem, Vid. Job 28. 17, 18, 19.20. and aliis locis.
which commonly signifies a mass of bright and shining Gold, from the word
Katham emicuit, it has shined, or been bright; and to this they add Tahur from
the Verb Taher mundus fuit, and this signifies a mass of pure and clean Gold,
and was most usually reckoned amongst their best sorts of Gold.

4. They use the word Phas or 1. Pas from the Verb Pasas, 1 King. 10 18.
deauratus est, it is covered over with Gold, and that very pure; for it is
said: And the King made a Throne of Ivory, and covered it over. 2. Mepasas,
that is with pure Gold; and sometimes it is taken for that precious stone that
is called Topazion. Jer. 10.9.
And it is not unlike but that it was brought from a place of that name, for it
is said; That silver spread into plates, was brought from Tha^sis, and Gold from
Uphaz. And again, Dan 10.5.
Then I lift up mine eyes, and looked, and behold, a certain man clothed in
linen, whose loins were girded with fine gold of Uphaz. Where the word Kaethem
is used, as coming from that place called Uphaz; and Arias Montanus renders it,
in massa auri obrizi. Vid. Polan. in loc. citat.
But it is plain that Uphaz was the proper name of a place, and not to be taken
adjectively; and is thought to be the same with Ophir, of which we shall say
more presently.

Job. 28.1, 6.
5. We may observe that it is probable that in the time of Job, Gold was gotten
forth of the Earth, or Rocks, or separated from the sand. For he says, as
Piscator renders it, and Tremellius seems so to expound it; Vid. Author. in loc.
'Surely there is a vein for silver, and a place for Gold where they find it:
and it (the Earth) has dust of Gold.

6. But the Gold that was known in the days of King Solomon, that had the
chiefest commendation, was that which was brought from Ophir, or Uphaz; for it
is taken by all the Learned, that they were both one place. And this is in
diverse places of all other most commended. Job 28.16.
For Job preferring wisdom before all earthly things, says it shall not be
compared with Kaethem Ophir, naming that sort of Gold that was accounted the
most excellent and pure above all other, nor it shall not come in competition
with Kaethem tahur, Psalm. 45.9.
the mass of the purest Gold. And David setting forth the glory of Christ's
Kingdom and the Church under the person of a Queen, says; Upon thy right hand
did stand the Queen in Gold of Ophir, Kaethem Ophir, in massa auri Ophir, as
that sort of Gold that was most pure and excellent in esteem in those days. And
that this gold was fetched by Hiram from Ophir, these places do testify. Then
went Solomon to Ezion-Geber, 1 King 10.11. 2 Chronicles. 8.17, 18.
and to Eloth at the Sea side, in the land of Edom. And Huram sent him by the
hands of his servants, ships and servants that had knowledge of the sea; and
they went with the servants of Solomon to Ophir, and took thence four hundred
and fifty talents of gold, and brought it to King Solomon. Id. c. 9. v. 10, 21.
For the Kings ships went to Tarshish with the servants of Huram: every three
years once came the ships of Tarshish bringing Gold and Silver, Ivory, and
Apes, and Peacocks. Now the great question being amongst the Learned, where
this Ophir or Uphaz was, from whence was brought the most pure Gold that was
known in the days of Solomon; Sir Walter Rawleigh, Hist. of the World. l. 2.
part. 1. c. 18. parag. 3. p 425. Hist. of the Ind. c. 13. p. 41, etc.
a person of profound judgment, and great learning, has extremely labored to
prove that it was not from Peru in the West Indies, but brought from an Island
in the East Indies, called by the name of Ophir; and to make this good he has
strained all possible or probable arguments to assert it. And so has Josephus
Acosta, and many others.

But notwithstanding the authority of such learned persons, I am of an opinion
that the^r arguments are not of such force but that they may be easily
answered, as having no other ground but probability and conjecture; but we have
no time to bestow that way, but shall lay down that proof that may demonstrate
that the land of Ophir or Uphaz was the two Peru's now known to Europe: For
that text is so plain, that no reasonings can be able to overthrow it. 2 Chronicles.
3.6.
For it is said in the text; And the gold was the gold of Peruaim. And all men
know that the Hebrews put a-im in the dual number, as Peru being the singular
number, when a im is added to it in the dual, it makes Peruaim. Which must of
necessity be the name of a place or Country. Which Epithete they could not have
given to their best and purest gold, if there had no such Country been known to
the Jews in the time of Solomon; and indeed could be no other then the two
Peru's now known to the Europeans. And the Septuagint renders it (...), which
in a manner is the same. And the French Bible, Et l' er estoit or de Pharuaim,
which agrees with the Hebrew. And Tremellius renders it, Aurum autem ipsum
erat aurum Paruaimorum: and to the same purpose the Italian Bible says, Et l'
oro, era oro di Paruarim, as though it were the Gold of the people of the
Country so called, which amounts to the same purpose. And Luther calls it Das
Goldt war Parwaym Goldt. Greg. Lex. Sart. praef.
And therefore an Author of great learning and credit, says; Terra igitur
illa, ex qua tanta optimi auri copia Solomoni advecta fuit, and ad alias gentes
asportata, jam tum Paruaim dicta fuit, quam hodie Peru vocamus: quae ad
Europaei orbis notitiam and Mercimoniorum usum Christophori Columbi sagacissima
pertinacia anno supra millesimum quadringentesimum nonagesimo secundo traducta,
Hebraeis autem veteribus fuit exploratissima. Verba Ariae Montani in libro
Phaleg, id est, de gentium sedibus and situ orbis ita habent. Dictio Paruaim
iis qui vel tantum sciunt Hebraice legere, duas regiones olim Peru dictas clare
demonstrat, unam quidem, quae eodem vocabulo hodierno etiam die Peru dicitur,
alteram vero quae nova Hispania a navigantibus est appellata. Ejus autem
regionis aurum purissimum atque in maximo pretio apud omnes gentes fuisse
constat. Atque interpres quidem vulga^us vel ob ignotam sibi regionem, vel
potius in ejus, quod illa regio exhibebat, auri laudem (cum in Hebraeo ita
scriptum legatur: and aurum illud aurum Peru and Peru: nam Peru in numero duali
Paruaim dicitur) convertit: and aurum erat probatissimum. Quocirca quicquid
auri inter alias gentes priscis illis seculis in usu fuit, id fere totum ex
illius terrae cavernis elicitum esse existimamus, etc. And thus much by way of
digression for the curious to consider of.

7. We shall not insist upon that place in the Revelation, Rev. 21.18, 2^
where it is said, And the City was pure gold, like unto clear glass. And the
street of the City was pure gold, as it were transparent glass. Because it is a
prophetical place, and also that it was but like unto, or as it were
transparent glass, not that the gold was really transparent; of which it may be
doubted whether any such gold were ever existent, either by Art or Nature.

Besides these foregoing sorts mentioned forth of the Scripture, we find
several sorts of gold gradually distinguished, according to the Regions from
whence they are brought, as the Arabian, Spanish, Hungarian, and German gold,
which all differ one from another in the degrees of goodness or pureness. And
the purest that we have in these days (that I know of) is the sand-gold brought
from Guinea, and some other places, which is so near pure, and unmixt with any
other Metals, that the Artificers that beat, or make leaf-gold, and those that
draw gold into small Wire, or fine threads, do commonly buy it, because it will
serve their turns, without using the Aqua separatoria; and so they do the old
gold coined by Edward the Third, because it has in it the least alloy of
Silver or Copper; and the purest Gold that I have ever seen, was a piece of
Roman Gold, stamped with the image and name of Nero, which was as soft, and
would have cut as easily as Lead.

And the goodness of Gold is commonly esteemed according to the number of
Carats, of which there ordinarily are 24. though Paracelsus makes them 36. Not.
and Mor. Hist Ind. c. 4. p. 214.
For Acosta tells us, The most famous Gold is that of Caranana in Peru, and of
Valdivia in Chille, for that it rises with his alloy and perfection, which is
twenty three Carats and an half, and sometimes more. They make account likewise
of the Gold of Veragua to be very fine. They bring much Gold to Mexico from the
Philippines, and China, but commonly it is weak and of base alloy.

CHAP. XI. Of the descriptions of common Gold according to some Authors, and of
the properties thereof: as also of some ways of beating, sifting, and washing
the Ore thereof.
BAcon does describe, Spec. Alchy^^. c. 2. p. mihi 259.
or define Gold thus; Aurum est corpus perfectum, etc. Gold is a perfect body
generated of Argent vive, pure, fixed, clear, red, and of a clean sulphur,
fixed, red, not burning, and has no defect. Lex Alchym. p 90.
Rulandus thus; Gold is the most temperate Metal of all other, yellow, shining,
ponderous, equally digested in the belly of the Earth, very long washed with
Mineral Water; consisting of a pure Argent vive, fixed, clear, red; and of a
clean sulphur, fixed, red, not burning. In brief, it is the subtle substance
of Argent vive.

Libanus gives it thus; De not. M^tal. c 4. p. 24.
Gold is a perfect Metal framed of a most mature, and most pure Mercury, by the
virtue of a most excellent sulphur, and together with it brought into a most
tenacious, and the best commixtion, and adorned with a citrine tincture.

Wormius thus, Mus* Worm. l. 1. Sect. 3. c. 2. p. 114.
Gold is the most pure, and most perfect of all Metals, consisting of a most
pure Mercury, most perfectly concocted, and of a red sulphur most excellent,
and most fixed, being exactly mingled and united together: sustaining all the
trials of the fire, and of Aqua fortis, most heavy; and above all other Metals
extensible, or to be beaten forth, shining with a yellowish color.

And these are sufficient, that from hence we may gather some of its chiefest
properties.

1. Therefore of all other Metals it is most perfectly maturated and decocted
by Nature, and is of the most equal temper: Art. Aurif p. 40.
for as Trevisan tells us, Quare in auro sunt quatuor elementa in aequali and
anatica proportione coadunata. Therefore the four Elements are in Gold, joined
together in an equal and anatical proportion. But yet taking his supposition
that gold is generated of the four Elements, we are not to understand this
equality of proportion in respect of their equal quantities, but anatical
proportion in regard of qualities.

2. Of all other Metals, Gold has the least portion of external or separable
sulphur (for that it has some, appears by the authority of Paracelsus and
Helmont; the latter of which tell us, That external sulphur is not possible to
be separated by Nature, but by one constructive liquor) and therefore is in
that regard accounted more perfect then any of the rest.

3. Gold is more dense and compacted then any other of the Metals, that is, it
is less porous then any of the rest, being so closely joined per minima, that
little or none of the air, or globuli aetherei (as Cartesius calls them) can
lodge within its particles. And this is the cause of two other of its
properties; to wit, its heaviness, and power of extension; both of which are
far beyond either of those qualities in other Metals.

4. It indureth not only all the force of our common fire, but if we may give
credit to Writers of sufficient authority, they do inform us that in the
greatest torture of the fire, it loses nothing of its substance or weight, but
rather gains; for so does Wormius tell us in the place above cited. And it
will not only endure the trial per cineritium, or testing with Lead (which
silver will also abide without wasting) but also the probat of Aqua fortis, the
cementum regale by Antimony, and that which Artificers call Quartation. All
which do sufficiently declare all those perfections and excellencies that
Authors have attributed unto it.

As for the beating, grinding, sifting, and washing of Ores in general from
their earthy filthiness and superfluities, Georgius Agricola has written very
largely and learnedly, Lib. de re Met. 8. passim.
more then any other Author that I know of. And I could wish that some person
that has ability and leisure, would translate it into English; for it might be
very serviceable to our common Miners, that in that particular have little to
direct them, but what they learn one from another. But we shall only here note
some few particulars of beating or washing of gold Ore, from two or three
Authors of Credit. For Agricola tells us, Seeing that Nature does for the most
part bring forth Metals impure, and mixed with earth, concrete juices, and
stones; it is necessary, as far as can be possible, to separate those things
from the Metallic veins, before they be fluxed or molten.

1. Acosta tells us, Histor. nar. and mor. of the Indies, c. 4 p 213, 214, 215.
Gold in stone is a vein of gold that grows or ingendreth within the stone,
or flint, as I have seen in the Mines of Curuma within the government of
Salines, very great stones pierced and intermixed with gold; others that were
half gold and half stone. The gold which grows in this manner, is found in
Pits or Mines, which have their Veins like to the silver Mines, but it is very
hard to draw it forth. And a little after: They refine powdered gold in basins,
washing it in many waters, until the sand falls from it, and the gold as most
heavy remains in the bottom. They refine it likewise with Quicksilver and
Strong-water, for that the Allom whereof they make this water, has the virtue
to separate gold from dross, or from other Metals.

Lib 3. c. 11. p. 73.
2. Diodorus Siculus tells us a strange story both of the getting of gold Ore,
as also of its preparing by beating, grinding, and washing, which for brevity
sake, we shall only give in the English. In the borders of Egypt that join to
Ethiopia and Arabia, there are places very fertile of Metals; Forth of which
with much labor and expense, Gold is drawn. For the black earth by nature has
passages, and veins of most white marble, which shines above all brightness.
And a little after, he says, That almost infinite thousands of men do dig
forth with iron instruments, the more soft rock, and which is broken with
indifferent labor. He that discovers the Veins of gold, goes before the
Workmen, showing what places they are to dig. They cleave the stony marble
being showed, by the strength of strong bodies, not by Art, but by great force
with iron wedges. But they drive shafts or passages not straight, but that way
which Nature leads, by the gold in the shining marble. But when by reason of
the diverse bendings, and turnings, they are darkened in their passages, the
Workmen carrying lights before them, the rocks by great force being cut in
pieces, they carry up, and cast upon the ground. Others cut them so casten into
very small pieces, others carry them away. The pieces taken from these Workmen
being cut to a certain measure, they beat in stone Vessels with a pestle or
hammer of Iron, unto the smallness of Millet seeds. They then being cast into
Mills, are grinded unto the very fineness of meal. Then the Workmen taking it
ground, do put it upon broad Tables a little declining, and again beat, or rub
the Marble, water being cast upon it: By that means the earth being washed
away, the gold by its gravity does remain upon the Tables. This they often
iterating, they rub the Gold with their hands. Then with thin and porous
sponges, they press forth the soft earth, until it be made like unto golden
sand. Lastly, other Workmen do put it by weight and measure into earthen pots;
and do superadd in a certain measure, Lead, Sea-weed, or Tange, and Bran of
Barley. These things compounded in a certain proportion, they diligently lome
or daub up the pots with clay, or lute. Furthermore, being decocted five whole
days and nights in a Furnace, pure Gold is only found in the Vessel, the other
things being wasted, the former weight being little diminished. I have the
rather delivered this at large, because it is a very remarkable passage, and
perhaps not taken notice of by many Readers, and may be of some considerable
use to an ingenious Mineralist.

3. Gonzalus Ferdinandus Oviedus relates two notable ways both of their
finding of Gold at the Indies, Of the West Indies* p. 188, 189, 190.
and of the washing and purifying of it: and that not by hearsay, but upon his
own experience; some of which we shall transcribe, because I believe the Book
is not very common. Who says, This particular of the Mines of Gold, is a thing
greatly to be noted, and I may much better speak of it then any other man,
forasmuch as there are now twelve years past since I served in the place of
Surveyor of the Melting-shops pertaining to the Gold Mines of the Firm Land,
and was the Governor of the Mines of the Catholic King Don Ferdinando; after
whose departure from this life, I served long in the same room in the name of
your Catholic Majesty. By reason whereof, I have had great occasion to know
how Gold is found and wrought out of the Mines, etc. And a little after he
says: The manner how Gold is gathered, is this, either of such as is found in
Zanana; that is to say, in the Plains and Rivers of the Champian Country being
without Trees, whether the earth be with grass or without; or of such as is
sometimes found on the Land without the Rivers, in places where Trees grow; so
that to come by the same, it shall be requisite to cut down many, and great
Trees. But after which soever of these manners it be found, either in the
Rivers or Breaches of Waters, or else in the Earth; I will show how it is found
in both these places, and how it is separate, and purged. Therefore when the
Mine or Vein is discovered, this chances by searching and proving in such
places, as by certain signs and tokens do appear to skilful men, apt for the
generation of Gold, and to hold Gold. And when they have found it, they follow
the Mine, and labor it, whether it be in the River or the Plain, as I have
said. And if it be found on the Plain, first they make the place very clean
where they intend to dig, then they dig eight or ten foot in length, and as
much in breadth; but they go no deeper then a span or two, or more, as shall
seem best to the Master of the Mine, digging equally; then they wash all the
earth which they have taken out of the said space, and if herein they find any
Gold, they follow it, and if not they dig a span deeper, and wash the earth as
they did before: and if then also they find nothing, they continue in digging
and washing the earth, as before, until they come to the hard rock or stone:
and if in fine they find no Gold there, they follow no further to seek Gold in
that place, but go to another part. And it is to be understood, that when they
have found the Mine, they follow it in digging in the same measure in level and
depth, until they have made an end of all the Mine which that place contains,
if it appear to be rich.

Their manner of washing he thus describes, And when they have dug forth the
Mine, they fill certain Trays with that earth, which other Indians have the
charge immediately to receive at their hands, and to carry those Trays of Earth
to the Water where it may be washed: yet do not they that bring it wash it, but
deliver it to other, putting it out of their own Trays into others, which they
have ready in their hands to receive it. These Washers for the most part are
Indian women, because this work is of less pain and travel then any other.
These women when they wash, are accustomed to sit by the waterside with their
legs in the water even up to the knees, or less, as the place serves their
purpose; and thus holding the Trays in their hands by the handles thereof, and
putting the same into the Water, they move them round about, after the manner
of sifting, with a certain aptness; in such sort that there enters no more
water into the Trays then serves their turns; and with the self-same apt
moving of their Trays in the water, they ever avoid the foul water with the
earth out of the one side of the Vessel, and receive in clean water on the
other side thereof: so that by this means, by little and little, the water
washes the earth as the lighter substance off the Trays, and the gold as the
heavier matter rests in the bottom of the same, being round and hollow in the
middle, like unto a Barbers Basin. And when all the earth is avoided, and the
gold gathered together in the bottom of the Tray, they put it apart, and return
to take more earth, which they wash continually, as before. So that to
conclude, there are in all five persons ordinarily assigned to every Tray of
Washers.

I have been the more tedious upon this subject, because I judged it very
material and profitable; but now we shall come to some higher questions
concerning Gold, and so leave it.

CHAP. XII. What may be thought of common Gold; whether it be an ingredient
into the Philosophers Tincture, or not? What may be said of Aurum potabile, or
the Tincture of Gold; and what of the white body when the Tincture is taken
from it; and something of the Alcahest.
I Very well understand that I shall undergo no small censure, for taking upon
me to intermeddle with such abstruse matters as I have proposed in this
Chapter. And some may deem that it is my ambition to be thought or esteemed an
Adeptist; or at least to speak my self so highly knowing in these Arcana's,
that thereby I may draw some to make suit unto me for further unveiling of
these secrets. To which I shall say little, but only this, that my Motto has
long been, and is, Qui been latuit, been vixit; and however they may censure, I
shall easily pass by it, and answer with that of Paracelsus, Alterius non sit,
qui suus esse potest: and shall modestly tell them, that it is above 35 years
since I first learned a course of common Chemistry under old Johannes Huniades;
and have ever since at times and seasons been employed therein; and have been
and am a continual reader of and studier in the best Authors that have written
in mystical Philosophy; and therefore let none be too censorious of what I
know, or what I know not, in this abstruse Science, but weigh the Authorities
and Reasons that I lay down, and accordingly judge of what I write.

1. For those that are seeking the grand secret in Animals or Vegetables, or in
any thing that they produce, or that proceeds from them, or in any Minerals or
Metals, except in,, and Mercury, we shall pass them by, as looking at those as
things that are too far removed from the intention of the Philosophers: who if
they did mention them, it was only by way of similitude, Spec. Alchym. c. 3.
p. mihi. 260.
as Bacon tells us; Quare admirandum est, quod aliquis prudens suam fundat
intentionem super animalia, sive vegetabilia, quae valde sunt remota, cum
inveniantur mineralia sa^is propinqua. Nec credendum est omnino, quod aliquis
Philosophorum posuerit artem in praedictis remotis, nisi similitudinarie.

But those that think they come nearest the mark, do fix upon the noblest of
Metals, to wit, Gold; taking that of Augurellus for a truth, (which is so
indeed, if rightly understood) In auro, semina sunt auri, and ut ignis est
principium ignificandi, sic aurum aurificandi; and finding the Masters do call
the Gold that they use in the first work (for we speak not here of
fermentation) their Gold not aurum vulgi, they therefore commonly pitch upon
pure Gold, such as is much sand gold, or as the Germans call it, Wash gold,
that has not been melted in the fire; and this many of the wiser sort do take
to be living gold, strengthened by that subtle assertion of Sendivogius, who
says, Scito enim metallorum vitam esse ignem, No. Lum. Chym Tract. 3. p 311.
dum adhuc in suis mineris sunt, and mortem etiam ignem fusionis videlicet. And
if to this they add what Trevisan has written in that learned and abstruse
Epistle of his to Thomas of Bononia, it would in a manner convince an
understanding person, to believe that common gold being decocted in their
menstruum, would communicate its virtue to their water, by which the whole
magistery might be perfected; but it is good to be wary, latet anguis in herba:
and therefore the learned Mayerus gives us this caution, ut perspicuus apparet,
ita profundus delitescit.

And I shall crave pardon of those that are learned in this point, if I do not
adhere to this opinion; for though I may confess that Gold by fusion in the
force of fire, is thereby dead, yet my question is, that it was dead before;
and so after fusion that may be more amply praedicated of it, though it was
truly dead before, as when a man is slain by a mortal wound, he may be said to
be dead, when he is absolutely cold, and no motion of life in him; and much
more he might be said to be dead when his body (like the custom of the Romans)
is burned.

And to confirm that Gold and other particular Metals are dead when they are
coagulated into an hard and fixed metallic body, we shall give sufficient
authority.

And first, Basilius Valentinus (a man of unquestionable verity and experience)
tells us thus. Elucida^. of the 12. K^yes, p. 140.
In the first place be informed, that our Gold (so much spoken of hitherto)
must never be taken for such Gold by any of our Disciples, which has been
melted and fully digested by Nature; for herein such error is committed, that
men dilapidate all that they have, and lose both the end and beginning of all
their Works.

From this it clearly appears, that not only gold that has been melted, is
excluded from the beginning of their Work, but also gold that has been fully
digested by Nature; for who can expect life from a dead thing?

To this we may add that signal passage of Paracelsus, quoted by us once or
twice before, R^r. Nature. l. 9. p. 113.
though not this very purpose, who says: Primo sciendum est, metallum quodvis,
quamdiu in primo ente adhuc latet conditum, peculiaria sua Astra habere. Ita
aurum habet astra Solis: Argentum astra Lunae, etc. Quam-primum autem ad suam
perfectionem venerunt, and in fixum metallicum corpus coagulantur, ab illorum
quolibet sua astra recedunt, and corpus suum relinquunt mortuum. And a little
after he tells us; Et una intelligendum, ad utrinsque tincturae, rubrae
scilicet and albae, praeparationem initio non corpus auri vel Lunae, sed primum
ens auri vel Lunae assumi debere. Si enim in principio error committatur, de
opera and labor omni actum erit.

From whence it is not only plain, that gold when coagulated into a metallic
body, is dead; but also that it is in vain to take it in the beginning of the
Work.

Theatr. Chym. vol. 1. p. 754.
Trevisan tells us the same thing, saying; Corpora vulgaria, per naturam solam
in mineris absoluta, sunt mortua, ut imperfect a perficere nequeunt, etc.

De Sal. Phil. l. c. 4. p. 157.
And the learned Combachius in his Translation of Nuysement, tells us this
certain rule. Prudentes and nasi emunctioris homines, ex radice opera sua
incipiunt, and non ex ramis: Eligentes, ut doctissimus Bacon ait, rem, super
quam natura tantum primas operationes incepit, per unionem and mixtionem
proportionatam puri and vivi Mercurii, cum simili sulphur in massam solidam
congelati. And this is a clear point which Bacon further explaineth thus; Spec.
Alchym. c. 3. p. 263, 264.
showing how they are excused from taking gold to the composition of the red,
or silver to the white. Cum inveniamus rem, vel corpus aliquod, ex tam mundo,
vel mundiore sulphur, and argento vivo, super quod natura parum, vel minimum
est operata. And after, Eligenda est ergo materia, in qua est argentum vivum
mundum, purum, clarum, album and rubeum, non ad complementum perductum, sed
commixtum aequaliter and proportionabiliter, per modum debitum cum sulphur
tali, and in massam solidam congelata.

And to this agrees the saying of Paracelsus, De Mineral. l. Tr^ct. 1. p. 347.
speaking of the sulphur of Gold. Hoc sulphur, si quale in aurifera arbore, and
ad hujus radicem in montibus est, Alchymistae invenire and adipisci possent,
esset certe, de quo effuse gauderent.

From all which it is manifest that common Gold as it is perfected by Nature,
and digested to the height of maturity, though it have never been melted, nor
felt the force of the fire; yet in respect of the Philosophers first work, is
but dead, and wants the principles of life and vegetability, that necessarily
is required to their purpose; and that there is another gold not vulgarly known
for such, in which Nature has but wrought her first operations, which above
all other they persuade to seek after, and to take. Therefore we will conclude
this (because we have spoken more largely where we treated of Gold according to
the mystical Authors) with the advice of Johannes Spagnetus, Arcan. Herm. p.
175.
who says, Now those bodies must be taken which are of an unspotted, and
incorrupt virginity, such as have life and spirits in them, not extinct as
those that are handled of the vulgar; for who can expect life from dead things?
and those are called corrupt, which have suffered copulation; those dead and
extinct, which (by the enforcements of the chief Tyrant of the World) have
poured out their soul with their blood by martyrdom.

2. In the next place many do imagine and urge, that though common Gold be
dead, as Nature has produced it; yet it is to be revised by Art, and that
herein lies the great difficulty and mystery of their solution, and the
bringing of it back to its first matter. Of this there is enough said to
encourage this opinion.

We shall be a little large in handling this, because it is a deep and
mysterious point. And in the first place, we shall find all the Philosophers as
it were unanimously agreeing, that the transmutation of Metals is impossible,
unless they be reduced in materiam suam primam: which we shall take to be
granted as a certain truth, but all the difficulty lies in the true
understanding of the Philosophers meaning, who never speak more truly then when
darkly; nor never more equivocally (if not falsely) when they speak plainly.
Some understand this reduction of them into their first matter, to be taken to
be brought to pass in projection; of which we shall say nothing. Others, that
it is to be understood of their first matter, that it must be by solution
reduced into its first principles, of which it was constituted; and this in a
sober and limited sense we shall allow of, and inquire what first matter it is
that they must be reduced into; and that cannot be understood truly and
properly of the first matter of Metals, No. Lum. Chym. Tract. 4. p. 312.
for that is vapor. For Sendivogius tells us; Sciant ergo doctinae filli
sperma metallorum diversum non esse a spermate rerum omnium, scilicet vaporem
humidum; ideo frustra quaerunt artistae metallorum reductionem in materiam
primam, quae tantum vapor. Philosophi non talem intellexerunt materiam primam,
sed tantum materiam secundam. So that rationally it must be thought to be that
which is the next and proxime matter of Metals, which Trevisan excellently
describes thus: Thearr. Chym. p. 758.
Glorientur Alchymistae utut volent, nunquam formas transmutabunt metallorum,
nisi per ipsorum in primam materiam reductionem: hoc ipsum habent omnes libri
qui de forma tractant metallica. Verum ut intelligatur quid sibi velit in
primam reductio materiam, apprime sciendum, materiam esse primam, rem ipsam in
quam immediate proximeque specifica forma introducitur, uti prima hominis
materia, est utrumque viri seminis and mulieris. So that it being granted that
there is a necessity of reducing the Metals into their first, which was the
next matter into which the specific form is introduced, and those that suppose
natural gold, though having not felt the fire, is to be reduced into this
proxime matter, which they suppose to be done by their solution; which is
accounted so hard and difficult: we shall now examine whether common gold can
be reduced into this proxime or first matter, which we suppose simply
impossible.

And first, whereas they allege that their solution is so extreme hard and
difficult, we shall oppose the authority of Sendivogius, No L^^ Chym. Aenig. p.
351.
who says; Et hoc vobis dico, quod opus est rem quaerere aliquam, quae occulta
est, ex qua fit (miro modo) talis humiditas, quae aurum sine violentia seu
stropitu solvit, imo ita suaviter and naturaliter, sicuti glacies aquae calidae
beneficio liquescit, si hoc invenistis, habetis rem, ex qua aurum a natura
productum est: and quamvis omnia metalla, and res emnes ex illa ortum habeant,
nil tamen ita amicatur ei, sicut aurum, nam aliis rebus adhaeret impuritas,
auro autem nulla, propterea instar matri est ipsi. From whence I shall commend
these considerations unto the studious Reader.

1. That this matter forth of which is drawn their great solvent, is a thing
that is occult and hid, which humidity is made forth of it in a wonderful
manner. 2. That this Water does dissolve Gold without violence or noise, as
pleasantly and naturally as Ice is melted in warm water; so that the water once
had, the dissolution is easy; and therefore what difficulty soever they speak
of in their solution, must be understood of the preparing and attaining of this
solvent, and not in regard of the solution of Gold in it. 3. I shall commend it
to be inquired of by all curious persons, whether this Gold that is so easily
dissolved in it be common Gold, or that of the Philosophers; because I cannot
determine it here, for reasons not fit to be divulged. 4. Especially to mark
that this water is that from which Gold by Nature is produced; so that there is
a subject to be had, from whence Gold by Nature is produced, forth of which
this their solvent is made and prepared; which is a clearer hint then I know
that any other Author has ever given; and therefore I wish every true Artist
to consider, and ponder of it well; for this is the Key of all their secrets,
and only can open the door into the Philosophers Rosary. 5. To note, that
whereas he says, That although all Metals, and all things have their
offspring from this water, yet nothing is so amicable unto it as Gold, because
other things have impurities, but that Gold has none, which must be taken with
a grain of salt; for there is no natural or common Gold but it has some
impurity; and in what respect all Metals, and all things have their rise from
it, must be carefully considered, calling to mind that this Author (as well as
others) uses contradictions in his Writings, and tells us that the Rose is not
found without its prickles.
To this of Sendivogius we shall subjoyn that of Helmont: Potest. Medic. p. 474.
Summus autem atque felicissimus salium est, qui ultimam puritatis and
subtilitatis metam in natura attigit, cuncta pervadit, solusque agendo manet
immutabilis, quaeque alia pro lubitu, prompta resolvit obedientia, rebellemque
omnem materiam, non secus atque aqua calida nivem liquat, and volatizat. And in
another place he says: Ignot. Act. Regim. p. 334.
Quae long clarius per Adeptos demonstrari possunt. Quibus scilicet unicus and
idem liquor Alkahest, omnia totius universi corpora tangibilia perfect reducit
in vitam eorundem primam, absque ulla sui mutatione, viriumque diminutione. A
solo autem suo compari, subter jugum trahitur, atque permutatur.

From whence we may observe: 1. That this liquor must in all probability be the
same specifically with that solvent of Sendivogius, because they work the same
effects, of which we shall say mare anon.

2.We are to note that the subject out of which this great liquor or solvent is
drawn, is a Salt, and that the chiefest, and most happy of Salts. But I should
caution every learned Artist, or Searcher of these secrets, to take care that
he mistake not (as many that thought themselves learned, and of piercing wits,
have been) who, misled by many passages in the Philosophers Writings, have been
drawn forth to rome after some universal or catholic Salt, gotten forth of the
beams of the Sun, Air, or some Earths, or carried after the fancy of some
other more common and vulgar Salts; but shall wish them to remember a saying
often reiterated by the Philosophers, which is this; Qui habet Sal metallorum,
habet lapis antiquorum; a sentence of few words, but of a vast depth, rightly
to understand and find the true meaning of; and which some that I have known
that have many years read and studied the Philosophers books, never could
rightly dive into. But verbum sat sapienti.

3. That this liquor of Helmont^, like the other, did perfectly reduce, or
dissolve all tangible bodies of the Universe (of which common Gold is one) into
their first life, as easily as Snow is volatized and melted in warm water,
without any mutation or diminution of its own strength, but remained immutable.

4. But that it was drawn under the yoke, and thoroughly changed by its only
compeer; which what that is, we shall plainly tell the Reader in general, that
it is the Philosophers incombustible sulphur, fixed grain, or first agent,
which we hope no man will think that we should particularly name. The seal of
Hermes ought not to be broken.

Though these two places of these Authors are sufficiently concordant, as to
the easiness of the radical dissolution of bodies by this liquor once had, and
obtained; yet we shall give them another hint from this great Adeptist Helmont,
that seems disagreeing to what has been said, in regard of the difficulty of
dissolving some bodies, and yet make it appear that they are reconcilable; for
though the Philosophers spoke often darkly, yet they spoke truly; and how
dissonant soever they seemed in words, notwithstanding there was a perfect
Harmony in their meanings: And thus Helmont speaks concerning metallic
Mercury; Progym. M^^. p. 70.
Siquidem in mercurio deprehendi quoddam sulphur externum, originale metalli
labem continens. Quae quia originalis, ideo and difficulter ab eo tollitur. Qua
tandem nihilominus per artem separata, aiunt periti, mericurium superfluo
sulphur, and humido superfluo mundatum. From whence it is manifest how hard
and difficult it is to separate the external sulphur from metallic Mercury,
because they were originally conjoined, but that nevertheless by Art they may
be separated. And such an Artist he calls Peritus, which does manifest in part,
that the difficulty lies chiefly in preparing and obtaining the solvent, and
not in separating the sulphur from the metallic Mercury, when the liquor is
once had. For where he is speaking of the Ludus, he says; Est autem hoc opus
long difficillimum, non quidem quoad praeparationem Ludi; sed ipsius Alkahest.
By which it is plain beyond exception, that the preparing of this great
solvent, is of all other far most difficult, and not in dissolving any other
bodies by it when it is once had: and therefore in another place, speaking of
the Alkahest, he says it is taediosissimae praeparationis.

The next thing concerning this question in hand, is first one place in
Sendivogius that seems to favor this Opinion, that common Gold is to be used
in the first Work, and that is where Sendivogius says: Lapis Philosophorum seu
tinctur^, No. Lum. Chym. Tract. 10. p. 330.
nihil allud est, quam aurum in supremum digestum, nam aurum vulgi est sicuti
herba sine semine, quando maturescit producit semen, sic aurum quando
maturescit, dat simen seu Tincturam. By which any one would think that vulgar
Gold ought to be taken in the beginning, and so long concocted and digested
until it be ripened, and then it yields seed or the Tincture. But if we
consider more narrowly we may observe, that though it be true that common Gold
must be ripened, ere it yield the golden seed or tincture by which other Gold
may be produced, and inferior or imperfect Metals be changed into the nature
of Gold; yet the question is still, whether common Gold be only ripened by
being joined in fermentation with the Philosophers sulphur first had and
prepared, that does maturate and ripen it, or not; for it is known that the
Philosophers sulphur being prepared, is universal and catholic, and would work
upon Vegetables or Animals, as well as Metals; and is only determined and
specificated by that Metal that is joined with it in fermentation, thereby
causing it to transmute others into its own specifical nature; and therefore it
is credibly written of Kelley, that he transmuted Gold into Quicksilver; and
this was it that made Lully cry out and say, Is Nature also retrograde? But to
confirm this, let us give some Authorities.

Arc. Herm. p. 1.88.
Spagnetus telling the qualities of the Planet Mercury, concludes thus; The
like this uncertain Elixir works, for that being tied to no proper quality,
it embraces the quality, and disposition of the thing wherewith it is mixed,
and wonderfully multiplieth the virtues and qualities thereof.

Petrus, Johannes Faber, Hy^roge. l. 3. c. 14. 250.
who (as is credibly thought, and may be known in part by some of his last
Writings) became a Master of the grand Secret, speaks (in this point) thus
plainly and roundly. Omnes fere Philosophi Spagyrici asserunt fontem Chymicorum
seu Mercurium Philosophorum perfici non posse sine auro vel argento: sed aurum
illud, non est aurum vulgi, nec argentum illud est argenium vulgi: Sed est quid
aliud, a font ipso non alienum nec extrinsecum; imo est aurum and argenium in
ipsis visceribus ipsius font is enatum: Et est pars fixa ipsius fontis, quae
cum in duplici sit differentia, rubea and alba; rubea quae est, aurum est
Philosophorum, and quae alba est, argentum est eorundem; verissimum est sine
auro illo and argento, fontem Chymicum perfici non posse.

And a little after he says, Ut supra.
De auro autem vulgi nullo pacto hoc est censendum, quia quamvis in
fermentatione lapidis nostri, sit necessarium ut determinetur lapis ad
perfectionem metallorum: non tamen determinat perfectionem lapidis, imo contra
lapis noster terminat ac perficit aurum vulgi, sine ipso enim lapide, aurum
vulgi mortuum omnino est, ac sterile and infoecundum; cum lapide vero connexum,
fit vivum and foecundum, communicans suas perfectiones and dotes: unde
perficitur aurum vulgi ab ipso lapide, non e contra, ab auro perficitur lapis.

The last we shall add to this particular, is the testimony of learned Mayerus,
who says: Nihilominus Philosophi affirmant, ut in igne ignificandi principium
extat, sic in auro aurificandi: verum tinctura quaeritur, cujus medio aurum
fiat. Haec indaganda est in suis propriis principiis, non in alienis: nam si
ignis ignem producat, pyrus pyrum, eguus eguum, tum plumbum and non argentum,
aurum aurum, and non tincturam generabit: Ad haec aurum Philosophis plumbum,
proprium est, quod non negant pro fermento in fine operis lapidi aurifico
adjici debere, sed necessario requiri quoque asserunt. Cum fermentum ducat
fermentatum in sui naturam, sine quo tota compositio ad perfectionem nunquam
rediret.

Chrysop. l. 1 p. 203.
By this may be clearly opened that of Augurellus, which so many have mistaken,
and so few rightly understood; to wit, Theatr. Chym. Vol 3.
Hordea cui cordi demum serit hordea: ne tu
Nunc aliunde pares auri primordia, in auro
Semina sunt auri, quamvis abstrusa recedant
Longius, and multo nobis quaerenda labor.


Besides what we have already said, we shall now show two irrefragable
arguments that common Gold, whether having felt the force of the fire, or not,
is no ingredient in the first work for the Philosophers tincture.

De Lithias. c. 8. p. 69.
1. And first Helmont lays it down for a firm ground of truth (which also all
knowing Mineralists understand to be a certain verity) thus: Quia prout nullum
sulphur, (id est, externum sulphur) est metallum: ita omnis mercurius
metallicus, est verum metallum. And then speaking of Copper after the external
sulphur be separated from it, he says; In propositis autem cupri terminis,
contemplare internum illud, quod in albo, anonymo, ac mercuriali metallo,
corpus fixat, sive coagulat, efficitque sub malleo ductile: cum alias mercurius
absque sulphur nunquam in metallum coagulari possit.

And after, where he is speaking of metallic Mercury, which contains its
combustible and inseparable sulphur within it, Ut supr. c. 8. p. 70.
he says; Si non vidissem argentum vivum eludere quamcunque artificum operam,
adeo quod aut totum avolet adhuc integrum, aut totum in igne permaneat, atque
utrolibet modo, servet impermutabilem sui ac primitivam identitatem,
identitatisque homogeneitatem anaticam: dicerem artem non esse veram, quae vera
est, sine mendacio, atque long verissima. Adeo ut quod supra est, est sicut
quod est infra, and vicissim. Ignaros ergo se rei metallicae produnt, quotquot
docent praefatas mercurii aurique metamorphoses.

And further; Imo licet aurum radicaliter in parts heterogeneas, salem
scilicet, sulphur, ac mercurium se pateretur sequestrari (quod nullatenus
naturae, nisi per unicum liquorem constructivum, est possibile) Istud tamen in
mercurii homogeneitate, est naturae and arti impossible. Quippe qui auro est
simplicior, majori anaticaque identitate constructus.

From whence we may observe; 1. That metallic Mercury does either altogether
abide in the fire, or altogether fly from, and both ways remains immutable.
And this Helmont had seen in experience.

2. That they are ignorant of the nature of Metals, that teach the change of
Mercury or Gold.

3. That Gold may be radically separated into Salt, Sulphur, and Mercury; but
not possible to Nature to be done but by one only constructive liquor.

4. But lastly, That this in the homogeneity of Mercury, is impossible to
Nature, and Art. And in another place he tells us: Aqua itaque, est interno
metallorum Mecurio simillima, Progym. Met. p. 68.
qui cum omni prorsus metallici sulphuris labe, jam est exutus, tam sibi
undequaque indissolubili nexu cohaeret, ut radicaliter omnem divisionem, art
aut natura possibilem, respuat.

And further he says; Mercurius ergo originali labe mundatus, atque virgo, non
sinit se amplius a sulphuribus, aut seminibus apprehendi, quin baec confestim
consumat, ac velut conficiat, excepto suo compari. Sunt namque alia sublunaria,
nimis debilia, ut tanti mercurium, subigant, penetrent, commutent, aut
defoedent.

Ibid. p 70.
And further says; Mercurius ergo de mercurio vel in mercurio, sospes manet,
tam ignibus, quam liquore acri. Alioqui si corrosiva, illum mercurium
attingeret, forte multorum labor compesaretur. Quippe tota radix,
transmutationum est in sulphur. Vid. Tria prim. p. 408.

So that the force of the Arguments lies thus: That though metallic Mercury by
composition, and marriage with metallic Sulphurs, be made a Metal, and this
may be destroyed by reason of the duality of its sulphur; yet the mercury of
that Metal is not to be destroyed. And if the mercury of Metals when separated
from its external sulphur, be not to be changed either by Art or Nature, but
only by its compeer, which is the Tincture already prepared, then it must
necessarily follow, that common Gold cannot be an ingredient in the work of the
Elixir before fermentation; which was the thing we undertook to prove. Nay
further, either the Art of transmutation of Metals is false, or else metallic
mercury is indivisible, for if it were divisible, it would be utterly unfit for
the work in the particular of projection.

And if they suppose that the A^kahest, constructive liquor, or universal
menstruum, which we grant is able to separate the external sulphur from Metals;
nay, even from Gold it self, were able to divide, change or overcome metallic
Mercury, when separated from its external sulphur, they flatly argue against
the plain assertion of our Author Helmont, who denies it to be possible either
by Art or Nature. And it is the unanimous affirmation of all the Masters, that
in their first work, their Water is the Patient, and their fixed grain, or
Sulphur their Agent, that does work upon it, overcome, and coagulate it.

And if they urge the Authority of Paracelsus and Helmont, D^ vit. long. l. 3.
c. 3.
the former of which says: Auro enim quatenus aurum est, corrosivum praestat,
and citra corrosivum mortuum est. Pot. Medic. p. 480.
And the latter says, Sensi ergo, aurum absque corrosivo suo proprio, esse
mortuum: mortuum inquam, nisi radicaliter a suo corrosivo penetretur. Supposing
by this, that Gold though dead, as it is dug forth of the earth, or melted
in fire, does yet become alive, and quickened by it its proper corrosive, or
their menstruum, so that it thereby has gotten a vegetative and generative
power, and therefore is most fit for the first work. In which opinion they may
be confirmed by many good Authors, if they be understood according to the
letter. But they must excuse us if we be not of their judgment, for we shall
easily grant that Gold is shut up and dead in respect of yielding any remedies
to cure diseases withal, except it be opened and loosed with their only
constructive liquor, which separates its sulphur* and salt, in which does lie
the medical virtue (as we shall show more at large anon) but notwithstanding
the mercurial part of it remains indivisible, and cannot be changed by the
power of that liquor, nor by no sublunary except its compeer. But take a full
answer from the said Authors, who (whatsoever any may think) did not in so main
a point contradict themselves, but did harmoniously agree.

Butler p. 594.
For Helmont tells us; Profecto, metallica corpora, juxta suos mercurios clausa
sunt sigillo anaticae homogeneitatis aequaliter: Sed sulphura eorum nequaquam
nobis indignata, colloquia praebent, modo familiaria reddantur.

And further he says, Attamen mercurius illius metalli manet indestuctibilis.
Hinc Paracelsus in vexatione praefata: etsi metallum destraxeris decies
millies: attamen a destructionibus semper resurget long perfectius. Tria prim.
p. 408.
Et in Archidoxis lib. de separat. elementorum cap. de Metallis unumquodque
Elementorum in specie olci destructionis metallicae, potest reduci iterum, in
metallum album, pristinum and malleabile, excepto elemento ignis, quod
tincturam sive sulphur continet.

From whence we may note, 1. That all Metals in respect of their Mercuries are
equally shut up and sealed with the seal of anatical homogeneity; so that their
Mercuries do yield us no Medicines, however wrought upon by their constructive
liquors, but their Salts and Sulphurs do hearken unto us, if rendered familiar,
and separated with that grand and universal solvent.

2. That the Mercury of those Metals remains indestructible, and not to be
changed from a metallic form, or precipitated; but if they be never so often
destroyed, they will arise more perfect then before.

3. And that the Sulphurs and Salts (in which only consists the Medical
virtue) may (but doubtless not without their great solvent) be separated from
their Mercurial bodies, which all remain white after their Sulphurs and Salts
be separated from them; which white bodies may again be reduced into Anonymous
Metals: of which Paracelsus says thus much. Archidox l. 4. p. 13 13.
Tandem ascendent obscuri duo colores, unus albus, alter vero juxta metalli
naturam, and conditionem. And after again, Album vero si reduxeris, habebis
inde malleabile corpus album and metallicum, quod cognosci nequit sub qua
specie contineatur.

From whence note, 1. That he there names water wherein the Metals must be
dissolved and putrefied, but according to his usual custom does tacitly omit
to declare what kind of water it should be; when doubtless according to
Helmont, and truth it self, it was their constructive liquor or Alkahest; for
nothing else would radically dissolve Metals, and that not without a praevious
digestion or putrefaction. De Li^hias. c. 4. p. 33, 34.
For Helmont tell us, In aliis vero liquorum activitatibus, corpus nunquam
potest se radicaliter commiscere liquori solventi. Ideoque corroditur quidem,
at non solvitur intime, uti ad transformationem formalem alioqui, requiritur.

And a little after, Itaque terreum corpus, sive dissolvatur per corrosivum,
sive non, pristinum suum esse servat. Eo quod istud dissolvens non peneiret
dissolutum, in radicali vinculo connexionis. Quod tamen in transmutandis
essentialibus, est per necessarium. Discant ergo Chymia Tyrones, quod corpora
non resolvantur per corrosivorum calcinationes. Licet etiam saepe repetitas:
nisi intercurrat fermentalis impressio, per putrefactionem, quae praecedit
quamlibet radicalem solutionem.

2. That the mercury of the Metals, as well as their Salts and Sulphurs, are
brought over the helm, and that the white may be reduced into a metallic
malleable white body, which cannot be known under what species it falls.

3. That in these Salts or Sulphurs the medical virtue lies hid, and that they
are colored according to the several Metals from whence they proceed. As thus:
Ex Sole vel auro spadiceum, ex Luna lazurium, ex Mart rubeum and valde
obscurum, ex Mercurio album, ex Saturno lividum atque plumbeum, ex Venere
viride prorsus, ex Jove flavum. And these in the bottom, the being at the top.

Tria prim. p. ^^8.
2. The second Argument that I shall use, arises from that immovable Axiom that
the Adeptists have laid down, and is so strongly, and pertinently prosecuted by
Helmont: which is that: Facilius est aurum construere, De Lithias. c. 8. p. 70.
quam destruere: Also quod sit long facilius, aurum ex non auro construere,
quam aurum natural destruere. Theatr. Chym. p. 828.
And another says; Qui aurum scit destruere, ita quod amplius non sit aurum,
is ad maximum arcanum pervenit. Art. aurif. Rosar. p. 152.
And another says, Qui auri destructionem ignorant, constructi^^em ejus ex
cursu naturae necessario habet ignorare. Facilius itaque est aurum construere
quam destruere. To these add that of Geber: Sum. perf. c. 11. p. 42.
Attentaverunt forte, quod sit fortis compositionis, sed quam fortis
compositionis sit, non attentaverunt. We shall only urge Helmonts conclusion
from the two former, and leave the mystery and seeming contradictions in the
rest, because we intend but that only point, and he concludes thus. Tria
prim. p. 408.
Quotquot ergo promittunt auri vel mercurii separationes, nec tamen aurum
peculiosa quantitate construere sciunt, cum nesciant, quod est long facilius,
credant etiam se nescire, quod long est adhuc difficilius. Ideo Bacon,
inquirens primam artis materiam, perque omnia mundi corpora discurrens, negat
aurum and argentum, esse materiam artis: eo quod sit plane impossibilis
eorundem reductio in sulphur and argentum vivum, De Lithias. c. 8. p. 70.
unde fiat filius ignis tantus in amore Philosophorum. And so finally urges
that, That either the Adeptists do lie and are deceived, or themselves the
young Writers in Chemistry.

So we shall close this point (wherein we have been so tedious) with a few
Authorities of the best Philosophers.

1. And first that of the learned Author of the Tractatus aureus; Mas. Herm. p.
45, 46.
who says, Verum benevolus lector informatus sit, quod metalla, utpote aurum
and argentum, in forma sua metallica, materia nostri lapidis non fuit: medium
autem sunt inter nostram materiam, and perfecta metalla, quemadmodum nostra
materia medium est inter illa, and magnum nostrum lapidem.

2. To the same purpose is that of Lully, Test. Theor. c. 56.
who says, Et ideo bonus artista capit metalla pro mediis in opere magisterii,
and specialiter solemn and lunam. Theatr. Chym. vol. 4. p. 94.
Ideo, quia illa duo venerunt in co^qualitate temperata, and multum depurata de
sulphuris and argenti vivisubstantia, cocta pura, and been digesta ingenio
naturae, ad quam proportionem Artista in vanum se vexaret, si a principiis
naturalibus, sine realibus mediis pro intention faciendi velit incipere. M^s.
Herm. p. 4^.
To which add what is quoted forth of his Codicil: where he says, Sine illis
duobus, auro and argento-videlicet, ars ista perfecta fieri nequit, quam hac in
re purissima sulphuris substantia sit, quam natura plenarie purificavit: ad
quam purificationem perveniendi ars multo est debilior, quam natura, ad quam
tamen pervenire nequit, etiamsi in eo maxumopere desudet.

Art. Aurif. p. 140.141.
3. This also is a most remarkable passage: Ex hoc patet, quod aurum
Philosophorum, non est aurum vulgi, nec in color, nec in substantia. So that
if not either in color of substance, it must be another thing; which is to be
noted.

Theatr. Chym. vol. 1. p. 757.
4. That of Trevisan is carefully to be weighed and considered; who after he
has persuaded us to leave Alloms, Vitriols, Salts, and the like; and Animals,
and all that proceeds from them; and all Minerals, and the Metals alone. For
although from them there be an entrance, and that their matter ought to be
compounded of Argent vive, as all Philosophers affirm; and that this is no
where else to be found but in the Metals, as appears by many testimonies
there cited; and that by them all, it is affirmed that Metals are nothing else
but Argent vive, congealed by gradual decoctions; yet he concludes thus: Hic
non obstantibus omnibus affirmativis rationibus, ipsa (scilicet metalla) non
sunt lapis noster, dum in forma sunt metallica: nam impossible est unam and
eandem materiam habere duas formas. From whence, if it be a truth that Helmont
holds forth, That metallic Mercury, can be changed by no sublunary Agent,
except its compeer, but that still it will remain a Metal not to be altered
from that state either by Art or Nature: then seeing that it immortally and
immutably remains in its metallic form, except changed by its compeer, which
we assert to be the tincture already prepared, then of necessity it cannot be
an ingredient in the first work, which was that we undertook to make good.

5. I shall only give two Authorities in this particular, Mus. Herm. p. 222,
223.
and so conclude. One is this by Johannes Mehung; who says, Aurum itaque ex
mineralibus optimum esse mihi haud ignotum est: nihilominus tamen neque in
forma, neque materia, ad perfectionem suam transgrediendam, ullam aliquam habet
efficaciam. Nullam siquidem majorem operationem habet, ut amplius aliquid, quam
seipsum, perficiat, qualem qualem etiam artem homo huic adhibeat. Si quis enim
affirmare conaretur, quod reserandum, and in argentum vivum redigendum illud
esset, is hac in re plus justo stultesceret, cum ex auro nihil amplius, quam
quod in eo est elicere possit. And a little after: Imo adhuc amplius affirmo,
quod destruere, conficiendi auri, minime via sit. The other for brevity sake I
commend to be considered of by the Reader, where he may find it at large in the
Via Veritatis unicae, in the Musaeum Hermeticum, p. 266, 267.

Now what clear light I have brought in this particular to the dark places in
Paracelsus, Helmont, and the rest, will be known unto those that have thoroughly
studied their Writings, and do solidly understand them. And I hope that divine
Providence will be pleased to open these Mysteries to the meek and lowly, and
keep them still veiled from the proud and wicked.

2. The next thing we proposed to handle, is concerning Aurum potabile and the
Tincture of Gold; which may be much cleared by what we have here spoken in this
Chapter, and by some things that we have before mentioned, though upon another
occasion. But to open it more largely, we shall draw some particulars from what
has been spoken, and add some more weighty considerations.

Chrysostom. passim, p. 192.

Id. Sept. Plan. Terrestr. p. 162.


1. Angelus Sala, a laborious, learned and honest Chemist, writ a Treatise of
common Gold, therein laboring strenously to prove that it cannot by Art be
brought into such a condition, as may be properly said to be potable, in either
of those acceptations; as either Oil or Water, which of themselves are liquid,
nor as Salts, which though of themselves neither liquid nor potable, yet
infused in any moist and liquid substance, will then become potable. But this
he means, that though its body may be divided into such small atoms, or
particles, that mixed with wine or some other liquor, and so give it another
color, or a new tincture, yet that it is not thereby radically dissolved, but
may again be reduced into the metallic form of Gold, of which he gives many
clear and learned instances. Thus far this Author (according to what he knew)
has said right, and so much is confirmed by Helmont, Progym. Me^. p. 68.
who not only grants that common gold may be reduced into a light-red
colored oil, but also teaches the open and plain process thereof. Yet after
all concludes that it is reducible into metallic Gold again, in these words:
Est enim sum levigatum, imo and durum, solidum, malleabile, ac fixissimum
corpus, quod jam in naturam versum videtur. At sane mentitus ille liquor, in
pristinum auri pondus, and corpus, facile redigitur. And again, Etenim post
quam scivi corpora denodare, Po^. Medic. p. 480.
per consentanea suis principiis radicalibus^: tum primum coepi, cum salutari
taedio, irridere, stolidas credulitates meas, quibus olim aurum dissolvi: ejus
tamen potabili succo minus profec^, quam simplicis alicujus decocto. Deinceps
vero potui aurum dissolvere, butyri, resinae, atque vitrioli facie ludere. At
nusquam inveni virtutes auro tributas, eo quod nostris sic etiam fermentis
reluctaretur. And in some other places he has things to the same purpose; from
whence we shall commend these particulars to be noted.

1. That common Gold may by vulgar Chemistry be brought into the form of a
light red-coloured oil, but that not profitable at all in medicinal virtue, and
may easily be again reduced into the fixed and malleable body of Gold; and thus
far only Sala was experienced in, and in this respect only his Arguments are
good and conclusive.

2. But that notwithstanding Gold and other Metals may be dissolved per
consentanea suis principiis radicalibus, which thing was unknown unto Sala; and
therefore we may very well take notice, that conclusions drawn from the
experience of one man, nay of many, will not necessarily infer a general rule:
for Helmont was once ignorant of this liquor that was consentaneous to the
radical, proper principles of Gold; and therefore for him then to have
concluded generally that there was no such liquor as would radically dissolve
Gold, had been false, since he knew it afterward: and what a thousand knows
not, one that is none of them may know.

2. We have in this Chapter before sufficiently showed that the color,
tincture, or sulphur of common Gold, may be by Art separated from its body,
afterward remaining white, and an Anonymous Metal, and not to be destroyed by
Art or Nature. But that we may make it clear beyond all exception, we shall add
some further proofs. H^lmont tells us, speaking of his Arcanum Coralinum, which
is common Quicksilver fixed by the liquor Alkahest: Lib. volup. vivent. p. 386.
N^n etiam auri color, sulphur, aut tinctura alvum subducunt. By which he
clearly grants that the color, sulphur, or tincture of Gold may be separated
from it; but that it does not loose the belly, or purge as the Arcanum
Coralinum does. And in another place he says, Tria prim. p. 408.
Quod aurum quidem sit^ corporum constantissimum i^igne, sed suae constantiam
separationis mutua^ a mercurio: adeo si sulphur ejus includat dualitatem
heterogeneam; id mercurium minime attingit. Admitto quidem, quod mercurius per
compositionem transmutationis, and maritationem sulphurum metallicorum, fiat
metallum, and hoc sit destructibile ratione dualitatis sui sulphuris: Attamen
merourius illius metalli manet indestructibilis. From whence he implies
plainly, That common Gold and other Metals have in them an heterogeneous
duality, in regard of their external sulphurs, and that this may be separated,
or in respect of it the Metal may be destroyed, yet that the Mercury of that
Metal is indestructible. And again, Ibid.
which may be is quoted before: Unumquodque elementorum in specie olei
destructionis metallicae, potest reduci iterum in metallum album pristinum, and
malleabile excepto elemento ignis, quod tincturam sive sulphur continet. Of
which we have spoken largely before. And again to repeat somewhat, he says:
Imo licet aurum radicaliter in parts heterogeneas, salem scilicet, sulphur, ac
mercurium se pateretur sequestrari (quod nullatenus naturae, nisi per unicum
liquorem constructivum est possibile) Illud tamen in mercurii homogeneitate,
and naturae and arti impossible. Quia in mercurio non est reperibilis
diversitas, qualis alioqui in tinctu^a auri hujusque albedine. From whence it
is most manifest that the sulphur or tincture of common Gold may be separated
by that only one constructive liquor; bu^ that the remaining body of the
metallic Mercury (which is truly a Metal, though anonymous, and not to be
known under what species it falls) is impo^^ible either to Art or Nature to be
divided or separated. And this he has plainly showed of Copper; where he
declares, Non est ergo ignis veneris spiritus vitrioli, utcunque exquisite
rectificatus: sed ignis ille est, sulphur cupri volatile, in forma olei
viridis, melle dulcius, and a corpore mercuriali sui cupri plane separatum.
Residuum autem cuprum manet album, nec unquam viridescens per aeruginem, ut
neque amplius ex numero septem metallorum. Quia evasit notum atque anonymum
metallum: non potest autem haberi ignis veneris, nisi cum plenaria: cupri
destructione corporisque mercurialis ipsius veneris vola^ilizatione. Quod
quantumcunque sit volatile, Do Lithias. c. 8. p. 69.
in forma olei: facili tamen negotio, postmodum iterum reducitur in metallum
album ignotum, atque sub malleo extensibile. Sed ignis sive sulphur veneris,
non item amplius reducitur in metallum per se. Which is a clear demonstration,
not only that the sulphurs or tinctures of Metals are by Art^to be separated
from them, but (excepting the manifesting of the matter and manner of the
preparing of the Alkahest, which he and all other Adeptists are bound to
conceal) also the way of separating them, and the qualities both of those
sulphurs and their mercurial parts are showed. A point of high concernment
rightly to be weighed and understood; and it is no great marvel that so many
frivolous, and ignorant disputes have been, and are about Aurum potabile, or
the tincture of Gold, which can never be truly resolved but by him that
knows, I^id c. 3. p. 24.
and is possessor of that universal solvent. Thus much more we shall only add
in this particular; where he faith: Quoties namque a merucriis sales, and
sulphura distinxi, admiratus sum illorum ignaviam, horumque vero principiorum
dignitates. Where again he declares that the Salts and Sulphurs of Metals are
to be divided from their Mercuries; and that the Mercuries of Metals in medical
virtue (for we have showed by his authority before, that the mercuries of
Metals are all equally shut up with the seal of anatical homogeneity, and yield
no medical virtue at all, but that their sulphurs do hearken unto us, if
rendered familiar) but did wonder at the efficacy of their Salts and Sulphurs.
And from this root does spring and arise those medicaments prepared by the
Alkahest (but not otherwise to be had) that Paracelsus called Hematina: Pot.
Medic. p. 479.
of which Helmont says he had taught that which was sufficient, and therefore
concludes thus; Quapropter ejusmodi Hematina admirandas in re medica
operationes perficiunt. Sensi ergo Hematina Solis and Lunae, quod etiamsi ex
puritate sui balsami comfortarent: tamen aliquid alieni in se continere,
respectu nostri. From whence we may note, that these Hematine medicines may be
had forth of Gold and Silver; but not without the help of their constructive
liquor, or universal solvent: and therefore (as he says elsewhere) are not
ordained for remedies for the Poor; and that scarce one Artist of a thousand,
can rightly get these rare and excellent medicines contained in their Salts and
Sulphurs, separated from their Mercuries, which contain no medical efficacy at
all.

3. From hence may be resolved that great question, whether common Gold may be
made so potable, as never to be reduced again into a metallic body? To which
we say that it plainly appears both by this Author and Paracelsus, that
common Gold and Silver may by their great solvent be brought into an oily
substance or liquor, in two forms or colors; the Salts and Sulphurs of them
according to the Metals from whence they were taken, of diverse colors (which
has been showed before) but the Mercuries of all the Metals in a white form or
color, which by it self may be reduced into a malleable and metallic body,
but their salts and sulphurs never. For as no external metallic sulphur is a
Metal, so every metallic Mercury is really a Metal. So that if they mean by
aurum potabile, or any other Metal, the whole substance brought into a potable
liquor, and never again to be reduced into a metallic body, notwithstanding
the Arguments of ten thousand to the contrary, we positively affirm with the
Adeptists, that the mercurial part of it is always reducible into a Metal, and
remains immortal and immutable, never to be divided or changed, but by its
compeer. But if they mean by aurum potabile, or the tincture of Gold, the
external sulphur (which contains its salt) separated from its remaining white
mercurial body (in which is contained its internal and inseparable sulphur,
agent, or verus ignis naturae) then we absolutely affirm, that it may be
brought into a condition of potability, at least like salts to be dissolved in
liquors, and that it is never possible either to Art or Nature, to reduce that
sulphur or salt into a metallic body again; and this when the Philosophers
speak of aurum potabile drawn forth of common Gold, is that only which in that
respect they truly understand, and the only end they aim at. To confirm which
take these particulars; for Helmont says, Potest. med. p. 479.
Sensi quoque, remedia mineralia, in salis naturam mutata (non intelligo, quae
per adjunctum condiuntur salem) secum gestare, sua semina, in gradum tamen
exaltata. Quibus etsi totum metallum resolvatur in alienam dispositionem (quae
est magisterii) attamen quia exin mox mercurius currens elicitur: quicquid
salis resolubilis naturam vere assumpsit, non est mercurius, sive metalli
interior, and immutabilis nucleus, sed sal^em sulphur ejus. From whence it is
apparent, that mineral Medicines changed into the nature of Salt, do bear their
seminal efficacy but in an exalted degree; he does not mean by the adjoining of
salts unto them, but of their own interior and separable salt and sulphur. And
that by this their solvent the whole Metal is brought into another disposition,
(which he calls a magistery) from whence the mercurial part being separated,
that dissoluble salt is not the internal and immutable kernel of the Metal, but
only its sulphur. Therefore as he tells us in another place, Pharmacop. p. 461.
A magistery is the total substance of a thing reduced into its primitive
juice, in which retroition of solution, the heterogeneous juices are separated
on their own accord, for the most part with diverse bottoms, swimming in course
one above another, one chief remaining, or falling to the bottom, famous in
diversity containing the seminal entity. And this way of preparing is unknown
to the vulgar Chemists, because not to be performed, but by the liquor
Alkahest, and such a magistery is aurum potabile, which when the Gold is
dissolved by their liquor, Paracelsus tells us, that that which is white
swimmeth above, and is the mercurial part that may be reduced into a white
anonymous Metal, Ibid. p. 467.
and that the Quintessence in which is the Medical virtue, remains in the
bottom. And of this way of preparing, take Helmonts caution in these words;
Haec medendi pars, solertem requirit, ac gnarum naturae Secretarium. Quia in
illa part, amplissimae medicaminum opes, and deaurata glaurae suppellex
invenitur. To which I shall only subjoyn what that learned and laborious
Chemist Ioachimus Polemann has taken notice of, Theatr. Chym. vol. 6. p. 636.
in relation to Paracelsus process of preparing aurum potabile, or the tincture
of Gold, by the spirit of Wine; which is thus: Quain re ( speaking that the
Alkahest is of the nature of an Alcali) tanto magis me confirmavit annotatio
Philosophi nostri (id est Helmontii) quam propria manu in ma^gine Chiru^giae
magnae Paracelsi, p. 202. in folio juxta praeparationem tincturae auri
scripsit: ubi Paracelsus docet, si super calcem auri alcool vini affundatur,
tunc animam auri extractma iri. Hac occasion annotatio Philosophi nostri haec
fuit. Nisi sal circulatum insit spiritui vini, tinctura ex au^o non transit in
eum. And so enough of this particular.

4. The Philosophers often make mention of another sort of aurum potabile, or
the tincture of Gold, which is not drawn forth of common Gold, but forth of
another subject; and this we touched where we spoke of Astralish Gold, and
shall here again mention it more at full. Those that will take the pains
seriously to consider what Paracelsus has written concerning the Primum ens
auri, in his Book of Renovation and Restoration, and in diverse other places,
may (if they can understand that dark and subtle Author) find much
satisfaction in this particular; to which we refer the studious and curious
searcher of the Secrets of Nature.

In the next place take what Rhumelius, a learned German Author, Antid. Chym.
p. 231. and p. 239.
and one who doubtless was Master of the universal solvent, says to this
purpose: That all particulars whereby to obtain aurum potabile, or the tincture
of Gold, are in vain, and fruitless, except by the universal solvent. And he
further says, Out of this spiritual like matter, from whence the beginnings of
Gold do grow, or arise, may aurum potabile be made, that is of more efficacy,
and better then forth of common Gold it self. Ibid. p. 245.
Again, That aurum potabile may be made forth of the Primum ens vel ex auro
imperfecto, vel e radice solis; that is, more perfect, more efficacious, and
better then that which is made forth of common Gold it self. Ibid. p. 248.
Again he says, That he did prepare two sorts of aurum potabile one forth of
perfect Gold, that is, common, and perfect, fine Gold. The other e radice
solis, or forth of unripe and imperfect Gold. Sometimes they call their Elixir
aurum potabile, because it will cure the most diseases that are curable; and
that it is sprung from that root which was of a golden nature, and many things
to the same purpose. Man. de Lap. p. 138.
For so Paracelsus having taught the composition of their great tincture, he
says; Ex hoc enim (ex electro minerali immaturo scilicet) font scatet verum
aurum potabile, nec melius alibi reperiri potest. And a little before, Dico
tibi autem in veritate, nullum melius fundamentum esse medicinae totius, Ibid.
p. 137.
quam in Electro latet. And further: Sed in nostro dicto Electro praeparato,
tanta virtus latet homines curandi, ut certior, and praestantior medicina in
toto mundo, non p^ssit reperiri. And of this, thus Helmont. Inprimis tinctura
Lili, ab Electro minerali immaturo in vinum vitae redacta, cujus una pars
metallus primus: altera vero membrorum essentia. Arcan. Paracelsi, p. 790.

5. Now we come to the last member of this tedious Chapter concerning the
universal solvent, by Paracelsus first, and after by Helmont called Alkahest;
about which we shall be brief. For we intend not here to speak either of the
subject forth of which it is prepared (which is one of the Adeptists greatest
secrets, nay indeed the only thing that they have most labored to veil and
conceal, all other points of their great work being for the most part plainly
opened, either by one of them or another, in one manner or another, in one
place or another* nor of its preparation, which Helmont says is most tedious,
nor of its manifold names, and Epithetes, nor of the innumerable virtues of it
in general, because (if it please divine Providence to grant us health and
life) we have something in a readiness to all those purposes, that may come to
public view hereafter, if we can judge the World worthy of it. Only here we
shall say, that the Alkahest of Paracelsus and Helmont is the same specifically
with that universal solvent or menstruum of Sendivogius, Lully and the ancient
Philosophers, though many may stumble at the bold assertion, and others carp,
contradict, or condemn us. For we conceive we have in part sufficiently evinced
that they are parallel, by what we have said in comparing the effects of
Helmont's Alkahest with the Chalybeate water of Sendivogius, that they both
would as easily dissolve and volatilize the body of Gold, as Ice or Snow is
melted in warm water; which they could not perform, if they were not both of
the same specific nature in their effects, and operations. To which we shall
only add one or two Authorities more, and urge the conclusions that may be
drawn from them. The first is that of Helmont, Lid. de Febrib. c. 14 p. 52.
where speaking of the Arcanum Corallinum, which is prepared by drawing of the
Alkahest from common vendible Quicksilver, which is done in one quarter of an
hour: and there he quoteth Raymund Lully, who, his friends, and the King being
present, did coagulate Quicksilver, and none knew the manner except the King.
And says, In qua coagulatione istud est singular. Quod liquor Alkahest, idem
in numero, pondere and activitate tantum valet millesima action, quantum
prima. Quia agit sine reactione patientis. And then tells that it is to be
made into small powder, without any remaining part of the liquor. And to be
distilled five times with the water drawn from the whites of Eggs, and then it
is made red as Coral, and then concludes, and says; Iste pulvis dulcis est,
sixus ferens omnem follium ignem, nec perit in plumbi examine. Spoliatur tamen
virtute medica, dum in album metallum reducitur. To this we shall join the
place in Lully hinted at by Helmont, Theatr. Chym. vol. 4. Theor. Lullii c. 87.
p. 139.
who says; Et pro certo, in praesentia, and voluntate certorum sociorum
argentum vivum vulgar congelavimus, per suum menstruale, and alias uni de
sociis nostris, in cujus eramus socie^ate express, quasi ad duas Leucas prope
Neapolim, in quo loco in p^aesentia Physici regis, and unius fratris de sancto
Io. de Rhodis, and Bernardi de la Bret, and aliorum, congelari fecimus argentum
vivum per suam menstrualem naturam. Et quamvis hoc vidissent, and manifest
palpassent, tamen non potuerunt scire quid esset, nisi simpliciter solummodo
rustico more, regia majestate salva. Etsi realiter and Philosophice cognoscere
potuissent per speculationem intellectivae virtutis dictum menstruale ac suas
virtutes, artem ac scientiam absque dubio habuissent, prout dicti socii, qui
per nos multum been intellexerunt manifest, and habuerunt. Et tunc argentum
vivum vulgar dimisissent ad creandum lapidem, and ad exuberandam suam
humiditatem, and ideo nos cogit ratio, quodignoranti habeamus illud celare.
From all which we may take these most remarkable observations. 1. That this
coagulating common Quicksilver by two such grand Masters as were Lully and
Helmont, was no vulgar knack, but a true Philosophical work, else it had been
unworthy the naming by two such serious and learned persons.

2. That Helmont would never have hinted at Raymund Lully's coagulating common
Quicksilver, but only that it was to show that their menstruum was
specifically the same in effect and operation, otherwise he would not by his
knowledge of the Alkahest have numbered himself amongst the Adeptists, as he
says; which is more clearly demonstrated by the Adeptists, and mecum norint
Adepti, but that the knowledge and possession of this liquor, is the only key,
and the most noble of all their secrets.

3. We may here from Helmont note the excellency of this liquor, that it still
remained the same in number, weight, and activity, and was as prevalent in the
thousand operation, as in the first: which is an admirable and stupendous
quality.

4. We may observe the great energie and penetrativeness of this liquor, that
in so short a time as a quarter of an hour, could so perfectly fix, and
coagulate Quick silver.

5. It is as clear as the light of the Sun at noonday, that this that Lully
calls a menstrual humor, was of the same specific nature with the liquor
Alkahest of Helmont, because they both produced the same real effects in fixing
and coagulating common Mercury.

6. But the main thing above all the rest, that we are here to take notice of
is, That whosoever is the Master, and Owner of this most precious liquor, has
the gates open to the Treasure of Treasures, even to the attainment of the
great Elixir, or the Philosophers Tincture: for Lully tells us faithfully and
truly, that if the standers by had known this menstrual liquor really and
philosophically by the speculation of an intellective power, and its virtues,
they had known without doubt, and had had the Art and Science it self.

7. And therefore because this is the only key that opens the Rosary of the
Philosophers, they are bound in all reason to hide and conceal it from the
ignorant and unworthy.

8. That those that know this will dismiss common Mercury from creating the
Stone, or exuberating its humidity; so that common Mercury is no ingredient (as
many do too vainly and stiffly maintain) in the composition of the great Elixir.

9. We may observe from Helmont, That this powder of common Quicksilver, when
coagulated by the Alkahest, is sixth and endures all the blasts of the bellows,
neither does perish in the trial of Lead; and therefore has as great a
fixation and perfection as silver; which is most seriously to be weighed and
considered.

10. We may from hence note, That in the coagulating of common Quicksilver by
the Alkahest, the Atoms of the homogenous Mercury, are brought more close
together and joined per minima, then they were before; and the external and
combustible Sulphur, which is less or more in all common Quicksilver, and in
which is the medical virtue, is, by the radical piercing of the Alkahest the
smallest particles of the Mercury protruded, and extroverted, which Sulphur is
without question burned or separated, in flu^ing down the fixed and coagulated
Mercury into a white Metal, and so of necessity must thereby lose its medical
virtue.

We might here also say something of that which they call Horizontal Gold, but
a more fit place to handle it will be where we write of common Quicksilver:
only here we shall say a word or two concerning the compeer of their Alkahest,
Ign. Act. Reg. p. 334
for Helmont says, speaking of that great liquor, and its virtues: Quibus
scilecet unicus and idem liquor Alkahest, omnia totius universi corpora
tangibilia, perfect reducit in vitam eorundem primam, absque ulla sui
mutatione, viriumque diminutione. A solo autem suo compari, subter jugum
trahitur, atque permutatur.

From whence we may note these two things, 1. That its general virtue is to
reduce all tangible bodies of the whole Universe into their first life, without
the mutation of it self, or the diminution of its virtues, which is high and
wonderful.

2. But that it is brought under the yoke, and thoroughly changed, only by its
compeer; and the question is, what that compeer is? To which we answer, that as
the Alkahest is the key to the knowledge of the Philosophers great work, and is
an ingredient into it; so that which they call their earth, fire, sulphur,
agent, king, or male, is that which does coagulate, work upon, subjugate, and
change this their water into that which they call their ripened or exuberated
sulphur, No Lum. Chy. Tract. 11. p. 333.
or tincture, before it be fermented; and this is confirmed by Sendivogius, who
says: Primum resolvetur terra in aquam, quae mercurius Philosophorum dicitur,
and illa aqua resolvit illa corpora Solis and Lunae, and consumit ea, ut non
remaneat nisi pars decima cum una part: Theatr. Chym. vol. 1. p. 832.
and hoc erit humidum radicale metallicum. And Trevisan says: Nulla aqua
naturali reductione speciem metallicam dissolvit, nisi illa quae permanet cum
specie metalli in materia, and forma, and quam metalla ipsa possunt recongelare.

CHAP. XIII. Of the description of Silver, and the several ways that the Ore of
it is gotten; and of its Mines, conditions, and striking passages.
NExt in goodness to Gold, Silver by all Authors is most esteemed, Last Will
and Test. c. 4. p. 86.
and of it Basilius says thus. Silver Ore is wrought in its own stone, of a
perfect nature, and most noble earth, and of a fixed clear sulphur, salt, and
mercury; which with a mixture does join in a fixed and firm uniting, and
appears of a degree lower then the Gold is, and is the best Metal next to
Gold; and in the fining of it loses very little, and is separated per se, or
with other Metals joined in the fire. Not. and Mor. Hist. and. c. 5. p. 216.
And of it Acosta speaks thus. And first I will say that the reason why they
give Silver the second place among all other Metals, is, for that it
approaches nearer to Gold then any other, because it is more durable, and less
indamaged by the fire, and more malleable then any other: yea, it passes Gold
in brightness, beauty, and sound; the which is clear and agreeable; for the
color is more conformable and resembling the light, and the sound more
piercing, more lively, and more delicate. And the description of this Metal,
Spec. Alchym. c. 2. p. 259.
Bacon, according to the Ancients, gives thus. Silver is a clean body, pure,
almost perfect, procreated of Argent vive pure, almost fixed, clear and white,
and of such a kind of sulphur, and to it is awanting a little fixation and
color, Phys. Herm. c. 4. p 335.
with weight. Pollius thus. Silver is a Metal consisting of a white tincture,
and Mercury well concocted, and constantly coagulated. The most of the Ancients
do in their descriptions agree with this of Bacons, and therefore needless here
to repeat more of them. Mus. Worm. l. 1 Sect. 3. c. 3. p. 115.
The learned Wormius gives this description of it. This perfect Metal is next
unto Gold, consisting of Mercury, and Sulphur almost fixed, extensible like unto
Gold, but in weight lighter then it, as also then Lead, bearing the force of
the fire. They gather that it does participate more of Mercury then of Sulphur,
as well by the color, as the liquefaction. But an indication of Sulphur, the
vehemence of the odor of Sulphur, when it is fluxed and refined, to be
perceived by the nostrils. But that it does not reach the fixedness of Gold, is
manifest from this, that in caemen^o Regali, and Antimony and Sulphur,
something of it does perish, and is burned, when by fusion they are mixed
together. And also when it is touched with Aqua fortis, or stained with their
vapors, it emits a rust of a blue color.

And these may seem sufficient for describing the nature and conditions of
Silver, we shall only add what Paracelsus says to this particular; Lib. de
Min. Tract. 1. p. 348.
who, though he may be disesteemed with many, yet is the account that he gives
of it, as good as the best Author we have read; which stands thus. Silver is
generated of a white Sulphur, Salt, and Mercury; which being prepared most
subtily, and made diaphanous, are rendered of a fixed nature; that is to say,
they are fixed of their proper nature next unto Gold, abiding in the test by
Lead, or per cineritium: but not in Antimony, the caementum Regale, nor in the
Quartation. All which passages do fully show the qualities and properties of
this noble Metal, so that we need not sum up the particulars.

1. Now we shall proceed to declare from the best Authors, how the Ore of
Silver lies in its passages in the bowels of the Earth, the manner of its
Coats, Matrixes, or Coverings: for though some little may be gathered in small
grains in the Rivers, and their muds and sands washed by the force of waters
forth of the tops or sides of the Mountains, yet is that so seldom found, and
in such small quantities, that Authors do write but very little thereof, and we
have not attained the sight of any of it, and therefore shall pass it by. And
as for our own Nation of Great Britain, we have not had the fortune to obtain
any Ore of Silver (that we might justly call a Royal Mine, not to speak that
all Lead Ore contains some silver in it) except some three sorts, two of which
were pretty rich in silver, as containing about sixty six pound in a tun, and
was found in a blewish-grey stone, in some places intermixed with white spar,
and the silver mixed with some Lead, appearing like white and bright grains, as
small almost as Needle points. The third which contained about twenty seven
pound in a tun, was like that which Authors call Galena, or the hardest sort of
Lead Ore. And these are all that of our own experience we can inform the Reader
of; and therefore shall pass to what others deliver to the same purpose.

2. The diligent Observer Josephus Acosta gives us this account very worthy to
be regarded. Hist Ind. c. 5. p. 217.
The Mines of Silver are commonly found in Mountains, and high Rocks very
desert, although they have been sometimes found in Plains, and Champaigns.
There are two different kinds, the one they call straggling, the other fixed and
settled. The straggling, are pieces of Metal found in certain places, the which
drawn away there is no more found. But the fixed veins are those which have a
continuance in depth and length, like to great branches and arms of Trees; and
when they find any one of them, they commonly find many in the same place.
(...) supra p. 218
And further says, The chief places of the Indies from whence they draw
Silver, are New-Spain, and Peru; but the Mines of Peru far surpass the rest:
and amongst all others of the World, those of Potozi. And speaking of the
Mountain Potozi, Ibid. c. 6. p. 219
he says: The ground and soil of this Mountain is dry, cold, and very
unpleasant; yea altogether barren, which neither ingenders, nor brings forth
any fruit, grass, nor grain; it is naturally inhabitable, for the intemperature
of the heaven, and the barrenness of the earth. Ibid. p. 223.
He notes another very remarkable passage, which I cannot but commend to the
Reader; and is this: They say of the rich vein, the first that was discovered,
that the Metal lay above the ground the height of a lance, like unto Rocks,
raising the superficies of the earth, like unto a crest of three hundred foot
long, and thirteen foot broad, and that this remained bare and uncovered by the
deluge. This Vein having resisted the violence and force of the Water, as the
hardest part: The Metal was so rich as it was half Silver, and this Vein
continued in his bounty fifty or threescore stades, which is the height of a
man, and then it failed.

Plin. lib. 33. c. 6.
3. Take this passage of Pliny, Englished by the same Acosta. They find Silver
almost in all Provinces, but that of Spain is the best, which grows and
ingenders in a barren soil, upon Mountains and Rocks. It is a certain and
infallible thing, that in places where they have once discovered any of these
Veins, there are others not far off, which is likewise found in all other
Metals, and for this the Greeks in my opinion called them Metals.

4. Basilius Valentinus thus describes the growing and lying of Silver in its
Clifts, Last Will and Test. c. 4. p. 87, 89.
Rocks, Stones, Earth, and such like other Coats or Coverings. Because nothing
is so fixed, next Gold, then Silver is in its perfection; and is the reason why
Silver-passages are accompanied with white fluxes and mineral veins; next
thereunto are such passages, in which are generated red mineral Sulphur, and
red yellow juyces of the noble Gold. Silver metalline Ore is wrought many times
in a red goldi^hness, and comes forth better then the other; a proof whereof
may be had, if well ordered. White-gold Ore is naturally thus tinged of
white-copper glass, which cause such Ores and passages, by reason of the food
of their perfect Minerals; and with the Glass Ore black fumes are exhaled, and
feed upon Wismuth, Lead, and Tin Ore, wherein Minerals that strike upon the
Lunar passages are greedily refreshed: thus grows the firmest and compactest
Silver Ore of its pure, proper, and unmixed Stone. They carry and produce also,
not only mixed chambers, and Mine-chests, but also several hard and sturdy
mixed Ores in whole Flintworks, and other Copper-flowers, yellow and black Ore,
and are found different in their nature, form, and tincture; so that the one is
more hard, sturdy, slaty, broader, narrower, whiter, blewer in its colors thus
qualified, and natural in its end, middle, and beginning. This is the reason
why these Silver fruits and Ores are found differing in their colors and
forms; the one being more compact, fairer, and of a better gloss then the
other. Sometimes there is found in such a Vein or Passage, firm and compact
Gold, Silver, and Copper; so it is found sometimes at Krenach. There are found
and seen also in a certain Vein and Passage in mixed Lime-stones, Lead, Iron,
and Copper Ore in one union and juncture. And in one Mine is found Copper Ore,
in another is found Silver Ore, and in another Mine is found an Iron stone.
Some silver passages are found also in their natural Zachstones, which either
are in the hanging or lying ones. Silver passages show themselves also with
blue gritty flowers, in hollowed fluxes, in sprinkled marbles, and carry
flint-works of several colors; and these passages and clifts are full of
pleasant silver-colours, of yellow and green, of a color of Goslings; the more
they are mingled with such colors, the more they have wrought. there are some
silver passages and veins which carry three distinct colors, after the manner
of a Rainbow; where the one color works in nature either more closely, or
more mildly then the other, in a curious order; and the one may be discerned
before the other in their passing strokes, and shootings, together with their
chamber colors and floats, as they fell severally, and apart in each Mine-Ore.
Mand. Subter. l. 10. Sect. 3. c. 1, 2, 3, 4. p. 183, 184, 185, 186, 187.


5. Athanasius Kircherus also gives us to understand of several sorts of Silver
Ores found in the several Mines of Hungaria; from whence he had responsions to
his questions sent to inquire about metallic bodies and minerals, some of
which held only Silver, some Gold and Silver, some Gold, Silver and Copper,
and some of other sorts; which may be of singular use to a diligent searcher
after mineral knowledge, which would be over-tedious for us to transcribe, and
therefore we leave them.

6. Wormius has some things in this particular worthy to be noted, Mus. Worm.
l. 1 Sect. 3. c. 3. p. 118, 119.
where he shows what silver Ores he had, and in what Coats they were
contained; for he says: 1. A white Marble, in which did inhere silver of its
own color and red. 2. A white Marble, in which was mixed only silver of its
own color. 3. A white Marble, containing Galena in it, yielding Silver. 4. An
Ash-colored Marble containing silver. 5. And also another of the same kind. 6.
A blue one containing silver. 7. A kind of flint, which they call Quartz, which
contains silver of its own color, and lead. 8. A black Marble, which being
polished shows like the Touchstone, to which also certain veins of Iron do
grow. This is pregnant with silver, so that when it is polished, streaks and
lines of silver are frequently seen in it. 9. That also there is found in the
Groves or Pits of Norway, a certain Mineral of Silver ash-colored, which is
tinged in a certain part of it with a yellow color, and almost an Iron color,
that it is suspected to hold something of Iron. 10. That he had a Mineral of
silver, fruitful enough from Sneberg, which the Germans call Rotgylden ertz. Ut
supra c. 4. p. 120.
11. He tells us, That from the Church of Heerrestad, about four Norway miles,
at the top of a certain Mountain, there are found certain kinds of Earths, in
which the sparks of silver do shine sometimes less, sometimes greater, as also
to be seen in the form of most tender, or small hairs. To which is adjoining a
vein of pure silver of a foot broad; from whence they brought away a piece cut
with a hatchet of a pound weight.


From all which I shall only commend these two particulars to all diligent and
inquisitive Artists.

1. That seeing we have in England so many several places where store of Lead
Ores are gotten, and those Ores also of many several sorts and kinds, that it
might prove worth the cost and labor, to have some small quantities of them
(especially those that are most likely to contain silver) to be tested and
tried per Cineritium, to see what they hold. 2. That whereas often the Miners
find diverse other sorts of Ores and Minerals, which because they yield no Lead,
are commonly thrown away and not regarded; that these also might be tried to
see what they hold; for it is often usual the better is cast away, and the
worser kept.
CHAP. XIV. Of Silver found pure by Nature, that needs no refining by Fire. And
of those sorts that must be purified, their Colors, Mixture, and several Coats
wherein they lie.
WE have in the third Chapter, where we spoke of the growth and vegetability of
Metals, showed that much silver is found pure by Nature, and that needs no
refining by the Fire, but is (as they distinctly and properly call it) statim
suum, which though we have seen now of it our selves (though we have strained
our abilities, and the interest of friends to procure some of it) yet we are
assured from other persons of sufficient veracity who have seen and handled
some of it; and that it is often so found, we shall now prove.

1. Sebastianus Munster, a person of good credit, Germany, Geograph Munst. l.
1. c. 9. p 7.
which is also almost word by word related by Georgius Agricola, who wrote
about the same time, and is also recited, and credited by the learned Wormius,
gives us a most remarkable passage to this purpose. He declares that (contrary
to the opinion of the Ancients) Silver is found pure in diverse places of
Germany, as at Schneberg, Anneberg, Gair, and in the Valley of Ioachim and
Abertham, near the Mountains of Bohemia. Also in the Hill Vosagus in
Lotharingia in the Valley Liberia; and two especially, one at Schneberg called
George, the other at Abertham called Laurence and Theodorick; from whence a
huge treasure of pure silver is dug. And that forth of the Mine called
George at Schneberg there was a great Mass dug, which when Albert Prince of
Saxony descending into the Grove, or Pit, with his followers, had used for a
Table, he is reported to have said, Frederick the Emperor is Great, and rich,
but yet he has not such a table as this. Agricola relating the same story
tells us, De not. Fosse. l. 8. p. 641.
that none of those that remembered that famous Mass has recorded its weight,
which doubtless (he says) was of many Talents. And Wormius reciting the same
thing, Mu^. Worm. l. 1. Sect. 3. c. 3. p. 116.
says: It was thought that this Mass was of many Talents weight. And
subjoyneth: That the King of Denmark, Christian the IV. had a Mass not much
less, dug forth of the Mines of Norway, esteemed to be five Talents weight.
And that in the Grove, or Pit called Divine Benediction, there was found a Mass
of pure Silver, in the Year 1629. the seventh of May, in weight 130 Marks. And
further, Munster says; Another grand Mass weighing ten Attick Talents, was
dug forth of the Mines in the Valley of Ioachim, out of the Grove called
Stella, and Sulcera or Suicera: which Agricola confirms, as but lately dug
up in his time. Vid. ut supr.
And Munster again says: And that many Masses or pieces of pure Silver were
dug up at Abertham, forth of the Grove Theodorick, some weighing one, some
two Attick Talents. And Agricola says, And that many Masses dug forth of
the Grove Theodorick at Abertham of the weight of two Talents, or of one: which
must needs be a Truth, being established by the mouth of two or three such
credible witnesses as these Authors, and one of them an ocular witness too.

2. To this very purpose these Authors tell us further; Munster says, And that
many pieces, some greater, some lesser, were found in the clifts of the stones,
or adhering unto them, or to the Marble. And that nature does figure pure
silver into the form of Trees, Rods, Twigs, or Hairs. And we shall here take
that eminent and pleasant relation of Wormius; who says: That (amongst others
which we shall nominate hereafter) he had an elegant, and excellent Mass of
silver that was statim sui, from the gift of the Lord Stenon Beck, the Kings
Treasurer, which weighed twelve ounces, that did imitate a Vine, with branches
variously spread abroad. For diverse little boughs did arise from the broad root,
being full of fibers, which according to the rise did show more thick truncks,
which were writhen variously amongst themselves, and did embrace one another,
until they did end in boughs and fibers, or small twigs; and so goes on in
that pleasant description, which for brevity we omit, and concludes; That it
was infected with a leaden color, which with a slight friction would go away,
and leave the Metal clean and neat.

3. Agricola tells us: That in the cavities of the De not. Fosse. l. 8. p. 642.
as also little pieces severed from the Rocks, Stones, or Marbles, or cleaving
unto them, or else most slender leaves of the silver do embrace them: or like
Gravel, Sand, or small Grit, is mixed with the earth. And also Nature does form
or figure pure silver into the shape sometimes of trees, sometimes of little
twigs, sometimes of hairs: after which manner it is often found most white with
flaws, like flakes of Snow, which do wholly consist of the least threads of
silver, which sometimes outwardly we see tinged with a golden or other color.
That also is very singular which was sent forth of Hungary unto Kircher, Mund.
Subter. l. 10. Sect. 3. c. 4. p. 189.
and thus described. I send you here a Mineral altogether precious, seeing any
thing more rare may not be found at this time; where you may see the pure
silver flowring forth into its filaments, or little threads; that which shines
yellow is most pure gold, that which is of a blackish color is silver mixed
with gold. And though he do not tell its weight, nor quantity, yet it seems to
have been no very small piece, but is a wonderful and rare evidence of the
vegetation of this Metal. Rulandus does tell us the very same things of the
growing of silver in diverse figures, which we have before quoted. And also
Eucelius in the very same words adding, De re Metal. c. 5. p. 15.
that he had seen an whole Fish, a Serpent, a Scorpion, etc. so formed in the
bowels of the Earth, of such pure silver, which the Germans call Gedygen Silber.

Mus. Worm. l^ 1. Sect. 3. c. 3. ^. 1^6.
4. We shall now show the several sorts of pure silver, so produced by Nature,
that Wormius had in his Musaeum, and were of less weight and bigness then some
of those formerly mentioned.

1. He had a piece of pure native silver equalling 3 ounces in weight, which
appeared to have been greater by far, because the two sides which were large,
had had some parts taken from them, because the footsteps of the Ax or Hatchet,
rendering the two sides plain and equal, did fully show it. When otherwise the
remaining body of the Mass, approaching to a form of triangle, was rough, and
unequal in its figure. 2. Another piece he had that was branched, spreading it
self like unto boughs, or twigs, after a certain manner resembling a Vine,
abounding with the wonderful twistings of leaves and young twigs, drawing with
it little parts of the lapis specularis, or that we call Muscovy Glass, from
which it did grow or arise, showing its roots wonderfully wrapped or twisted
together, and that it did almost equal two ounces in weight, and had it from
the Mines of Norway. 3. Rudiments of the same he had in another lapis
specularis, which (he says) without doubt was from the same Vein, but not
abounding with such plenty as the former Mass. 4. He had another forked piece,
resembling the figure of an Hearts horn, to wit, pure, without any mixture of
stone, or other thing; branched elegantly, and near the ends adorned with its
branches and small twigs. 5. Another he had resembling an hook crooked,
sharpened at both ends, of a white silver color, something yellowish like Oker,
it sticks together in notches, plainly in its other part it was like a
crooked Tooth-picker, such as by Art Workmen are wont to fashion of silver or
gold, in the other part like unto a Crows bill. 6. Another piece he had
crisped, resembling the shrub Southernwood, thick set with little twigs leaning
one to another. 7. He had another piece that was rough, and endowed with diverse
extuberances on the one side, as though infected with Oker, on the other
showing in it certain most elegant Amethystine flowers, like gems. 8. Another
piece he had like thin leaves growing to a stone (to wit) an ash-colored
marble, which sticks to the plate or leaf, and sometimes as it were pierces
it through. 9. He had a capillary or hairy piece of two sorts, one crisped and
writhen together, the other consisting of more thick hairs, most subtle,
plain, and most like to Spider Webs. 10. Besides these enumerated kinds of pure
silver statim sui, he had various elegant particles, which commonly they call
Gaud-stein, in some of which Amethysts, in some Crystals are seen. Some do show
a Dragon fighting with a Lion, some the twisted locks of hair, some trees, some
shrubs, and infinite sports of Nature, etc. And these are sufficient not only
to show that Silver is found pure by nature, without mixture of any other
Heterogeneous substances, but also may further illustrate the growth and
vegetability of this Metal
Now we are to handle those several sorts of silver Ore that is not pure of it
self, but stands in need of refining, purging, or decocting by the fire to
bring it to the perfection of silver, of which there are two sorts: I. Those
that are mixed with other Metals. 2. And those Ores that yield no other Metal
but silver.

Argentum rude, is that Ore that is dug forth of the earth, Mus. Worm. l. 1.
Sect. 3. c. 3 p. ^18.
and has mixed with it some stones, earth, or other Mineral stuff, which must
be separated from it, before it become a pure Metal. Or as Agricola defines it
in Bermanno, which is truly silver, but differs in color; and ere it attain
that color of silver, requires decoction by the fire; and some of these are
mixed with other Metals, of which we have spoken something before, and shall now
add a little more.

1. Wormius tells us that he had vena Aeris rude argentum continens, that this
was of a golden color, showing purple, and red spots of raw silver, having
something of the rock mingled with it, in the figure of a rude mass, of a
golden fire-stone, or marcasite; or in a more dilute color, in an ash-colored
stone, having no purple spots mixed with it.

2. A black Copper Ore containing silver in it, ponderous, and smooth, tending
to whiteness, by that most often betraying that which was lodged in it.

3. An Ore of iron holding silver in it, being blackish, and in certain places
covered over with an iron color; but when broken, shining fairly, with almost
a silver color, and is of an unequal color, showing various protuberances.

4. Galena containing silver of a leaden color, shining, and friable, that
knocked with iron does easily fly asunder. Some of them do contain silver
invisibly, some of them have leaves and thin plates, that are thick enough.

5. Sparks of silver is joined to Talck, and is either mingled with more minute
grains, or adheres unto it in the manner of leaves or plates.

2. Now of rude silver, though this be of diverse Mus. Worm. ut supra p. 117.
as of a leaden color, an ash color, black, white, red, purple, liver color,
and yellow: yet notwithstanding within it has its genuine color, which does
shine and appear when it is broken with the hand stroke of a stone or hammer.
And in this kind that is accounted the best, when forth of an hundred pound
weight, Lex. Alchym. p. 56.
ninety pounds or more of pure silver is drawn, as was often found in the Kings
Mount of Norway. Agr. de not. Fossil l. 10. p. 655.
Rulandus reckons, though not this precise number, yet he enumerates diverse
sorts, of some of which we shall now speak. To which Agricola does accord; from
whence in likelihood Wormius had it.

Mus. Worm. ut supra.
1. The first place is given (says Wormius) to the rude Ore of silver, which is
of its own color, called by the Germans Gediegen Silber ertz, of an hundred
pound weight, of which more then ninety pounds are made of pure silver. Of
which (he says) he had one piece excelling the rest in weight half a pound,
having diverse inequalities and protuberances, shining with a silver color, and
of one part having something of purple colored raw silver admixed: which
Christian the IV. with his own hand drew forth of the Mine or Pit.

2. The next that succeeds is crude silver Ore, of a leaden color, which the
Germans call Glass ertz; which appellation (he says) Agricola does not
unworthily carp at, when plainly it has no affinity with Glass, but does
emulate Lead, or Plumbago in color, being a little more obscure; so that by
the sight of the eye, no man ignorant of metallic affairs, can discern it,
though in nature they much differ. For Plumbago or Galena is composed of Lead
and Stone; but rude silver Ore of a leaden color, comprehends little earth and
much silver. Plumbago in the Mortar is reduced with the Pestle into Powder; but
this rude Ore will be dilated, or extended. Plumbago smitten with a hammer, or
pressed with the teeth, or cut with a knife does break, or leap asunder; but
this silver Ore will be dilated, and spread abroad. Although sometimes this Ore
is found hard, which is only ^ried by the Touchstone, and uses to be of a
more dilute color, and is found in diverse and sundry forms.

3. The third is crude silver Ore that is black, called Swartz Silber ertz, and
is a blackish stone, shining with frequent sparks of pure silver, and seems
rather to have obtained a gray then a black color. He says he has also a
black silver Ore, to which is mixed in thin leaves pure silver, joined with
fire-stone, and silver of a leaden color.

4. The next is crude silver Ore of an ash color, called Graw ertz; and
sometimes this abounds with much pure silver, sometimes it contains little.
Sometimes it shines forth of an ash colored stone like most small grains: of
which he says that he had two little stones, which being held to the fire did
seem to sweat forth silver, and therefore was called of some, the Vegetable
Moon. And that Matthesius Sermon 3. Sareptae, did call it Russ-gesprossen
Silber, that is, sprouting Silver, because that being thrown into the fire, it
does shed forth pure granulated silver, like Hemp or Poppy seed. The other of
the little stones that he had of this sort of Ore did contain red silver,
inclining to purple. And there was that had a fire-stone joined unto it.

5. He had raw-yellow silver Ore, Worm. ut sup*
of an earthly and porous substance, to which some Galena was admixed, showing
a color like Oker, more soft then other sorts of Ore contained in stones. And
so says that he omitteth Ores of a red, purple, and other colors, because he
was not possessor of them. And almost to this purpose the Author of the Musaeum
Veronense acknowledges that he had seen some such sorts, which were needless
here to relate.

In the next place we shall show what sorts of silver Ores, that are raw and
crude, the experienced Rulandus does reckon up. Lex Alchym. p. 56, 57.
For he says that of those Ores of silver that stand in need of purifying by
the fire, there were found several sorts in their Mines, some of a white, red,
leaden, black, purple, ash color, and the like; of all which he reckons many
sorts, some of which we shall here transcribe, to satisfy the curious
inquirer, because (he says) that six of these sorts were known to the German
Miners.

Ib. p. 61, 62.


1. White silver Ore that was glebous, or cloddy, found at Sneberg, which might
be cut with a knife, or bearen with an hammer. 2. White silver Ore in a most
white Marble, found at Anneberg, and also found there Ore of that color, like
hairs, or wrapped together like a lock of many small hairs; and also that which
was most white, like flakes of most small silver threads, and other crisped
together, in a crumbling earth of a light red color. 3. That of this sort of
Ore there was some found in a yellow clayish earth, as also in a most white
flint, and in red spar (or that we call fluores) that was transparent, at
Marieberg in an hard ash colored stone; also thin plates of white silver in a
fattish stone, as also thin plates or leaves at Marieberg in an hard
ashcoloured stone.


1. Of this color that might easily be cloven with a knife, or beaten forth
with an hammer. 2. Of this color in a most hard white fire-stone, also in
fire-stones that were joined together, Ib. p. 63.
and apiece. 3. Of this color in white spar, that was of six angles,
likewise in purple-coloured spar, that was pellucid, and quadrangular.
III. Silver Ore of an ash color or gray was found Anneberg in metallic
Cadmia, or Copper Ore, as also in a mass, and in white flint.

IV. Silver Ore that is black, in which sometimes

V. Ore of this sort that is yellow, is found: 1. In yellow earth like hairs.
2. Fire-stones like to a purple color, to which do adhere little grains of a
leaden color. 3. Ore of this sort found at Marieberg like to a transparent
horn, which holden to a candle does dissolve or melt. 4. Of an iron color, Ut
supra p. 65.
which smitten with an hammer, does shine or sparkle, and is not known by its
species, but by the fire.


VI. Silver Ore of a blue color.

1. That which contains in it self in the middle, as though it were marrow,
crude red silver Ore. 2. Mixed with white cloddy silver Ore, of a leaden
color. 3. Ore found at Anneberg of a green color, dug forth of the Vein
called the Celestial Army; as also Ore of a purple color in the same Vein.
Germans call Roth gulden ertz. And he says it appears to be some kind of
Carbuncle, but that a Carbuncle does shine more vehemently, but this kind of
silver Ore more faintly. And that it was found in the Mines, in the Valleys,
and also in other places, and that in diverse manners, but especially three ways.

1. The first was bright with a certain blackness. 2. Certain small pieces like
sparks do embrace some sort of its rock. 3. Thirdly the solid masses of it do
cleave and adhere to the stones, and that sometimes simply, or after a simple
manner. On the contrary, sometimes for the other part of it, which hangs
forth in a Point or Pyramid, rounded as a Top, it imbraceth some other matter
then the Vein contains: and that in a apiece form like a Die, sometime
in a sexangular form as a Diamond; commonly it consists of many, and unequal
angles as the Iris. Thus does Nature exercise Geometry in the bowels of the
Earth, by a wonderful workmanship.
Lastly, The same crude red Ore of silver is found interspersed with caeruleum,
or native blue, after a beautiful manner: so that Nature seeming to be weary in
perfecting of Metals, does recreate and delight her self with such colors,
which Art with its greatest endeavors cannot attain unto. And these sorts of
Ores were (as most of others) utterly unknown to Dioscorides, yea to Pliny and
all the Ancients.

Of this and the preceding sorts, De not. Fossll. l. 10. p. 656.
that diligent Mineralist, Georgius Agricola, give us an account to this
purpose. But (says he) the unwrought, or crude Ore of silver that is red; if
it be soft, it yields not much, or altogether none at all in goodness to the
crude Ore of Silver that is of a leaden color. But if it be hard, as in the
plentifulness of silver it is overcome of the other Ore of a leaden color, so
it far excels it in most excellent beautifulness; especially when it is
interspersed lightly with caeruleum, or natural blue: or has the greatest
similitude to the translucid gem the Carbuncle. For it is no doubt but that it
has grown of the matter of a perspicuous stone, mixed with the juice of that
from whence silver was after to be produced. Therefore it is not only like to
the Carbuncle in color, but also with a transparent facility. But
notwithstanding they differ betwixt themselves, for the Carbuncles for the most
part do shine more fully, and this more weakly. The Carbuncles cannot be filed,
but this will be wounded with the file. The Carbuncles either do not at all, or
very slowly feel the fire; but this put into the fire, does dissolve, and is
made liquid. This Ore does vary in figure no otherwise then the crude Ore of
silver of a leaden color, but more often is angular, and sometimes square as a
Die, sometimes six-angled as Crystal, and sometimes it has many angles. Also
its most thin plates or leaves do adhere to the Rocks and stones. But that
silver Ore that is pellucid, is like to the Carbuncle; that which is not
pellucid, is like Rubrica, or Ruddle, and does much vary in color. That which
is most like to mean Ruddle, was dug up at Sneberg, forth of that Grove or
Pit that has the name of Levites. And (he says) certain old men have affirmed
to us with all asseveration possible, the Mine called George, besides other
kinds of crude silver Ore, had yielded great store of this sort. But crude
silver Ore that is of a red color, sometimes contains in it Gold; and such (he
says) is dug up in the Mountain called Carpatum, at Baccantium and
Cremnitium: and was dug forth of the Grove in the Valley of Ioachim, that is
called Rich Barbary. That obscure sort which may be dilated with the stroke of
the hammer, does more abound with silver, then that which is transparent, that
being smitten with the hammer, does fly asunder.

Lex. Chym. p. 64, 65.
Rulandus proceeds, and of the red Ore of silver that is pellucid, he gives
these sorts: 1. That which was glebous or cloddy, like unto the Carbuncle
imitating the Amethyst. 2. Like unto the Carbuncle, having six, seven, or eight
angles, erected in the form of a Bean, found in a fire-stone of an ash color,
and in native yellow sulphur. 3. Like the prickles of an earth Hedg-hog, in
metallic Cadmia or Copper Ore, which has the form of a Brain. 4. Little
masses which appear most purely, as though compounded or Rubies. 5. Masses
compacted as it were of pellucid oriental Granates.


Of the sorts of red silver Ore not pellucid, he reckons these: 1. Bloud-red,
of seven angles, called red golden Ore. 2. Glebous or cloddy found in a white
metallic Marble. 3. Glebous in a fire-stone of a golden color, like unto
native Minium or Cinnober. 4. Found in six^angled spar, like to the external
coat of a Chestnut. 5. Found in an ash colored stone. 6. Found adhering to the
Rock. 7. That which was something whitish. 8. Found in a white soft stone. 9.
In a fire-stone of an ash color. 10. Found in Galena inani, which the Germans
call Blend; and our Miners in the North, Blue Blindake. 11. Another sort that
contained Gold in it. 12. That which was red, inclining to blackness. 13. That
which was of a Liver color.


From all this that has been spoken concerning the crude Ores of silver,
especially those of a red color, we shall commend these ensuing particulars to
be considered of by the Learned and Ingenious.

1. We should heartily desire that the learned Mineralists

2. We would entreat all noble and generous spirits kind, that are to be had in
Germany, (where they most abound) may in some small parcels be procured,
thereby to examine how far the credit of these Authors may be relied upon.



Agricola and Rulandus, persons experienced in what they writ, there are some
others that do testify that Ore is found red, and also transparent. As
Johannes Rhumelius (whom I have quoted before, though not to this very purpose)
does confess in these words: Antidotar. Chym. p. 248.
That his Tinctura Solis was made forth of a Rubie-coloured, red,
thorough-shining, or transparent, bright golden Ore, etc. And that his Aurum
vitae was prepared forth of a certain, P. 261.
pure, splendent, or shining Mineral; which in its first coagulation, was found
of a red color. Also that learned Author (whosoever he was) that writ the
Cheiragogia Heliana does quote Paracelsus, Theatr. Chym. Vol. 4. p. 306.
and to this purpose he says; The Helvetian Doctor, in libro Thesauri
Thesaurorum, writing of Minerals, says thus; Nature does produce a Mineral in
the bowels of the Earth, of which there are two sorts which are to be found in
many places and coasts of Europe. But the best is in the figure of the greater
World, in the rising of the Star of the Sphere of the Sun: The other in the
Sotherine Star, which is in its first flower, produced from the Star, of the
gum of the Earth; and that which in its first coagulation is found red, in
which the flowers and colors of all Minerals do lie hid. Of which words of
Parac^lsus, the aforesaid Author says thus. Which words literally taken, do
seem to be understood of the Ore of Gold and Mercury; because Theophrastus does
attribute to Argent vive, as to the Mother of Metals (as also the great
Phraedro) all the colors of Minerals, as in the Book of the Generation of
things in his Metamorphosis is to be seen. Although they are not a wanting, who
do accommodate very stiffly this Mineral to the red translucid Ore of silver
(called by the Germans Rotguldig ertz.) But I (he says) should rather think
that it does agree to another certain kind of Mineral, that is truly fruitful
of Gold, but notwithstanding is not Gold. From whence we may note these things.
1. That there were in the time of Paracelsus, two sorts of Minerals to be found
in diverse places of Europe, that in their first coagulation were found red, in
which lay all the flowers, and colors of Minerals; but he does not speak that
they were transparent, nor is it very easy to conjecture what kind of Minerals
they were, and therefore we shall leave the search of them to all curious
inquirers. 2. That many thought that these were the red Ore of silver, by which
he plainly grants that there was a red Ore of silver, to be found and had, but
thinks it not the same that Paracelsus meant or intended. 3. But conceives the
Mineral that Paracelsus intended, was an Ore that was fertile of gold, but not
gold; which for some weighty reasons we shall not here determine, but leave it
to be discussed by others. Fascie, Chem* Corollar. c. 2. p. 41.
And the learned Arthur Dee (who in his younger years had with his own eyes
often seen the truth of the Art by projection made by his Father and Sir Edward
Kelley) tells us that their matter was taken from a certain mineral mass,
coagulated, lucid, red, and ponderous, being perfect metal in the nearest
power, containing in it self vive-spermatick sulphur, and vive immature
Mercury, multiplicable in it self. Of which


5. To illustrate this more amply, I find in such Authors as I have met withal,
that treat of mineral matters, that there are three sorts of Ores that are
found in the bowels of the earth, that are red, or yellowish, and transparent.
1. This mentioned by Agricola and Rulandus, that did contain silver in it, and
therefore by them ranked in the number of silver Ores. Lex. Chym. p. 458.
2. I find that Rulandus tells us, that at Dresda diverse sorts of Sulphur were
excocted forth of certain firestones, whereof some were of the color of crude
silver Ore, red, and pellucid; some other, like native Cinnober, De re Metal.
c. 2. p. 10. De Metal. l. 1. c. 28. p. 62.
red, and transparent. And Eucelius speaking of native vive sulphur, of all
other sorts commends that most that was translucid, resplendent, and
flourishing. Mus. Worm. l. 1. c. 11. p. 26.
And the very same is confirmed by Caesalpinus. And the learned Wormius tells
us, that he had a piece of native sulphur, weighing scarce a dram, that was
exceeding elegant, and was pellucid like Crystal, and of a golden color,
plainly like to that which the Author of the Musaeum Calceolarium calls Vive
sulphur, dug forth of the gold Mines of Peru; which did imitate most pure
Gold, in a full yellow color, and so transparent that it might be assimilated
to Glass. Pharmac. Tom. 2. Not. 13. p. 672.
3. Josephus Quercetanus speaking of native Cinnober, tells us: That Nature did
bring forth in certain gold Mines in Hungary, a certain kind of mineral
Cinnober most ponderous, and of a far more red color then artificial Cinnober.
And that it was so far transparent, and thorough-bright, that it was of no less
price and esteem then Gold it self. And this sort, (though I have used mine
ultimate endeavors) I never yet could procure nor see any, though I am
informed by a learned German Physician, that there is of it in some places of
his Country, but rarely to be had.

These sorts (if to be met withal, which I fear cannot be but with difficulty
and much diligence) may doubtlesly be indifferent easily distinguished one from
another. 1. For the Ore of native sulphur, though transparent, seems not to be
so highly red as the other. 2. But rather yellowish; and again, it contains
neither Quicksilver, nor any other Metal, as the other do, the one containing
Quicksilver, and the other Silver. And also the combustibleness and strong
smell of this Sulphur does difference it from both the other; the red
transparent Ore of Silver, being (I suppose) neither so inflamable, nor of so
strong a smell; and the native Cinnober will hardly burn, and scents very
little of Brimstone. 2. The transparent Ore of native Cinnober will (as I
imagine) with an easy fire yield Quicksilver, which the other Ore of Silver
will not.




6. The last thing we shall observe is, that whereas Agricola and Rulandus do
tell us that some of this transparent silver ore, Vid. Anselm. Boetium de
Boodt. l. 2. Gem. and Lap. c* 8, 9* p. 70, 71.
that is red, is often found formed very like unto Carbuncles, which (I
suppose) they mean of Rubies or Granates (that which they call a Carbuncle,
being nothing but the greatest and purest sort of Rubies) and that these
metalline Carbuncles (as they call them) differ from the other, in that they
are of less luster, more soft, and will yield to the file, and dissolve in the
fire, it may be a reasonable conjecture, here fit to be proposed to the Learned
to enquire after; whether these be not of that kind that Paracelsus calls
Granates, Lib. de Miner. Tract. 1 p. 349.
that did contain some Metal; of which he says thus much. Besides these there
is another peculiar Metal, which is found in Rivers and Ponds or Fens, in the
form of a grain, like a greater or less Bean. It of it self is to be melted, or
fluxed, and may be hammered, but not to the aptitude of instruments. This is of
no great use, neither is its propriety known, what it may contain. And if
herein Alchymy discover nothing, it will not easily appear what at last it may
be. It sustaineth many adulterations of Silver and Gold, which do pierce into
it, as into Copper or Lead. And further gives us this note. Furthermore also
some Granates are perspicuous in the form of Crystal, in which Silver and Gold
do lie hid. Here he seems plainly to intimate, that these which he names
Granates, did contain an Anonymous Metal, that was neither silver nor gold;
neither does he mention that these were perspicuous or transparent, but that
there were other sorts that were perspicuous, and in form of Crystal, in which
were contained silver and gold: which in probability were such as Agricola and
Rulandus do describe; and that he did not understand it of the Granates that
are gems, and doubtless contain little o^ no Metal in them. And thus much for
curious Enquirers.

CHAP. XV. How they refine Silver Ore at the Indies, and of some other such
things.
BEcause the Natural and Moral History of the Indies written by that learned
and experienced Spaniard, is not in the hands of many, I shall therefore
transcribe some particulars that may be of very good use to an ingenious
Mineralist, as follows, where he says thus: H^st. of the Ind. c. 9. p. 232.
The Veins, as I have said, where they find silver, runs betwixt two Rocks,
which they call the Chase, whereof the one is commonly as hard as flint, and
the other soft and easy to break. This Metal is not always equal and of the
same bounty; for you shall find in one and the same Vein, one sort of Metal
very rich, which they call Cacilla, or Tacana, from which they draw much
silver; and another is poor, from whence they draw little. The most rich Metal
of this Mountain, is of the color of Amber, and the next is that which
inclines to black. There is other somewhat red, and other of the color of
ashes: finally of diverse and sundry colors, which seem to such as know them
not, to be stones of no value: But the Miners do presently know their quality
and perfection, by certain signs and small veins they find in them. They carry
all this Metal they draw out of these Mines upon Indian Sheep, which serve them
as Asses to carry it to the Mills; the richest Metal is refined by melting in
those small furnaces which they call Guayra's, for that is most leady, by
reason whereof it is most subject to melt; and for the better melting thereof,
the Indians cast in a matter they call Soroche, which is a Metal full of Lead.
The Metal being in these furnaces, the filth and earthy dross, through the
force of the fire, remains in the bottom, and the Silver and Lead melt; so as
the Silver swims upon the Lead, unt^l it be purified; then after they refine
the Silver many times, after this manner of melting. And a little after he
says. At this day the most usual manner of refining in Potozi, Ut Supra c. 12.
p. 243.
is by Quicksilver; as also in the Mines of Cacatecas, and others of
New-Spain. Then after, having related the manner of their getting and purifying
of Quick silver, he shows how with it they refine silver Ore after this
manner. We must understand (he says) there are diverse sorts of Metals, for
some yield much Silver, and waste little Quicksilver; others consume much
Quicksilver, and yield little Silver; and there are others which consume much
Quicksilver, and yield much Silver; and others that consume little
Quicksilver, and also yield little Silver: and as men encounter in these
matters, so they grow rich or poor in their traffic. Although commonly the
rich Metal yields much Silver, and consumes much Quicksilver; and likewise
that which is poor yields little Silver, and consumes as little Mercury. They
first beat and grind the Metal very small with Hammers and other instruments,
which beat this Stone like unto Tanmills; and being well beaten, they searce it
in a Copper searce, making the powder as small and fine, as if it were
Horse-hair. These searces being well fitted, do sift thirty quintals in a day
and a night; then they put the powder of the Metal into the Vessels upon
Furnaces; where as they anoint it and mortify it with brine, putting to every
fifty quintals of Powder, five quintals of Salt. And this they do, for that the
Salt separates the earth, and filth, to the end the Quicksilver may the more
easily draw the silver unto it. After they put Quicksilver into a piece of
Holland, and press it out upon the Metal, which goes forth like a dew, always
stirring and turning the Metal, to the end it may be well incorporate. Before
the invention of these Furnaces of fire, they did often mingle their Metal with
Quicksilver in great Troughs, letting it setle some days, and did then mix it,
and stir it again, until they thought all the Quicksilver was well incorporate
with the silver, the which continued twenty days and more, and at the least
nine days. Since they discovered (as the desire to get is diligent) that to
shorten the time, fire did much help; to incorporate Silver with Quicksilver
the sooner, they invented these Furnaces, whereon they set Vessels to put in
their Metal, with salt and quicksilver; and underneath they put fire by little
and little, in Furnaces made for the same purpose; so as in five or six days
the quicksilver is incorporate with the silver. And when they find that the
Mercury has done his part, and assembled all the silver, leaving nothing
behind, but is well imbrued as a Sponge does Water, dividing it from the Earth,
Lead, and Copper, with the which it is engendered. Then afterward they separate
it likewise from the quicksilver, the which they do in this sort; they put the
Metal in Caldrons, and Vessels full of Water, where with certain Wheels they
turn the Metal round about, as if they should make Mustard, and so the earth
and dross goes from the Metal, with the Water that runs away: The silver and
quicksilver, as most ponderous, remaining in the bottom, the Metal which
remains, is like unto Sand: Then they take it out, and wash it again in great
Platters of Wood, or Keelers full of Water; still drawing the earth from it,
until they leave the silver and quicksilver well cleansed. Ut supr. p 244, 245.
There slips away also some small portion of silver and quicksilver, with the
earth and dross, which they call washings; the which they after wash again, and
draw out the remainder. When the silver and quicksilver are cleansed, and
begin to shine, and that there remains no earth, they put all the Metal into a
cloth, which they strain out very forcibly, so as all the quicksilver passes
out, being not incorporate with the silver, and the rest remains as a loaf of
silver, like to a mark of Almonds pressed to draw oil. And being thus pressed,
the remainder contains but the sixth part in Silver, and five in Mercury. So as
if there remain a mark of threescore pounds, ten are of Silver, and fifty of
Mercury. Of these Marks they make Pins (as they call them) like Pine Apples, or
Sugar loafs, hollow within, the which they commonly make of a hundred pound
weight. Then to separate the silver from the quicksilver, they put it into a
violent fire, which they cover with an earthen vessel like to the mold of a
Sugar loaf, or unto a Capuchin or Hood, the which they cover with coals, and
set fire unto it, whereby the quicksilver exhales in smoke, the which striking
against the Capuchin of earth, it thickens and distills, like unto the smoke of
a pot covered, and by a pipe like unto a limbeck they receive the quicksilver
which distills, the silver remaining without changing the form, but in weight
is diminished five parts of that it was, and is spungeous; which is worthy the
observation. Of two of these loaves, they make one bar of silver, in weight 65
or 66 marks; and in this sort they carry it to the touch, custom and mark.
Silver drawn with Mercury is so fine, that it never abates of two thousand
three hundred and fourscore of alloy; and it is so excellent, that the Workmen
are enforced to allay it, putting some mixture to it, as they do likewise in
their Mints where as their money is stamped.

In the next Chapter he shows the manner of their making of Assays, Ib. c.
13. p. 247.
which he describes thus:

To give the alloy to every piece, they carry the bars of silver unto the
Assay-master, who gives to every one his number; for that they carry many at
once, he cuts a small piece of every one, the which he weighs justly, and puts
them into a Cruset, which is a small vessel made of burnt bones beaten: after
he places every crucible in his order in the Furnace, giving them a violent
fire; then the Metal melts, and that which is Lead goes into smoke, and the
Copper and Tin dissolves, the Silver remaining most fine, of the color of
fire. It is a strange thing, that being thus refined, although it be liquid and
molten, yet it never spills, were the mouth of the crucible turned downwards;
but it remains ^ixed, without the loss of a drop. The Assay-master knows by
the color, and other signs, when it is refined; then does he draw the
crucibles from the fire, and weighs every piece curiously, observing what every
one wants of his weight; for that which is of high alloy wastes but little, and
that which is baser diminishes much; and according to the waste he sees what
alloy he bears, according to the which he marks every bar punctually. Their
balance and weights are so delicate, and their grains so small, as they cannot
take them up with the hand, but with a small pair of Pincers: and this trial
they make by Candlelight, that no air might move the balance. For of this
little the price of the whole bar depends.

Now though this way of the refining of silver Ore by quick silver cannot, in
great quantities, be practiced in Europe, by reason of the scarceness, and high
price of quicksilver: yet in these passages of Acosta, there are many things
worthy of a deep remark, and may by diligent and ingenious persons be promoted
to great advantages, both in regard of severing the dross, and baser Ores from
the more noble; and also in relation to the Art of testing or Assaying of
Metals, which wants much of that perfection, that careful skill and observation
may bring it to.

But however the way of separating silver from baser Ores by quicksilver in
small quantities, we have found very effectual, and cannot but commend it (if
performed by a knowing and careful Artist) as the most certain way of probation
of Metals, that we have known, and in some respects excelling that by Lead, the
Test, and Fire. Which way of separating the nobler Metals from the baser, and
one from another, was well known unto that learned and experienced Philosopher
and Chemist, Lib. de Separ. ^er. nature. 8. p. 103.
Paracelsus, who very curtly and acutely (according to his accustomed manner)
does mention the several ways of purifying several Ores by means of
quicksilver, giving therein exquisite Rules, and excellent cautions, to which
I commend the curious and inquisitive Artist, the mystery of which, trial and
diligence may find out.

But the way of separating Silver from Lead in great quantities, so as to save
the greatest part of the Lead, has been little known or practiced in England,
that I could ever understand, saving by one experienced person that had been in
Holland, and seen it done there; and did affirm that they could separate the
Silver from the Lead, and in a Tun not lose above two hundred weight of the
Lead: and that if it held above 5 l. a Tun, they would separate it with the
charge of fifty shillings, and make gain by it; and to that end they bought
much of our English Lead, and did refine it, and so make a gain of it. And he
made me a pattern of the Furnace and Vessel, such as they used, which (to me)
seemed a feasible and rational way.

Lastly, The whole company of common Chemists do tell us great stories of
Argentum potabile, and other medicines drawn forth of this Metal, which they
cry up to be excellent remedies for the Epilepsie, and other nervous
distempers: but they must pardon me if I give no credit to their hyperbolizing
fancies; for I dare affirm that they are nothing but vain and ignorant brags,
and will perform no more then the small filaments or powder of Silver
laminated, which (indeed) is nothing at all, except prepared by the universal
solvent, or Alkahest, as was that blue or azure colored tincture or oil,
containing the saline and sulphurous part of the Metal, the mercurial and
indestructible part being left behind untouched, Archidox. l. 2. de Separ.
Elem. p. 7.

Helm. Butl. p 594.


which Paracelsus mentions. And the reason of this my so positive assertion,
I shall give from the experience of that learned Chemist Van Helmont, which may
bear credit against a thousand of the others; who tells us, That the bodies of
Gold and Silver are so closely shut, that for the most part they elude the
whole endeavors of Artists (especially those that have not the forementioned
key of the Alkahest to open them) so as when they think they are most of all
opened, they have remitted nothing at all of their former bars or clausure. And
that quicksilver, although it seem a tremulous and open body, yet
notwithstanding nothing in the whole order of Nature, is more closely shut up
then it; and therefore few of a thousand Artificers obtain effectual remedies
forth of Gold, Silver, or Mercury; but the other four do more easily and freely
obey the desires of Operators. Ut supr. p. 594.
And further he says, That metallic bodies in respect of their Mercuries, are
all equally shut up, with the seal of anatical homogeneity; but that their
sulphurs afford us acquaintance and help, if they be rendered familiar. And
therefore concludes thus: De Lithias. c. 3. p. 24.
Quoties namque a mercuriis, sales and sulphura distinxt, admiratus sum illorum
ignaviam, horumque vero principiorum dignitates.

So we have finished this tedious discourse of these two noble and perfect
Metals of Gold and Silver, and shall now descend to the other, that are called
(in comparison of these) imperfect; of which two are compact and hard, of which
we shall now treat: and first of Copper.

CHAP. XVI. Of the descriptions of Copper, of its Ore, Stone, Operation, and
striking Passages.
AES, Eucel. de re Metal. c. 13. p. 22.
or Copper (which was so called from the Isle of Cyprus, where it was first
gotten in great plenty) is a metallic body, participating of a fuscous or
darkish redness, being ignible, and fusible, and is as the mean betwixt Gold
and Silver; and is generated of Argent vive, impure, not fixed, earthy, burning,
red, not clear, and of such a sulphur, it wants fixation, purity, and weight.

And Casalpinus tells us: De Metal. l. 3. c. 5. p. 179.
That Copper does in color imitate Gold; for if its redness be a little
diluted, it becomes Aurichalcum, most like to Gold. And that it imitates Silver
in its tractable substance, and ^lowness of fusion; for it requires ignition
before it be melted. But it differs from both, because it does not bear the
trial of fires (as they do) but is universally burnt; from whence it is noted
to contain much of combustible exhalation, for above the rest of the Metals it
yields a sulphurous smell and flame. Besides, being madefied, it does most
easily contract a rust, which is called Aerugo, of a green color.

Now for its manner of lying in the Earth its Stones, Last Will and Test. c. 5.
p. 88, etc.
and passages, we shall give it from Basilius Valentinus, a person of great
experience in these matters; which though it be large and something obscure,
yet we shall transcribe for the benefit of all diligent and laborious
Mineralists; and is thus.

Copper Ore is wrought in its own and proper stone, of good pure Salt, and
over-hot-burning sulphur, through an heavenly impression into all its parts,
tinged red thoroughout, not quite freed from a superfluous humidity, in an
affinity with iron; because their dwellings, or houses, are set one by another,
and is the reason why the one may easily be transmuted into the other.

This metalline Ore is much wrought in slat floatworks, which are green flinty;
many times it appears in a red or brown form, and is seen also like
limestone, in black, and yellow slat-works, like unto Coals, in green flinty
passages, in a twofold manner, either current, or in the manner of a float.
Sometimes it is red and brown, mixed with a green color: some are of a lazure
color, some of a Copper-glass, flinty, and iron shot, or of a white food. The
Copper Ore in its passages, is sometimes rich of Gold and of Silver; as it is
accompanied with curious Zach-stones, and enclosed with passable stones, if so
be that other Metals and Minerals do not entrench upon them, which corrode and
consume them. And Copper Ore is a slat-work also, mixed with foliated Earth,
and the mercurial Copper is hardly brought out of it, at, or in an ordinary
melting, affords store of iron, and unripe Copperfood, which rub very much the
Copper in roasting, and make it unmalleable.

The richest Copper Ores are found in Hungaria, Bohemia, Silesia, Thuringia,
Hassia, and Voightlandia; the like is found about Trantevan, where it is every
where in the manner of a float mixed with Sand Ore; and where it breaks
vehemently in the slat work, they call that Slat of Clifts: they are poor in
silver, and such must be roasted, or calcined: in some places it breaks in a
fair blue and brown color, or it looks ruddy, of a Copper-glass, and like unto
green Oker: and sometimes it is white-goldish, which is called white Copper
Ore. It grows white at an effectual mixture, because at its uniting, it
assumeth or takes in much of Silver, and of Lead. It breaks also of a
yellowish, and lazure-like color, green flinted upon floats and moving
passages, in lime and spongeous stones. It breaks also of a blue color, like
blue Oker; is Copper, glassy, and flinty, in great and huge rocky and marble
passages, being mixed with a white marble. They are rich in silver, in green
slat stones, which are clear and brittle. It lies dry and green in clifts,
open caves, and passages, like green frogs insprinkled one in another, in a
strange manner distinct, or parted with strange pleasant colors; which
graduated works are losers in half their works; in these rocks are strange
clifts of marble, and of white Veins; yellow flint is insprinkled, and mixed
with Copper passages, which yield much Silver, have few flowers, are of a
ponderous form, break very flinty, of a red glass, of a green color mixed with
yellow flowers; these flints are joined with white gold marble, of a green
color, beside the rocky passage. There is sound also Copper Ore which is rich
of Silver, flinty and not white-goldish is of a white shining glass, mighty in
dry hollow flat Mines, some whereof are mixed with iron or sorts of Wismuth, or
fire-stones. At the one hanging of some passages, is wrought the Chrysocolla,
and Copper Ore; on the other hanging of the Mine, is wrought pure flint, all
according to the quality and condition of the Ore. And it is to be observed,
seeing that Copper Ores are usually mixed with sulphur, easily unite with the
nether Metal, and join with their stones; therefore green flinty copper Ores,
which carry in the dry Lead slatty passages, a black molben, are minerallish,
and are not rich in silver, nor rich in species, encompassed with immature
iron, and perfect Copper Ore; and some are free of it, if far separated asunder
from dry mineral slats, are richer in Gold and Silver, according as the stones
take in a good natured Ore, they usually entrench upon Gold and Lead Rocks, or
Antimonial Ore; as also upon Iron and Silver stones. There are found also
flinty passages, that have their mineral juices of Vitriol and Sulphur, some
whereof partake of Allom, and alumen pluviosum. These commonly have the best
and most Copper passages, which are least mingled with other Metals, as lime
and tartareous stones, in which black floats and slats do break, are enclosed
with green, and are of mild quality: at Eisleben and Mansfield, Miners put
there several proper names to it very exactly, according unto their nature.
Miners in Misnia know least how to distinguish these; the upper part of clay
earth they call Putredo, in which the true earth is also; and when they come to
the stones, they call it the Day-work, because they cover all the rest, and
turn quite to stone. The third place they come unto, they call Night-work,
because it is easily lifted, and heaved one after another, and is pure: then
they come to the Cave or Hole-work, which must be hollowed, and set; here are
the stones that must be broken: then they come unto the slat, and below that
slat, they come unto the Sand-Oar, though sometimes it be overgrown at the
Lockwerg, or Hole-work above the slat; then they turn unto the dead earth
again. Slat and richest Copper Ore at the Silver breathing, lies also on the
rocky, horn-stony combustible Ores, which have their Gold and Silver passages
of your special kind, among which there are found several forms how each of
them are discerned. In Hungaria and Carinthia the passages yield Copper Ores,
which Copper is very malleable, and is at a dearer rate then any is in the
whole Europe; as their minerals also, and especially the Vitriol there, is held
to be the best, as also their Antimony is counted the best. The Vitriol has
the best and rarest virtues, which is known to true Naturalists, and experience
has found the same to be true. I speak something now, which if reason and
understanding were answerable, many expenses, hard work, and good time could be
saved; and it comes only from hence, because Gold breaks so near it, and of
the same Ores is found, where that earth is impregnated with goldish seed, and
make use of the same food in many subtle unitings. Minerals in their
generating qualit^es, are better supported among perfect Metals, where they are
higher and more effectual, and are best used for both such perfect Metals, in
case Nature be rightly imitated, the ancient Philosophers have had experience
of, and made trials of it. There is a remarkable difference found among
Minerals which have their descent from Gold and Silver Ores, and partly from
Copper Ores; they are Minerals and Metals, each have their particular nature,
and being, among which some Ores look green, and bleach at the day, and grow
near other Metals; but their stones are most like unto Lead-stones, some
whereof are grosser, softer, and harder then others, and some are more obscure,
dark, muddy, and some more green, and so forth.

De Mineral. Tract. 1. p. 349.
To this we shall only add what Paracelsus says of this Metal, which is this;
Copper is generated of a purple sulphur, a redish salt, and a yellow Mercury.
These three colors if they be mingled among themselves, then Copper is
produced. But Copper does contain in its self its female, that is, its dross or
refuse; which if it be separated by Art, and the body reduced, then the male
does appear. But this is the nature of them both, that the male does not suffer
it self again to be destroyed, and the female does not any more send forth
dross or scorias; and they are different in their fusion and malleability, as
Iron and Steel differ. And also if this separation be used, either of them
being severed into its nature, there do arise two Metals different one from
another in essence, species, kind, and propriety. And further says, that
though commonly the male and female go together, yet they ought to be separated.

CHAP. XVII. Of some signs where Copper Ore may be found, as also of its
several sorts, and the diverse preparations it undergoes ere it be pure.
AThanasius Kircherus does give us these signs to know where Copper Ore may be
found. Mund. Sub^^r. l. 10 Sect. 4. c. 9. p. 216.
1. That where plenty of the clifts and sissures of stones are, that show of a
yellow and bluish color, there is latent Copper Ore. 2. That whenever we
find stones of a blue color in or among other stones of a gray color,
shadowed with little Veins of a green color, then this is a certain token of
the best and most plentiful vein of Copper Ore. 3. That when we see the rocks
or stones in the Mountains to shine like Talk, which is nothing else but the
birth or foliated offspring of a Marchasite, or fire-stone, that it obtains
the next discovery of an hidden vein of Copper Ore. 4. Furthermore, when the
vitriolate waters flowing from the Mountains, are of a somewhat green color,
and of a metallic smell, and which cover over the bottoms of the floods or
rivers, with a certain putrid, green, tenuious, and slimy matter, as with a
skin; it does show that the Mountains from whence the water comes, are pregnant
with Copper Ore.

Now for the sorts of Copper Ore, they are twofold, the one when pure Copper is
found in the Mine, which is statim suum, and needs not to be purified by the
fire, and the other must be refined, and that often ere it be brought into pure
clear Copper.

For the first sort which the Germans call Rein gediegen Kupfer; it is affirmed
by several experienced Authors, that it is found pure sometimes in the Mines,
and needs no purifying with the fire; and so Eucelius tells us in these words:
De re Metal. c. 13. p. 24.
That there is found pure Copper in the Copper and Silver Mines, that is such
of it self, without excoction by the fire. And that sometimes little veins are
found implicated with the stones; and sometimes leaves or plates do embrace the
stone, and that Alber^us was ignorant of this. And Agricola tells us thus much:
De nature. Fossil l. 8. p. 643.
That pure Copper was not only found in its proper Veins, but also in the
silver Mines. This (he says) the Ancients knew not, neither Albertus, although
that he writ that the most and best Copper was found at Gostaria, and mixed
with the whole substance of the stone, as it were a Marchasite, so he calls a
fire-stone. But Agricola says, If it be found mixed with the substance of the
stone, it is not pure; that is to say, it is not statim suum, and much less
most pure, but is purified by the help and workmanship of the Furnace. but he
further says, I do not know that great masses of Copper, as there has been
found of Silver, have been dug up; but rather certain little masses of a
very various figure: to wit, sometimes in the figure of drops or isicles, of
little rods, or little rundlets, or globes. Also its most small leaves or
plates do cleave to the stones. But this native Copper, for the most part,
contains somewhat of Silver in it. Mus. Worm. l. 1. Sect. 3. c. 5. p. 121.
Wormius tells us that he had a piece from the Mines of Osterdale in Norway, of
the figure of little masses, laminated plain, consisting as it were of most
small grains joined together, of a rubicund color, and truly Copper-like, but
exceeding brittle. And although it did seem to consist of most small grains
joined together, by reason of which it was very brittle and friable, yet it did
cleave together, and was hardly to be separated into smaller pieces. He had
another piece, to which leaves or plates of Talk were admixed. Mus. Calceol.
Sect. 4. p. 444.
And he says that very near a kin to this, was that which Andreas Chiocus the
Author of the Musaeum Calceo^arium calls the true flower of Copper, and did
describe it in these words: The true and legitimate flower of Copper is heavy,
friable, and of an astringent sapor or taste, growing reddish with a little
shining color, flourishing forth of its proper Mine of Copper, into most small
little grains, expressing in magnitude the seed of wild Poppy. Rulandus tells
us also, Lex. Alchym. p. 10, 11.
some sorts of pure Copper that needed not the fire: 1. Native red Copper free
from other Metals, that was found in the Country of Mansfield in its proper
Veins. 2. Pure, dug forth of the Mines of Silver at Scheberg. 3. Red, at
Mansfield, which contained Silver in it. 4. That which was native and red
Suaceuse in Alpibus Rheticis, which did contain gold in it. 5. Of its own
color found at Gishubelia, cleaving like leaves or plates to a hard stone of a
red color. 6. Of othersome cleaving to an hard stone, of a whitish ash color,
other cleaving to a slat stone at Mansfield, of its own color; and from
Moravia, Philos. Trans. N. 19 p. 337. Q. 50.
that was statim suum. The honorable person Mr. Boil tells us in one of his
Queries for Minerals thus: Whether any part of the Metal be found in the Mine
perfect and complete? (As I have had presented me good valuable Copper, and
pieces of perfect Lead, that were taken up the one at Iamaica, and the other by
an acquaintance of mine, that took them out of the ground himself in New
England.)

Britan. p. 767.
there are diverse sorts, some of which kinds were formerly found at Keswick,
and Newland in Cumberland, as learned Camden relates at large, and the Work
was continued a long time, and much good Copper made there; but now the Work is
quite left and decayed: yet I am informed that some do now melt forth as much
very good Copper as serves them to make Half-pennies and Farthings. Some of
the Ore I have, which is like a greyish kind of Marchasite, glittering with
some goldish sparks, and very ponderous. Another sort I have, that seems a
bluish kind of stone, with bright sparks of the color of gold, and exceeding
heavy; and I make no doubt, but that if diligence were used, plenty of this
sort of Ore might be found in many places of England. R^r. nature. Pinax. p. 208.
And Dr. Merre^t tells us, that Copper was dug up at Wenloch in
Staffordshire; and that in the time of Richard the Second there was a rich
Copper Mine at Richmond in the Bishopric of Durham. But now I do not hear of
any gotten thereabouts.

Mas. Worm. l. 1. Sect 3 c. 5. p. 121.
Wormius tells us thus much, saying, Crude Copper Ore obtains various
differences, in respect of its color, consistence, goodness, and coction. For
the most part it is drawn forth of a Marchasite, or Firestone, or forth of the
lapis scissilis, which I take to be some sort of that which we call slat
stones. Among thirteen peculiar kinds (he says) I find great difference in
respect of goodness and fertility, though they all arise forth of a granulated
fire-stone or Pyrites. 1. One kind of this golden Pyrites is plainly barren,
yielding no Copper at all when it is excocted in the fire. 2. There are two
sorts (he says) whereof an hundred pound weight of Ore does afford one pound
of Copper. 3. Another a pound and a half. 4. Another four pounds and an half.
5. Another four pound and three quarters. 6. Another six pound and an half. 7.
Another nine pound and an half. 8. Another nine pound and three quarters. 9.
Another ten pounds. 10. Another fourteen pound and an half. 11. Another fifteen
pound. 11. Lastly, another sixteen pounds, which is the highest.

1. For several sorts of Ores he reckons first that

2. A purple Ore of Copper, or of a violet color Braun ertz, having little
crumbs or grains of a ^ire-stone of a golden color mingled with it; on the
other part purple shining Ore mixed with a stone of a gray color; on the other
part it has more of blue, in the midst of the body sparks of Copper growing
whitish, mixed with golden ones.

3. English Copper Ore, consisting of a black stone,

4. A golden Pyrites friable, or crumbling, shaped Osterdale in Norway he had
brought without square, and shining with diverse colors.





The Author of the Musaeum Calceolarianum mentions these four sorts of copper
Ore: Carpathian Mountain, which is most fruitful of Metals. Kepnice in Misnia,
which is not red, but has a leaden color* replenished with certain little
yellow Veins; for every hundred pound weight of which, by the help of the
Furnace, is extracted two and twenty pound weight of Copper. Inaceburg, like to
a cloven or slat stone, of almost an ash color, in which little Veins
imitating a golden color, are seen growing, an hundred pound weight of which
yields twenty pounds of copper. Anneberg shining with a reddish color, forth
of an hundred pounds weight of which, the Vein being poor, yields only
sixteen pounds of Copper. We have enumerated these several sorts of copper
Ores, that the laborious Miners may be better enabled to judge of the several
sorts of Ores. Now for the several preparations that the Ore of copper
undergoeth before it be made good valuable copper, Mas. Worm. ut supr.
Wormius tells us thus, saying, I have six differences in respect of the
excoction of copper. 1. Of which the first is the crude Pyrites or fire-stone
it self, of a golden color, as it is dug forth of the Mine, and rich with
copper. 2. The second is of the Ore, burned by the space of fourteen days, or
three weeks. For then the mass is rendered copper-like, of a blackish color,
forth of which viride aes does flower. 3. Thirdly the Ore so excocted and
fluxed, that it is reduced into thick plates, which the Germans call
Ruffer-stein. 4. Fourthly, These plates being put into other Furnaces, are
burned six or eight times, and are carried forth of one Furnace into another,
until they acquire a rubicund color; this they call Robber werk. 5. Fifthly
again, it is excocted into a spongious and light matter, black and porous,
which they call Raw copper. 6. Sixthly, It is melted again, and then becomes
pure copper, fit for uses. So many mutations it is meet that the Ore of copper
undergo, before it become pure Copper.



CHAP. XVIII. Of native and factitious Orichalcum, of Corinthian Copper or
Brass, and of some other Compositions that Copper undergoes with other Metals
or Minerals, and of the Medicines prepared forth of it.
THat native Orichalcum (and not Aurichalcum, as though it were compounded of
Gold and Copper, Rer. Deperdit. Guide. Pancirol. Hen. Salmuth. Comment. Tit. 8.
p. 26, 27.
which learned Salmuth quoting Scaliger, does deny, and that with reason) was
dug in ancient times forth of the earth, so produced (as Salmuth and Kircher
do probably conjecture, by some natural commixture of Terra Cadmea, or the
Lapis Calaminaris with it) not as mixed of Gold and Copper, but a certain kind
of native Copper, which had the color and splendor of Gold, or which was like
unto Gold. There is little or no mention made of it by the Ancients, except
Pliny in these words speaking of Copper, that (he says) was first found in
Cyprus. Hist. not. and Plin. l. 34. c. 2. p. 471.
Reperto in aliis terris praestantiore, maxim Orichalco, quod praecipuam
bonitatem, admirationemque diu obtinuit; nec reperitur longo jam tempore,
effoeta tellure. That there was better Copper then that of Cyprus found in
other Lands, especially Orichalcum, which for a long time obtained the chief
esteem in goodness and admiration; neither was it to be found for a long time
before the age of Pliny. But Salmuth says there did remain of it certain sorts
or masses, and many fragments. And that it was of so great esteem with the
Ancients, that when it was no where to be had, notwithstanding as if it were to
be had, it was esteemed more excellent then gold; and gives thereof some
notable proofs, that the Inquisitive may find in the place before cited. Ubi
supr.
And Pancirollus says, Orichalcum was a Metal of Copper, which was like to
Gold. Of which kind (he says) I suppose the Toreumata were: The Toreumata were
Works embossed in Metal, which the Ancients (he says) did suppose to be of
Corinthian Brass; but falsely: for the Corinthian Copper or Brass, was a mixture
of Copper and Gold. But that these embossed Works of Metal being destroyed or
dissolved, had nothing in them of Gold or Silver: and therefore (he says) he
does believe them to be of native Orichalcum. And though Pliny thought it lost,
yet (he says) it is manifest that the Lawyer Martian, who lived in the time of
Alexander the Emperor, in the Year 225. did make mention of it as though it
had been extant also in his Age. And that Lattone or Orichalcum (he says) that
they used in his time, was not the native Orichalcum of the Ancients, but
Copper mixed with certain powders that give it that splendour. Exerc. 88. Mund.
Subter. l. 10 Sect. 4. c. 9. p. 218.
And Scaliger (who would seem to know all things) and also Kircher tell us,
that betwixt Mexico and Darien natural Orichalcum was dug up that could be
melted with no violence of fire, which did sufficiently demonstrate the truth
of the thing.

Now for factitious Orichalcum, the several ways by Art to prepare it, the
Reader may find in the forecited place of Kircher, Mus. Wo^m. ^t supr.
and we shall only mention one way set down by Wormius forth of Agricola. They
put (he says) the fragments of the best Copper, and of Cadmia nativa (I
suppose he means the Lapis Calaminaris) by course (or as the Chemists say,
stratum super stratum) into long pots, Vid. Albert. Mag. de Reb. Metal. l. 4.
p. 352.
which being so filled, are set in hollowed Furnaces, and the fire is kindled,
as it were in certain burrows, channels, or passages, and when they are molten
together, the Copper being tincted with the color of gold, is changed into
Orichalcum, which is that we call Brass, or by some Flanders Metal. Which is
hard, tractable with the hammer, and to be drawn forth into thin plates or
leaves, which being tinged with gall, becomes like gold, and is called of
Pliny, Aurum Coronarium, because the Players did use it for Garlands and Crowns
about their heads; which is that which we commonly call Horse Gold, used for
Embellishments in Pageants, Plays, Shows, and such like pastimes. And of this
sort some is more malleable then other, and will suffer it self to be drawn
forth further; and some is of a deeper, and some of a lighter color. Again,
There is by Art made diverse sorts of this Orichalcum or Brass, some that (as I
believe) will abide the hammer in some measure, of which is made fire-tongs,
fire-shovels, snuffers, Mathematical instruments, and of many other sorts and
kinds, that I cannot well reckon up. Some that will hardly abide the hammer,
but either cleave, or break asunder, which is called Aes Caldarium, and we call
it Pot Metal; of which is made Pots, Pans, Chafing-dishes, Candle-sticks, and
abundance of such like utensils, some of a fair golden color, some more
whitish, and some more inclining to redness, according to the proportion of the
commixture. Again, Copper is mixed often with Iron, Lead, and some other
materials, of which is made bullets for great Cannon, Bells, and many other
such like things. Sometimes they mix a certain proportion of Copper and Tin, of
which little Bells for House-Clocks, and little Alarum-bells, and some things
else are made; and those Bells will sound sharp and shrilly. And of this
Composition may be made fine Seeing-glasses and Burning-glasses, if they be
well polished and smoothed, and made of a right figure and bigness, of which I
have seen diverse sorts. And with a mixture of Tin and Brass are made Vessels
that appear very like unto Silver: all which Compositions and many more of this
Metal of Copper, with other Metals and Minerals, we shall leave as sooner to be
learned by practice, and sight, from Artificers and Mechanics, then from Books
and reading. As for the making of Copper white it is practiced sundry ways,
some do it with Talk, some with the Magne^is, or Cat-silver; and that which we
have seen done, was with A^snick and Nitre; the way of doing which may be found
in many Authors, as also in Manuscripts, and written Processes; but I do not
account the knack so much worth, as to be at labor to transcribe it. For both
Copper when it is whitened, or made Orichalcum, or of a golden color, will
with often fluxing, and keeping long in the fire, burn out the Minerals commixt
with it, and return to red Copper again as it was.

Now whatsoever common Chemistry may boast of the medicaments prepared from
Copper, as its Sulphur, Tincture, Salt, Crocus, or the like, we have not seen,
or experienced any that do deserve any great commendation, and therefore shall
forbear to say any more of them. Only we shall add this; That even Vitriol,
such of the blue transparent sort that is brought forth of Germany, and
commonly called Roman Vitriol, and by Quacks, and others, called Lapis
Coelestis, which is of great affinity with Copper; nay, indeed the very
offspring of Venus; and that which many account the best, that holds the most
Copper, is a most noble Mineral, and even of it self affords much help to an
expert Surgeon; for it is one of the mildest Corrosives that an Artist can
use for making of Fontanels or Issues, and is far better then any actual
Cautery, and serves better then any thing else for stopping fluxes of Blood,
especially in Amputation, or dismembring, where the great Arteries and Veins
are laid open. And the Powder of it is very prevalent in cleansing old ulcers
and sores, and by its astringency leaves a good ground for breeding new flesh,
and healing. The waters of it also are exceeding profitable for many distempers
in the Eyes, sore and inflamed mouths, and for all Erysipela's and the like.
And the Phlegm, and oil of it, as also the Colchotar freed from its Salt, will
do a Surgeon much credit in desperate ulcers and old sores, though but
prepared by the way of common Chemistry, if he know how to apply them with
judgment and discretion. I speak this to encourage young practitioners, having
my self had experience of this Mineral for near forty years, in all things that
Surgery can require properly to use it in. Yet notwithstanding as to
Medicines that may be taken inwardly, prepared the common way, I have not seen
any such effects by them as may any way answer the high Encomiums that many
Authors that write of common Chemistry, do attribute unto them; for except that
the oil or spirit of Vitriol (as some call it) mixed with liquors of Juleps,
does in some measure allay, and abate the heat and thirst in Fevers, and hot
distempers, and sometimes to be helpful in Epileptical diseases, I have known
or seen little effect by it. The Vitriolum vomitivum (I confess) being duly
prepared, and purified, is a laudable Vomit against Phlegm, and such like crude
humors annoying and over-burthening the stomach; and is a remedy of much
efficacy and value against the Worms, and all Verminous generations.

But there are far higher and more noble Medicines to be had from Venus, or
Copper (if we may trust the writing of Helmont, whose veracity and experience
few learned men will question or doubt of) then any of those that are prepared
by common Chemistry; by the help of that immortal and immutable liquor the
Alkahest, by which (he declares) that the body of Copper is totally destroyed,
and the external Sulphur and Salt (in which the medical Virtue lies) is
separated, and the internal Sulphur that is inseparable from the Mercury,
either by Art or Nature remains, by which it may be brought into a white
metal. But of this as far as by the Alkahest the medical sulphur is separated
from it, by which that universal medicine called by Paracelsus and Helmont
Mercurius Diaphoreticus, and Aurum Horizontale, by mixing with Praecipitate
prepared after Vigo's order, is made; we shall give here, as far as concerns
the Copper in Helmonts own words, and the rest we shall mention when we come to
speak of Mercury; and thus he says. For the Sulphur of Venus, De Lithias. l.
1. c. 8. p. 64.
after its separation from its body, and arising again, is made as it were a
glorious sulphur, and therefore it tingeth the sulphur of Mercury (which in the
powder of Johannes de Vigo, by corrosive Mineral spirits is extroverted)
immediately, and do mutually embrace themselves in an inseparable bed: and
therefore the force of both sulphurs do then stand outwardly. And a little
further he says. Therefore the fire of Venus, is not the spirit of Vitriol,
however exquisitely rectified: But this fire is the volatile sulphur of the
Copper, in form of a green oil, more sweet then honey, and fully separated from
the mercurial body of it Copper. But the remaining part of the Copper does
abide white, nor ever waxing green with rust, as neither any more of the number
of the seven Metals; because it is become a new and anonymous Metal. But the
fire of Venus cannot be had, except by the full or plenary destruction of the
Copper, and the volatization of the mercurial body of the Venus it self. Which,
however it be made volatile in the form of oil, notwithstanding with an easy
labor, it is after again reduced into a white unknown Metal, and extensible
under the hammer. But the fire or sulphur of Venus is not any more reduced into
a Metal by it self, because as no sulphur is a Metal, so every metallic
Mercury is a true Metal. For the Adeptists teach, that the sulphurous part of
a Metal cannot be separated from its mercurial and metallic body, except by
its total destruction; which therefore (although abusively) they call
elemental; because, to wit, in Metals there are two sulphurs; one therefore
they deservedly call external, the other internal. But in the proposed terms of
Copper (he persuadeth) to contemplate that which is internal, which does fix
the body in the white anonymous and mercurial Metal, and makes it ductible
under the hammer: when otherwise the Mercury without the Sulphur could never be
coagulated into a Metal. But that external sulphur of Venus, is that green
sweet oil which cannot be brought back again into a Metal. Therefore the
Symmistae or Secrataries of this Philosophy, do univocally testify, that the
external sulphur cannot be separated from its body, no not by fire in imperfect
Metals, but also the mercurial part does perish together with it. Therefore
seeing that external sulphur (such as is drawn forth of Copper) is not
necessary to the perfection of the Metal: but that sulphur is added of God to
the Copper. Therefore it is necessary that that sulphur of Venus should have
its ends, conducing to the necessities of ungrateful man, to wit, for humane
infirmities, above all the dignity of metallic perfection.

From which we shall commend some considerations to the sons of Art to revolve
over, and seriously to weigh them in the balance of a right understanding, and
not slightly to pass them over.

1. To take careful notice of the effects of this incomparable Alkahest, both
in working upon Vegetables and Minerals; for without it no true natural or
radical dissolution can be made of either of them. Which if they duly weigh
with the true light of a rational understanding, it will lead them as a thread
through all the Labyrinths of darkness, to the bottom of the clue, that is the
knowledge of the true subject, forth of which it is prepared. Which subject is
but one in the whole Universe, and is commonly known, and may (as Basilius
says) with great praise be had, and is not any particular of the animal,
vegetable, or mineral Kingdom, but in it self (though to outward appearance a
base and despicable matter) is of the nature of them all, but not any common or
known salt, as many deem, nor no kind of earth (except metaphorically so
called) nor any universal or catholic salt or water (as many that do think
themselves wise do imagine) drawn forth of the air, or the beams of the Sun,
but is in a far nearer subject: and therefore I shall only mind them of what
Raymundus Lullius tells us, Codicil. p. 13
saying; Nihil ergo convenit rei, nisi quod propinquum est ei ex sua natura.
And Helmont tells us in some place of his writings, that things to be
dissolved, are to be dissolved per consentanea suis principiis radicalibus.

Venus when volatized and separated from its white mercurial anonymous body, is
in the form of a green oil, never again to be reduced into a metallic body,
and that in this the whole medical virtue lies. C. de Metal. p. 7, 8.
And this is doubtless the same green oil that Paracelsus in his Book, De
Separatione Elementorum, says is altogether green, and drawn from the body of
Venus left white, that may be again reduced into a white Metal, that it cannot
be known under what species is falls. And this questionless is that green
oil, or Arcanum vitrioli that Paracelsus so highly commends in curing the
Epilepsie, De Morb. Ament. l. c. 1. p. 575, 576.
whose preparation he in many places mentions; but according to his wonted
manner, tacitly concealeth the Alkahest, without which it cannot be truly had
or prepared. And forth of this green oil was prepared that rare soporiferous
Medicine which he calls Sulphur Anodynum Veneris, of excellent virtue, so that
it would sopifie, pacify, or cure a whole troop of diseases: In verb. herb.
and lap. l. p. 577.
Of which, and other metallic Sulphurs, he gives us these ensuing
commendations. And that (he says) I powerfully regard or look into the
sulphurous remedies of Minerals, to wit, into the sulphur of Venus, S^ibium or
Antimony, and especially into the sulphur of the Glaura Augurelli, which Nymph
hitherto does want another proper name. For these kind of Sulphurs, because
they are farther distant from humane Nature then the whole company of
Vegetables, and in the mean time do obtain notable gifts from God the giver of
them; so also they most fully and pertinaciously resist, that from the
digestive faculty they bend not into the Commonwealth of Aliments, and
therefore they do preserve their native powers free and unbroken, to wit, the
Crasis or temperament of the Minerals does remain whole or complete, and more
fit to disperse their ray into Duumviratum, the seat of the Soul. For hitherto
the sulphur of Minerals under Vulcan, or the Fire, do obtain their highest
complement of the intention of Physicians. Therefore I exhort young Tyronists
or Fresh-men to despoil sulphurs of their strange and virulent force, under the
custody of which verily the vital fire is hidden, leading the Archeus most
pleasantly into desired ends. For there are certain sulphurs, to which being
corrected and perfected, the whole company of diseases do hearken: whose
plurality as it were is contracted into the unity of the Archeus, as into the
fist of a man fighting. From whence we may note: 1. That the farther a Medicine
is from being changed, or brought into aliment, the more it is to be accounted
Medical, and may more vigorously spread its rays to the very center of the
diseases. 2. The chief point in curing diseases, consists not so much in the
purging of humors, as in the pacifying of the Archeus. 3. That the chiefest
medicaments for curing the generality (if not all diseases) consists in mineral
sulphurs, especially when they are despoiled of their strange and virulent
force, which every Artist ought to labor to attain unto. 4. That one of these
chief sulphurs is this of Venus, before spoken of; another is the sulphur of
Antimony, which doubtless must be prepared by the Alkahest; for those two sorts
that are prepared by common Chemists, whereof the one is fixed by a Lixivium or
Alcali; and the other volatile, of another way of preparation, though they will
do some pretty things, especially that which is volatile; yet come they far
short of the virtues of that of Helmont and Paracelsus preparations: for this
sulphur I take to be his Tinctura Lili Antimonialis, and account it one of the
Arcana's of Paracelsus: Arcan. Parac. p. 790.
for he says, In the third place is the tincture of Lili also Antimonial,
almost of the same efficacy with the former (which is his Mercurius Vitae,
which is the offspring of the whole Stibium) although of less force. The last
Mineral sulphur that he most respects, is that of the Glaura of Augurellus,
which has no other proper name; and what Mineral it is, many make a great
doubt; and truly all I dare reveal of it is, that it is a very common and known
Mineral, and of a metallic root and principle, if not the very root of all
Metals and Minerals: but I would not have the Reader suppose that I mean it to
be (as many that think themselves very knowing, do imagine) native Mountain
Cinnober; for I must assure them it is not, for that is not the root of Metals,
as the Glaura is. But it cannot be better known then by that apposite
description that learned Augurellus has given it. To which I commend the
curious Student, and Searcher, and to compare it with what Paracelsus has
said, and also Helmont, of the Metallus primus sive masculus, and the Electrum
minerale immaturum; and to consider whether they be all one Mineral or not; for
I cannot, for many reasons, discover it any further; and I am sure here is
sufficient for those whom God will direct to know the secrets of Nature in the
mineral Kingdom.


3. We shall here with Helmont wish all ingenious Students, and Searchers after
Natures Secrets, seriously to consider of, and ponder this white anonymous
Metal of Copper, after the external sulphur is separated from it, that it
remains a true and real Metal still; and that the external sulphur of Metals
is not anatically homogeneous, nor essentially necessary to the constitution of
that which may be truly called, and is a Metal. And if they heedfully weigh
this, and compare it with what Helmont elsewhere says of common Quicksilver;
that all of it has in it less or more of an external Sulphur, that may be
separated from it: as also with what Paracelsus says in the forecited Book of
The Separation of Elements, that though the sulphurs of the seven Metals being
separated from their mercurial parts, and are of diverse colors, which he there
describes; yet that the mercurial part of all, or any one of them, does after
that separation remain white, and may be reduced into a metallic body, which
cannot be known of what species any of them are of. If this be well considered,
it will manifest that the Adeptists were not men led by Opination and fancy,
(as many that would seem Masters of no little Learning, do vainly dream and
object) but men that fundamentally and experimentally understood the nature of
Metals, and the subject they writ of, otherwise then thousands that are, and
have been rigid censurers of them and their Works; but blind men are not fit to
judge of colors. And further, if all Metals when divested of their external
and combustible sulphurs, be and remain Metals still, although of a white
color; as appears plainly from the unquestionable experience and authority
of these two persons; then let the Artist and Learned consider what is the
difference among them one from another. Is it specifical, or only gradual? Let
them speak that are fit to judge, and by this those that can understand and
take it, may perceive what that transmutation is that the Philosophers speak
and write of, and will open to the Learner the true way he is to walk in, and
the real end that Alchymy aims at. And above all it will open the reasons of
that most assured and true maxim of theirs, which is, that omnia metalla in suo
interiori sunt Sol and Luna. Compare this with what we have said before of the
Hematine Metals of Gold and Silver. So we will conclude this tedious discourse
of this Metal, willing the Reader to look upon what Sebastian Munster has said
in his Geography, Geograph, c* de Aerc. p. 8.
concerning Copper and its kinds; and so we shall descend to the next of the
harder sort of Metals, which is Iron.

CHAP. XIX. Of the descriptions of Iron, its Ore, or Mine, Operation, Stocks,
Flotes, and Passages.
THe other imperfect Metal, Mus. Worm. l. 1. Sect. 3. c. 6. p. 123.
famous in its hardness, called of the Greeks (...), of the Germans Eisen, is a
metallic body consisting of little Mercury, and much fixed Sulphur, abiding
ignition long, and very slowly fusible, easily contracting rustiness, of a
something whitish livid color. Lex Alchym. p. 206.
Rulandus gives it thus.

Iron is a metallic body, much livid, little red, hard and participating of a
whiteness not pure. For if a fixed earthy sulphur be commixed with Argent-vive
fixed, and earthy, and both these be not pure, but of a livid whiteness, if the
sulphur bear sway, it becomes Iron. In brief, if the Argent-vive shall be
porous, earthy, and impure, and the sulphur also impure, foetid, and earthy,
and of a fixed substance, De Mineral. p. 348.
Iron is generated. Paracelsus says of it thus: But on the contrary, Iron is
generated of a sulpher, Salt, and Mercury; of all the least fluxible, contrary
to the nature of Tin and Lead; and is coagulated into an hard Metal, and is
coupled in it self. For in one two Metals are conjugated, to wit, Iron and
Steel: Iron is the female, and Steel the male. And this conjugation is like to
that wherein Gold and Silver, to wit, the male and female, do also grow up
together. So they may be separated one from another, the female into her sex,
and the male into his also. And the male may be employed to its uses, and the
female also to hers. Last Will and Test. c. 6. p. 92, 93, etc.
Basilius Valentinus gives us its description, and the manner of its Ore lying
after this order. Iron-stone and Iron Ore is wrought in its Mine-stone,
according to the heavenly influence of Mars. For he is Trinus Magnus, the great
Lord of War, and an instrument whereby others are forced and compelled: of an
hard earthly impure sulphur, of putrefied Salt, and gross Mercury; which three
principal pieces in their juncture mix much of earthliness, therefore it is a
difficult labor to mollify Iron with, or in the fire, carrying much of
impurity, by reason of its sulphur; and above other Metals, it has a deep,
red, quick Spirit, which if it be taken from Mars, then is the Iron gone also,
leaves again a putrid earthliness. Iron is not easily mixed or joined with
other Metals, or united in the casting. Iron has a threefold partition, and
several parts in its earthly Ore, namely a magnet, a quick metalline Ore, which
has its quality from quick Mercury, and must hold communion and affinity with
Iron, must be quickened and renewed with Iron filings, in which he lies like an
Hedgehog, and is endued of Sol in Nature with glorious gifts and Adamantine
virtues; at one place and side it attracteth, and at the other side it
refuses; which virtues may be augmented and increased in it. A true type of
just judgment, it shows after the Sun the true hour in the body of the
Compass, by Water and by Land.

Secondly Steel, the hardest and purest, most malleable Iron, of its proper
light draining place, wherein it lies close tied and knit together in all its
parts most compactedly, which in all Iron-works is usually put to the edge and
point.

Thirdly, there comes the common Iron Ore, ordered together by its earthly
sulphur; which three ministered good thoughts to the first expert Naturalist,
that Master of Mine-Works, Tubal-Cain, who made his three principles in all
things, and made his dimensions in the Mines in three parts, in which such
metalline Ore was: he found at first the Iron-stone wrought in several ways,
namely upon standing passages, and floats, fallings, and proper pieces tinged
after the four Elements, and colors of the Rainbow. Then he considered
exactly its flowers, according to the condition of each stone-work, how and out
of what the Iron may most conveniently be melted, and what manner of
instruments may be used thereunto, where it may best and most fitly be wrought;
for its Ore affords a threefold ferocity and wildness, which are useful; as
namely, Glass-heads, which are like a sharp boodstone, breaking in the manner
of a skull, are scaly, and brown spissie. Secondly, The brown stone out of
which is made Glass, and iron-colour. Thirdly, Granulate iron-filings in the
float work; which is so hard, that it can scarcely be forced to be gotten off,
or be brought to right; and when the iron-stone is come to its perfectness,
then it breaks off by piecemeal, through the Stone, and Rock, that there are
found whole mines of iron-stone, such is the Iron Ore in Styria. The best
iron-stone is black, or red-brown, sometimes it inclines to a yellowishness,
some is of a Cherry-brown in the floats and stocks, some are black, and small
spissie, some yellowish, which glittereth among the rest, like a Copper stone,
of a brown black marble, and of a fair Glass; some looks like separated float
work throughout the whole Mine, some is cloddy and hoary in clayish fields,
which only is called the driving, is as the sand-stone, most hurtful unto Gold,
because it affords most of the slacks, and very little of Iron. Some sticks
in the gray clay, which affords most malleable Iron, but is of a brownish
color. There breaks also good iron-stone in tartareous and limy Mines; and the
most running is on the standing passages, in cristy sandy Dalk stones. The
gross clift stones break some in their slats. It usually breaks also in the
fore and after Mine-works, where some of it lies off-washed among the Roasts,
like a brown earth, and on the day there is no Ore so common as the Iron-stone;
because it assumeth, and takes in other Ores, and sets it thorough: thus
often it changes its color and nature; after it there ensues Glass-heads,
Hemasites, Brown Stone, Osemund, Bolus, together with the Red Oker, and
Iron-shell, all these assume the nature of Iron; and the Iron-stone receives
the highest Metals, Gold, Silver, Copper, Tin, Lead, whereby it grows
untoward; but Gold and Silver are not hurtful unto it, they make it malleable;
that which is mixed with Copper, or with other poor Metal, easily falls
asunder, is brittle; of the same condition is Iron flint, producing out of many
passages an huge flint, partly porous like unto a black slat, which beside the
Iron-stone, yields another grosser or subtiler Iron. Thus the Iron-stone is
associable unto other stones, be they metalline, or mineral. At Musbach there
is Copper shot Iron, which has a Lead joining thereunto. Founders must be
expert to deal with such Ores in their melting. Iron-stones have in many
Countries decreased, all other metalline stones are upon their decay, only
Gold, Silver, Copper, and Lead, keep their multiplying condition all the World
over.

CHAP. XX. Of the several sorts of Iron-stone, or Ore, and of Medicines
prepared forth of this Metal.
OF Iron there are two kinds, one which is native, being found such in the
Mines, the other that which is excocted. The pure Native Iron, that is found
so, of the Germans called Gediegen Eisen, ( Wormius says) is found in the
Mine, Mus. Worm. l. 1. Sect. 3. c. 6. p. 23.
either like grains, or a mass. That which was like a mass (he says) was found
in many places in Norway: one kind sharp, rough, and very porous, tincted
without with rust; but when it was broken, the genuine color of Iron did shine
forth, which also within a short time would be covered with rust. And that he
had lately received such like clods or pieces from Island. That he had another
mineral piece, whose third part was the best and pure Iron, of which he had a
little square portion of the length and weight of an ounce. That it was black,
porous, and compounded of small lamels or plates unequally, being disposed like
unto Talk, and while it was turned toward the Sun, would show a Violet color.
That there were many other pieces showing the best Iron, for the most part
black of color, and ponderous, which did not stand in need of a longer
description. Lex Alchym. p. 208.
We shall add some sorts of pure native iron to these, named by Rulandus.

1. Pure Iron, of its own color, found in its own Vein or Mine, in a white
flint. 2. Pure Iron found in Styria in the sand of the Rivers. 3. A vein of
Iron at Gishubeliah, of a liver color, solid, pure, and ponderous.
These are the sorts of Iron found pure, that we in particular can find
recorded by any Authors of credit, which may be sufficient to clear the matter,
that pure native Iron may be found, which we commend to all inquisitive Miners
to search after, that they may be able to satisfy themselves, and others of
the truth in this particular, seeing we have seen none such to aver it of our
own knowledge.

Now for the several sorts of Iron-stone, Ore, or Earth, (for there are of all
these sorts, that yield Iron plentifully) there are so many named by Authors,
and also such plenty and variety found in his Majesty's Dominions, that we
account it needless to enumerate them, being so commonly and vulgarly known.
Only we shall say thus much, that of those sorts that we have, or have seen
gotten in England, some are of a black color, and ponderous; some more brown,
and reddish; some more yellowish, and some of a gray whitishness, that all
yield plenty of indifferent good Iron. The Veins or Ore of Iron, when they are
excocted, do melt so that they may be poured out, which when it is cooled, the
dross and recrements being removed, it is heated in the fire, and does grow so
soft, that it may be beaten with the hammer, and does suffer it self to be
extended into Plates, and sometimes into very thin ones, as are those that are
after covered over with Tin, and called commonly Long-lane Tin, and Plate; of
which are made very many utensils for household, and diverse other uses, though
they last not long, but the Tin wears from off them, and then the Iron
rusteth, and so they soon decay. But Iron thus excocted and depurated, is not
all of one sort of goodness: for some is very tough and limber, which is
accounted the best; some is Copperish, rough, or brittle, and frangible; of
which they make bullets for Cannons, and cannot commodiously be beaten forth
with the hammer, but is burst, and therefore accounted more base. Another sort
holds it self in a middle manner, and may in part be beaten forth with the
hammer in great Works, in part not. But we here in England do for the most part
make choice of Iron according to the several uses men intend it for, and so
sometimes choose English Iron, sometimes that which was brought from beyond the
Seas, and both of these of diverse sorts, which are better known to the
Merchants and Mechanics that work in this Metal, then to me. Mus. Worm. ut
supr.
Now for Steel, which Paracelsus makes but the male, and Iron the female; some
make it to have a proper Vein, or Ore of it self, others to be but the purest
part of iron, drawn from the other that is more drossie and earthy: Of which
Wormius says, Of Iron more often molten and purged, is made Steel; which also
is brought forth by nature in some certain places. Elsewhere Iron is often
being hot extinguished in certain waters, that thereby it may be made very
hard, but ever thereby loses much of its weight.

Rulandus tells us, Lex. Alchym. p. 448.
that a pure Vein of Steel, was found in Voidtland near to Fichtelberg, and
also that it was excocted forth of a Steel Ore, as also drawn forth of pure
Iron. Our Workmen at the Forge do usually distinguish it into two sorts; one
they call Coldsel, and another Redsel.

Lastly, as to this point I shall only mind the Worker in this metal of a
passage in Diodorus Siculus, H^st. l. 5. c. 9. p. 145.
an ancient Author, who tells us; That the Celtiberians did thus prepare Iron
to make their weapons of War of. For they hiding Iron plates in the earth, did
suffer them to be there so long, until the weaker part of the Iron was wasted,
and the stronger remained. Then of that they made Swords, and other Arms for
the use of the War. To these thus made, all things or Arms would yield, that
neither shield nor helmet, nor any other Armor could resist them. And I have
known some that have found old rusty Knives that had long lain in the earth,
that being grinded anew, would cut better then the best new Knife that could be
found. But this I leave to be considered of by Artificers.

For the medicaments that are by common Chemistry prepared forth of this Metal,
they are either used in outward applications in Surgery, or are inwardly
administered. For those that are used externally, as the Crocus martis, it will
in some measure help to stop small Haemorhages or fluxes of blood by its
conglutinative quality, or help phlegmatic and watery ulcers by desiccation.
Also there is an oil made sometimes of it, with the help of Salt Armoniack,
that is a very fierce and painful Corrosive, but will (for those that can abide
it) cleanse rotten and filthy ulcers, and painful and virulent scabs: but this
that seems of an oily substance, will with long keeping decay; and the Salt
will separate it self in the form of Water, and leave the parts of the Steel,
as a red earth, or Crocus; because it was but a forced confusion or mixture,
and not an homogeneal union, nor any true oil from the Steel, but wrought by
the sharpness and pungency of the Salt, more then by its own nature, except
some of the atoms of its Salt might commix with the Sal Armoniack. But there is
another oil of Mars to be prepared according to the order set down by that
learned and experienced Surgeon, Felix Wurtzius, which appears in the true
form of an oil, and will swim upon the top of water; that will much honor a
Surgeon in curing malignant and desperate ulcers.

Now for the medicaments prepared forth of it by common Chemistry, neither the
Crocus for astringency, or staying fluxes, nor the Aperitive Crocus (as they
call it) for opening obstructions, will perform half so much as they have been
commended for. But I rather extol the Sal martis (if prepared by a careful and
expert Chemist) then either of the two former; a Medicine that some of the most
learned Physicians that England had, have much praised, and have gotten both
profit and credit by it. And I am confident that those medicaments drawn forth
of this Metal, so extremely extolled by Basillus and Helmont, Butler. p 594.
were not had but by the help of their universal dissolvent or menstruum,
though they do not openly declare as much. For the later of them says thus.
And that nothing does so equally gloriously work upon the radical moisture, as
the first ens or Being of Copper; nor that is more benign, or beneficial to
long life, then the sulphur of Vitriol, which notwithstanding does indigitate
the sulphur of the Philosophers. Compare this with what we have before written
concerning the sulphur of Venus.

Lastly, Mars, though most vile in price, and despised by reason of a numerous
issue, notwithstanding is not reputed by Paracelsus, the last in a warlike
nature. Let this be seriously considered of, and examined.

CHAP. XXI. Of the description of Lead, its Ores, Mine, Condition, and striking
passages.
NOw we come to the softer Metals, of which Lead is the most soft of any that
is in an hard and coagulated form (not to mention Quicksilver that is fluid)
and is by the Latins called Plumbum nigrum, to distinguish it from Tin, which
they called Plumbum album; and from Bismuth or Tin-glass, which they called
Plumbum Cinereum, because of its color. And many accounted these three sorts
to be all but Lead, and so to differ but in some degrees, accidents, and the
like: but omitting this opinion, we shall handle them as distinct Metals.

And this Metal which they called Plumbum nigrum, the Germans call simply Bley,
and we Lead, without any other addition, Lex. Alchym. p. 263.
and of Rulandus is thus largely described. Lead is a metallic body, livid,
earthy, and ponderous, participating of a little whiteness, and has much of an
earthy substance, and is turned into Tin by lavation, or washing. From hence it
is manifest that Tin is a certain thing more perfect then Lead. And Lead has
more of the substance of fixed sulphur to its composition then Tin has. For
Lead is an impure body, imperfect, procreated of Argent-vive, not fixed,
earthly, and feculent, a little white in appearance, but red in secret, and
compounded of such a like adustible sulphur in some part. It wants purity,
fixation, color, and ignition. And to this does Eucelius agree word for word,
as though Rulandus had transcribed it from him, Mus. Worm. l. 1. Sect 3. c. 7.
p. 124.
as in likelihood he did. Wormius describes it thus: Lead is an imperfect
Metal, soft, livid, ponderous, not sustaining the fire long, infecting the
hands of those that handle it with blackness, generated of much crude Mercury,
and impure and foetid sulphur, and comes nearest unto Gold in weight and
gravity. And Caesalpinus says: De Metal. l. 3. c. 7. p. 180.
For Lead does imitate Gold in heaviness, and gives forth no sound, therefore
they call it mute. I desire those that have opportunity, exactly to try whether
it come near to Gold in weight or not, for I much doubt of it.

It is not amiss here to give the differences betwixt white Lead, or Tin,
Bismuth, Tin-glass, or ash-colored Lead, and this common Lead, which they call
black Lead; according as Agricola has set them down: Lib. Fossil. 7. p. 644,
645.
who says; The white Lead or Tin, before it be polished, does shine much; but
polished, much more; the ash-colored much less, the black not at all. The
white is more perfect and precious then the black, the ash-colored holds the
mean betwixt them. The black is most easily melted, and does not long endure in
the melting-pot, nor conserve its species, but is partly changed into that
which we call the Spume of Silver, partly into that we call the foam of Lead,
or Molybditis. The black is soft, and therefore most easily handled, and
dilated with the hammer; the white is more hard, the ash colored most hard of
all. The white is tough, the black fragile, the ash-colored most fragile of
all. The black does not give forth any sound, the ash-colored does sound, the
white does make a noise or crash. The white is light, the black is ponderous,
the ash-colored keeps a mean betwixt them. The vapor of Vinegar does make
Ceruss both of the white and black, being corroded. That white is made of the
white, or of Tin, is called Spanish White, that which is made of the black, is
called white Lead, or Ceruss. Also of the black being burned, or calcined, is
made a sort of artificial Minium, sometimes of an high red color, which we
call red Lead; and sometimes of a lower yellowish red, which we call Calx
Saturni. The white has more of dryness, the black more of moisture. Therefore
of the ash-colored and the white, without the mixture of the black, vessels,
or utensils can hardly be made; but with the mixture of the black they may be
made easily, as are many and sundry sorts, and all our common Pewter. There is
also made of Tin by calcining, a Powder which the Artificers call Putty, of
great and excellent use for burnishing or polishing any instruments made of
Iron, Steel, Copper, Brass, Glass, and the like. As also a very fine curious
powder of a yellow color, called Masticot, Vid. Agricol l. Fossil 9 p. 651.
of singular use for Painters. Also that which we commonly Litharguron; adding,
because that some of it is of a white silver color, and some of a more
red-goldish color, that it is Litharge (and that, to speak in English, is but
stone-silver, or stone of silver) of Gold and Silver, when it is known to all
experienced persons, that it is nothing of Gold or Silver, but only the Lead,
that in the separating of the Silver from it, is by the force of the fire, and
the Bellows blown into, and (being cooled) hardened into those lumps like
stones, and may all or the greatest part of it, be again melted down into Lead
as it was before. Now we shall show something what Basilius Valentinus says of
this Metal, Last Will and Test. c. 7 p. 95, 96, etc.
its Ores, and the manner of their passages in the earth.

The Lead Ore (he says) is wrought under that heavenly impression of the black
and cold Saturn, by an undigested waterish Sulphur, impure Mercury and Salt.
First, there is wrought generally a brittle glittering Lead color in that Ore,
which is called Glass Ore (the Germans call it Glantz ertz, because being
broken, it is smooth and shining, though Agricola rejects the reason of this
appellation of his Countrymen; but without reason, for they call it not by this
name because of its transparency, but because it is smooth, and shining, as
that which we call Pottern Ore is) breaking in many rocks, contains Gold and
Silver, yields gross and lasting Mine-works. Some Lead-stones are very broad,
because Glassie Ores are mixed with it, with flints, or marchasites, partly
they are glassie, red-goldish, white-goldish, silvery, Copper-glassie, and of
Copper. Some Lead Ores turn to a blue color, mixed with a white transparency,
like unto a shot Bolus; some is like unto the Stone-salt and Allom; some are of
a dark green like unto green floats, which lie gritty in a yellow or
Glue-coloured clay; some are of a brown black, some are yellow-red like Minium,
some is pure and compact, some is insprinkled and moving, some is mixed with
Iron, some with Silver and Lead, some are mixed with Marbles and Flowers, some
breaks also upon standing and level moving passages, and some is wrought in
pieces here and there in slate Mines, where black Lead lies along through the
whole Mine, some is Glassie in Lime-stones, and some is very rich of Silver in
huge marble passages. There is a twofold Marble; the silver passages have an
earthly mixed gross marble, white, red-goldish, red-glassie, and ponderous. But
the Lead passages have a subtle light, and glassie brittle marble, which looks
like the glass upon Gold Mine-works, is of a curious white glittering quality.

Lead Ore is wrought several ways, and the color of it changes after the
manner of the Ores, especially in the sorts of Glass Ores. For if Saturn lies
below, or is in subjection unto others, then the Glass has no power to bring
Saturn unto Saturn, an imperfect mineral, which either is too hard or else
untoward; and the Nodus of Venus is a Mispukel, or a mixture of Lead, and
Silver, which is knitted very hard; but if soft, then it is Water-lead glass,
of the which is found in Gold juices, and Tin Ores, a kind of Iron-glass, or
Iron-mole, but is heavier and more brittle then Iron-glass, by reason of its
terrestreity or earthliness, which keeps in the Metal, and is neither too soft
nor too hard, and is glassie, white-goldish, red-goldish, and falls into the
best metalline Ores. True Lead-glasses and Ores afford half, or the third part
of Lead, mixed with some other Metal, and if one of the other Metals be found
in the Glass, which keeps the predominancy, then Lead passages are simply good,
and Lead is united with Gold, and these are mixed stones; for the Stones of
Mine-Ores are more wonderful in their singular accidents.

Thus is here the Lead also in its fall, and bleak, after the heavenly
impression, which the Highest has so endued, that it is subject to other
Metals, and is the supreme Finer in the essential fruits of others. It easily
mingleth naturally with other Metals, and the qualities of other Ores, together
with the leaves, bulk and roots, into other stones of Earth. And Saturn in his
degree and power is the highest, in a singular division of all his Works, in
which he shows himself in a clarified transparent soul, runs into Antimony
with its sweetness, which should merely embrace the Gold: This is done so, not
without a cause, for in its ponderositie it yields the lightest remedy to all
melancholy and heavy blood. As heavenly Astrals are several, the clouds under
them are of all sorts of colors; so the one Lead is purer and more malleable
then others, as that in England, and at Villach; it is seen in the Lead-stones
also.

For Lead Ores which are mixed with other stones, especially with such as
contain Silver, Iron, or Copper, yield much of light stones and Lead work,
which are picked out for separating, and the rather if they be rich of Gold.
Such worthy Metals there are in Hungary; less pains are taken about them in
their fining mineral flints with their unripe juices in the weak joynings of
Lead Ore, unite the Saturnal Glass; if without any mixture, affords to Potters
a green glazure, if all be not melted into Lead: but if you get a brittle mixed
flint, there the glass is half upon Iron, and such that are most pliable afford
melting glass, for fining such sturdy wild Ore, which will not melt. Artists
may prepare such Saturnal glass, mingling with it a small quantity of metalline
flowers, which will look as fair as if it were a natural one. There may be
extracted from Lead an effectual medicine for Man's health.

If slate Ores are found with another mixture, there are generated most fix and
firm Copper, Vitriol and Calamy also, as they are at Goslar in Harlynia. The
best Lead is in England, and at Villach.

Man cannot well be without any of his members; Metals according to Gods
Ordinance are of the same quality, if Man knew to make good use of them; for
Nature has provided richly for him in that way: if men work these ignorantly,
what utility can they have of them? Of the metalline Soul is made a chain which
linketh together the junctures of Gold and Silver: these are endued with a
special spirit, which is distilled into a Water, through a transparent head.
Nature congealeth under ground in the passages such Water into Ice, for a sign
that there is at hand a Vein of Lead, and Silver, or of pure Lead; and if there
be a mixture of other Metal about it, it is the better.

The best Lead passages are such Waters, blue, scaly, Talky, slate stones and
fluid streaked Marbles at length, or curled insprinkled ones, and not wrapped or
wound about with moving passages, almost not unlike unto Silver Ores. Some Lead
Ores are of a white, scaly, Talk-slate, full of wild Granats, in which Lead Ore
does appear, which is rich of Silver.

If the Reader think we have been tedious in transcribing so much forth of
Basilius, he may very well believe it was not done without cause, neither in
respect of the common Miner, nor of the mystical Philosopher, for there is
matter enough for them both, if they seriously weigh it, and can penetrate the
depth of his meaning, which I commend to them both heedfully to ponder and
judge of.

CHAP. XXII. Of the several sorts of Lead Ore, their Coats and Matrixes, and of
Medicines prepared forth of this Metal, and of such things.
LEad has such several sorts of Ores, and is accounted so base a Metal, that
few Authors have given description of them. But we shall note such as we find,
and add those several that our own Country yields. Lex. Alchym. p. 365.


Rulandus reckons these: 1. Lead Ore, of its own color, but impure.

2. A vein of Lead among the Ubii, that is whitish like unto white Spar or
Fluor, that is not pellucid.

3. A Vein of Lead that is like to transparent Spar, or Fluor, which is very
rich; for forth of an hundred pound weight, they draw above sixty pound of Lead.

4. At Caldeborn, like unto ash-colored Marle.

5. Like unto a white Sand-stone.

6. Like unto a metallic flint, in which little veins of live Sulphur appear,
and forth of Poland mixed with native Oker.

The experienced Ercker enumerateth these sorts.

Lib. Mineral. 4. p 113.
1. That which the Germans call Glantz ertz; and it is commonly called, or
rendered Glass Ore, or Glassie Ore, that is, that has a fine shining gloss, and
is smooth; not because it is transparent as Glass: and this is often rich, and
holds more then half Lead. 2. Also a white Lead Ore, which they call wiess
Bley ertz, like unto a Sand-stone. 3. Also a red Lead Ore, which they call Rot
Bley ertz. 4. Also yellow Lead Ore, mixed with gray; also found in Pebbles,
which they call Riess.
For the Ores of Lead that are gotten in England, they are very many and of
diverse sorts, Mr. Boil reckons these, Frim Ore, Steel Ore, Pottern Ore, etc.

And I shall number up some of the sorts that I have either seen, or that I
keep by me.

1. And first, That which the Workmen commonly call Potters Ore, because
therewith (being beaten to powder) the Potters do glaze their pots, of a
greenish, pale bluish, or brownish color: and this Ore is hard and brittle,
of a fair shining glass or gloss, and is (as I conceive) the very same that the
Germans call Glantz ertz, and is easy to be broken with the stroke of a stone,
or hammer, and does commonly break into smaller square pieces; wherefore some
of our Miners do call it Dice Ore: and this is generally the most rich of Lead,
and easy to be molten. 2. The Ore that they call Steel Ore, either of its
blackish dark color like Steel; or because of its hardness, being more hard
then any other sort of Lead Ore, and very ponderous, and sometimes contains
something of Silver in it, and is so hard to melt, that they are fain to mix
two or three sorts of the softer Ore with it, to make it run, or melt the more
easily, and this often contains store of Lead in it. 3. The Ore that they call
Frim Ore, is that which is very brittle, and will almost crumble with the hand
like a Sand-stone, of a whitish or grayish color, and sometimes of other
colors, and holds not so much of Lead as the former. 4. Soft-Ore, that is
near the color of Lead it self, and is far softer then any of the former;
insomuch that sometimes in beating it bruiseth, and spreads abroad with the
hammer, so that the Workmen are fain to mix much of the harder sorts with it,
otherwise they could not get it beaten small enough for their purpose; and this
sort often contains good store of Lead. 5. There is Ore of Lead that lies
insprinkled in Spar, Cauk, or grayish stones in small grains of a bright color
like silver, and yet contains very little of that Metal in it, but holds
very well of Lead; and of this sort there is very much gotten in these Northern
parts, and so there is of all the other forts.
There is besides these named, which may have many subdivisions, and are of
exceeding great variety, a sort of Ore found in the Lead Mines, that looks
well, and in appearance is like other Lead Ore, but yields no Metal at all,
but being mixed with good Ore, does rather hurt and consume it. And this the
Workmen (if they mean to melt their Ore themselves, and not sell it) pick
forth, and separate it from the good Ore: but if they mean to sell the Ore when
beaten and washed, then they beat and mix this with the good Ore, and
oftentimes Spar or Cauk beaten with it, which this kind of barren Ore will in
the washing color of a leadish hue, and so does augment it in bulk and weight;
but then it yields not so much Lead in the fusion, as in proportion the Ore
would do, if it were separated from it. And this kind of barren Ore our Miners
commonly call blue Blindake, and I judge it to be the same that the Germans
call Blend, which they say is barren, and contains no Metal in it all.

Here it cannot be amiss to say something of that which we commonly call
Black-Lead, because it discoloureth the hands far more then common Lead, and is
that whereof Pencils are made for Painters and Scriveners, and many other such
like uses. In the North we usually call it Kellow, and some call it Wadt; of
which there is still a Mine near Keswick in Cumberland, which is opened but
once in eight or ten years; either by reason of its scarceness, or to keep up
the price of it, of which learned Cambden says thus: Here also is commonly
found that mineral kind of earth, Britan. p. 767.
or hardened glittering stone (we call it Black Lead) with which Painters use to
draw their lines, and make Pictures of one color in their first draught: which
whether it be Pingitis or Melanteria, spoken of by Dioscorides, or Oker, a kind
of earth so burnt with heat, that it becomes black; or whether it were unknown
to the old Writers, I cannot certainly aver, and let others for me search it
out. But I am persuaded with Dr. Merret, Rer. natural. P^nax. p. 218.
that the Ancients had no perfect knowledge of it, however they left us no
clear description of it, nor no peculiar name for it, and therefore he not
unfitly styles it Nigrica fabrilis.

The Ores that are commonly gotten in these parts lie either dispersedly, which
some call floats, some loose or shaken Ore; and this is for the most part in
black bituminous earth, or in yellowish red clay (which some call the Brown
Hen, and then say her blue Chickens are not far off) Marle, and among small
stone; or in a continued course, or line, which some call strings, some veins,
which commonly lead to a greater stock or trunck; and these are enclosed
sometimes in one sort of Coat or Matrix, and some in another. Ut supr^
In Darbyshire these commonly lie near the Lead, Cauk, Bastard Cauk, Black
Chert, Wheatstone, Sheaf. In these Parts most usually in Spar, or in Cauk, or
in Flints, Slates, and other kind of Stones of diverse colors, but most what of
a gray or ash color. The Spar is something transparent, the Cauk not so, but
more ponderous, and both help the fluxing of the Ore.

For Spars which the Latins call Fluores, the Germans Flusse, they are Stones
found in the Mines like unto Gems, Lex. Alchym. p. 217, 218.
but less hard. The Miners call them Fluores, because with the heat of the
fire, as Ice by the Sun, they melt and flow. And they are the rudiments of
Gems, and the like, and are of these sorts.

1. Of a Red color, and seem at the first view crude red silver Ore, although
this be sometimes translucid. They look also like Carbuncles, but though
perspicuous they shine more faintly. And those that are not transparent, are by
that distinguished from Carbuncles; but the Fluores or Spars, as soon as they
feel the fire they flow; but Carbuncles will not melt with the fire. 2. Of a
dilute purple color. They look like the more greenish Amethysts, such as are
found in many places in Bohemia, and are not very much unlike them; and
therefore many are deluded by them. 3. Of a white color like Crystal. 4. Of a
yellow color like a Topaz. 5. Of an ash color. 6. Of a very black color.
And of all these sorts, and some more, he reckons many diversities and
differences both in color and figures. To whom and Wormius we refer the Reader.

As for Spars or Fluores either transparent or not, I shall recite some sorts,
such as I have in my custody.

1. And first I have diverse sorts that are white, and very transparent, like
the coarser sort of Crystal, and in some of them the Rudiments, as it were, of
Diamonds growing in them, finely angled, and more bright then the Spar in which
they seem to grow. 2. I have some that is black as Jett, with fine angled and
pointed Diamonds, (if I may so call them) of the same color, that
notwithstanding the blackness, will against the light show a kind of luster, or
resplendency. 3. I have Spar purely transparent, that is of a fair blue
sky-colour, very delightful to the eye. 4. And some of the very color of the
Amethyst, that if polished, and set in Rings with a right soil or water, were
able to deceive a very skilful Lapidary.
Now though we have spoken something before concerning Gur, that is a peculiar
mineral juice, and little know nor enquired after; we shall here add something
concerning the Medulla lapidis, or Lapidea, which the Germans call Stein marck;
some of which is agreeable to the Gur, or of its nature, and some of a
different temper; of which sorts Rulandus recites these.

1. Of a white and fluid kind, which was found in the Rocks of Torgense. 2. A
sort that is white and fatty, found in the same place. 3. A white metallic
matter growing in the Veins of silver, which when it is first taken forth, it
is in color like liquid Cheese, but forthwith in the air it waxes hard, so as
notwithstanding, being holden in the mouth, it melts like butter. 4. A sort
that is a metallic substance most white, fat, and soft, found in the Iron
Mines of Sachsenfield; and in touch not unlike to that which is called
Soap-stone or Earth. 5. A red soft matter, found in the Mines of Rochlicense,
which they use with great profit, in stead of Bole of Armenia.
Lastly, As for Medicaments prepared forth of Lead, there are some store used
in Surgery, as Litharge of both sorts, Ceruss, Red Lead, Plumbum Ustum, and
the like, which are common and vulgar.

For Medicaments prepared forth of Lead by common Chemistry, I know none of any
value, (an^ that by the opinion of the most of them, except Hartman, not to be
taken inwardly) is that which they call Saccharum Saturni, which I confess in
inflammations and the like distempers, will do very handsome and commendable
things. But yet if we will believe Ripley, Lully, and some others, we might be
induced to believe that in this Metal there are contained far more noble
secrets and Medicines: For Lully tells us this in few words. Epist. Accu^^at.
p. mihi, 371.
Scire debes quod ex plumbo Philosophorum ex^rahitur oleum quoddam aurei
coloris, vel quasi, cum quosi lapidem mineralem, vel mixtum, vel animalem post
fixionem primam solveris tribus vel quatuor diebus, vel vicibus, excusabit te
ab omni labor solutionum, and coagulationum. Ratio est, quia hoc est oleum
occulium, quod facit medicinam penetrabilim, and amicabilem, and conjungibilem
omnibus corporibus, and augmentat ejus effectum ultra modum sic, quod in mundo
hoc, secretius eo non est. But there is a learned French Author (who for some
reasons we shall not name) that describes the drawing of an Oil of
extraordinary virtue forth of this Metal, and gives Lully's words in a shorter
sense thus. Ex plumbo nigro extrahitur oleum Philosophorum aurei coloris vel
quasi, and scias quod in mundo nihil secretius est eo. This is enough for those
that do, or can understand, and therefore we shall add no exposition. And
Ripley says thus; XII. Gates Pr^fac.
An Oil is drawn out in color of Gold,
Or like thereto, out of our fine Red Lead.
Which Raymond said, when he was old,
Much more than Gold would stand him in stead.
For when he was for age nigh dead,
He made thereof Aurum potabile,
Which him revived, as men might see.
Compare this with the Latin quoted by the aforesaid French Author, and with
the Latin set forth by Combachius, and some passages in Ripley's Medulla, and
then (perhaps) the truth may be more apparent. But that we may sharpen the
appetite of the studious searchers into the secrets of mystical Chemistry, we
must affirm that neither the ancient Poets nor Philosophers did speak such
great things of Saturn and his off spring, without just and great cause,
whatsoever the most censorious Critic may say to the contrary; and the reasons
are sufficiently known to the Secretaries of Nature, and for others they may be
as well contented with the Husk as the Kernel. And that I may put those that
are inquisitive into a more serious search in this particular, I shall commend
unto them one Stanza of that which speaks Sir Edward Kelley a learned Adeptist,
and not such a person as Weaver in his Funeral Acts and Monuments would
personate him to be, mistaking the one born in Worcestershire, for the other
born in Lancashire, and hardly to be reconciled by any near touch of
Chronology, nor other circumstances; who after he has spoken heartily enough
to the Sons of Art, says thus: Remember also how the gods began, Theat. Chym.
B^it. p. 333.

And by descent who was to each the Sire,
Then learn their Lines and Kingdoms if you can,
Their manners eke, with all their whole attire.
Which if thou do, and know to what effect,
The learned Sophies will thee not reject.


But to knit up this discourse (which some may deride, which we shall leave to
their own extravagant fancies) we shall give you the testimony of two eminent
persons, of the secrets contained in this Metal. And first that of Paracelsus,
Coel. Philos. p. 122.
who though a dark Author (as many account him) yet few come more close to the
mark, whose words are these, where he makes Saturn speak of himself: Mundo
minime foret utile, si cognosceret, aut saltem crederet, quidnam in me lateat,
efficere que possim: utilius foret, si mecum id, quod possum facere calleret:
Alchymistarum arts omnes deserens, hoc solo, quod in me est, and per me fieri
potest, uteretur.

Butler p. 594.
Lastly, to bring up the Rear, as a most stout Champion, we shall give the
witness of the experienced Adeptist Helmon^; who having showed the difficulty
to obtain medicaments forth of Gold, Silver, common Mercury, says thus: Sunt
ergo praeterea quatuor Metalla, quae facilius ductui, and optatui artificum
parent. Adeo ut non frustra Paracelsus glorietur, solo plumbo, forte ducentas
morborum Classes superari posse.

CHAP. XXIII. Of the description of Tin, of its Ores, Operation, Stocks,
Floats, Fallings, and striking Passages, and the like.
IT seems that betwixt the Stannum or Tin of the Ancients, and that which later
Authors call Plumbum album, White Lead, which now is taken to be our common
Tin, there are many that have made a difference. But if there were any such
thing, it is now unknown, therefore we shall say nothing of it, but proceed to
that which is commonly known by that name, Mus. Worm. l. 1. Sect. 3. c. 7. p. 1
24.
which Wormius thus describes. Tin is an imperfect Metal, soft, and consisting
of a plentiful Mercury, less fixed, and of a white impure Sulphur; of more
difficult fusion then Lead, scarcely contracting rust, and will ring, or make a
sound.

Rulandus thus, Tin is a metallic body, white, not pure, Lex. Alchym. p. 445.
livid, participating of little earthliness, of Argent-vive, pure fixed, and not
fixed, clear and white in its outside, and red in its inside, and of such a
sulphur, it only wants decoction or digestion.

Basilius writes thus of it. Last Will and Test. c. 8. p. 99, 100.
Tin Ore is wrought in a Sand-stone, having its influence from Jupiter above,
wrought of a dark brown purple colored, grayish, black, shining mercurial
salt, and some sulphur mixed with it, interlined with an unkind gross
sulphurous fume; all these incorporate together, making the body of Tin. This
unkind fume is the cause of the brittleness of Tin, and makes all other Metals
that are melted with it, unkind and brittle. This Tin or Quitter grows or
breaks in a threefold manner, viz. it slideth, it is full of fumes, and it
grows in pieces. It has a threefold wildness also, as Shoal, Flint, and
Iron-mold, which causes Lead-works. Their colors are black slate, brown, and
yellow. These Sand and Quitter Ores, are environed or enclosed in mighty broad
standing passages, which appear to the day with Quitters: some contain also
rich paint-work, some of these flints must be calcined, some are mixed with
store of Talk and Cat-silver, which is a food unto Quitter, and loves to stay
there; some there are which grows in a Glimmer, or Cat-silver, and is
Iron-mold; others also do strike in a Fire-stone or Flint, so that fire must be
applied thereunto, others are in a soft stone, and as it were swimming along:
some are richer then others. That which grows pure, and in black small
stones, and heapeth together that natural work, that gives the greatest gain.
And because Jupiter is the potent Lord of it, therefore it has a mighty Throne
and seat, that is, a mighty huge Mine-Ore, out of which Tin is made by heaps,
and is of that nature and property, that it presses outward, and blossometh to
the day, thrusts off Soap-work, whence come the wash-works of Tin-Soap. For
Quitter does not grow in the sand of Earth, besides in its body it is removed
further from the seat of its Throne to the Footstool, makes for it self a
twofold dominion; in one it bordereth, and reaches to slates, and other
stones that lie about it, insomuch that his dominion increases; in which is
not a little, but much on the blue stones, fallings, floats, passages, shoals,
and clifts, which incline one upon another, and do join. Many times a mighty
Tin-stone is wrought, which sinketh down among its own cinder and slate, and at
its sinking purges it self, and there come other fumes like clouds, which at
all sides shoot into, and then breaks again as good as ever it did before;
and it is of that good condition, that it despises no lodging, nor passes by
any; but as poor and as despicable the stone is in that place, be it red,
brown, fresh, or stale, broad or small, it will press into, and mingle it self
with it, and will not be forced out of it, making it self great, little, gross,
mild, tame, subtle, and pliable, even as the rest will have it, and all this
in a natural way. It loves to border upon Silver, and Iron-stone, that Tin and
Iron be united in a mighty fixed Silver and Copper Ore; all which are found at
their several marks. Tin Ore is in this place better and malleable; if found
afar off from flint-passages, and are less mingled with Iron-mold, especially
of Copper-stones, which in calcining can hardly be separated, proves Lead work,
without any fair glass. Some of it is so mild and soft, that when they are
cleared, and calcined, still lose something; for flints and sulphurous matters
which are volatile, and cannot endure any great heat, corrode somewhat of the
metalline Tin, which appears by the white thick fume, at the calcining. They
are calcined thus hard by reason of Bake-Iron, else they might yield as much
again, for they lose extremely in calcining. It is strange to some why they
shrink together to so small a quantity, being they get a greater quantity of
Lead, with good Qwitter, at first brought out of the Mine.

As for the several sorts of Tin Ore, I find little mention of them in Authors,
Rer. nature. Pinax. p. 208.
only Doctor Merrett says that the Mine-men in Cornwall and Devonshire do
distinguish their Tin into that which they call Pyran, Murdick, and Block Tin,
and that they call their Tin-stones Shoad. Philos Trans. n. 19. p. 337.
And the learned Mr. Boil does tell us, that store of excellent Tin is said to
be found in some parts of Cornwall, at the sides, and in the channels of running
waters, in grains like Sand or Gravel, which they call Corn-Tin.

Now for the Tin Mines in Cornwall and Devonshire, which have been so ancient,
that it may well be an argument that Nature neither decays, nor that Minerals
cease to grow, Brit. Cornw* p. 185.
take what learned Camden says in these words. The Inhabitants do discover
these Mines by certain Tin stones lying on the face of the ground, which they
call Shoad, being somewhat smooth, and round. Of these Mines or Tin^Works,
there be two kinds, the one they call Load-Works, the other Steam-Works. This
lies in lower grounds, when by trenching they follow the Veins of Tin, and
turn aside now and then the streams of water coming in their way: That other is
in higher places, when as upon the hills they dig very deep pits, which they
call Shafts, and do undermine. And a little after he says, There are two sorts
of Tin, Black Tin, which is Tin Ore broken and washed, but not yet founded into
Metal, and white Tin that is molten into Metal; and that is either soft Tin
which is best Merchantable, or hard Tin less Merchantable. And again: That the
ancient Britans practiced these Tin-works (to omit Timaeus the Historian in
Pliny, who reports, that the Britans fetched Tin out of the Isle Icta in
Wicker Boats, covered and stitched about with Leather) appears for certain
out of Diodorus Siculus, who flourished under Augustus Caesar. For he writes,
that the Britains who inhabited this part, dug Tin out of stony ground, and
at a low Water carried the same in Carts to certain Islands adjoining.

Now I shall give the Reader such informations as I received from one Thomas
Creber of Plimpton St. Mary in Devonshire, who was one (and all his Ancestors
before him) that had wrought in the Tin-mines; and these particulars I had from
him.

1. The Hills where they get Tin Ore, near that place where he lived, are
called Yelsborrow and Woollack.

2. Black stones that hold Tin, they call Tin-stones, and lie either in a load,
or in a string.

3. There is other Tin Ore that is softer, and lies in a dun stone, and is of a
yellowish color, but will melt near both alike.

4. Pure Ore, which they call Corn Tin, being found in grains, and is the
hardest to melt.

5. Another place they call Armed Pit, which holds Ore they call Zill Tin,
which is as small as Grit or Sand, and needs nothing but washing, and is the
most easily melted of all other sorts of Tin Ore, and lies in Chalk and Clay;
and this small Ore, because it is rich, they call it fatty Ore.

6. The black stones, if they find them at the top, do continue in the whole
Mine or Work. Sometimes it is in that they call strings, running through earth,
or stones, like small twigs or strings: and sometimes it is all in one, like a
great branch or trunk, which they call a Lode. Sometimes it runs in Spar,
sometimes in a black stone that will strike fire, sometimes in white stones
that are soft.

7. Their smelting houses roofs, after certain years they pull down, and find
store of Ore in that stuff, that in their former meltings was forced from the
fire.

8. The Corn Ore is found at the bottom of the Hills, being there dug into,
and lies sometimes in one sort of earth, and sometimes in another. And the
Zill Ore is found in the same order.

9. The uppermost part of their Work they call Cooping; and if it be good or
rich, the Lode or Strings underneath are good: If bad or indifferent, those
underneath, are sometime good, and sometime bad.

10. They call that part of the mineral, that is found washed down, or
otherwise brought down into the Valleys, Shoad.

11. They have a thing they call Mundick, sometimes found in the Ore, which
they separate lest it should spoil the Ore; some of it is yellow, which is the
worst, and sometimes of other colors: and the Mundick after smelting the Ore,
Philos Trans. n. 19. p 317.
is blackish and hard. Of it Mr. Boil says thus. Mundick I have had of a fine
golden color; but though it be affirmed to hold no Metal; yet I found it in
weight, and otherwise, to differ from Marchasites, and the Mine men think it of
a poisonous nature.

12. They have a thing they call Maxy, mixed with the Ore, which cannot be
separated by the water, but by the fire, and then smells very ill, and is of a
bluish color.

13. Lastly, They also find something like bright Ore, which they call Shim.

And thus much of this Metal, seeing there is no need to speak of any
Medicaments prepared forth of it, because I have not had experience of any such.

CHAP. XXIV. Of the several sorts of Mercuries according to the Mystical
Philosophers, or Adeptists.
THough I may be censured variously by several sorts of men for intermeddling
in such a mysterious and high a subject as this Chapter imports; yet without
valuing them, I shall lay open some things that have not been much noted, or
understood by many that think themselves sufficiently knowing in these matters,
and leave them to those, that with me do understand the Authors from whom I
have these things I now treat of; being assured that these things are not for
those that are led by fancy and opination, but for those that are
understanding, and the genuine Sons of Hermes. I find in the heedful and
diligent search of the Writings of that profoundly learned, and experienced
person Paracelsus (absit invidia verbis) that he understood four several sorts
of Mercuries, which we shall rank in this order, and so handle them.

1. There is the Mercury of the Philosophers, which is a thing in a various
sense, Mercurio vulgi communius.

2. There is that which he calls Mercurius Corporis, which is made astraliter
by the Tincture forth of another Metal, as when Lead, Tin, or Copper is
transmuted into true running common Mercury, or Quicksilver; Ret. nature. l. 9.
p. 113.
or it may be (as Libanius records of Kelley) that common Gold is changed
into Quicksilver; of which he thus speaks. Sic etiam Mercurius Corporis e
metallo alio factus astraliter, multo nobilior, and fixior est Mercurio communi.

3. There is Mercurius Metallicus, or Corporalis, that is extracted, drawn and
separated from the perfect or imperfect Metals; as is that mercurial part of
Copper mentioned by Helmont, after the external and combustible sulphur be
separated from it, which may be reduced into a white and anonymous Metal; and
this not to be had but by the help of the Alkahest.

4. The vulgar Mercury, or common Quicksilver.

And of two of these we shall speak, to wit, of the Philosophers Mercury, and
of common Quicksilver.

Arcan. Herm. p. 168.
therefore let them take this rule from a learned Author, who says thus: Let a
Lover of Truth make use of a few Authors, but of best note, and experienced
Truth; let him suspect things that are quickly understood, especially in
mystical names and secret operations; for truth lies hid in obscurity, nor do
Philosophers ever write more deceitfully, then when plainly, nor ever more
truly then when obscurely. And therefore Geber tells us, Ubicunque aperte
locuti sumus, ibi nihil diximus, sed ubi sub Aenigmate aliquid posuimus, and
figuris, ibi veritatem occultabimus. Again, Let the studious Reader diligently
mark, in what points they agree in, for there necessarily the truth is to be
found, for Concord is the strongest evidence, and Truth consists only in
unity. Bern. Trevisan. de Alchym. p. 756.
For Trevisan says, Consideravi potius quibus locis, libri maxim convenirent
in eundem sensum, ibidem existimavi latere potissimum veritatem, quae non
potest in pluribus, sed in uno tantum existere: hac via mihi fact a est obviam
veritas: In quibus enim maxim convenire videbam in unum, hoc ipsum fuit, quod
tam anxie quaesieram. Lastly, observe this. Let the studious Reader have a care
of the manifold signification of words; for by deceitful winding, and doubtful,
yea, contrary speeches (as it should seem) Philosophers vent their mysteries,
with a desire of keeping and hiding, not sophisticating or destroying the
truth. Ut Supr. p. 188.
And in nothing have they been more dark and obscure, then about this that they
call their Mercury, which they have made manifold; four sorts of which we shall
only handle.

1. They do sometimes call perfect Elixir, and coloring medicine their Mercury
(though with some impropriety, as to other appellations of it, being perfectly
fixed, and not volatile) because of the likeness and great conformity it has
with heavenly Mercury, or with the Planet so called, which accommodateth it
self, to the nature and quality of every thing it is joined withal. The like
this uncertain Elixir works, for that being tied to no proper quality, it
imbraceth the quality and disposition of the thing wherewith it is mixed, and
wonderfully multiplieth the virtues and qualities thereof. And in this sense
for the most part the Philosophers understand it, and not in respect of common
Mercury, or its volatility. For Sendivogius says thus: Nov. Lum. Chym. Tract.
6. p. 320.321.
Dicitur Mercurius propter ejus fluxibilitatem, and uniuscujusque rei
conjunctionem, non propter essentiam, assimilatur sulphuri propter internum
calorem, and post congelationem est humidum radicale. For the Philosophers
Sulphur or Tincture before Fermentation is (in this sense) truly mercurial and
universal; but after it be fermented, that universality is determined, and
specificated according to the nature of the Metal with which it is fermented,
and so it is no more an universal, Theatr. Chym. Vol. 4. p. 471, 472.
but a particular. Et ante fermentationem tamen est catholica ac universalis
vere, and in omnia sublunaria agit universaliter, and catholice. Post
fermentationem autem est specificata ad naturam metallicam. And again; Et est
vere universalis ante fermentationem, post eam specifica.

2. There is another matter which they call their Mercury, which is the most
universal that is in nature, and forth of which in the first creation all
specificated bodies were produced, and still continues both the efficient and
material cause, and matter of all generations, and productions, and this they
called Hyle or Chaos, and Raymund Lully the genus generalissimum of all things.
And doubtless was no other then Aristotle's materia prima, fifth Essence, or fifth
Element, which few of his Interpreters understood, and many others derided, as
though because they did not know it, therefore others did not: when indeed that
learned Grecian understood much, that in his Writings he opened but darkly,
and therefore however the proud and ignorant may scoff and jeer, we do affirm
that there is such a matter in rerum natura: though in some respects it be a
truth, that it is, neque quantum, neque quale, neque quid, neque quicquid
eorum, quae cernuntur; and this the ancient Sages knew and understood well
enough, and sometimes called it Anima Mundi, or Spiritus Catholicus, and by
many other such like names. And it is of this that the learned Lord of
Nuysement epitomized by Combachius, writ that learned Treatise, De sal Philos.
c. 4. p. 158.
De vero Sale secreto Philosophorum, and de universali mundi spiritu: who says
in one place thus; Ego vero tracto de materia universali nondum specificata,
quae proprie materia prima hujus materiae primae metallicae appellari potest,
tanquam generalissimum genus generum, a Raymundo Lullio adeo celebratum. And as
the Philosophers did understand this to be the first true matter of all things,
so they had an universal matter that was mineral, from whence all Metals did
spring and arise; so that by allusion and comparison, they often expressed the
nature of the one by the other; which many (and they very learned too) not
discerning the confounding of these two together, have often taken the one for
the other, and so have both been deceived, and also deceived others; of which
thing learned Ripley gives us this caution: In the beginning when thou madst
all of naught, The 12 Ga^es Prefac. p. 122, 123.

A Globous matter, and dark under confusion
By the beginner marvellously was wrought,
Containing naturally all things without division,
Of which thou madst in six days dear distinction.
As Genesis aperily does record,
Then Heaven and Earth perfected were with thy Word.
So through thy will and power out of one mass
Confused, was made all things that being is;
But in thy glory before as Maker thou was,
Now is, and shall be without end I wiss;
And purified souls up to thy bliss
Shall come a principle, this may be one,
For the declaring of our Stone.
For as of one Mass was made all thing,
Right so must it in our practice be;
All our secrets of one Image must spring,
In Philosophers books therefore, who lust to see,
Our Stone is called the less World, one, and three.
Magnesia also of Sulphur and Mercury,
Proportionate by nature most perfectly.
Here the careful Reader may observe, not only the description of this matter
that he calls Globous, known, and understood of so few, as also the
comparison of it, to the matter of their great Stone.

3. The matter forth of which they prepare their artificial Water, they call
their Mercury; which thing Nature has produced ready for the Artist to begin
his work withal. And though it be conversant before the eyes of all the World,
and be a common known despicable matter, yet it is one of their greatest
secrets, which they have most hid and veiled, and the most difficult for an
Artist to know, that this is the true subject that he must begin to work upon.
But when it is truly known, men will rather wonder why they knew it no sooner,
then at their knowing of it after they do understand it; for the Ancients have
declared the proper marks and tokens so fully, that hardly can it be done more
largely, except they should in plain and vulgar words have named it, and said
this is it: which has caused diverse of the later Adeptists the more to obscure
it, and to put their Readers into the greatest dubitation about it. This is it
that they have called their metallic seed (and indeed is really so) and have
given it so many various names and descriptions, according to its furthest,
midd, or near nature, that without divine assistance, or a faithful Master, it
is hardly to be comprehended, or known. Therefore Sendivogius tells us, Nov.
Lum. Chym. Tract. 6. p 318, 319.
Semen Metallorum vel minerale creat natura in visceribus terrae, propterea non
creditur tale semen esse in rerum natura, quia invisibile est. And, Tract. de
sal. Philos. p. 7, 8.
Minerale semen a Philosophis cognoscitur. And again, Semen Metallorum tantum
filii doctrinae noverunt. And Combachius says, Metalla similiter suum habent
semen, sed hoc videri non potest nisi a ver is Philosophis, qui illud ex
subjecto suo proprio magna industria ex^rahere norunt, quanquam illud etiam
facilius ratione concipi, quam corporis oculis videri possit. Here if thou
understand, I have said enough; if thou do not, I have said too much.

4. The last sort of their Mercuries that we shall name* is that which by the
Artist is prepared forth of their true and proper matter, and is as Lully often
tells us, never left prepared by nature, but must be made by the Artist. Nov.
Lum. Chym. Tract. 11. p 332, 333.
And of this, thus Sendivogius speaks in his practice: Sed hoc admonitus sis,
ne accipias aurum and argentum vulgi, nam haec sunt mortua, accipe nostra quae
sunt viva, postea pone in ignem nostrum, and siet inde liquor siccus; primum
resolvetur terra in aquam, quae Mercurius Philosophorum dicitur, and illa aqua
resolvit illa corpora solis and lunae, and consumit ea ut non remaneat nisi
pars decima, cum una part, and hoc erit humidum radicale metallicum. From
whence note: 1. That first they have that which he calls their Fire, into
which their Sol and Luna are put, and this their Fire is a Water; for their
Water is a Fire, and calcineth the bodies of Sol and Luna more then common Fire
can do; according to their maxim, Vulgus cremat per ignem, nos per aquam; and
this is that Water which Helmont calls ignis Gehennae, and ignisaqua, which
he calls an immortal and immutable liquor, and is (notwithstanding the opinions
of all men to the contrary) the very same that he and Paracelsus call their
Alkahest, and was that very Water by which Helmont and Raymund Lully fixed
common Mercury, and is by Lully called Aqua Coelica, Aqua Lunaria, Menstruum
vegetabile universale, and Aquaignis. 2. To note that their Sol and Luna are
not the Gold and Silver of the Vulgar, for they say aurum nostrum non est aurum
vulgi, neque in color, neque in substantia. 3. That after their earth be
dissolved in their Fire or Water, then it is called the Mercury of the
Philosophers, and so does but at the best differ gradually when the earth is
dissolved in it, from the Fire or Water that did dissolve their earth. 4. That
this Water does dissolve those bodies of Sol and Luna, and consume them, and
then it is humidum radicale metallicum. 5. Observe that in saying there
remains but the tenth part with one part, he truly teaches the proportion
of the earth and water in this conjunction, if thou can rightly understand
him. Lastly, Aenig. Philos. p 351.
He tells us of this Water thus much in another place. Et hoc vobis dico, quod
opus est rem quaerere aliquam, quae occulta est, ex qua fit (miro modo) talis
humiditas, quae aurum sine violentia seu strepitu solvit, imo ita suaviter and
naturaliter, sicuti glacies aquae calidae beneficio liquescit, si hoc
invenistis, habetis rem, ex qua aurum a natura productum est: Et quamvis omnia
metalla, and res omnes ex illa ortum habeant, nil tamen ita amicatur ei, sicut
aurum, nam aliis rebus adharet impuritas, auro autem nulla, propierea instar
matris est ipsi. Compare this with the former, and seriously consider of it,
for there is much hidden and couched in it.


From whence we may consider the reasons why they use this propriety in calling
all these Mercuries theirs, or Mercuries of the Philosophers; and those chiefly
we conceive to be these two following: 1. The most of these (or at least two of
them) are called theirs, because Nature has not brought them forth in that
perfection that the Philosophers desire and stand in need of. But it is the
Philosophers Skill, Art, and Industry, that exalts them to this pre-eminence,
which Nature had not contributed unto them, and therefore are truly and
properly called theirs, for none but true Philosophers indeed can bring them to
that height of perfection. 2. The other universal Mercury or Hyle, has not its
virtues and excellencies known to any but to true Philosophers, who well
understand the nature and qualities of it. And that other Mercury which Nature
produces of it self without Art, and is the principal matter, and seed of
which Metals are generated in the bowels of the earth, they also call (as they
do many other things) theirs; and that because though it be commonly known, and
be to be had; yet none but true Philosophers know the hidden, and secret
virtues thereof (though it be conversant before the eyes of all the World) nor
that it is the seed from whence Metals are produced.


But notwithstanding all this that has been said, there are many so wedded to
the great Opinion that they have of common Mercury, that either they believe
that it is that true seed of Metal the Philosophers speak of; or at least that
forth of it the Philosophers Mercury may be made; both of which are clear wide
from the mark: Nov. Lum. Chym. Tract. 6. p. 320, 321.
For Sendivogius tells us plainly in these words, Et quamvis corpus metallorum,
ex mercurio sit procreatum, quod de mercurio Philosophorum intelligi debet,
tamen hi non sunt audiendi, qui putant mercurium vulgi, semen esse metallorum,
and ita corpus loco s^minis accipiunt, non considerantes, quod and dictus vulgi
mercurius, suum in se habeat semen. Therefore to put this forth of doubt, we
shall give the differences of the Philosophers Mercury, from common Argent
vive, forth of their own mouths.

1. The Mercury of the Philosophers is a mere product of Art forth of a fit
natural subject, and is never to be had but by the assistance of Art. But
common Quicksilver is a product of Nature without the help of Art; for there is
much of it found in its own form, which the Workmen call Virgin Mercury.

2. The Chemical Fountain, or Philosophers Mercury, does produce all things,
and vivisie all things; and on the contrary, it destroys all things,
corrupts all things, and works all other things that concern life and
death; but so does not common Mercury.

3. The Chemical Fountain is fiery and hot, but common Argent vive is cold and
moist.

4. The Chemical Fountain with the most easy distillation is changed into a
spirit, and a volatile body. But the common Argent vive is all spirit, and in
distillation is not changed into a watery spirit, but ascends corporally, no
whit changed from it self.

5. The spirit drawn from the Chemical Fountain, is fiery, and pontick, and so
penetrating and subtle, that it also dissolveth Metals, and being so
dissolved, does deliver them to death. But common Argent vive cannot be
converted into a watery, pontick spirit by distillation, nor kill or destroy
the Metals, but only hides them in its belly, and does vomit them up again, by
separating it self from them, with any easy heat.

6. The Chemical Fountain does dissolve it self, and congeal it self, and
perfect it self, without any other thing added unto it. But common Quicksilver
does not dissolve it self, unless it be dissolved of another; nor congeal it
self, nor by any means perfect it self.

7. The Chemical Fountain has in its belly and inward parts, salt fixed, red,
and white, yea it is totally salt, and springs and arises forth of a saline
den. But common Argent vive is nothing else but a running Metal, movable, and
slippery.

8. The Chemical Fountain has Sol and Luna in the nearest power, and with only
simple coction, they are reduced into the ultimate act: which we can bring
forth of common Argent vive by no kind of Artifice.

9. Of the Chemical Fountain, without any thing added to it, is made the
Elixir, and true Philosophic Tincture: which by no means we can obtain from
common Argent vive.

10. The Chemical Fountain has in it self in the nearest power all Metals,
seeing it is the immediate, and next seed, forth of which they are generated
and compounded. And it is the father, efficient, and material cause, out of
which common Quicksilver is produced, which cannot be said of the other.

11. The Chemical Fountain does compound precious stones in the bowels of the
earth, and all those others which Nature hides in her bosom, by the
congelation, and coagulation of the Fountain into stones, which we cannot say
of vulgar Mercury. Hydrogr. Spag. Pet. Fabr. l. 3. c. 12.

13. Vulgar Mercury does not so dissolve Gold and Silver, that it never can
again be separated from them. But the Philosophers Argent vive does so dissolve
Gold and Silver, that it is never again separated from them, but is as water
commixt with water.

13. Vulgar Mercury has combustible and evil sulphur, with which it is made
black. But the Philosophers Argent vive has in it self sulphur incombustible,
fixed, good, white, and red.

14. Vulgar Mercury does make bodies black, and staineth them. But the
Philosophers Mercury does make bodies white as Crystal.

15. Vulgar Mercury by praecipitation is turned into a Citrine or red powder,
and an evil sulphur. But the Philosophers Mercury by virtue of heat, is changed
into most white sulphur, good fixed, and fluxible.

16. Vulgar Mercury, by how much more it is decocted, by so much the more it is
made volatile, and fluxible. But the Philosophers Mercury by how much it is
more decocted, by so much more it is thickened, and made fixed. Sendivog. Tract.
de Sulphur. and de tribus principiis.

These are the differences that these two Authors quoted have given of the
differences of common Mercury, and that of the Philosophers, but indeed are so
full of equivocations and evasions, one while meaning their Elixir, another
while the catholic Mercury or Hyle, sometimes their artificial Mercury, and
but seldom, if at all, the matter out of which they prepare their own Mercury,
or universal liquor. So that they may well buzzle the brains of a person
reasonably well versed in their terms, and Art. But to be a little more candid,
we shall show some agreements betwixt the matter of which they prepare their
Mercury and common Quicksilver, that the doubt of their being both one, may be
put forth of all scruple.

1. Their matter, and vulgar Mercury agree in this, that they are both of a
mineral and metallic root and principle.

2. They differ in this, the Philosophers matter is the true root, seed, and
principle of all other Metals, as is known by observation and experience; but
vulgar Mercury is not the seed nor root of Metals, nor ever was known to grow,
or change by nature into a more perfect Metal.

3. The Philosophers matter is no one of the vulgarly known Metals, but is
rather omnia metalla, and the true Lunary and Solary Tree; but common Mercury
has ever been taken for one of the vulgar Metals, and is no true Electrum, nor
has plurality in it at all.

4. The Philosophers matter is a thing that is far more common then common
Mercury, and is never so well apparelled, nor so specious to the eye, as is
common Quicksilver.

5. That it is threefold both in Name and Nature, and yet is but of one and the
same root, and so is not common Quicksilver.

6. That it has both fixed and volatile parts, and so has not Quicksilver.

Paracelsus that is singular, and (that we know of) not mentioned by any other
Author; which is this.

He says that Mercury contains in it self three bodies. Chir. magn. p. 152.


1. The first is that out of which it is generated, before it perfectly be that
which it ought to be. 2. The second is that which it is. 3. The third is that
unto which it may be prepared by Art.
1. The first (he says) is to be taken in its Mineral, and Ore, while it
flowereth, and is to be prepared so as the Art of preparing Mercury does
command.

2. The second requires that the Ore be separated from the Mercury by the
artifice of fire.

3. The third is, that the same Mercury be prepared into the form of an adust,
or burnt Metal.

In another place he tells us almost the same thing; Morbill. l. p. ^43.
Mercury, he says, is concluded with three bodies.

1. First, As it is in its Mineral, or Ore, with its blood, and is to be as
Mercury prepared by Art. 2. Secondly, the Body separated from the Ore, is to be
purged by fire. 3. But that the third body is that when it is reduced into an
adust Metal.
Now for the two last we shall speak of them hereafter, only here we shall say
something of the first, which seems a strange matter; for he seems to show
that the Ore of Quicksilver may be found and had in its Mine, when it is in its
flower, and before it be hardened into that body which we call Cinnober; for in
his Preparations he says: Ut supr. p. 244.
Take the Ore out of which Mercury does arise or grow, as it is found in its
first coagulation, before it grow hard, or be made into a body: And calls it
after it be prepared, the liquor of the immature Mineral. Again he says, Take
of that Ore forth of which Mercury is generated, as it is found to consist in
its first coagulation: but yet it ought to be so coagulated, that it has not
yet passed into an hard and solid body. By all which it plainly appears that
this experienced Author (than whom, no man that we read of, had seen more
Mines, nor was more expert in Mineral knowledge) had seen, found, and had the
Ore of Cinnober, or Quicksilver soft, which is a thing (doubtless) of that
rarity, that few have had knowledge of it. And therefore I heartily desire all
the Learned that have Interest in foreign Parts, and all other ingenious
persons that travel, to be inquisitive, whether any such Ore of Cinnober be
known, found or to be had as is soft, and not yet grown hard, because besides
the knowledge of such a mineral secret, there may no doubt some excellent
Medicine be made forth of it.

CHAP. XXV. Of the Description of Quicksilver, of Cinnober, and its several
Ores, and Passages, and how it is gotten, and refined in diverse places, and the
like.
THe description of common Mercury is by most of the mystical Authors omitted,
that thereby they might obscure the nature and quality of the matter from
whence their Mercury is taken. For asserting Sulphur and Mercury to be the
principles of Metals, they therefore usually left out the description of
Mercury, that thereby their Readers might think that common Quicksilver was
that principle of Metals which they made mention of: It being ordinary for
those sort of Authors to set men at gaze after one thing while they intended
another, and to make themselves bread of the best of the Wheat, while others
had but the Husks, or Bran.

Art. Aurifer. vol. 1. p. 260.
For the description of Argent vive Avicen has a long discourse of it, but may
rather agree to another Mercury then to that which is common; and therefore we
leave it to the Reader to consider of according to the quotation in the Margin.

L^x Alchym. p. 67.
Rulandus describes it thus, It is no other but a viscous water in the bowels
of the earth, of a subtle substance of white earth, united by a total union,
by a most temperate heat, until the humidity be tempered with the siccity, and
the siccity of the humidity equally. This description any one half-eyed may see
will not altogether agree with the nature of common Quicksilver, but so they
use to mock with fresh water Soldiers.

The learned Wormius of it tells us thus; Mus. Worm. l. 1. Sect. 3. c 9. p. 126.
That by proper speaking it cannot be said to be a Metal, seeing the definiton
does not agree unto it, for it melts not in the fire, it is not hard, solid,
ductile, nor malleable. But it is a mineral liquor consisting of a viscous
metallic water, and a sulphurous earth, full of spirit, volatile, cold to the
touch, but endued with an hot virtue, ponderous, of the color of silver, fluid
as water, but not wetting the hands. And of this he reckons two sorts, first
either native or factitious, for that which is factitious we do not now meddle.
And as for the Cinnober, or Minium, it is either mixed with stones, or pure.
For that which is mixed with stones, it is sometimes found in a slate-stone of
an ash color, grown together in the manner of leaves, or plates, sometimes in
a most white metallic stone, as at Hartenstein. Of pure Minium, or native
Cinnober (he says) he had two sorts; one rubicund, like the crude Ore of red
silver, ponderous and elegantly ^inging with a rubicund color, found in Hassia
near Marpurg. The other is more black, of a liver-colour, also ponderous, being
like the stone Haematitis, or Schistus, in which grains of Quicksilver, as
though it were enclosed drops, do appear, tinging with hard affriction with a
rubicund color.

Basilius gives his relation of it thus: Last Will and Test. c. 9 p. 10^.
Mercurial Ore is wrought in its proper Mine-stones, by the quality of its salt
earth, and its nimble volatile earth, in a moist, groasie, slimy, waterish
oleity, which is mixed with a most subtle, red sulphurous digested earth,
with a most weak slow binding, like an unripe pleasing fruit, of all particular
Metals. Mercury shows its virtue in many things admirably, and works
effectually upon Minerals and metalline Sulphurs, and upon such which border
upon Antimonial stones or Ores, it loves to be in such places where the Tin
Ores lie higher then Silver passages. It requires many iterating effectual
operations unto other Ores, and is multiplied upon other strange stones, and is
drawn through the juices of Minerals and Metals which are in affinity one to
another, and produce many miscreants, this is the reason why it is so pleasant
unto Metals, Goldsmiths amalgame and gild with it. It is used also for
metalline colors, and is prepared to an oil, and water, for man's health, and
is sublimed to corrode the worst of poisons, and is a true robber, takes along
whatever costs have been bestowed on him; but if he can be catched in his
nature, then is he in subjection and obedience unto quick and dead. He is very
effectual in Medicines, especially for outward ^ores; he is naught to naught,
and good to good; and is not every bodies friend, though he is willing to do
what you put him upon. His metalline stones are of the same nature with pure
white slate earth, inclined to a water-blue, in fresh intermingled white
marbles, in a glassie, grayish or porous Glimmer, or Cat-silver, which lie
beneath betwixt the slates, in a float way, which are mingled in their
metalline passages with onsled matchasites, and with the subtilest small
streaked white Talk, and are through grown with two sorts, standing and
float-striking passages, in which is wrought a curious red-shining Quicksilver
Ore, not unlike unto red Mine Sulphur, and sometimes flows purely out of the
clifts, and caves of the passages, stands in a sink, or puddle together like
water, which its natural quick substance sufficiently evidenceth.

Paracelsus tells us these things of Quicksilver. De Miner. l. p. 346.
For that they say Argent vive is a Metal, is far from the matter. For it is of
the kind of other Minerals, not a Metal, not a Stone, not a Marchasite, not a
Saphir, etc. It is a peculiar product of Nature, gifted with its body, De
Element. Aq. Trac. 3. c. 7. p. 281.
and endowed with its proprieties, as the rest. Again he says, Argent vive is
Mercury, not admitting ductibility, but opposing it self against it. This the
Archeus does cast forth, changing it into a singular Metal void of ductibility.
And though of all Metals it be most especially assimilated to Mercury,
notwithstanding it differs in this, that it does not obtain ductibility, by
reason of its debility, which it conceived from Salt and Sulphur entering into
it, in too little quantity. From hence it is manifest that by Spagyrical
practice, to wit, of addition, it may be made a ductible Metal, as the
Philosophy of transmutation does demonstrate. For it may be turned and changed
into every, or any Metal: Therefore, to wit, because it remains from the
operation of all Metals that may be drawn into ductibility. De Mineral, Tract.
1. p. 349.
In another place he describes it (almost to the same purpose) in this manner.
Moreover there is a certain kind of metallic body, that can neither be
hammered, nor fluxed, or melted, and it is a mineral water of Metals. As water
is amongst other things, so is this amongst Metals. But it therefore ought to
be a Metal, because it is reduced by Alchymy into malleation and fabrication:
notwithstanding commonly it is not constant, sometimes it is constant. It is to
be holden that it is the first matter of the Alchymists, who of it do prepare
Silver, Gold, Copper etc. which the event shows. And perhaps Tin and Lead may
be made of it: for its nature is manifold, and wonderful, neither altogether to
be sought out with easy pains or labor. But this notwithstanding is evident,
that it is the first matter of the Alchymists, in the generating of Metals; and
furthermore, is a most noble medicine. It grows by such a subtileness from
Sulphur, Mercury, and Salt, that it flows, or is liquid, and yet does not
moisten; it runs and yet has no feet, and is the most heavy of ail Metals.

From these dark sayings of this mystical Author, we may gather these things.

1. That in propriety of Language it is not a Metal, as abiding neither fusion
nor malleation; and that it is a Metal, or may be made one by the Art of
Alchymistry, but not without addition of something, which doubtless is their
Tincture, or Elixir. And then it may be turned into any other Metal, according
as the Elixir was fermented, and so in that respect is by them truly called
Mercury: and yet that of its own kind it is a mineral water, and of a metallic
nature.

2. That it is of a strange and wonderful nature not easily by labor found
out: which made Helmont confess that he had spent thirty years sub ferula
Mercurii, and that it had not its compeer in Nature.

3. That when he says that it is the first matter of the Alchymists in
generating of Metals, he speaks the positive truth, yet must he not be
understood to mean that it is the first matter that Nature uses to frame or
generate Metals of in the bowels of the earth, for that first matter it is not,
neither the first matter (as too many vainly dream) whereof they make their
Elixir: But it is the first and principal matter by which with their Elixir
they change, or generate Metals by the rules of Art. Progy^^. Mer. 70.
For Helmont tells us, and that truly; Eo quod Aeternus, non creaverit
humiditatem, constantia sui, Mercurio metallico assimilandum. And again he
tells us, Tria prim Chym. p. 408.
Si Mercurius esset divisibilis in parts Heterogeneas, ars Chymica non esset
vera: ac ipse Mercurius ineptus operi esset. Etenim nisi mercurium vidissem,
ita subsistentem, negarem artem esse veram.

4. Where he says that Quicksilver is the most heavy of all Metals, is must be
understood with a grain of Salt.

Rulandus and Eucelius tell us of two sorts of Native Quicksilver. Lex. Alchym.
p. 69.


1. That which is of its own color without excoction, which is found such
among Metals, in the cavities into which it has flowed forth of the Ore.

2. That which is had forth of the Ore by washing or excoction, and this Ore is
that which was called Nativum Minium, or Cinnabaris Metallica; and the Germans
call it Berg Zinober: and was found in their Mines; of which he notes these
sorts: 1. A Vein of Cinnober in which the Argent vive did grow, that as often
as it was broken the Argent vive distilled forth drop by drop. 2. Like to crude
red silver Ore, that was brought from the Valley of Ioachim. 3. Like to Scarlet
in a fire-stone of Gold. 4. Like to the same in an ash colored slate, or
cleaving-stone. 5. A Vein rich of Quicksilver, of a Liver color. 6. Like unto
crude red, transparent silver Ore, in Cat-silver, of the color of silver. From
Hydria black with a reddishness, which smitten with the hammer, did drop forth
little grains of Argent vive. 8. At the same place of a light red color. 9. Of
a yellow color, in which was mingled in channels a fire-stone of a golden
color.


Much what agreeable to these does Agricola mention, Agricol. Berm. p. 698.
to whom I remit the Reader. Anat Spagyr. Mercur. l. 1. c. 5. p. 415, 416, 417,
418.
Matthias Vutzerus tells us of diverse places where Argent vive is found in its
own form and color without excoction. And one sort, especially in the Mountain
Gimnanede, six miles from Cracovia in Poland, which of its own accord at
certain times of the year does break forth to the superficies of the Earth, but
especially about Autumn, although also about the Feast of St. John Baptist, the
Author of the Tyrocinium Chymicum does testify, Tyr. Chym. l. 2. c 13. p 305.
that he had gathered many grains like Pease, in the roots of the Grass, and
says that notwithstanding that Mercury was too waterish, and inferior far in
goodness and virtue to that of Spain and Slavonia. And of Native Cinnober or
Minium he reckons the same sorts, and colors, and names the places where
they are gotten, and says that Native Cinnober, and the Lapis Schistus, are as
it were the Parents of Argent vive; to which, to eschew repetition, I refer the
inquisitive Reader.

Philos. Trans. n. 2. p. 21, 22, 23, etc.
There is a notable, ingenious, and succinct Extract of a Letter, written from
Venice, by the learned Doctor Walter Pope, to the reverend Dean of Rippon,
Doctor John Wilkins, concerning the Mines of Mercury in Friuli. Where he
exactly relates that about a days Journey and an half distant from Gori^ia
Northwards, at a place called Idria, situated in a Valley of the Julian Alps.
There he describes the nature of the soil, and the depth, and quantity of
their Mines, and their manner of Working, washing, and the like. The Ore he
describes thus. They (he says) dig the Mineral with Pick-axes following the
Veins: it is for the most part hard as a stone, but more weighty, of a
liver-colour, or that of Crocus Metallorum. There is also some soft earth, in
which you may plainly see the Mercury in little particles. There are also
several Marchasites, and Stones, which seem to have specks of Gold in them; but
upon trial they say they find none in them. These round Stones are some of them
very ponderous, and well impregnated with Mercury, others light, having little
or none in them. And so he describes the manner of getting the Mercury forth
of the Ore or Stone; which for brevity I omit, and leave the Reader to the more
full relation of the Extract it self. Only he relates that they have their
Mercury two ways, the one is by the means of the fire; the other he relates
thus. All the Mercury got without the use of fire, whether by washing, or found
in the Mines (for in the digging some little particles get together, so that in
some places you might take up two or three spoonfuls of pure Mercury) is called
by them Virgin Mercury, and esteemed above the rest. I enquired (he says) of
the Officer, what virtue that had more then the other; he told me, that making
an Amalgama of Gold and Virgin-mercury, and putting it to the fire, that
Mercury would carry away all the Gold with it, which common Mercury would not
do.

De difficult. Alchym. l. in Theatr. Chym. Vol. 1. p. 144.
Theob. de Hogheland of Middleburgh, tells us a Story not unlike this recited;
that traveling to view, and examine Mines with their several Ores, he came to
the Mountain Idria, where by good fortune at that time, Argent vive, which of
its own accord had flowed forth of the Mine, was gathered forth of the River
hard by, of which by gift he received fifteen pounds weight. And then purposing
to travel to Schonbach, a little Town of Misnia or Voitland, by reason of a
famous Mine there, of native and rubicund Cinnober; he turned to Norenburg, and
there he obtained a piece of native Cinnober from the same Mine, almost of two
pound weight; he went no further, but turned to Crui^znach, a Town of the
Palatinate; and from thence, and diverse other places, he got good store of
Argent-vive, or of native Cinnober, and so ceased.

The History of the Indies, c. 11, 12. p. 237, 238, 239, 240, 241, etc.
Also Josephus Acosta tells us: That at the Indies Quicksilver is found in a
kind of stone, which does likewise yield Vermilion, which the Ancients called
Minium, and at this day they call the Images of Crystal Miniades, which are
painted with Quicksilver. After he says, It is a rock of most hard stone,
interlaced all with Quicksilver, and of that greatness, that it extends above
fourscore Vares or Yards in length, and forty in breadth, in which Mine they
have many Pits and Ditches, etc.

For native Cinnober I have by me three sorts, that with much difficulty I have
procured, it is so scarce to be gotten here in England.

1. One of them is a ponderous Ore, of a dark red color, but indifferently
rich of Quicksilver. Another is pretty reddish in some parts, but something
whitish in the other parts, but very full of the Argent-vive, that appears in
very small grains. 3. The third sort is in small pieces, the greatest not much
bigger then beans, of a very rubicund color, and shining, which being broken,
do show very small grains, like the points of Pins, of the Argent vive; and
this I procured forth of Germany, and they call it Berg Zinober, or Cinnabaris
Montana. Also I have had intelligence from some learned Germans, that there is
some of this sort that is transparent, but is but rarely found, and therefore
hardly to be had. Of which Quercetan gives us this account. Pharmacop. c. 10
Not. 13. p. 672.
Quod ad nativum and natural Cinabrium attinet; natura nobis in quibusdam
Aurifodinis in Hungaria, profert genus quoddam Mineralis Cinnabaris
ponderosissimae, ac long artisiciali rubicundioris: Imo etiam quae usque adeo
transparens, ac dilucida est, ut non minor is pretii, ac major is uiam ipso
auro aestimetur. And commends it highly in vertiginous and epileptical
distempers, even taken by it self, without any preceding preparation.
Now for either Argent-vive, or the stone it grows in, called Native
Cinnober, (though Agricola seem to intimate as much) I could never hear of any
that was found either in England, or Scotland, only Dr. Jorden gives us this
account. In Scotland three miles beyond Berwick (he says) I found a red stone,
which I take to be Minium nativum, seeing Agricola makes mention of it in
Scotland, but by a mischance I could not try it. From which hint I could desire
all ingenious persons that live near that place, to make diligent search, if
any such stones be there to be found, that thereof trial might be made.

CHAP. XXVI. Of several sorts of Medicaments prepared forth of common Mercury,
both by the way of vulgar Chemistry, as also by the mystical way. And of the
Praecipiolum of Paracelsus and Helmont.
THere are so many several Medicaments prepared by common Chemistry forth of
Quicksilver, that it would be very tedious, and too large to recite them all;
as is easy to be seen in Crollius, Beguinus, Hartman, Schroderus, Quercetan,
Vutzerus, and the like; and therefore we shall only enumerate some few of the
principal of them.

1. And first there is that which they call Mercurius vitae, which whether it
participate solely of the Antimony, or solely of the Mercury, is not so easy
to determine, there being Authors, that hold it stiffly on either side; and we
never accounted the Experiment either so luciferous, or frugiferous, to make it
our business to attend trials, and exact observations about it. As for the
Mercurius vitae we have administered it very frequently for the space of near
thirty years, and can give it no further commendations, then that it is a
strong, and churlish Vomit, fit only for robust bodies, and beneficial only in
some Phlegmatic distempers, and far unworthy of those high praises that are
usually attributed unto it, and therefore now we do very rarely, or never use
it, having found other mineral Vomits, that are far more safe, and of more
effectual operation then it; and I wish all Tyronists to take care of its
preparation.

2. The next we shall name is their Turpethum Minerale, which is indeed a
mercurial one, and that sharp and desperate enough, if not very carefully and
skilfully handled. In our younger years when we had too high an esteem of
Chemical Medicines, we have often used, and administered the same, and that with
no bad success, especially in some sorts of Epileptical distempers: But shall
warn all young Physicians to be both careful in their preparing of it, and in
their administration of it also, especially in that great point de ratione
victus. And all I can commend it for (if that may be called a commendation) is
for that woeful and dishonorable way of curing by flux or salivation, which
indeed is a way of cure, almost as bad as the worst of diseases.

3. The next we shall name, is that preparation of it which they call Mercurius
dulcis, which is of very frequent use, and exceedingly extolled by many; we
confess it may have a commendable use in Surgery, and may to sundry good
purposes be mixed with Plasters and Unguents; and is of singular effect in
Ointments against all Verminous distempers, and taken inwardly does the same;
and is a pretty purger, or promoteth the working of other Catharticks; but heed
must be taken, that it be not administered too often near together, for fear of
a sore mouth, looseness of teeth, or a flux. And yet for the Worms may the crude
Quicksilver it self, or the water wherein it is boiled, be taken with as much
or more safety, and as good effects.

4. The last we shall name, is some sorts of Praecipitates prepared forth of
Mercury; not to mention the common Praecipitate prepared after Vigo's order, or
the white one, which (if used inwardly) are far more likely to kill then to
cure. One of the best, is the Quicksilver praecipitated per se; which
notwithstanding is a violent Vomitive Medicine, yet may be tolerably used by a
skilful and careful Physician. But the best that ever we have seen, is a
Praecipitate prepared with the good and pure spirit of Nitre, and afterward
often cohobated with the distilled water of the whites of Eggs, whereby it will
become of a fine red color as any red coral, and almost as sweet as honey, and
hardly to be distinguished from the true Arcanum corallinum that is prepared
with the great liquor Alkahest; and though it be vomitive in some measure, and
be far short of the eminent virtues of the other Arcanum, yet will it never
disgrace a skilful Artist, that knows its due preparation and way of
administering, but will without vomit or purging (if rightly handled) even cure
desperate Agues by sweating only.

But I will conclude of all these with that of Helmont, who says, Antimonium
dum vomitum movet, and Mercurius dum vivificari potest, non sunt boni viri
remedia.

We descend now to treat of those great Arcana's that are no ways to be
obtained but by that universal solvent, the Alkahest, that noble liquor, that
is the sole glory of a Philosopher in this frail life. Which is that Key that
only opens the Rosary of the Philosophers, and reveals the hidden secrets of
the Animal, Vegetable, and Mineral kingdom; without the knowledge, and
possession of which no man is worthy to sit at the golden Table of the
Adeptists, nor indeed truly worthy the name of Physician.

Nec prius ante datur telluris operta subire
Auricomos quam quis discerpserit arbore foetus.
Of these Arcana's prepared by this liquor forth of Helmont first mentions
the Mercurius Diaphoretius, Arcan. Paracel. p. 790.
of which he says thus, Quarto loco est Mercurius Diaphoreticus, melle
dulcior, and ad ignem fixus, solis horizontis omnes proprietates habet.
Perficit enim quicquid Medicus and Chirurgus possint optare sanando: non tamen
tam potenter renovat, ut praecedentia. In his answers to the questions
propounded unto him concerning this, he makes this responsion, De Lithia^. l.
c. 8. p. 69.
to wit; That as the Sun is thought to spring up in the Horizon of the
Hemisphere: so Mercury, while it is made Diaphoretick, sweet as Honey, and fixed
as Gold, is Gold in its Horizon, and is in medicine, by so much more noble than
Gold, as much as an Oriental Pearl is nobler than a Scotch one. And after he
tells us, that the glorious Sulphur of Venus being raised again does tinge
the Sulphur of the Mercury (that in the Powder of John de Vigo, by sulphurous
corrosive Minerals was extroverted) immediately, and did mutually embrace one
another in an inseparable bed: And that therefore the virtue of both the
Sulphurs did stand outwardly. And therefore by this conjunction the
Diaphoretick Mercury from thence arising, did perform whatsoever the Physician
or Surgeon could wish, either in respect of curing acute or chronical
diseases. Again, De Febrib. l. c. 14. p. 52.
in another place, he largely describes the virtues and effects of this
Mercurius Diaphoreticus, in relation both to Internal, and External Distempers.
And of its Preparation tells us thus much; Its description (he says) is as
well in Paracelsus Book De Morte Rerum, as in his Chirurgia Magna, and says,
he will declare it something more manifestly. Take the Powder of John de Vigo,
prepared with thine own hand: For otherwise it is adulterated with artificial
Minium or red Lead; as the most Chemical medicaments that are to be sold, are
full of deceit. This Powder, the element of fire extracted from the Vitriol of
Venus being affused, or poured upon it, is five times to be cohobated with Aqua
Regis, at the end increasing the fire; for it is fully fixed, and is a Powder
very corrosive. Which then is to be cohobated ten times, with Aqua vitae
dephlegmed the best that may be, and renewed at every time, until it have
carried off all the corrosiveness with it. And then this Powder is sweet as
Sugar. Therefore the Spirit of Wine is there called Saltaberi, or Tabarzet,
which sounds Sugar, not that it is sweet in it self, but that it carries
away the corrosive spirits with it. So far, that the remaining Powder does
excel in its own sweetness, not with a sweetness borrowed elsewhere. For
besides, that the fire of Vitriol is sweet, the very Sulphur of the Mercury,
then turned outwardly, is of greatest sweetness. This Powder is ^ixed, and is
called Horizontal Gold. Therefore (he says) I have finished a secret in few
words, which does ennoble a Physician. But to have prepared it the first time,
is of huge labor, and its direction depends of his hand, to whom all honor
is due, because he reveals these secrets to little ones, which the world
knows not of, and therefore disesteemeth. From all this we shall animadvert
some few things to be considered of, by the learned and ingenious.

1. To consider the high excellency of this medicine, that is so noble, that in
operation it effects whatsoever a Physician or Surgeon can desire: And
therefore may well instigate all of those Professions, that they may bend all
their studies and endeavors both day and night to the obtaining of the same.
2. That it is no wonder that they call it Horizontal Gold, which if one
seriously consider the great medical virtues, is an apposite name, and to be
esteemed far more precious than common Gold, that cannot afford such rare and
almost incredible effects. 3. To remember that it cannot be perfected without
the Sulphur or fire of Venus, which though he call the Sulphur or fire of
Vitriol, yet it is not the Spirit of Vitriol, however rectified; but is the
Sulphur of Copper it self, which cannot be had, but by the total destruction of
its body, and the leaving of its internal and incombustible Sulphur,
inseparable from its remaining white, anonymous metallic mercurial body; and
this to be performed by no sublunary body but only by the Alkahest. 4. To note
that the fire of Venus must be poured upon the Powder of John de Vigo, prepared
by ones own hand, whereby it appears that it must be in a liquid form,
otherwise it might be mixed with it, but not poured upon it, and therefore
certainly is in the form of a green Oil, as both he and Paracelsus do make
manifest. But one chief point is here tacitly concealed, that is the
quantities of either of them, which the studious Reader must labor to find
out. 5. It may be some that are very critical, may question what sort of Aqua
Regis this Author means, but it is plain that it is the common sort, and no
mystical kind, because he tells us plainly that after five times cohobation
with it, and increasing of the fire, it remains an exceeding corrosive
Powder; and therefore must be cohobated ten times with the best dephlegmed Aqua
vitae, every time being renewed, or fresh used, and that thereby the corrosive
spirits are all carried off with the Spirit of Wine, and the Powder left as
sweet as Sugar. And if we consider what this Author has told us elsewhere,
then we are to know, that it is no rectified Spirit of Wine by any common way,
but prepared by the Alkahest, which is required twice in this Preparation, once
for the fire of Venus, and also for the Spirit of Wine. 6. As for the places in
Paracelsus in his Book De Morte Rerum, and in his Chirurgia Magna, though that
Author seem dark enough, yet to an attentive and understanding Reader he has
showed things that are sufficient to understand its Preparation by, and has
omitted nothing in the forecited places, but only the naming of the Alkahest,
which in all his great Preparations he commonly leaves out: Though in other
parts of his Writings he has spoken more fully, (both as to the matter forth
of which, and the manner how, that great liquor is to be had, and prepared)
than any other Author that I know of, and those that cannot learn it from his
Writings, will hardly understand it in other. Authors.
The next great Arcanum to be had forth of common Arcanum Corallinum, or
Corallatum, of which he says this. And there is the purgation Diuceltatasson,
which cures the Gout no less than Fevers. De Febr. l. c. 14. p. 52.
And its Arcanum is called Corallinum, which is prepared out of the essence of
Horizontal gold, after this manner: Draw off the liquor Alkahest from vulgar
vendible Mercury, which Paracelsus remembers 2. de viribus membrorum, c. de
hepate, which is done in one quarter of an hour. For Raymundus says, my
friends being by, and the King present, I have coagulated Argent-vive, and none
except the King knew the way or manner. In which coagulation, this is most
singular, that the said liquor Alkahest does prevail the same in number,
weight, and activity, so much the thousand action, as much as in the first;
because it acts without the re-action of the patient. Therefore the Mercury
being so coagulated, without any remnant of the thing coagulating, then make
small powder of it: and distill from it five times, the water of the whites of
eggs distilled, and the Sulphur of the Mercury, that by its former coagulation
was drawn outwardly, will be made rubicund as Coral: and although the water of
the whites of eggs does stink, notwithstanding this powder is sweet, fixed,
bearing all the fire of the bellows. Neither does it perish in the examination
of Lead, notwithstanding it is spoiled of its medical virtue while it is
reduced into a white metal: but it is given to eight grains for the most part,
because it purges the body of man as long as it is foul, and not perfectly
sound. Also it heals Ulcers of the bladder, of the Larinx, Arcan. Par. p. 790.
and Oesophagus. And in another place he recites it almost in the same manner,
but not so fully. In another place he says of it thus. Therefore the purgation
by the Arcanum Corallinum, Vol. Vivent. etc. p. 387.
does destroy the Gout in its seed. But this Arcanum is not the color or
tincture of Coral, (as the ignorant company of Chemical Writers, to be laughed
at, do interpret) because the apposite words of Paracelsus (which is of the
essence of Gold) do sound another thing.

Also the color of Gold, the Sulphur, or Tincture, do not loose the belly, or
purge: but this Arcanum is in substance, metallic; in color, coralline; in
taste, like honey; and in essence, golden. Truly not that ever it was a
malleable body, but is the Horizon of Gold, a shut-up body, and fixed; whose
Sulphur is sweet, and to be commixed with our Constitutive parts. In this
Sulphur the Omnipotent has collected all the virtues of the Sun, to whom only
all honor and glory is due.

We have before, where we spoke of the Alkahest, said much to what from all
this might be observed: only we shall add these few things.

1. That the Learned may note, that the Writings of Paracelsus (by many so much
condemned) do bear in them a far deeper sense and meaning than even common
Chemists do imagine; and are not to be weighed according to the letter, but
according to the depth of that Learning the Author was master of. And therefore
we may here observe that Helmont understood him otherwise (and that according
to the truth of his meaning) than many hundreds have done besides. 2. That he
that will understand the matter out of which the Alkahest is prepared, and its
manner of preparation also, can never find either of them by any surer way than
by truly considering and understanding the effects of that liquor. And I am
bold to tell all searchers, that no effect of it does more declare the matter
from whence it is taken, than this that he has related in what I have before
quoted; and therefore let it be observed. 3. Where he says, That the Mercury
being coagulated by the liquor Alkahest, has its Sulphur extroverted: but if
it be melted down into a white metal, that then it loses its medical virtue.
The reason of which is, (though we may be condemned for disclosing it) that the
medicinal virtue consists only in the external and separable Sulphur, and not
in the Mercurial part, which is not to be destroyed either by Art or Nature;
and therefore in fluxing it down into a white metal, the external Sulphur is
wasted in the fire, or burnt off, and so the medical virtue must needs be lost,
which consisted only in the Sulphur.
The last thing that we purposed to handle here, is the Praecipiolum of
Paracelsus, for from him Helmont had it; and therefore might well confess
(though in many things he is very injurious unto him, even sometimes to
attribute those Theorical notions to himself, that he plainly stole from him,
and yet labored to deprive him of the honor) that by his Writings he had
profited much. But ere we give our censure about this Praecipiolum, we shall
fully give the Reader an account what they both say in the matter. And first,
Paracelsus thus: The condition of Mercury is, that it be precipitated in its
Mineral or Ore, and be separated from it dead; De Hydropis. l. p. 623.
for so it is not Argent-vive, but Mercury: for when dead, it is Mercury; but
living, it is Argent-vive. If therefore, as the prescribed manner of its
preparation, it be mortified; its dose is two grains, the process being
observed, that the Schole delivers, neither need it be included in the Text.

Ignor. Hydrop. p. 521.
The relation of Helmont is thus. But Paracelsus approves his Praecipiolum or
Mercury, drawn forth dead out of its Mineral or Ore, above other remedies: but
other simples, for the degree of affinity, by which they come near this
metallic Mercury. And a little after he says, In the mean time I confess,
that that same Mercury has always answered to my desires. Truly its
acquisition is difficult, but the dose of two grains three or four times
exhibited does suffice. But the Diaphoretick Mercury once being had, it
suffices to many myriads of diseased persons, as well for the Physician as for
his posterity.

That which we shall move from hence is this, That there are some learned men
with whom we have conversed, or had intercourse by Letters, that are of opinion
that this Praecipiolum, or dead Mercury, is some artificial preparation by the
Alkahest: but saving the judgments of those men, we cannot be of their opinion,
for these reasons.

1. Because both the Authors say that it is drawn dead forth of its Mineral or
Ore, and therefore in likelihood must be by nature mortified in its Ore, or
else it could not be so drawn forth of it, except it were dead before. 2.
Helmont says it is of difficult acquisition, not of difficult preparation, so
that only the difficulty must be in finding or obtaining such of its Ore as
has the Argent-vive mortified in it when it is dug forth of the earth, and
not made so by Art. 3. He compares the Diaphoretick Mercury with it, and
extols it far above it, as able to serve the Physician and his posterity, being
once but had, but does not say so much of the Praecipiolum.
Therefore I would entreat all ingenious and learned persons to take notice of
these two things.

1. That Paracelsus tells us, that while Argent-vive is living, it is
Argent-vive, but Mercury when it is dead, or so fixed that it cannot be revived
again; for then it is like the Planet Mercury, able to exert its virtues, when
before it is (though a tremulous body, and seeming open) most of all shut, and
does utterly deny its help to humane bodies. So that Long alius est sensus
Sophorum, quam vulgarium literatorum. 2. To move all inquisitive persons that
either travel where Mines of Quicksilver are, or have correspondency with any
that live near them, or work in them, to endeavor if any such thing may be
found as the Ore that has the Argent-vive dead in it.
CHAP. XXVII. Of Antimony or Stibium. Of Wismuth, Bismuth, or Plumbum Cinereum,
or Tinglass. Of Zinetum, Zinck or Spelter. Of Cobaltum. And of their Qualities,
Ores and Medicaments, prepared forth of some of them, and of native Electrum.
HAving now ended our Collections and Discourse of the seven Metals, vulgarly
accounted so; we now come to some others, that many do also repute for Metals;
and if they be not so, at least they are semi-Metals, and some of them
accounted new Metals or Minerals, of that sort that were not known to the
Ancients; of which we shall speak in order.

M^s. Worm. l. 1. Sect. 3. c. 8. p. 125.
Of some of these Wormius says, We call those of their own kind sui generis,
and improperly Metals, which have great affinity with those that are true
Metal, if thou mark the rise, manner and place of Generation: But they differ
in certain proprieties that are agreeable to true Metals, for they are not
ductile or malleable, but brittle or frangible.

Spiessglass, Ubi supra.
seems to be a Metal of its own kind, although Paracelsus put it in the number
of Marchasites, lib. 6. Archidox. where he calls it the Marchasite of Lead,
does consist of a combustible mineral substance, and of a suliginous Mercury,
coagulated of a certain earthly matter. Its Ore is found in the mountains as
other Metals, and from thence is drawn by various operations. It is found in
Italy, and the best in Hungary, in Germany at Hoenstein, and in Bohemia. In
times past it was sold as it was dug forth of the earth: that which was most
approved of by Dioscorides, was that which most shined with rays; and when it
was broken, would be divided into shells or crusts, being friable, or to be
crumbled, void of earth and filth, which Pliny called the female. Now it is
sold by Merchants in loaves, or measures, as if melted: outwardly it is crusty,
and of a leaden color, for the most part infecting the fingers; within, full
of capillary veins, glistering and shining as polished Iron; in bursting and
breaking, easy: but when it is made into powder, it loses its splendour, and
assumeth the color of burnt Lead. And a little after he says, The Hungarian
Ore of Antimony is most beautiful, wholly consisting of Cylinders, or small
Columns, of the thickness of a small Needle, but wonderfully knit together, for
they are to be seen right, parallel, oblique, transverse, etc. because this
matter is porous, and appears with a splendid blue color, like polished
Iron. From hence a sulphurous and yellow matter does sweat forth, rendering the
mass diverse colored, the gift of Doctor Custerus.

The like to those in a manner does Agricola write of Antimony, De na^. Fossil:
l. 10. p. 657.
and says, That it is something like in color to the Lapis Plumbarius, or
Lead Ore, but that it shines more, and is more white. Rulandus tells us, that
the Ore of it was found in their mines of Germany, and does reckon up these
sorts.

1. That it was dug up at Rome in the Flaminian Circuit, Lex. Alchym. p. 417.
and was soft, and black, and crusty, or shelly, like Cat-silver. 2. Dug up
that was friable, or would crumble, like to polished Iron, from the Island Ilna
in the Tyrrhene Sea. 3. Dug up in Bohemia, in a white Flint-stone. 4. At
Isfeld in Hercynia, which is as it were conglutinated together with little,
long, and round-angled little crusts, in a white Flint. 5. At Stolberg, in
which there are white six-angled fluores, that are pellucid. 6. In Pannonia, in
which there is Gold, and Black Lead. 7. A Vein of Stibium like to barren
Galena. 8. In an hard Stone, like a Fire-stone or Marchasite, of the color of
Silver. 9. A Vein of Iron, in which is found Stibium. 10. Growing near the
Stone Schiston besides Priburg in Misnia. Darbyshire, p. 556.
Cambden tells us, neither only Lead, but Stibium also, called in the
Apothecaries shops Antimony, is here found by it self in Veins. And Doctor
Merrett says, Pin. re. not. p. 209.
that Antimony is found in the Lead Mines of Darbyshire; and I am informed by
diverse that have long wrought in Darbyshire, that there is good store of it,
especially in some places, but I have not been able as yet to procure any of
it. That Ore of Antimony that I had forth of Germany, is of a bright bluish
color, and lies in a yellowish, grayish stone, and is most like to that sort
of Lead-Ore which they call Steel-Ore. I could earnestly desire all our English
Miners to be vigilant and careful to discover where any of the Ore may be
gotten, for it is a good vendible Commodity, and much gain and profit might be
made of it. Basilius of it says thus: Antimony comes from perfect Mercury,
wrought of little Salt, Last Will and Test. c. 10. p. 102.
and a waterish fluid Sulphur, though it shines black naturally, and its
outside is of an Antimonial form, yet it graduateth the noble nature of Gold,
and does much good unto man. But those that would be more fully satisfied of
the excellent properties of Antimony, may seriously weigh the Currus Antimonii
triumphalis of Basilius, and the Writings of Paracelsus, who not only have
written largely of its virtues, but also understood the intrinsecal nature of
it, better than any other two that can be named. And for the Medicines that may
be, or are prepared forth of it by common Chemistry, which are very numerous,
the Reader may find them in Sala, Hammerus, Poppius, Schroderus, and almost in
every Dispensatory: so that we need not enlarge here to recite them, for there
is scarcely any one Mineral that is more largely treated of than Antimony; only
we shall speak a little of those great Arcana's that Paracelsus and Helmont
prepared forth of it by the Alkahest.
1. The first Medicine that Helmont names, prepared forth of Antimony, is the
Mercurius vitae, of which he says thus; Sequitur dein Mercurius vitae, stibii
pro^es integri, quae omnem morbi nervum penitus absorbet. Which though he call
Mercurius vitae, as having Mercury joined with it in its Preparation, yet is
the offspring of the whole Stibium, and none of the Mercury joined with it.
And doubtless is not the Mercurius vitae prepared by common Chemistry, that
does both violently purge and vomit, but is of a far more noble nature and
virtue, as being prepared by the Alkahest, and therefore does not only cure
diseases, but in some measure, renew Nature also. The m^nner of its Preparation
he no where (that I can observe) does mention, L p. 5. p. 20. Lib. de Vit.
Long. c. 6. p. 64.
but Paracelsus according to his dark fashion does set it down in his
Archidoxis, as also in his Book De Vita Longa, and in both places tacitly
concealeth the Alkahest.

2. The second is the Sulphur or fire of Antimony, of which Helmont made so
great account, and questionless is the Tinctura Lili Antimonialis, Arc. Parac.
p. 790.
for Helmont says, Tertio loco est Tinctura Lili, etiam Antimonialis, almost
of the same virtue with the former, although of less efficacy. And the reason
why we so boldly affirm these to be prepared by the Alkahest is the authority
of the said Helmont, Resp. Anth. p. 524.
who says, Probabo primo, quod liquor Alkahest, ens primum salium, Lili,
primus metallus, Mercurius Diaphoreticus, sive aurum Horizontale, unum inquam,
qualecunque ex illis (nam cuncta unius dissolventis consanguinitate, conspirant
in unisonum) sat sit ad quorumlibet morborum sanationem, utut momis crepent
ilia. Imprimis norunt Adepti mecum, quantum hinc distent dispensatoria
Seplsiae, in o and quam remoti absint scriptores, qui Basilica, Chir. Mag. tr.
3. c. 5. p. 67.
and Tyrocinia Chymica ingenti gloriolae pruritu, adhuc ipsimet Tyrones
ediderunt. But the Preparation of the Tinctura Lili, that is Antimonial, you
may find in the Writings of Paracelsus.

Plumbum Cinereum was known to the Ancients, but little said of its use, or
virtues, and by this name Agricola calls it, Mus. Worm. l. 1. S^ct. 3. c. 8. p.
125
the Miners call it Bismutum, Caesalpinus a Silver Marchasite, the Germans
Bismut, Mythin, and Conterfeit. It is rather, I think (says Wormius) a Metal
of its own kind, than to be referred unto Lead. For it differs from both Tin
and common Lead in color, and hardness. It sometimes shines with a silver
color, and sometimes with a dilute purple, like to Stibium or Antimony,
according to its figure, but more excellent in color, being like the Regulus
Stellatus of Antimony. The Ore from whence it is drawn is like to Galena, but
it infecteth or colors the hands, which the Galena does not. And it is found
solid, which admits cutting, and does not break, or leap asunder as the
Galena. It is also more black, and of a leaden color, which sometimes
contains Silver in it, from whence in the places where it is dug up, they
gather that Silver is underneath, and the Miners call it the Cooping, or
Covering of Silver. Its masses do use to cleave to a Stone that is most hard,
except it contain ^fluores; or have Nitre in it, which makes the Stones
friable. It is found in England, and Misnia in the Silver Mines. They use to
mix it with Tin, that it may confer splendour and hardness to it, and that being
melted it may run more easily. They also make of it Vessels of diverse sorts,
which are like Silver in color.

As for the Ore of this Metal, or Semi-metal, which they call Bismuth, or
Wismuth, and our Artificers in England Tin-glass, I could never hear of any
that was gotten in his Majesty's Dominions; and therefore should desire all
ingenious Gentlemen that are inquisitive after Minerals, and all other persons
that seek or dig for Ores, to inquire if any may be heared of or discovered in
this Nation, for it would be a commodity of great worth, for the Metal is very
dear. Neither have I ever been so happy, as to be able to procure any of this
Ore, and therefore cannot of mine own knowledge give the Reader any
satisfaction about the properties of it. Neither do I know that much use is
made of it, in this Nation, except by the Pewterers, from whom we commonly buy
it at dear rates; but that there is some use made of it in soldering the many
Vessels, and Utensils that are made of those thin Plates that are made of Iron,
and tinned over, we commonly call it Crooked-lane Tin: Neither have I seen any
Vessels made of this Metal only, and if they be, they must be made by molding
or casting, for of it self it will not abide the hammer.

De Nar. Fossil. lib 1. p. 575.
Agricola numbreth this amongst Metals, and reckons up many places where the
Ore is gotten, both in its own Mine, and also where it is found among other
Metals, De Vet. and no. Metal. l. 2. p 677.
much-what after the order before rehearsed, and therefore we shall not need to
say more of it here. And Rulandus speaks but to the same purpose.

Of this Metal Basilius writes thus: Wismuth is wrought in its own Mine-stone,
Last Will and Test. c. 10. p. 101, 102.
not quite freed from a protruding Silver, or Tin-stone, of an imperfect, pure
Quicksilver with Tin-salt, and fluid silver Sulphur, of a brittle immiscible
earth, partly of a crude fluid Sulphur, partly of a mixed exiccated Sulphur,
according as it has got a matrix, after it was conceived: Then it turns a
bastard of a brittle nature, easily uniteth with Mercury, and is wrought
naturally in a twofold form, the one is fluid and metalline, is melted with dry
Wood, being mixed with Clay, yields much of white Arsenick. The other is
small streaked and spissie, remains an unripe substance, yields a fixed
Sulphur instead of Arsenick; both these are silver Wismuth.

Of these two foregoing, Coel. Philos. Can. 5. p. 122.
Paracelsus says thus; There is found a twofold Antimony, one vulgar and
black, by which Gold is purified, being molten in it. This has the nearest
affinity with Lead. The other is white, which also is called Magnesia, and
Bisemutum. This has the greatest affinity with Tin. As for any Medicines drawn
forth of this Mineral either by the way of common Chemistry, or otherwise, I do
not know of any.

The next we come unto, is that which Paraecelsus Zinetum, the Germans Zinck,
and our Artificers Spelter, a Metal that has not been known unto the Ancients,
but may well be ranked among the new Metals. I do not find that Basilius makes
any mention of it, except he name it once, which is all that he does in all his
Works that I have perused, to the best of my remembrance, unless we should
imagine (as some do) that it should be that Mineral of which he says thus,
when he speaks of Minerals and Metals: Of the great Stone of the Ancient
Philosophers, Pre^ace.
Among these I happened to get one Mineral, composed of many colors, which had
many and rare virtues in Medicine, I drew (he says) its spiritual Essence from
it, whereby in few days I cured my diseased Collegiate. Though some (and that
with more likelihood) do take it to be the Cevillus or Ludus Paracelsi.

The most that we find of this strange Metal, is that which Paracelsus has
recorded of it, whose knowledge and experience in Minerals exceeded all other
Authors that ever we have seen or read.

1. And first of this, and Bismuth he says thus; When therefore the Metals are
generated after this manner, De Elem. Aq. c. 9. p. 282.
to wit, when the true metallic flux, and ductibility, is taken away, and is
distributed into the seven Metals, a certain residence does remain in the Ares,
like the births or offsprings of the three first things. Of this Zinck does
grow, which is a Metal, and not a Metal. And so Bismuth, and others like to
this, which are partly fluid, partly ductile. But although they a little adhere
unto Metals in their flux, notwithstanding they are nothing but the spurious
offspring of the Metals, that is to say, they are like unto Metals, but are
not Metals. Zinck for the greatest part is the spurious offspring of Copper,
and Bismuth of Tin. Of these two there are of all others the greatest dregs and
remnants made in the Ares.

De M^neral. Tract. 1. p. 349.
2. He says further also, there is a certain Metal not commonly known as
Zinetum, or Zinck. It is of a peculiar nature, and seed: notwithstanding many
Metals are adulterated in it. This Metal by it self is fluxible, because it is
generated of the three fluxible Principles. But it does not admit malleation,
but only fusion. Its colors are diverse from other colors, so that it is not
like to the rest of the Metals as they grow. This is such a Metal (that he
says) that its ultimate or last matter is not yet known unto me. For in its
propriety it comes most near of all unto Argent vive. Chron. Can^ith. p. 247.
It does not permit permixtion: nor does it permit the fabrications of other
Metals, but is by it self, or alone.

3. He has a notable passage of this Metal, which though the Latin
Translations have not mentioned what particular Ore it is, but have omitted it,
(for what reasons I know not, except to hide it) yet in the High Dutch it is
plainly thus, where he speaks of the Metals and Minerals that are found in
Carinthia. There are found also certain Mines of the Ore of Zinck, the like
whereof Europe it self knows not. This is a singular Metal, and truly
admirable by its rarity. But for its virtues in Medicine or Bismuth either; Of
the usefulness of Experimental Philosophy, part. 2. p. 130.
neither this Author Helmont, nor few of the common Chemists have said any
thing; only we shall give the Reader an account what that honorable person Mr.
Boil does write of them both. Some modern Chemists (as particularly Glauberus)
have of late prepared remedies not unuseful out of Zinck, or Spelter. Of the
other he says thus; Ibid. p. 134.
And though Bismutum have not, that I know, till very lately been used, unless
outwardly, and especially for a Cosmetick, yet the industrious Chemist Samuel
Closseus, by Calcination and addition of Spirit of Vinegar, and Cremor Tartari,
makes two Medicines of it, which he highly extols in the Dropsy; And (to
reserve for another place, what I have tried upon, Tin-glass) a very expert
Chemist of my acquaintance, does by preparing it with common Sublimate (carried
up, by which I remember, it has afforded a very prettily figured body) make it
into a Powder (like Mercurius vitae) which he assures me he finds in the Dose
of a few grains, to purge very gently, without being at all (as Mercurius vitae
is wont to prove violently enough) emetick. I know not what use is made of this
Spelter, but only that the Brasiers do mix it with Copper, and thereof make
their Cement or Soulder, for from them we have it, and that at very dear rates.
The Ore of it I have not seen, nor as yet could procure, and I should be very
glad to hear that any of it could be obtained, or any of it found in England.

C. Starkey, nar. Explic p. 306.
I cannot pass by one thing, which a learned person, and a great Chemist, now
dead, affirms to the World, Pyrotech. asserted, p. 148.
in these words, speaking of Paracelsus his Metallus masculus, does say, that
it is Spelter, and is the Sulphur Gluarae Augurelli. And in another place says
thus; That a Sulphur may be extracted out of Venus, the Metallus masculus
(which in a Parenthesis, I tell thee is Zinck) and so out of Lead and Tin. But
though we might assert that the Metallus masculus, and the Glaura Augurelli are
both one, yet we must modestly affirms, that Zinck is not the Metallus
masculus; for Zinck is not radix nec pater metallorum, as the Metallus primus
is.

Paracelsus calls Cobaltum, and in my judgment does not understand it, De re
Metal. l. 1. c. 21. p. 33.
to be the same, that Eucelius, and many others, make to be the Cadmia nativa,
the Lapis aerosus, or Stone forth of which Copper is drawn, but of another
sort, which yields a new, and unknown kind of Metal, otherwise he could not
have described it, as he does. For of the Copper-stone, or Cadmia nativa,
Schroderus says thus; Pharmacop. l. 3 c. 18, p. 123.
The Cobalt, native Cadmia is metallic, and dug forth of the Earth, and is
an earthly Mineral, almost black in color, partaking of Copper and Silver: And
is plentifully dug up, not far from Gos^ar. And that it is of so Caustical a
quality, that it exulcerateth the hands and the feet of the diggers, and is
reckoned among Poisons. But that Cadmia nativa, or Copper-stone, that we have
gotten here in Cumberland, is not black, but pretty shining, like to a golden
Marchasite, but far more heavy. Of this Wormius speaks to the same purpose,
M^s. Worm. l. 1. sect. 3. c. 10. p. 128.
calling it Cadmia Metallica, to distinguish it from the Lapis Calaminaris,
which he calls Cadmia Fossilis, of which we shall say more hereafter. Now
Paracelsus description is after this order: De Mineral. l. Tract. 1. p. 349.
Further, there is another Metal made of Cobalt, that is melted, and flows
like Zinck, having a peculiar black color above Lead or Iron, appearing with
no splendour or metallic shining, it is beaten out, and hammered, but not so
far that it may be fitted for use. Neither truly is the last matter of this yet
found out, nor its preparation; and it is not to be doubted but that the Female
and Male are here both joined together as Iron and Steel; and these are not
beaten forth, but remain as they are of themselves, until that Art do find
forth the separation of them. From whence it is manifest, that this Metal,
drawn from this that he calls Cobalt, is neither in color nor other
properties like the Metal of Copper that is drawn from the metallic Cadmia, or
Copper-stone, though they may call it Cobalt also. And Rulandus description of
Cobalt seems to agree to this, Lex. Chym. p. 271.
from whence (perhaps) he had it, which is thus: Kobolt, or Kobalt, or Collet,
is a metallic matter more black than Lead or Iron, sometimes Ash-colored,
wanting a metallic color, yet it is melted and brought into places; therefore
it is not sixth, but carries away the better Metals with it by smoke.

Concerning native Electrum, that it has been produced Rer. deperdit. ^it. 33.
p. 120, 123.
but is now accounted by Pancirollus as a thing lost, and therefore he ranks it
in the number of his rerum deperditarum; and Salmuth says, that it was
naturally found in the mines, and was of great esteem with the Ancients, both
for its clear shining, and for its discovery of poison. And seeing it has been
found in former times, there is no doubt but that sometimes it might be found
still, because (however many may be of opinion that Nature decays both in
general and in particular) Nature is the same that ever it was, and works as
it did in former days: only it is want of care and diligence in seeking and
observing, and the covetousness of men that gape after nothing but Silver and
Gold, or those things that they may make present gain of; so that thereby many
particular Minerals are neglected, and cast by, because they know not how to
make present use or profit of them; or because their Ores being but rarely
found, they are not known, and therefore thrown by, as has happened by some
others as well as this. Also because Art has found out a way to commix Gold
and Silver in such a proportion as to the splendour and eyesight may satisfy,
though it want the intrinsical virtue; and so that which is native is not so
much sought after, as has happened in the native Orichalcum, seeing that by Art
it is now counterfeited. Pet. Martyr. Decad. 1. li. 4. p. 27.
But that it may possibly be found at some time and places, this instance from
another Author both of credit and veracity, may beyond exception sufficiently
evince, who says thus: I saw also a great piece of pure Electrum, of the which
Bells, and Apothecaries Morters, and many other such vessels and instruments
may be made, as were in old time of the Copper of Corinth. This piece of
Electrum was of such weight, that I was not only with both my hands unable to
lift it from the ground, but also not of strength to remove it either one way
or other: they affirmed that it weighed more than three hundred pound weight,
after eight ounces to the pound; it was found in the house of a certain Prince,
and left him by his Predecessors. And albeit that in the days of the
inhabitants yet living, Electrum was no where dug, yet knew they where the
Mine thereof was; but our men with much ado could hardly cause them to show
them the place, they bore them such privy hatred; yet at the length they
brought them to the Mine, being ruinate, and stopped with stones as rubbish: it
is much easier to dig than the Iron Mine, and might be restored again, if
Miners and other workmen skilful therein were appointed thereto.

To these we may add another, little written or spoken Of Not. Bath. c. 9. p.
43, 44.
but that Doctor Jorden says thus of it: Calaem may be reckoned among those,
which is a kind of white metalline Cadmia, brought out of the East Indies,
which has both metalline ingression, and metalline fusion, but not perfectly
malleable. This (if my memory fail me not) is also mentioned by Linschot in his
Voyages, but the place I remember not. I have much labored to get some of it,
but as yet could never compass any of it.

There is also something said of Bell-metal, that it should be found natural in
the bowels of the earth, of Kentman judges, and is found in our Tin and Copper
Mines in Cornwall. As for Granates that hold Metal, we have spoken of them
before.

CHAP. XXVIII. Something more of Galena, Lapis Plumbarius, native Cadmia, etc.
As also of Chrysocolla, or native Borax, Caeruleum, native Blue, Aerugo, native
Green, Talk, Magnes, the Lodestone, Haematites, the Boodstone, Schistus; The
Lazul-stone, and of Metallary stones, and the like.
Galena, Plumbago, Lapis Plumbarius, and Molybdena, ( Eucelius, Rulandus, Vide
Eucel. de re Metal. l. 1. c. 34. p. 66. and Ruland. Lex. Alchym. 374. and Mus.
Worm. li. 1. Sect. 3. c. 10. p. 127. Agricol. li. de na^. Fossil. 10. p. 655.
to whom we may adjoin Wormius, do make a long discourse, and bring many
Arguments to prove that they are all one) is that there is much said to little
purpose, and that in some respects they may be taken for all one; seeing it is
a truth that no Lead Ore is found so poor, but that it contains something of
Silver, (as all experience will make good) yet often so little that it is not
worth the charges of refining; and oftentimes in so an extreme minute
proportion, that it will deceive the best and most curious Artist that does but
try it by small quantities in the Cupel or Test. But if the Workman will take a
pound of the poorest Lead that may be, (that has not been refined before) and
calcine it in an Iron Vessel until all that can of it be turned to Litharge,
then let him take that small quantity, and purify it upon the Test, he then
shall find it will yield some Silver, whose quantity in a pound or more of the
Lead may soon be calculated. And therefore the most experienced Essay-masters
will not use any Lead that has not been calcined into Litharge, and blown up
again into Lead, lest thereby they be deceived in their trials. But however,
that in this respect they may be accounted all one, in regard that there is
none of them but they hold both Lead and Silver, yet notwithstanding I hold
that the main difference lies in this, that it is to be accounted Galena when
it holds a sensible quantity of Silver, or however when it holds as much
Silver as may make it a Mine Royal: but if it hold no sensible quantity of
Silver, then it may be called Plumbago; and this I wish every Test-master and
every Miner seriously to mind and consider of.

Besides what we have before said of native Cadmia, Robalt, and contains
Copper most commonly, sometimes Copper and Silver, and sometimes Gold, Silver
and Copper. M^s. Worm. Ut supra, p. 128.

Vid. Lexicon Alchym. Ruland. p. 120, etc


The best distinction of it is to call it Cadmia Metallica, thereby to
difference it from the Lapis Calaminaris, which the Germans call Galmei: It is
of yellowish color, and of a more soft stone, or of the nature of more hard
earth. They use it to ting Copper into a golden color, that thereby it may be
made artificial Orichalcum. Wormius says he had three sorts of it, one of an
Ash Color, another rubicund, the third something yellowish.

For native Chrysocolla (for we speak of none else Mus. Worm. Ut supra.
the Germans call it Steingrun, Schifergrun, Bergtgrun. This Nature produces
in fibers and holes, and it is sometimes found like to Sand, sometimes a
metallic matter does cleave unto it. Lex. Alchym. p. 146.
It is dug up in Hungaria, Bohemia, at Goldberg in Silesia, and in other
places. Rulandus says, it was gotten in a thousand places in Germany, and
might be called Chrysocolla viride scissile, as aerugo is called Viride aeris
rasile.

The native Chrysocolla is only in Metals that hold Copper, Mus. Worm. Ut
supra, p. 129.
and is only made out of Copper; and if it be sometimes found in Gold, Silver,
or Lead Mines, the Veins of those Metals are mixed with Copper. Its goodness is
esteemed by its color and strength: for all that which is native is green,
some to a full green; and by how much more it comes nearer the greenness of
the Emerald, by that it is esteemed better: othersome is a weaker green, which
is the worst, and there is some of a middle sort. I have some native green that
was gotten in the crevises and little holes of stone, that seemed like unto
Cadmia or Copper-stones, and were gotten in a Lead Mine, a little distant from
the Lead Ore, and had a vein or rake of stones or Copper Ore of the same
nature. And great plenty of it might have been got, but that the Workmen
seeking only for Lead Ore, and knowing no use to be made of it, would follow it
no longer: but whether it be the native Chrysocolla, or native Aerugo, I am not
yet satisfied, nor can be certain whether or no they be two different things,
or but one; for Authors seem to make them two, but show no distinction except
the names, of which more anon.

England use to make their blue Starch with, and they call it Powder-blue, and
is artificial, and made forth of the Lapis Lazulus, or Armenus) is found in
many several places, and Rulandus reckons these sorts.

1. That which is ultramarine, or from Cyprus, Lex. Alchym. p. 161.
which is most fair, found in an Ash-colored earth, and like the best sort,
that is factitious. 2. Very famous natural green from Sneberg, something cloddy
and hollow within, which is dug forth of a white sandy earth. 3. From Padua,
which is found in clods of earth of a deep Ash Color. 4. Native, from
Thuringia, which is dug up besides Muchel. 5. Native, copiously found
adhering to an hard, thin, Ash-colored earth. 6. Native, and pure from Poland.
7. From Poland, with hard sandy white earth. 8. Found with a rude white stone.
9. Native, from Spain, in which Gold does appear. 10. From Sneberg, cleaving to
rude or bare stones. 11. From Islebia in a Slate-stone. 12. Native, from
Goldberg found with Chrysocolla in a vein of Iron, in a white stone that
melts in the fire. 13. Native, from Sneberg, with Chrysocolla, being pure,
sticking in a white Flint distinctly. 14. Native, at Gieshubelia in a
Fire-stone, out of which Silver is drawn; it is mixed with a concrete green
juice, and sometimes placed like Girdles or Zones, out of which it flowereth
with pleasantness forth of the Vein. De re Metal. c. 22. p. 123.
Eucelius tells us, That is was found in the Pits or Mines of Cyprus, and that
it was found in their Gold and Copper Mines, as at Lanterberg in Saxony, at
Hircynia, and at Goldberg in Silesia: And that the best sort of it was found
there, and they call it Schifer blaw, and that it grew in Hungaria and
Lotharingia. I have gotten good store of this of a pure blue color, in those
stones that I mentioned last above, that were something like Copper stones,
pretty pieces almost as great as Hazel-Nuts, contained in the holes of the
stones, that were full of such cavities or holes, and also the green stuff
(which is either Chrysocolla or Aerugo) in small pieces, and contained in
lesser holes. I have been the larger in this particular, because our English
Miners do altogether neglect these, and such other like things, as knowing no
use or profit to be made of them, when doubtless they might both be of benefit
and good use.
Kupffergrune, De re Metal. l. 1. c. 27. p. 53.
or Spangrune, I find little of it, only Eucelius tells us, it is found in the
Metals of Cyprus, the stones having something of Copper in them, out of which
it flowereth, but that this is little, and the best, and that it was also found
in Copper Mines in Germany. Whether this and the native Chrysocolla be all one
or not, I shall not take upon me to determine, but leave it to the experience
of others, though I should rather incline to believe that they are but all one.

Lapis Specularis, Amianthus, and Talcum strictly taken; Agricola calls it
Magnetis, but seems to confound it with Mica, Cat-silver, or Glimmer; and that
description that Rulandus gives of it, agrees rather to Mica, than to that
Talk that we have sold in shops; and therefore we shall only take what
Schroderus and Wormius say of it, and the former thus: Phorm. M^d. Chym. l. 3.
c. 8. p. 40.
The Talk of the shops is like the Lapis Specularis, but it is more thin and
rough, or full of scales, of a greenish color, resisting the fire, and fixed.
It is called of some the stare of the earth, and by the Germans Talck; there is
found also red Talk and black, but they are less used in shops. That is thought
the best which is brought from Venice, that from Muscovia is equally as good,
that is most approved of that is chiefly greenish. Mus. Worm. l. 1. Sect. ^. c
7. p. 57.
Wormius says thus of it: It is a soft stone like to the Lapis Specularis, to
be divided into plates, bending, and variously intricate, of a Silvery white
color, bluish gray, sometimes blackish, unconquerable by the fire, for it is
neither to be melted nor burnt, nor loses its color, except by great
violence. It is found in many places of Germany and Norway, and its kinds are
distinguished according to its colors. He says he had clods or lumps of white
and Silvery Talk brought forth of Germany; but the more impure and grayish was
brought from Norway. He also had some small pieces of a golden color. There
was also black brought from Norway, which had joined the Ore of Gold with it,
that gave great hope of gain. The Talk that I have commonly seen and had, is
much agreeable to these descriptions, it being white and Silvery with some
greenishness, and may be severed or cleft into small tires or threads, and does
long resist the fire, and hardly to be consumed by it. It is a good vendible
Commodity, and therefore may concern the Miners to take care to enquire and
search after, for there is little question but some of it may be met withal in
some of our Mines in England. Paracelsus reckons three sorts, white, red, and
black Talk.

Mus. Worm. l. 1. Sect 2. c. 9. p. 62.
Wormius describes it thus: It is an hard Stone, ferrugineous, or irony, and
blackish, which draws or rejects Iron, or another Loadstone, and shows
the quarters of the World. It is found in diverse places, for the most part in
Mines of Iron, from whence also it contains much Iron in it self. For all
that body that does attract, is not the Magnet, but there is in it a Magnetic
Vein: Therefore in certain places in Germany they draw most excellent Iron
forth of it. In Italy in the mountains of Viterby, and in Ilna where it is
found, outwardly it is of a ruddish color, within when it is broken waxing
black, and a little tending to blewishness though obscure; in attracting very
efficacious, while it is smitten it trembles, being covered with a certain
dawn which goes to the Iron, if it be admoved unto it. Also it is dug up in
diverse places in Germany, near the Valley Ioachim, Swartzberg, Sneberg, etc.
Also (he says) they had it brought from Norway of great strength, of which he
could show some. Like this description are those fragments that we buy at the
shops, as also that which we have capped with Steel, and bound with Brass or
Silver, and those round ones that we call Terrella's. Doctor Merrett says,
That there is of it of good note found in the Rocks of Dartmoore in Devonshire,
and of worse sorts elsewhere. And I have had it from some Gentlemen of very
great worth, that lately there is found good store of it in the foresaid
County, of very excellent force and virtue. And I make small doubt, that seeing
we have so many Mines of Iron-stone in his Majesty's Dominions, if the Workmen
had skill in knowing of it, and were diligent and observant, it might be found
in many places; which I commend to all ingenious and laborious Miners.

Of this stone Haematites Wormius says, That it is Mus. Worm. l. 1. Sect. 2.
c. 9. p. 64.
or else being rubbed against wet Whetstones, it yields a bloody color, or
because it is prevalent in stanching of blood. It is a stone of the color of
coagulated blood, but more obscure, hard, and endowed with streaks like
Antimony; it is cloddy, and stays bleeding. It seems to be of a middle
nature, betwixt Earth, Stone, and Metal, when it is compacted into a stony
substance, from the shavings or sediment which the water has worn from Ruddle,
or some red stone. It is in diverse places in Germany, betwixt the Mines of Red
Oker or Ruddle and Iron, as in the Valley of Ioachim, and near Hildesheim; but
above the rest, that which comes from Spain is commended; that which is
brought from Compostella is of an angled figure, having the color and splendour
of blackish Iron. It is decocted into Iron, and contains Ruddle in the
caviti^s, sometimes it is observed to attract Iron obscurely: of this Rulandus
reckons these sorts.

1. That which is of a black color, found at Goslaxia, Lex. Chym. p. 250.
yielding a yellow juice most hard, and is unknown to the shop^. 2. It is
dug up in many places in Hassia, and is of a purple color, and to be
cloven. 3. Very fair is dug up in Geurg, and Anneberg of Salfield. This the
Goldsmiths commend, because it is most hard upon the Whetstone to polish Gems.
It is black, and sharp like a Topp. So the most that we have from the shops is
of the aforesaid figure, and of a bloody or Liver-colour.
Schistus, for which I want an English name, and Authors do disagree much about
it. Some by it understand some kind of the Amianthus, or the Lapis Specularis,
or Alumen Scaiolae, or a cleaving stone, which they vulgarly call Quartz. But
(says Wormius) I take it with Agricola and Caesalpinus to be a certain kind of
the Haematites, Mus. Worm. Ut supra.
or Boodstone; and Agricola would that the name of Schistus be attributed
unto it, not either that it is easy to be cloven, or that it is cloven, but
that after a certain manner that it seems so* For by the mutual Composition
of its parts, which have increased straight like wood, it is like to Ammoniack
Salt. As well the Schistus as the Haematites are either like to concreted
blood, or to Iron, and then sometimes some of the external parts are of the
color of Saffron. In this at the least it seems that a difference is set,
that the Haematites or Boodstone is almost always in the figure of a clod;
but the Schistus, either in one part or both, is formed like a Wedge. The sum
is as much as may be gathered from Agricola, that he acknowledges no
difference betwixt them, but that which consists in the figure.

To this (as near a kin) we may subjoin the stone called Smiris, Mus. Worm. Ut
supra. p. 64, 65.
in the High Dutch Smirgel, and we after the French name call it Emerg from its
absterging faculty. It is a ferrugineous or irony stone, inclining to
blackness, so very hard, that the Lapidaries do use it to ingrave in Gems, and
to polish Arms. Because to the watery Touchstone or Whetstone it yields a
sanguineous juice; of some it is accounted a certain hard species of the
Haematites. It is found in the Iron Mines. These we have enumerated, that all
ingenious persons might search after them; for if we could find any Smiris, or
Emery in our own Country, it would be of great profit unto many.

The Lapis Lazuli, which the Germans call Lasurstein, Ut supra.
and veins of a golden color. It has great affinity with the Lapis Armenus,
according to colors: but the Lapis Armenus is not so hard, neither has it
golden veins, and easily yields into Powder and friability. They set down two
sorts of it, one enduring the force of the fire, the other not. That which is
fixed, and does not change its color in the fire, is brought forth of the
East, from Asia or Africa, and is called Oriental, and is known by its
fixedness. That which is not fixed, is found in certain places of Germany, and
is of a middle kind betwixt the Armenus and Lazulus, for this is softer, that
is harder. I have spoken thus much of this Stone, because it is a good
Commodity, and sold dear, and it may be that some of it might be found in our
Nation. That which I have seen of it is of a fine blue color, interspersed
with little lines, or small sparks of a pure golden color, and is very hard:
Some have called it the Marchasite of Gold, and do believe that Gold does grow
in it, and may be drawn forth of it; but I could never yet procure so much of
the best sort of it, to wit, that which is full of golden streaks, as to make
any certain or considerable trial of it.

Mus. Worm. l. 1. Sect. 3. c. 11. p. 150.
sometimes on another, and sometimes on both, and are as it were the Matrixes,
or Coats, wherein the Metals lie enclosed: Forth of which also Metals are
drawn, or decocted.

1. The first is the Saxum Fissile, which I take to be that which we call
slate, which may be cloven into thin parts, and is of diverse colors, as blue,
sometimes blacker, sometimes whiter, and the like; some refer this to a
Fire-stone, and some to other things.

2. The second sort is that which the Germans call Quartz, which sometimes is
most white, sometimes a little yellowish, sometimes grayish. To this sometimes
sparks of Gold do adhere.

3. The third is Spatum, (for which I know no English word) that is more
smooth, and hard than the rest, by some it is called Metallary Marble. Of this
(he says) he had diverse kinds brought from the Mines of Norway, where Silver
was gotten. One that was barren, and contained no Metal nor other Mineral,
white, and cut into pieces. Some mixed with Fire-stone, or is with barren
Galena, or with Galena, Fire-stone, and Silver. By which we may discern what
various mixtures Nature exercises in the Mines.

4. The fourth is Saxum Corneum, or Flint, Hornstein, which appears most
hard, of the color of Horn, whose parts are sometimes so continuate, that one
cannot discern one from another, sometimes conspicuous by some Intersection.

5. Lapis Arenosus, as though compounded of Sand, called Sandt-stein: this is
that which we call Freestone, some of it being of a very small grain, and is
hewed for building withal, and some of a far coarser and rougher sort, and some
hard, and some so soft, that it may be crumbled with the fingers.

6. That which they call Mica, or Magnetis, is a metallic body, that does
shine in Marbles and Sand, as also in Stones, but cannot be separated from
them, the Germans call it Ratzensilber, and Glimmer, that is Cat-silver,
because it shines in the night like the eyes of Cats. Of it (he says) he had
some sorts, one alone, not having any admixture, another in a Stone with a
Fire-stone, a third in Sand. That it is not fixed, but is consumed with the
fire, and is almost of no use. De re Metal. l. 3. c. 29. p. 213.
Eucelius tells us that it has the color of Silver, and is of no use, and in
the opinion of the Vulgar is consumed in the fire. But (he says) if we
consider more warily, it is not consumed, no more than the true Amianthus, but
is only purged, and assumeth another color, otherwise it is of no worth. I
confess I know not what this is, nor could ever yet perfectly learn of any
person, unless it should be some of those silver-coloured Marchasites or
Fire-stones, of which we have plenty, that are of a glorious shining white
color, but being fired yield only a stinking smell of Sulphur, and leave some
black dross behind them, but are of no use at all.

CHAP. XXIX. Of the Transmutation of Metals.
COncerning this great dispute of the transmuting of one Metal into another, we
intend not here to demonstrate the possibility of it, for as the Philosopher
said well: Qnae experimento oculari videntur, probatione non indigent. Only we
shall labor to examine, and open the nature of Transmutations, and to show
some sorts of Transmutation, that are common and obvious, and full as strange
as this of Metals, and thereby show that it is no such impossible or wondrous
thing, as many that would seem wise and learned do labor to make manifest. So
leaving general Arguments, as either to confirm or confute, we shall stand upon
some instances that may sufficiently demonstrate the way and manner thereof.

And as for Mutation, Transmutation, or that which is commonly called
Generation, we shall not stand upon the strict logical definition, which we do
not perceive, yet is perfectly known, but rather make a search what the nature
of it may be; that hereafter it may be better understood and sought into, yet
(we suppose) that thus much may be granted, that there can be no Generation,
but of necessity there must be Mutation; for though that all Mutations be not
Generation, yet must every Generation of course be a Mutation, and it is most
certain that no Mutation can be but by motion; so that in this the Schools have
not far missed it (to give them their due, where, and when they deserve it)
that all Generation is some kind of Mutation, and so must needs be a species of
motion: But yet by all this we come not perfectly to know what Generation is in
its true nature and intrinsical essence and operation, Arist. 5. Phys. c. text.
4.8. Physiol. Jo. Magyri. l. 1. c. 5.

Jac. Z^barel. l. de gener. and interit. c. 3.4, etc.


nor the plain and true manner how these Mutations are wrought, by the means of
motion in or upon matter, but only are left to be puzzled with hard terms, and
blind notions, as any person may very well perceive that shall read and
seriously consider what these few Authors quoted in the margent have written
upon this subject.

We might here fall into those strange Mutations that happen in the Animal and
Vegetable Kingdom, that appear in the Generation of those things; but that
would lead us at too far a distance, though they would mightily conduce to open
and illustrate the matter we have in hand; and therefore we shall leave them,
as things that have been both learnedly and accurately handled by that learned
Physician Sennertus, Fabritius ab Aqua pendente, the incomparable Johannes
Marcus Marci, in that curious piece of his styled Idaea Idaearum Operatricium,
by our never-sufficiently-praised Countryman Dr. Harvey, in his profound piece
De Generatione, as lastly, by that learned Physician and Anatomist Dr.
Highmore, in his Treatise Of Generation, which though little in its bulk, is
not little in weight and worth.

But we shall contract our selves into a closer compass to fall upon some
mutations, (or transmutations rather) produced by Nature, or Art, that will
sufficiently serve to make forth what we intend concerning the Transmutation of
Metals, only we shall premise this,

That all Transmutations are made some of these three ways, or by two of them,
or all joined together.

1. By adding of something to the thing or subject to be changed that it had
not before. 2. Or by taking away, and separating from the subject that is to be
changed, that was in it before. 3. Or by reason of motion so to alter, dispose,
and order the contexture of the parts, that thereby it appears another thing
than what it was before. And either all of these, or some of them do concur in
every transmutation, or else there cannot be any: Now we shall give some
Instances to make good these Particulars, and examine the manner of
Transmutation by them.
And first of that Transmutation which is produced by Nature, in which Art has
little or nothing to do, as in petrifying of wood, leaves, moss, grass, and the
like, which is for the most part done either by Water or other lapidescent
Juyces, or steams turning the forementioned things into a stony matter or
substance. The first we shall name (as being most known unto us) is that famous
Dropping Well near the ancient Town of Knaresborough in the West Riding of
Yorkshire, mentioned in our British Authors, by our learned Antiquary Mr.
Camden, and of late written by Dr. Dean, Yorkshire Spaw, c. 16. p. 117, 118.
and Dr. French. The latter of which says of it thus; If any stick or piece of
wood lie in it some weeks, it will be candied over with a stony whitish crust,
the inward part of the Wood continuing of the same nature as before. But any
soft spungie substance, as moss, leaves of Trees, etc. into which the Water can
enter, will thereby in time become seemingly to be of a perfect stony nature
and hardness. Now the cause of this petrifying property, as Philosophers call
it, is succus lapidescens, i. e. a stony matter, which is in its Principiis
solutis, for indeed the Principia soluta of all things, whether Animals,
Vegetables, Metals, or Minerals, are in a liquid form, and are concreted by
degrees, by a natural heat separating from them all accidental humidities, and
fixing them into their proper species. When the water with which this Succus
lapidesceus is mixed, is in part wasted by the Sun and Air, it does then
deposite it, as being too heavy for it any longer to bear it. And when that is
deposited, and fallen down, it does by a continued addition and concretion in
time amount to a considerable stony moss, etc. From whence we may note*

1. That by his observation and judgment, the stony substance bred by the
water, is nothing but the apposition and fixing of the small stony particles
hid in the water one unto another, which is merely Aggregation, and so comes to
increase the bulk or quantity by continual addition. And thus far according to
this ingenious person and learned Chemist, here is nothing at all of
Transmutation, but that the moss, leaves, etc. become seemingly of a perfect
stony nature and hardness.

2. Yet if we look a little more warily, we shall find not only an Aggregation
of these small stony particles, and an Incrustation upon the outside of the
moss and leaves, but even that the substance of the moss and leaves, and the
small atoms of them are merely petrified as far as our eyes, or the best
Microscopes can inform us. And though the thicker and greater pieces of Wood,
be not in so short a time petrified, as are moss, grass, and the leaves of
Trees, yet in a longer continuance of time, Wood of a considerable bulk, will
be totally stonified both in the Internal and External parts: So that by this
Water of the dropping Well, stones are not only bred by Aggregation of small
stony particles, nor Wood and Moss only crusted over with a stony Concretion,
but also that the Moss, Leaves and Wood, are really changed into a stony
substance. And though the Explication of the true manner and way how it is done
may be occult, and yet require the study of many Observators, and does not
belong to our present enquiry, curiously to search forth: Yet thus much is
evident, that upon the supposition, that the Moss, and Leaves, etc. and the
small parts of them are truly changed into a stony nature, that then the aerial
part, or the Globuli aetherei (as Cartesius calls them) are by the entry of the
stony particles contained in the Water, extruded, and so separated. Whereby two
of the particulars are made clear; First, that there is something separated
from the thing changed that was in it before, and also that there was something
added, as the stony Particles, or petrifying Steams or Atoms that was not there
before, and consequently that there must be an alteration of the contexture and
position of the particles of the body changed. But because the stress of the
matter lies what Transmutation is, which we are searching after, and yet it may
be doubted whether or no there be any real Transmutation at all, quoad naturam,
sed solummodo, quoad nos, as when by a due proportionable commixture of Sand
and Ashes, Glass is made, which quoad nos, and in relation to our sight is
transparent, which neither Sand nor Ashes are; and yet the Sand and Ashes in
their primitive nature and principles remain as they were, the individual
particles of either of them being not changed, as may appear by the reducing
them to the same Sand and Ashes that they were before, which may be made
manifest not only by the Alkahest, (only known to Adeptists) but also by other
means that may and can be shown by expert Artists: And also when that Silver is
dissolved in Aqua fortis, according to our sight it is changed, and the water
remains transparent, and the Silver may again be separated from it, as is
known unto every expert Goldsmith: it may very well make us doubt whether there
be any real Transmutation or not, but what is by addition, diminution, or
altering of parts. Hector. Boctii Scot. regn. descript. p. 9. Sect. 50.
And therefore we shall quote some more instances, omitting that of Hector
Boelius of the Pond in Ireland, that if a piece of Wood be stuck down in it, at
much of it as is in the earth or mud, is in the space of a year turned into
Stone; that part which is in the water, is turned into Iron; and that which is
above the water does remain Wood; so that the same entire piece is Stone, Iron,
and Wood; which were a most strange relation, and fit instance if true. But
though we have had it affirmed by a learned Physician that lived long in
Ireland, and that others do maintain that our Irish Stones or Whetstones are of
the same petrified Wood, (as the grain or bait would almost persuade) yet
because the forecited Author is noted to be fabulous; and much suspected in
many things, and it not proved by later Authorities; therefore (I say) we shall
omit it, and so come to some of those that the faithful and Learned Helmont
has noted from Authors of better credit, De Lithias. l. c. 1. p. 13.
who tells us; For so the hand-glove of Frederick the Emperor was petrified
in that one part of it that lay wet in the Spring, but the other part being
fenced with a seal, remained Leather: so that not only Herbs, Woods, Bread,
Iron, Eggs, Fishes, Birds, and Quadrupedes, were by a wonderful Metamorphosis
petrified; but by the testimony of Ambrosius Pareus, a Child at ripe age was
cut out of the Womb petrified, which his friend told him that made Mathematical
Instruments, that used the back of that petrified Child for a Whetstone; and
more to the same purpose he relates in the same Chapter, from whence amongst
others he draws these Conclusions.

1. That whereas other seeds require that the substrate, or subject matter be
reduced into a sequacious, or an obedient liquor, and susceptible of the seed,
which they have called the first matter of Generation, and do require that also
that the figure, and all the comeliness of the precedent Concrete be destroyed:
yet the petrifying seed, the humane figure, being preserved, without any
intervening putrefaction, or dissolution of the matter, does petrifie the whole
through the whole, to wit, as well the bones as the skin. 2. That the
petrifying seed does consist alone in a saxeous or stony odor or steam, which
is an incorporeal and invisible Ferment.
We shall not here quarrel with this experienced and Learned Author, but only
note these two things.

1. That whereas he places this petrifying quality in an odor or steam, which
he makes invisible and incorporeal, I take him by incorporeal, not to mean
merely that the steam is altogether spiritual, as the Schoolmen and
Metaphysicians understand, but that it is so subtle, tenuious and fine, that
it is not liable to our sight; and in regard of other more gross bodies, may be
called and accounted incorporeal. 2. He plainly holds forth petrifaction, not
only in the superficial parts, but that it is totum per totum, as well in the
bones as in the skin, not only by incrustation, or adhesion of the stony matter
to the external parts, but by a real changing (in Animals) of the bony, sinewy,
musculous, and fleshy parts intrinsically and thoroughout, into a stony
substance; to verify which, Micrograph. observe. 17. p. 107, 108, etc. Vid
Philos. Trans. n. 6. p. 101.
more Authorities may be added to Helmont, as that of Pensingius historia
infantis, in abdomine inventi, and in duritiem lapideam conversi. And something
of this nature in that accurate and ingenious piece of Mr. Hooks Micrography,
as also much of this nature may be seen in Mr. Boyles Essay of firmness, and in
some other places, to which I remit the Reader.
Now in all this that the Learned Helmont has noted, or the rest, it will
appear that this saxeous Odor, or seminal Ferment, how thin or fine soever it
were, is of a bodily nature, and so piercing the body to be changed, whether of
Animals or other things, as Iron, Eggs, Leather, or the like, it does add some
such steams and particles as were not there before, and so does augment the
quantity or weight, if not both; which was one of the things required to be
proved. Again, by the ingress (which must be by motion) there must of necessity
be a cession of another body, which can be nothing but the Aerie Atoms, or
Ethereal Steams, contained before in the porous parts of the body to be
changed, which are thereby extruded and separated; which was another thing to
be proved. And as for the third, it necessarily follows, that when a softer
body is changed into an harder, or a more fluid body into a firm, the parts are
joined more close together; and however all motion in bodies must of necessity
make a change of the position, contexture, and order of the minute or smaller
parts. By all which we shall only urge thus much, That this petrification is as
strange as that which the Philosophers call the Transmutation of Metals; as may
appear by the comparing of their efficient causes, the manner of their
operations together, and also of their effects. To make which plain, we shall
here once for all lay down the requisites, and manner of metallic
Transmutation; and so as we go, show their accord or disagreement.

And first, in the Philosophers Transmutation of Metals, they have their
subject which they intend to transmute, (to use that common word, though truly
the thing that they do, is only to ma^urate and meliorate) which is some of the
more base Metals (as they are commonly styled) for as they never mean to change
Gold into Gold, for that would be no change: so in the intent of Nature and its
Operation, a Stone cannot be said to be changed into a Stone. And in this the
Transmutation of Metals, and of changing Wood, Moss, Leaves, Animals, Iron, and
the like, into Stone, does agree that they both have a substrate, or subject
matter to work upon, and so the one not to be wondered at more than the other:
but there are two properties wherein they differ.

1. For first, in the petrification wrought by Nature, the things changed are
not always contained under the same proxime genus, and the thing working the
effect of stonifying is of a Lapideous or Mineral nature, and (according to
common opinion) neither contained within the Animal nor Vegetable Kingdom, and
yet are wrought upon by that petrifying agent, when in the Philosophic
Transmutation, the thing changed is under the same proxime genus, with the
nature of that which it is changed into, being both of a metallic root and
nature, and so is less wonderful than the change made by Petrification.

2. Secondly, the things wrought upon by the petrifying agent, are more remote
from that stony nature into which they are changed, whether they be Animals or
Vegetables, as having had no praevious Preparation, to fit them for the
susception of the Operation of that petrifying power: whereas in the
Transmutation of Metals, the Metal to be changed is to be made as clean as Art
is able to perform, according to that true and certain rule of our Countryman
Ripley, who says: For who that joineth not the Elixirs, with bodies made clean,
He woteth not sykerly what Projection does mean.


Secondly, And as the agent in the change wrought 12 Gates, p. 18^.

De Li^hias c. 1. p. 13.


is (according to the doctrine of Helmont) a petrific Seed, consisting only in
a saxeous odor, or invisible ferment: So the agent in metallic Transmutation,
is a Seed of an aurifick or argentifick nature, for it is known to all that are
Masters, that the Elixir or small part of that which they call the Philosophers
Stone, or Tincture, has a seminal power, able to produce its like, according
as it was specificated by Fermentation. Which is sufficiently confirmed by that
faithful description that the experienced Polonian has given us, No Lum. Chym.
Tract. 10. p. 330, 331.
who says, Lapis Philosophorum, seu Tinctura nihil aliud est quam aurum in
supremum digestum, nam aurum vulgi est sicuti herba sine semine, quando
maturescit producit semen, sic aurum quando maturescit, dat semen sive
Tincturam. And again, Aurum potest dare fructum and semen, in quo se
multiplicat industria sagacis artificis, qui scit naturam promovere, sed si
absque natura, id velit tentare, errabit. To which does agree that often quoted
saying of Augurellus. Theatr. Chym. Vol. 3. p. 203.
Hordea cui cordi demum serit hordea: ne tu
Nunc aliunde pares auri primadoria: in auro
Semina sunt auri, quam vis abstrusa recedant
Longius, and multo nobis quaerenda labor.
So that as they agree in having a subject matter to work upon, and in their
agents, that they are both of a seminal power; so there is no cause to account
the one strange or impossible, and the other not except it be by reason that
petrifying is more common, and the change of Metals, but seldom or rarely seen,
which though it might stagger vulgar brains, yet can be of no moment to a
learned and considerate mind.

changed, that was not there before, and the airy steams or particles are
extruded forth of the body changed that were there before, so that the Position
and Contexture of the small Particles of the body changed are thereby altered
and changed. So in the Transmutation of Metals, there is added some small part
of the Philosophers Tincture unto the Metal (as suppose it Lead, or
Quicksilver) that is to be changed: And also there is something that is
separated from the body changed that was in it before, as less or more of that
which some call the external, separable and combustible Sulphur; but Trevisan
calls it Scoriadrosse, which being indeed of an Heterogeneous and differing
nature from the Homogeneous Mercury, did make its small parts that were
Homogeneous one to another, that they could not so nearly be joined per minima,
which by the ingression of the small quantity of the Tincture are extruded and
separated. But to illustrate this, we shall give the unquestionable testimony
of Helmonts experience, Arbor. vit^e. p. 793.
who says, Cogor credere lapidem aurificum, and agentificum esse, quia
dist^nctis vicibus manu mea unius grani pulveris super aliquot mill grana
argenti vivi ferventis, projectionem feci, etc. And that a great multitude
standing by, the matter, with the tickling admiration of them all (it seems
himself not excepted) did succeed in the fire, as the Books of that Art do
promise. And that he that first gave it him (so that it seems he had either
given a second time, or more, or else he had made it himself, because he had of
diverse proportions) was a stranger, and but a friend of one nights
acquaintance, and had at the least so much as was sufficient to change two
hundred thousand pounds into Gold. And that he gave him half (a grain he calls
the sixtieth part of a dram) and from thence 9 ounces of Quicksilver, and were
transmuted: which was an high proportion and noble exaltation.

Vita ae^ern^. p. 543.
Again, That he had once given him (which differs from the other) the fourth
part of a grain, which fourth part of a grain being wrapped in Paper, he
projected upon 8 ounces of hot Quicksilver in a Crucible. And forthwith the
Quicksilver with a certain noise, staid from the flux, and settled like a yellow
lump or morsel, and after being melted, with the blast of the bellows, there
was found 8 ounces of pure Gold, wanting eleven grains. Therefore that one
grain of that Powder had transmuted into the best Gold, of Quicksilver equal
parts to it self 19186: which was a most noble Multiplication exceeding the
former.

Demonst^. These. p. 671.
Again, he confesses that sometimes, or diverse times he had handled it in his
hands, and with his eyes seen the real Transmutation of common vendible
Quicksilver, in proportion exceeding in weight the Gold-making Powder some
thousands of times; and that it was of color like Saffron in its Powder, but
very ponderous, and shining like beaten Glass, when it is less accurately made
into Powder, and that once the fourth part of a grain was given him of it. And
this he enclosed in Wax, lest in throwing it into the Crucible, it might be
dispersed by the smoke; which he projected upon a pound of hot Quicksilver,
newly bought, and put into a Crucible: And forthwith the Quicksilver, with a
little murmuring noise, staid from the flux, and settled to the bottom like a
lump. And that the heat of the Quicksilver was but so much as might hinder
melted Lead from recongealing. Then by and by the fire being increased under
the blast of the bellows, the Metal was melted, and the melting Pot being
turned upwards, he found it to weigh 8 ounces of most pure Gold. And a compute
being made, a grain of that Powder did convert 19200 grains of impure and
volatile Metal, that may be put away with the fire, into pure Gold; only in
this there is required a moderate fire of glowing, or burning coals. And this
is an higher Multiplication than the former. From all which we may note,

1. That these were three several sorts of Powders, differing from, or
exceeding one another in nobility and virtue.

2. It is probable that in the last mentioned projection, he was not punctually
acquainted with the quantity upon which he was to project it; otherwise he
would have cast it upon less than one pound; which produced but 8 ounces, the
other 4 being flown, or otherwise wasted in the fire.

3. From hence we must note, that in projection the metal to be changed, is to
be in flux and open, that the Gold-making Powder may the more easily have
Ingression, and penetrate into the smallest parts of the Metal to be changed;
Rer. N^tur. l. 7. p. 97.
for Paracelsus tells us, that as Water being hardened by cold into Ice, will
not receive the Tincture of Saffron in Powder cast upon it; but when melted
into water, easily will: so the Metal to be changed must be in flux motion, and
opened by the fire, otherwise the Tincture cannot have Ingression nor spread it
self, and where there is no Ingression there can be no Transmutation. Yet here
Helmont tells, that it need but be easily hot, and not violently to any great
degree, but as much as may keep melted Lead from recongealing. And this
praevious artificial help, besides the cleansing of the Metal to be changed as
much as Art can perform, is requisite in metallic Transmutation, though in
that wrought by Nature in Vegetables, or Animals, in petrifying of them, there
is no such precedent Preparation, nor adjuvant cause, as external heat or fire,
but the petrifying steams, or seminal odor, does effect the thing without such
helping Concomitants, so that (if duly considered) the Work of Nature, without
the assistance of Art, in petrifying of Vegetables, and Animals, is more
strange and wonderful than the Transmutation of Metals.

4. We may note, That Nature in changing Vegetables or Animals into Stone, does
often work pedetentim, and by degrees, as also sometimes subitaneously and
quickly, as may appear by that story of Helmont, De Lithias. c. 1. p. 15.
which he thus relates. About the year 1320. betwixt Russia and Tartaria, in
the altitude of 64 degrees, not far from the Pond or Fen called Kitaya, it is
read, that an Hord of the people called Baschirdi with their whole herd of
Cattle, their Wagons and Carriages were altogether transmuted into Rocks or
Stones. And that yet to this day the Men, the Camels, the Horses, the flock or
herd of Cattle, and every other kind of thing that did accompany the Wagons or
Carriages, do yet stand by an horrible spectacle, in the daylight turned into
Stone, and that this was done in one night, without any preceding putrefaction.
The like story (if my memory fail not, for I have not the Author by me) is in
Ol^^s Magnus, an Author of good credit and reputation, and the like may be
found confirmed by some other Writers. Which (if true, and no miracle) shows
that this act of petrifying of Vegetables and Animals is sometimes quick and
subitaneous, as of one night, only that change of Metals is done in a far less
time, and therefore may well be said to be an acceleration of the work of
Nature by the help of Art.

5. It may very well be believed, that in the changing of Vegetables or Animals
into Stone, that the thing changed is of mo^e ponderosity, and for the most
part of greater bulk than the thing was of before it was so petrified and
changed; For so we have found in all our trials of Wood, Moss, Leaves, and the
like, stonified by the dropping Well near Knaresborough, because that is done
by Incrustation, but whether it happen to be so in all other sorts of
Petrification (for doubtless there are more ways than one) our experience
cannot determine, but must leave it to the trial and examination of others. But
in metallic Transmutation, if the exact degree of the virtue of the Powder
transmuting be known, and so be projected upon a just and due proportion, the
ponderosity will not much differ from what the Metal changed was of before, as
appears by that experiment of Helmont's, where he projected one fourth part
of a grain of the Gold-making Powder, upon 8 ounces of hot Quicksilver, and it
produced 8 ounces of pure Gold, wanting eleven grains, so that here was no
great difference in the weight: For reckoning that the 8 ounces of Quicksilver,
had the fourth part of a grain added to them, and when changed into pure Gold,
had but lost ten grains and three quarters of a grain, which must be that
either the Quicksilver had in it so much of combustible Sulphur (as Helmont in
a certain place of his Writings confesses that all common Quicksilver has in
it less or more of combustible and separable Sulphur) that was separated or
wasted away in the fire: or that so much of the Homogeneous body of the
Quicksilver did evaporate as being made too hot, and either of these ways it
might have been, though the first is most certain, that all imperfect Metals
have less or more separable and combustible Sulphur, which in projection is
separated and wasted. But howsoever that there be little difference of weight
in the metallic body changed from what it was before, yet it always becomes
less in bulk, and possesses lesser room, or place, as appears by this of
Helmont, that the Quicksilver settled with a certain noise to the bottom of the
Crucible, and so became of less bulk, and possessed less room. And that this
is, and must be so in all metallic Transmutations, is most clear, not only
from the authority of the Adeptists, but from their convincing reasons, showing
that in their Transmutation, there is a radical Solution and Penetration of all
the small parts or atoms of the Metal to be changed, by the subtle
penetrability and ingression of their so much purified and exalted Tincture,
and thereby all things in it whatsoever that are of an Heterogeneous nature,
are separated and extruded, and the Homogeneous Particles joined together per
minima as much as Nature can admit of, and so must needs be of less bulk, and
possess less room or place, which is manifest in Gold, that is one of the
heaviest bodies in the same bulk that Nature does produce, as being most dense,
containing most of matter, and having its particles most closely joined
together, that there are few interstitiums or spaces for the Air or Ether to
enter or possess, which is manifest in its extension under the hammer, whereby
it will be foliated farther, and be thinner than any other Metal whatsoever;
and so a baser Metal changed into Gold, must of necessity possess less room,
and be of less bulk.

6. And that we may come a little nearer to manifest this great work of
Transmutation of Metals, we may consider, that though in petrification by the
seminal Ordour, or saxeous Ferment, it works upon most bodies as it finds them,
either more susceptible, or more apt to resist, which might render its
operation and effects more difficult and strange. But here the matter is
rendered more feasible and facile, not only by a previous cleansing of the Metal
to be changed from its Heterogeneous parts, and gently opening of its body by
fusion in an easy fire; Spec. Al^hym. c. 7. p. 269.
but also our Learned Countryman Roger Bacon does show plainly that we having
nearer Metals unto the more Noble, are excused from the more remote: for seeing
that Saturn, Jupiter and Mercury are more near than Venus or Mars, we were
foolish to take the latter, and to leave the former.

7. The ancient Philosophers that were Masters of this great secret of
Transmutation, and knew it by experience, and had seen it with their eyes, took
little care of framing methodical Definitions or Descriptions of it, as little
valuing such trifles and niceties, but contented themselves with the true
understanding of it; and yet to their Disciples which they termed the Sons of
Art, they gave sufficient hints of the way and manner of it, but still as
veiled and obscured. But I find that Paracelsus (however condemned of many for
his too dark writing) to have said more of Transmutation in general, than the
most of those that went before him; some of which we shall here recite, where
he says thus: Lib. ter. nature. 7. p 97.
If we shall write of the Transmutation of all natural things, it is equal and
necessary, that before all things we first show what Transmutation is:
Secondly, what are the degrees to come unto it: Thirdly, by what means, and
after what manner it is done. Therefore Transmutation is when a thing loses
its form, and is so altered, that it is altogether unlike its former substance
and form, but assumeth another form, another essence, another color, another
virtue, another nature or propriety; as if a Metal be made Glass or Stone, if a
Stone be made a burnt Coal, if Wood be made a Coal, Clay be made a Stone or
Brick, a Skin be made Glue, Cloth be made Paper, and many such like: Now though
this be far from a Logical Definition, as written by one that is generally
believed to be no friend to Logic; yet is it no bad Description of
Transmutation in general, and may well stand uncondemned, unless by those that
can produce a better: for if the things that he does instance in to be changed
be duly considered, the most of them have incidents in the way and mode of
their Transmutation, that are as difficult to explicate and declare as the
principal things in metallic Transmutation. Is it not hard to open the true
causes how Antimony, that is a metallic body, is per se (which every common
Chemist can perform) brought into Glass, which is a transparent body, the
matter considered, will not be found so easy? And so (if we had leisure) might
be said of some of the rest.

8. And that we may more plainly understand the manner of this metallic
Transmutation, let us a little consider the virtues and properties which they
ascribe to their Tincture when perfected, because by it the operation is
performed: for if the nature of the Agent be well known, the effects that it
works upon the Patient may be the better perceived; and they are thus
enumerated and described by that ingenious and experienced person Johannes
Spagnetus, Arch. Herm. Can. 125. p. 249.
who says, There are five proper and necessary qualities in the perfect
Elixir, that it be fusile, permanent, penetrating, coloring, and multiplying;
it borrows its Tincture and fixation from the Leaven, its penetration from
the Sulphur, its fusion from Argent-vive, which is the medium of conjoyning
Tinctures, to wit, of the Ferment and Sulphur; and its multiplicative virtue
from the spirit infused into the Quintessence. From whence we may gather not
only its virtue and energy, but in some measure its manner of operation. 1.
For, first, we are to note that all that are properly called Metals, that are
to be changed, are fusile, and apt to be melted, and flow with the force of
fire, though some more easily than others; and if the Tincture which is the
efficient changing, were not of a fusile and flowing nature, it could never mix
or conjoin it self with the Metal to be changed; for where there is no
ingression, there can be no mutation. 2. That it must be permanent and fixed,
that is, that the force of the fire cannot make it fly; for otherwise it could
cause no Transmutation, for nihil dat quod non habet; and by these two
properties all heedful and considerate persons may easily conjecture, from what
root it must needs originally arise, and so may truly know the first matter. 3.
It is of a most penetrating nature: for if it were not so, the small and
homogeneous Atoms of the Metal to be changed could not be pierced, and thereby
to be so ordered that they may be joined per minima, and united together, and
thereby to extrude whatsoever is heterogeneous in the Metal to be changed. 4.
It has also the property of coloring, being indeed the Sulphur, or fire of
Nature, from whence all colors do arise; and mixing it self with the metallic
Mercury of the body, or Metal to be changed, which radically in all Metals is
one and the same, it becomes one with it as arising from the same root; and so
by the help of Art accelerateth the work of Nature, and does that in a short
time, that Nature cannot perform in many hundred of years, as says the learned
Philosopher in these words: Et haec est auri forma, Mus. Herm. t^act. de lap.
c. 7. p. 418.
summum and optimum, quod ad metallicam naturam spectat. Si itaque pura
isti^smodi forma, quae per artem, mediante natura, praeparari potest,
imperfectis Metallis addatur, tunc impurum imperfectorum Metallorum superatur.
Non enim impurum, sed pura materia illi est similis: Prima siquidem est ^orma
ad quam materia ista facta fuit. Idcirco par cum pari tempore incomprehensibili
conjungitur, impurum separant, quasi dicant: An tu venisti, quod meum est, and
quod ad me spectat? 5. It has a power to multiply the virtue, but not the
quantity; and having these rare qualities, it is no such wonder that it should
work such effects upon the more imperfect metallic bodies.


9. And that we may more clearly apprehend the Nature of this Transmutation, we
must consider some of their Maxims; which though by many slighted, yet do they
hold forth the certain and absolute truth: 1. As first, that of Bacon, Spec.
Alchym. c. 3. p. 260.
which they all allow of as the Basis of all Philosophic verity, which is
this, speaking of Sulphur or Natures Fire, and Mercury natural or radical
moisture, he says, Sed ex praedictis duobus fiant Metalla cuncta, and nihil
eis adhaeret, nec eis conjungitur, nec ea transmutat, nisi quod ex illis est.
Which is a golden sentence, containing both truth and plainness to those that
will rightly consider, and understand it. 2. Another is this of the same
Author: Ibid. c. 2. p. 258
Sed dico quod natura semper proposuit, and contendit ad perfectionem auri. Sed
accidentia diversa supervenientia transformavit metalla, sicut in multis
invenitur Philosophorum libris satis aperte. 3. A third is this: Mus. Herm. c.
2. p. 411.
Est itaque omnibus in Metallis verus Mercurius, rectumque Sulphur, aeque tam
in imperfectis, quam perfectis Metallis: Saltim contaminatus, and impurus
factus est in imperfectis Metallis, and quae sola perfecta maturatione
destituuntur. Et ex iisdem causis ad aurum, argentumque redigi possunt, h. ^.
ut ab aurea, vel argentea natura, quae in illis est, separetur impuritas, qua
cum inquinata fuerant, and forma auri, vel argenti iisdem ingeratur. 4. A
fourth is, That all Metals are in suo interiori, Gold, Silver, and Mercury, and
that metallic Mercury can no ways be destroyed, or otherwise the Art of
Transmutation were utterly false, which is certain, true, and most true.


10. From all this we may plainly gather what Transmutation of Metals is, and
how it is wrought: So that if Metals be in their root all of one Mercurial and
Homogeneous nature, and that there be perfect Sulphur and Mercury equally as
well in the imperfect as perfect Metals, then must their Transmutation be
easy; ^or then the Heterogeneous matter, or combustible Sulphur, Scoria, or
Dross, being removed, and some of the Tincture added, the parts are most
closely joined, and so united per minima, and tinged, by which means they are
maturated in a short time by the help of Art, that Nature could not perform in
many years. So that all metallic Mercury wants nothing of the degrees and
nature of Gold; but removing of its Heterogeneous parts, and the adding
something more of the fire of Nature, and then it becomes most dense, and to
have all the requisites that are necessary to Gold. Agreeable to what we say
here, is the opinion of an ingenious person, who says thus: Phil. Trans. n.
41. p. 823.
To conclude, I shall presume to give you some of my thoughts concerning the so
much discoursed-of Transmutation of Metals; concerning which I am of opinion,
that the change is erroneously apprehended by many, imagining that the whole
imperfect Metal is totally transformed into the more perfect by the substance
mixed with it; whereas the mixture added to the melted Metal, joins it self (as
I conceive) to those parts, which being Homogeneal, symbolize together with the
nature of the more perfect, whereby the pure metalline parts are separated from
the other Heterogeneal impure Sulphurs; which, together with other causes, did
hinder Nature in the Mine from concocting that substance into the perfecter
Metal.

A second instance that we shall give, is, That Helmont does deny to be any
Transmutation, and says thus: But that Vitriol-bearing Juice is thought to
change Iron into Copper, De Spadan. font. l. paradox. 3. p. 692.
the Mine-men themselves not acknowledging the delusion, because that the
succeeding Atoms of the Copper do fill up the place of the Iron that was
wasted; neither regarding that as Copper does render or make Silver dissolved
in Aqua fortis, that otherwise was invisible, to appear to the view, and be
corporeal. So that it is the propriety of Iron dissolved in the Vitriol to
manifest the Copper by drawing it to it self, and together in the same act,
that the Iron it self is dissolved, and does vanish in the Fountain. My
Witnesses (he says) are the Fountains themselves; because verily the
Vitriolate Waters are far more poor in Copper than they were before the Iron
dissolved in them, and the Copper thereby recovered from them. Therefore to wit
verily out of the very Fountain (where it is often continued, the flux of new
Copper does fail in the Pit or Spring) the putatitious Transmutation of Iron
does otherwise not happen. The manner of doing of which in the Mines of
Hungaria, called Herrengaundt, Athanasius Kircher does thus describe: Mund.
Subter. l. 10. Sect. 4. c. 10. p. 223, 224
They take rusty Iron that is unprofitable, as the remainder of various and old
instruments used in Houses, and being put into the Furnace and made hot, they
are upon the Anvile beaten forth into most thin plates. This being done, they
put these plates into the bottom of Vitriolate Water, which does flow in the
most deep Pits of the Mines; and being put there, they leave them for certain
months. And the due time ended, they come to the Pit, and find the plates to be
gone (or changed) into a yellowish stuff, like unto a soft plaster, and these
exposed to the Air and Winds, is hardened into Copper of the best account. And
it is so used at Neosel in Hungaria: Therefore it is questioned whether this be
a true Transmutation of Iron into Copper, or not. But I say that here true
Transmutation is not at all given, seeing that all the whole Iron is not
changed into the substance of the Copper, but by accident only, I do explain my
self. For seeing that in Vitriol infinite Copperish Corpuscles do inexist, and
as those have the greatest sympathy with Iron, so that also it comes to pass,
that forthwith they flow unto the Iron, and do most intimately insinuate
themselves into its pores; but seeing that they abound with Spirits of great
Acrimony, from hence being insinuated into the Iron, forthwith they begin to
corrode it, so far, that all the fatness of the Iron being consumed, the irony
substance being dissolved, does pass into dust, or a rusty powder, the
Vitriolate Corpuscules substituting themselves into the place of the Iron being
consumed, and the native particles both of the Iron and Vitriolate Water are
conglutinated into one mass, which first truly is soft within the Water, but
being exposed unto the more free Air, the wind and beams of the Sun are
indurated into perfect Copper, and by this means it is made the same thing that
it was before: before verily by the dispersion of its Corpuscles in the waters,
now by the union of the same attracted from the Iron. But if here were given a
true Transmutation, nothing of the Iron should remain after. But experience
teaches, that so much of the irony rust does remain, almost as much as the
irony mass did weigh before. And after he shows an experiment, by a rod or
thread of Iron put into some of this Vitriolate Water sent him forth of
Hungary, in this order: I (he says) put an Iron thread into a Viol full of
this water, which in the space of three days was all consumed, a certain soft
matter remaining in the bottom, which separated from the Dross, did yield pure
Copper; but the Dross remaining, did almost come to the weight of the thread of
Iron; so that from hence no man need further doubt of this matter. Thus far the
experience and opinions of these two Learned persons touching this kind of
change, which they will not allow to be a true Transmutation, from whence we
shall move some considerable Observations, and submit them to the judgment of
those that have Learning and leisure to examine the pertinency and validity of
them.

1. And first, if this (in their sense) be not a true mutation, yet of
necessity it is an apparent one: for the Iron not only to sense had in it the
requisites that are accounted proper to that Metal, but also really had that
which all account the properties of that Metal, as to endure ignition,
extension by the hammer, and fabrication into instruments, which by being
brought into Copper, has not only a more glorious color than that of Iron,
but will endure ignition even to fusion, and that more easily than any Iron,
and is become more extensible than Iron, and admits of more easy
fabrication into instruments. So that this change, (of what sort soever it be
taken to be) is a meliorating of the thing, a graduating and exalting of it
both in intrinsic and extrinsick virtue, the metallic root or nature still
remaining. So when the Philosophers mention the Transmutation of Metals, as the
changing of Lead or Quicksilver into Gold or Silver, they do but understand a
bettering, exalting, and graduating of them, the metallic root still
remaining: so that there is no such great difference as many ignorantly do
conceive and imagine.

2. Secondly, if they mean (as they seem to hold forth) that no Transmutation
is true, but where all the Atoms and Corpuscles of the Body to be changed, are
every and all of them transmuted, without separating of any of them, or adding
any thing unto them, then we must say, that (as far as we either know or
understand) few such Transmutations will be found in rerum natura, brought to
pass either by Nature or Art. And for the metallic change that the
Philosophers speak of, they never held that all the Atoms or Particles of Lead
and Mercury are transmuted into Sol or Lune, but that the Homogeneous parts
only are, and the Heterogeneous parts separated by the addition of some part
of their Noble Stone, which is not much differing from this mutation of Iron
into Copper.

3. We may consider the manner how this change is done, and that is by taking
it for granted, that in the Iron before it be changed, there are store of
Corpuscles of Copper, as also in the Vitriolate Water, and the Water by its
Acrimony corroding the Iron, and thereby separating the Atoms of the Iron,
those of the nature of Copper residing in the said Water, do substitute
themselves in the place of the Atoms of Iron, being separated; and so being
Atoms of a congruous Figure, Size, and other Properties, do easily couple
themselves together, as being Homogeneal, and refusing others as of a
disagreeing nature. So the Masters do hold that their Stone when exalted and
prepared to the red, is aurum intensum, exuberatum and animatum, as being
indeed brought and wrought from a Golden Seed; and that the Homogeneous Mercury
of all Metals, is in suo interiori of a golden nature, these two easily unite
most closely together, and refuse union with any Heterogeneous body, and so the
manner of both these changes are alike.

4. It would be worth labor to examine the certainty, whether all Iron, or the
Ore from whence it is drawn, have something of the corpuscles of Copper in it,
and (if possible) in what proportion: That thereby it may be considered whether
the atoms of Copper be in the Iron, and the atoms of Iron in the Copper, by
accidental commixture, or that they come to be so by progressive Generation.
And then it may be considered, that where there is particles of Copper and Iron
mixed in one body, which seems to be Iron, and to which we give that
denomination, be when it will, or its Ore is found so, in its ascension or
descension, as the Mineralists speak, that is, whether in continuance of time
more Copper would increase and grow in it, or that in length of time the Copper
Atoms would decay or grow into Iron? A Quaerie that may be necessary for all
Lovers of Mineral knowledge.

5. There is a passage in that profound, though dark piece, written by
Paracelsus, which is commonly called Coelum Philosophorum, or Liber Vexationum,
though some of great judgment call it Liber Fixationum, which here may well be
considered of, Can. 1 p. 121.
and that in this, Omnia sunt in omnibus occultata. Unum ex ipsis omnibus est
occultator eorum, and corporeum vas, extrinsecum, visibile, and mobile. This
hint with diverse others in that obscure and aenigmatical Writing, though not
regarded by many, that are so idle and lazy, that they will not take pains to
break the hard shell, thereby to gain the precious kernel, not minding that
Rosa non nascitur sine spinis, and that Dii sua bona laboribus vendunt, do
sufficiently show, that the nature of Metals is not yet perfectly understood.
And to me by this he seems to intimate that all Metals are hid in all Metals,
and that one is the hider of them. And therefore the question pertinent to this
case, will be, whether the Iron does hide the Copper, or the Copper the Iron,
and so of other Metals; which we shall not decide, but leave it to the judgment
and trial of others.

A third Instance that we shall give, is in an artificial Transmutation (if we
may call it so) and that is of Quicksilver, which is a fluid, open and volatile
metallic body, and yet is and may be by Art brought into a firm, close and
fixed body, De Febrib. c. 14. p. 52.
as Helmont declares thus at large. There is also the Purgation
Diuceltatesson, quae Podagram non minus, quam febres radicitus curat. Ejusque
arcanum corallinum vocatur, quod paratur ex essentia auri Horizontalis, hoc
modo. A Mercurio vulgo venali, abstrahe liquorem Alkahest, cujus meminit 2. de
viribus membrorum, ^, de ^hepate. Quod fit unius horae quadrante. Nam, inquit
Raymundus, astantibus amicis and praesente Rege, coagulavi argentum vivum, and
nemo praeter Regem, scivit modum. In qua coagulatione istud est singular. Quod
liquor Alkahest idem numero, pondere and activitate tantum valet millesima
action, quantum prima. Quia agit sine reactione patientis. Mercurio igitur sic
coagulato, absque ulla coagulantis remanentia, fac inde pulverem minutum, and
destilla ab illo quinies aquam ab albuminibus onorum destillatam, atque Sulphur
Mercurii, quod per sui praefatam coagulationem for as deductum est, fiet
rubicundum instar coralli: and quanquam foeteat aqua albuminum, tamen iste
pulvis dulcis est, fixus, ferens omnem follium ignem, nec perit in plumbi
examine. Spoliat^r tamen virtute medica, dum in album metallum reducitur. A
relation of this notable Experiment and most strange Mutation may also be found
in the Theory of Raymund Lully the 87. Chapter, which the learned Reader may
consult and consider of.

But from hence we shall observe these few things.

1. That this seems to be a more strange mutation than any other we can meet
with, for by this the common Mercury, an open, flu^^ tremulous and volatile
body, is made a shut, firm, settled and fixed body, even to abide all the fire
of the Bellows, and not to perish in the trial of Lead, which is all that
Silver will endure. 2. Here is nothing at all added unto it, but which is again
wholly separated from it, for the Alkahest is drawn of the same in number,
weight and activity, leaving not the least atome remaining with the Mercury:
Whereas in the Transmutation of Metals by the Elixir, the part of the Powder
projected does remain inseparably with the Metal changed, so that of the two,
this act of the liquor Alkahest upon the Mercury is more strange than that of
the Elixir upon another Metal. 3. They agree in this, that in the Transmutation
of Metals by the Elixir, the extraneous Sulphur, and Heterogeneous parts (which
in quantity less or more are in all Metals) are removed and separated, and so
in the fixing of the Mercury the extraneous Sulphur, is extroverted and turned
to the outside, by the operation of the Alkahest, which Sulphur contains in
it the Medical virtue, which by melting down is wasted, consumed, or separated,
and so the change in both is made by separating something from the body
changed, that was in it before. 4. By this it is manifest that in both these
Mutations, the Mercury by the Alkahest, and some other Metal by the Elixir,
both after the change become of less weight than they were before, according to
the quantity of the Heterogeneous parts separated from them. 5. Lastly, The
Mercury is fixed by having the extraneous Sulphur thrust from betwixt the
Homogeneous atoms of the Mercury, and thereby they become more closely united
per minima, which is the cause, or rather the fixation it self: and the
Transmutation of imperfect Metals is not only performed by the Extrusion and
Separation of their combustible Sulphur, whereby their parts may lie more
closely together, but also by the perfect union of the Power projected, with
the Mercury of the Metal changed, being both of one radical nature, and of a
symbolizing and homogeneous quality and condition.
FINIS.
Books Printed for, and Sold by Walter Kettilby, at the Bishops-Head in
Duck-Lane.
DEus Iustificatus: or, The Divine Goodness vindicated and cleared, against the
Assertors of Absolute and Inconditionate Reprobation. With some Reflections on
Mr. Parker's Discourse of the Divine Dominion and Goodness. By Henry Hallywell.
8. The Unjust Man's Doom, as Examined by the several kinds of Christian
Justice, and their Obligation. With a particular Representation of the Danger
and Injustice of partial Conformity. By William Smith, D. D. 8. The Jesuits
Morals, Collected by a Doctor of the College of Sorbon in Paris. Fol. The
Churches Peace, asserted on a Civil account in a Sermon before the Lord Mayor.
June 4. 1669. By A. Littleton, D.D. 4. Institutionum Chronologicarum Libri duo,
una cum Arithmetices Chronologicae Libellis. Per Guilielm. Beveregium. M. A. E
Coll. S. Ioh. Cant. Dissertatio de Vrim and Thummim, in Deuteron. 6.33. v. 8.
in qua de earum Natura, and Origin, non Paucorum Rituum Mosaicarum rations;
and Obscuriora quaedam Scripturae Loca Probabiliter Explicantur. Authore Ioanne
Spencero, S. T. D. 8. A Letter in answer to certain Queries and Objections made
by a Learned Galenist against the Theory and Practice of Chemical Physic. By
George Acton, Doctor in Physic. 4. Buchleri Elegantiae Poeticae. 12.

