A Fresh RELATION FROM THE KINGS ARMY IN SCOTLAND, The Retreat of the Rebels On
their Approach; WITH The Names of such Persons of Quality as have lately Joined
the Rebellious Troops. Being the Tidings brought by the last Express In a
Packet Dated the 20th. of this Instant June 1679. just at Midnight.
SIR,
ACcording to promise in my last, I cannot fail of giving you a particular
Relation of our proceedings; For I do not doubt but all good Subjects in
England are much concerned to be from time to time informed of the true matter
of Fact of such an insolent Rebellion, contrived by restless Spirits, who
(though seemingly composed of different and disagreeing Factions,) can yet like
Herod and Pilate Unite, and be sworn Brothers in Mischief; or like Sampson's
Foxes tied together by the Tails of Disloyal Principles, to raise Combustions,
to discompose the Harmony of that Government to which (though on various
pretensions) they are all equally dangerous and implacable Enemies.

I am not ignorant that there may be some few dissaffected Spirits abroad
amongst You, that may endeavor to stifle and impair the Credit of all
Relations from hence that do not suit with the Seditions Interests; Though I am
satisfied that the Principles of there tumultuous Rebels here, are so different
from the sentiments of those commonly called Presbyterian amongst You in
England that they can have no more concernment in, for kindness for these
Traitorous Assassinates, than all the Nonconformists had for those Madbrain'd
Fifth-Monarchy-men that once attempted to disturb Your Peace. It must be
acknowledged, that many (...) hope the greatest part of Dissenter^ are persons
of peaceable tempers; The Experience they have had of the late Confusion and
Extravagancies of Anarchy, and the Gracious Indulgence of the best of Princes
having calmed the roughness of their Spirits; and reduced them to a due sense
of Moderation and Obedience, since the same (as they must needs perceive,) is
not less their Interest than their Duty.

But to omit these Considerations which do not so immediately concern You and
I, further then as We are good Subjects, and hearty Well-wishers to the true
Protestant Interest which at such a juncture of Time seems not a little
endangered by this Insurrection, though it is not doubted, but by Gods Blessing
on our Arms, it may speedily be suppressed.

I am at present to acquaint you, That on Thursday the 10th, instant, His Grace
the Duke of Monmouth arrived in the Camp at Black-wood, where it was then drawn
up, and spent that Day in giving the necessary Orders preparatory to their
March; which they undertook the next morning, and Encamped near the Kirk-shots
within Six Miles of Hamilton.

Upon the News of our Advance the Rebels disorderly retired from Haggs (where
formerly they were posted) to the said Town of Hamilton and places adjacent,
where they are at present; And we doubt not but the Kings Host will be up with
them some time to morrow, soon after which you may certainly in some few days
hear of some considerable Action, if they dare stand an Engagement.

In the mean time the Lords of His Majesty's Privy Council here are
indefatigable in giving all necessary Orders for sending Provisions and
Ammunition to the Army, and all other things necessary.

The Kings Army daily Increases by the coming in of Fresh Troops from several
Shires with incredible cheerfulness, longing for nothing more than an
opportunity, and command to Attacque the Rebels.

We have just now Information that the Chief persons of Note that have lately
joined the Rebels, are these following, Robert Stewart Brother to the Earl of
Galloway, Mac Dougal of French, Mr. William Ferguson of Kettnoch* but all
Living in Galloway.

There is likewise gone to them one Home of Greden a Tevidale man; Robert
Hamilton Commands them still as General.

But the gross of their Body consists of people of such Profligate Behavior
and lewd and unsettled Principles, that all persons of Considerable Quality or
Sober Conversation, are so far from Encouraging them, that they express the
greatest Abhorhence and Detestation in the World of their Proceedings,

From the Camp near Hamilton, June the 20th. at 12 at Night 1679. SIR, I am
Ever Your Servant T. W.


