THE Poets Complaint, A POEM.

To which is added THE CHARACTER of POETRY; Written in PROSE.

Shadwell, in his Epistle to the Libertine. S' Death! what a Devil would ye
have us do,
Each take a Prison, and there humbly sue,
Angling for single Money in a Shoe.
LONDON, Printed for D. Brown, at the Black-Swan without Temple Bar, 1682.

The Author's EPISTLE To a Person of QUALITY.
SIR,
MY Obedience to your Commands so happily concentring with my inclination, to
this Subject, have in less than three days space producted, what here you see.
To you I need make no Apology for it is artless habit, who very well know my
want of years, and a necessary experience in this Ages humor, having never had
more than two Months conversation in London. But I must confess that was
sufficient to instruct me in this Subject; for among all the Poets I was in
company with, I heard nothing but their complaints, who unmercifully damned
both the times, and one another, neither have I seen a modern Play, but either
begun or ended in the same tune, some of which you will find quoted in this
Poem. And as for the Character of Poetry, it is a piece I had lying by me,
which I think is a more correct and a seriouser thought, than is the Poem, most
of which was writ Ex tempore, and too morrow being the day I take shipping I
wanted leisure to transcribe it. Besides you know I never loved to take much
pains. Then as for my declaring my self a Poet, yet performing it to illy, I
know I must needs seem guilty of a vain ostentation. But you knew before that I
have been above this year an incorrigible scribler. But notwithstanding my
discontents at home, could I any where in England have met with encouragements
any way suitable to my endeavors, I had not in this passion shaken hands with
it. But now I am in have to be gone, yet will ever remain

Your most humble Servant T. W.

THE Poets Complaint.
SInce here I Am banded up and down
By the keen blows of Fortunes frown,
When Art and Nature vainly strive
To make the unhappy Poet live,
I Will fly such native Plagues, as these,
For refuge to the calmer Seas.
And try if bodeing Stars dispense
Every where the same Influence,
Climes vary Constitutions, so
Why may not they change Fortunes too?
Through the habitable World I Will go
And if that fails, I Will search for New.
Wit somewhere has an happy Reign,
Or Nature gives us Thoughts in vain.
Here she her Bounty does provide
For every thing that breaths beside.
The Dunce made Bachelor of Art
Some Fustian Sermon learns by heart:
Then Preaches to a Country-Squire,
Who his deep Learning does admire,
And gives him Six-score pounds a Year.
Then he must marry the Chambermaid
Who is forsooth a Mistress made.
So he goes on with a fair hope,
And of his Pulpit makes a Shop.
Yet he esteems himself but poor:
Your wooden Doctor can do more.
He is a Bishop and can teach
Ye how to Pray, tho he cannot Preach.
That Is how to Pray, and Worship him
Else the old Bard looks monstrous grim.
And to correct ye straight will send
His Excommunic'm Capiend'.
Here perhaps Reader you surmise,
That I the reverend Gown despise;
Whose Royal Function I approve,
Next to the Ministers Above.
All I designed was to debate
On the unequal Acts of Fate,
Who cheisly Fools and Knaves prefer,
Perhaps, 'cause only such do worship Her.
Then there are mighty Peers of the Realm,
Whose conduct helps to steer the Helm:
They Are great pretenders unto Wit.
And that they may seem to encourage it
They Will have a Poet at their Tail:
And that to know him they may not fail,
He has an old fashion threadbare Coat,
Foul Linen, Hat not worth a Groat;
One points and cries, there goes Long-lane,
Another cries, he is Long-and-Lean.
For like one newly fluxt he will crawl,
And lets the Foot-Boys take the Wall.
But when to the Tavern they do go,
Their Honors will more freedom show;
There they may Swagger Swear and Lie,
And do any thing, but Pay:
Damn ye, I dined with such a Lord to Day,
And such a Lord did like my Play:
And without Vanity it is
The best I writ, my Master-peice.
Observe the empty Citizen,
That but in shape excel the Swine:
Those profane Atheists that do hold,
There is no Deity but Gold.
They hate the Poet, 'cause he is poor,
And but the Golden Calf adore.
They say our Plays are wicked dear,
The Expense in Ballads would go far:
And I protest; I Have heard some say,
Plays are a kind of Popery.
IN the City-shops they 're thought profane,
As were Mince-pies in Cromwell's Reign:
Where when for Dryden's Works I came,
They star'd and said they never heard his Name,
But they had Baxter if you please,
And such Diviner things as these.
But from damned Plays L. Mayor defend 'em,
And rather to a Conventicle send 'em.
See how the gaping Merchant range
To hunt his Cully over The Exchange:
Where such a discord they compound,
Like the loud Billows, when your Ships they drowned.
There they more fat in one warm Hour do sweat,
Then a poor Poet in a year can get.
It Is pretty sport to see the Tailer,
The Shoemaker, and Millener,
And every Fop that sells his Ware
Over the poor Poet domineer.
"Is this the Wit? the Devil take it,
"For without question he did make it:
"The truest Wit is Honesty,
"And to get Coin your Debts to pay:
"Wit is an Ass, where Money's slow,
"For it is that makes the Ass to go.
"Why, I am but a mean Tradesman,
"And yet do more than any Poet can.
"I walk the Street, yet fear no Dun
"Nor in their Debts, nor from them run:
"Nor yet for fear of being found out,
"Do I walk half a mile about.
The Bookseller grows fat of the gain,
He sucks from the poor Poets Brain:
He and the Printer, that do know
Nothing beyond the Christ-Cross-Row,
Will their Heads together join
To rob the Poet of his Coin.
He wresty Drudge must toil and sweat,
But honorable stabs to get.
And is forced to sigh and stay
For the Laurels till he is gray.
And at the last together come
To his Honor and his Tomb.
Tho, when dead, his Friends may not raise
Enough to guild his Funeral Bays.
The Quacks as often as they will
Can get Licenses to kill,
Whilst the hungry Poet may
For an Imprimatur slay,
Till he has eaten up his Play.
Nothing that is witty now can pass,
An heavy burden may fit an Ass.
Who if by chance discerns the Wit,
His envious Pen will murder it.
He who himself does guilty know,
No lawful Satyr will allow;
For seeing there his ugly Face,
He will be sure to break the Glass.
I speak not this for all, but one
Whose Malice I Have severely known:
And all because I told not quick
Who is Father to Melchisedeck.
As for his Name leave that alone;
There Is never a Poet in the Town,
But wish the Man they never had known.
But prithee Muse here calm thy Brow,
Least thou should seem Revengeful too.
In every thing but Poetry
Something impossible we see:
Rhet' rick, which we so much adore
N'ere had a perfect Orator.
The lingering Chimist blows his Fire
And waits till his own Lamp expire.
Searching for the enchanted Stone
Till he himself's as cold as one.
The natural Philosopher
About perpetual motion keeps a slir;
But straight his Engines rest obtain,
And all the motion's in his Brain.
How nauseous are Grammatick fools
Armed but with noise and canting Rules?
Where Lilly does debauch poor Verse
And gibberish in Heroic dress.
Astronomy each faith engage,
And with dark Notions cheats the Age.
But take off their disguise, you will see
It is more feigned than Poetry.
Else let it for a certain show
Whether this Globe has wings or no,
Or Ovid blame, who said the Sun
Did run away with Phaeton.
What is Geometry I Would know,
But a salse brat of fancy too?
If it is a Science, let it tell
How far from hence the Stars do dwell,
And the due proportion give between
A direct and a crooked Line.
And what is Logic but a cheat?
Nothing or something worse than it.
A Delphich Sword bent any way,
To make Truth yield to Sophistry.
Arithmetic how little Art!
Poetry is not so confined:
One Unite speak, can all thy Art
To the defects of Nature find.
Ye black Lectures of Mortality,
And of phlegmatic Morality
Adue! Adue! I soar too high
For your short Wings to follow me.
Speak dull Philosopher, what is all
You in mistake do Science call?
Since Socrates with much ado
Learnt only that he nothing knew.
Nothing is unconfined and free
Besides the Soul of Poetry;
When it does on the Organs play,
Throw all your mistick Books away,
And study Natures Library.
Move up to Heavens refulgent Throne,
There by the tab'ring Muses drawn;
First pause a while, then write, and all
The Gods to Convocation call.
Then with impartial Frowns survey
Man varying in Apostasy.
Pity poor Princes that do groan
Under the burden of a Crown
And contemn Riches, which we see
Is but a golden Slavery:
We Are richer far in Poetry.
And when we punish Avarice
It Is only 'cause we 'ld cure the Vice.
But the dull crowd our Power profane,
And say we only Write for gain.
Although Experience proves this sure,
It Is only Writing makes us poor.
Yet we are so just, we will do the Law,
Tho shame is all the gain we draw.
And when we serve them with a Play,
We must like Catch-poles sneak away.
But hold!
I Am almost starved, as I Am a Sinner,
Prithee Jack, trust me for a Dinner.
Poor Poet! what a Wretch thou art grown,
Cast to a Dungeon from a Throne.
You who but now did reach the Sky.
Low as despair condemned to lie.
Those soaring thoughts thou did admire,
With thy Poetic rage expire.
'Twas but a Dream: and now I see
Riddles untie themselves to fetter thee.
The Angels height procured their thrall,
But it is thy lowness makes thee fall.
Had Nature given thee a rich Mine,
Thou of all Fops had happiest been:
Thou had not been exposed thus,
Nor this complaint made thee ridiculous.
But now again my self I grow;
I the Poet am, yet wish I was not so.
Never poor Creature such strange Fortunes had,
A Poet's not himself, unless he is Mad.
Go backward Age, go backward Age,
And to Ben's days reduce the Stage.
Whose easy Palats would commend,
What entertainments Heaven did send.
Judges were then as Ladies now a days,
Whom any thing that is Flesh and Blood can please.
But now a Poet's counted out of fashion,
And Wits the only drug in all the nation.
Nature and Fate such Rivals are
That they cannot Reign in the same Sphere.
And as when Kings each other thwart
The unhappy Subjects feel the smart;
So those to whom Nature is kind
Must fortunes rage and malice find;
And till these friends and partners grow,
Who can have Wit and Money too?
I Have often heard this question rise,
Whether Wit made Men Poor, or Poverty Men Wise?
'Twas Poverty first me a Poet made,
And I Would fain know him who is rich of the Trade.
But if the World has such a Creature,
He is a Monster and not made by Nature.
Poets must break before they well can do,
And a great trade will make them bankrupts too,
They are good Chimists, tho, they do not know
To make imperfect Metals current grow,
Yet what you give them, they will straight turn to Sack,
Nay if there is need, the very cloths of the back.
Then with that Sack they will wondrous things prepare,
They Will Castles build, nay Kingdoms in the Air,
And give themselves vast Lordships there.
And since they here so disagree
About a paltry Lawrel-tree,
I wonder what a Devil will they do,
When they hereafter to their lands will go?
But now I think on it they will be all Gods there,
And every one will have a distinct Sphere.
For those great Deities of which we read,
Were by the Almighty Poets made;
And they who did those God-heads make,
May at their pleasure take them back.
Honest dear Reader, do not call
This Author mean and pitiful,
Tho he has spoken in his rage
The damned dull humor of the Age;
Yet by these following lines you will see
His excellent good Company.
Quotations.
Lacy in his Prologue to Monsieur Rogolle.
I Am a Poet, and I Will prove it plain,
Both by my empty Purse and empty Brain.
I Have other Symptoms to confirm it too,
I Have Great and Self-Conceit of what I do.
I have my little Cullies too in the Town
Both to admire my Works and lend a Crown.
My Poets Day I Morgage to some Citt,
At least six Months before my Play is Writ;
And on that day away the Poet runs,
Knowing full well, in Sholes come all his Duns.
If these things make me not a proper Poet,
He that has better Title let him show it.
Lacy in his Prologue to Pastor Fido.
WHO would not damn a silly Rhiming Fop?
When there is scarce a Foreman of a Shop,
With Sense of Animal and Face of Stoic,
But Courts poor tawdry Sempstress in Heroic:
Will make you Rhimes on Cakes and Ale, rehearse
An Holyday-Treat at Islington in Verse.
Otway in his Prologue to the Cheats of Schapin.
NOW Wit is grown so common, let me die,
Gentlemen scorn to keep it Company.
Leonard in his Prologue to the Country Innocence.
NEver was Wit so much abused before;
The Trade's grown common, and the gilting Whore
Debauched in every Street, at every Door.
Sir Charles Scroop in his Prologue to Alexander.
HOW hard the Fate is of that Scribbling Drudg,
Who writes to all and yet so few can judge?
Wit, like Religion, once Divine was thought,
And the dull Crowd believed as they were taught;
Now each Fanatic Fool pretends to 'xplain
The Text, and does the sacred Wit profane.
Idem.
THen Fencer-like they one another hurt,
And with their Wounds, they make the Rabble Sport.
In the Prologue to the Debauchee.
-- A Poet's such a Tool,
Fit to make nothing till he is made a Fool.
Dryden to Lee on his Alexander.
SO many Candidates there stands for Wit,
A place in Court is scarce so hard to get.
Desert, how known so'ere, is long delayed,
And then too Fools and Knaves are better paid.
Lee in his Epilogue to Alexander.
-- How ought they to be cursed,
Who this censorious Age did polish-first.
Who the best Play for one poor Error blame,
As Priests against our Ladies Art declaim,
And for one Patch both Soul and Body damn.
In the Prologue to the Morning Ramble.
Poets we justly may Wits Bubles call,
For they to almost nothing Venture all,
Hard Fate have they above all men beside,
Behind some Curtain still their Faults do hide,
Statesmen their Errors on their Agents lay,
It Is chance of War makes Soldiers loose the Day.
And the Physicians Shame Death sweeps away:
But every Fool finds fault with every Play.
Things being so, it cannot be denied,
But to be Poet is a Man's Blind-side.
This is the Cause, why active Times produce
The fewest Writers to the Stages use.
Sir Charles Sidly.
It Is well that Wit has something of the Mad,
Else how could Poets for the Stage be had?
Dryden in his Prologue to Circe.
-- The Brothers of the Trade.
Who scattering their Infection through the Pit,
With aching Hearts, and empty Purses sit.
Settle in his Prologue to the Conquest of China.
WHen our Forefathers did our Judges sit,
And Spite and Malice were not counted Wit;
Men's Appetites lay quite another way,
They went to'a Playhouse then to like a Play,
They came to meet Diversion from the Stage,
But it is not that which brings them here this Age.
That Mode of liking Plays is as much out
As it is to go to Church to be Devout.
Fancy and Wit can no more please them here,
Than Faith and Reason can persuade them there.
Shadwell in his Prologue to the Virtuoso.
NOW Drudges of the Stage must often appear,
They must be bound to Scrible twice a Year.
And like the Thred-bareVicar, who must Toil,
Whilst the Fat Lazy Doctor bears the Spoil.
Dryden in his Prologue to --
THE Clergy thrive and the Litigious Bar:
Dull Heroes fatten on the Spous of War.
All Southern Vices, Heav'u be praised, are here,
But Wit and Luxury they count too deer.
In the Prologue to the Rehearsal.
IF it be true that monstrous Births Presage
The following Mischiefs that afflict the Age;
And sad Disasters to the State Proclaim:
Plays without Head or Tail may do the same.
Wherefore for ours and for our Countries Peace,
Let this Prodigious way of Writing cease.
Let Us have at least once in our Lives a Time,
When we may have some Reason, not all Rhyme.
Dryden in his Epilogue to the Indian Queen.
Their Confidence
Is placed in lofty Sounds and humble Sense.
Then see the little Infants of the Time,
That write New Songs, and Trust in Tune and Rhyme.
Lacy in his Prologue to the Dumb Lady.
HEre I am, and not ashamed who know it,
I humbly come your forma Pauper is Poet.
Crown in his Prologue to the Country-Wit.
THE Mighty Wits now come to a New Play,
Only to taste the Scraps they throw away;
Poets now Treat them at their own Expense,
All but the Poets now abound in Sense.
City and Country now with Wit's o'reflown,
Weeds grow no faster there, than Wits in the Town.
Plays are so common, they are little prized,
And to be but a Poet is despised.
In the Epilogue to the Morning Hamble.
Some dare say
They have not seen of late a good New Play.
Not but this Age has many Men as Wise,
But wisely they this begging Art despise.
And two to one was Shakesphear here to Day,
He Would have more Wit than e're to Write a Play.
Whicherley in his Prologue to Love in a Wood.
YOU hardened Renegado Poets, who
Treat Rhiming Brothers worse than Turks would do.
See we in vain your Pity now would crave,
Who for your Selves, alas! no Pity have,
And your own grasping Credit will not save.
In the Epilogue to the Dutch Lover.
Hlss 'em and Cry 'em down, it is all in Vain,
Incorrigible Scriblers cannot refrain.
But impudently in the old Sin engage,
Tho doomed before, nay banished from the Stage.
Durfey in his Prologue to the Fond Husband.
ADulterate Age! where Prudence is a Vice,
And Wit's as scandalous as Avarice.
Yet in despite of this, you are Poets too;
And what two Fops rail at, a third will do.
Upon our Privileges you encroach,
And with dull Rhymes, the Noble Art debauch.
The APOLOGY To the Quoted POETS.
SIrs I expect tho not deserve your Frown;
Lest 'cause I Have mixed your Muses with my own.
Not that I dared to touch your Character,
Who want not Praise, nor can a Censure fear.
All I designed, was to agree with you,
And mean the self same Persons that You do.
Not that I think you on each other fall;
If so, some Critic may suspect ye all.
But I your Names with Sacred Thoughts adore;
Yet should I happen to profane your Power,
You Have no redress we are so far apart;
I fear no Wounds from any English Dart:
For e're the Printer will to Finis come,
On the Loud Seas I cannot hear the Storm.
Yet was I Conscious of a Guilt so high,
I Would with Winged Have to Rome's great Idol fly,
And on his Toe would Kiss the sin away.
THE CHARACTER OF POETRY.
THat which gave Birth to Poetry, and has supported its Reputation among the
most Ingenious of every Age, is the desire of Imitation which is interwoven
with every Man's Essence. Hence we admire the well-drawn Pictures of those dead
Bodies, whose Original we have in Horror. And we are ravished to hear the Voice
of a Swine Naturally counterfeited, tho we hate it in that Animal. So Poetry
and Painture in some manner expresses every thing that is done in Nature.
Whence Poetry is termed a speaking Picture, and a Picture dumb Poetry. And the
Word Poet does not signify one that Feigns but one that Makes. As when he
speaks of a Tempest, he must make the Winds Mutiny, Ships Split, Mountains of
Water Clash, and loose themselves in Gulfs. Which makes Poetry so difficult,
and consequently so rare and admirable, that few succeed well in it.

Another Excellency in Poetry is its Harmony, Natural not only to Man; but to
the meanest Individual, which God has created in Number and Measure: Which
made the Pythagoreans say, that not only the Celestial Bodies make a most
agreeable Consort, but also the Plants by their Proportions, and the Beasts by
their Motions, chant measured Odes in praise of their Creator. Therefore with
more Reason must Man (whose Soul is a number moveing of it self) be delighted
with numerous Language, which is Poetry, the most sensible Effect of that
Divine Harmony, which is infused into his Body. And we may make a Judgment of
good from vulgar Wits by their Delight or Disaffection to Poetry. For if a Man
ought to be regular in his Actions, Why not in his Words? the Image of his
Reason, as Reason is of his Soul. As if you should say that the well regulated
Dance of a Ball, ought to be less prized than an ordinary Walk, or
Country-Dance.

Moreover Poetry has such power over Men's Minds, that Tyrtoeus animated his
Soldiers to fight by the rehearsal of his Verses; which was also the Custom of
the Germans, when they were to charge their Enemies. Moses, David, and many
other Prophets accounted nothing more worthy than Poetry, to sing the Praises
of God. And the first Poets, as Musoeus, Orpheus and Linus were the Divines of
Paganism. Yea the Gods of Antiquity affected to deliver their Oracles in Verse.
So did Legislators their Laws to render them more venerable.

Besides they greatly help the Memory; the Cadence or Measure serving as a Rule
to the Mind to keep it from being at a loss. Poetry alone among all the Arts
supplies Praise to Virtue, the Rampant Style of Rhetorical Discourse, tho it
borrow its fairest Flowers and square Periods from Poetry, being not comparable
to it, which is far more sublime, and consequently more fit to immortalize the
Memory of Heroic Actions. Upon which account the Muses were believed the
Daughters of Mnemosyne or Memory. Tho Poets have been sometimes expelled out of
States, so have Philosophers, Physicians, Mathematicians, and many other
Professors of Arts, acknowledged nevertheless useful to Humane Society. If some
of them have been Lascivious, others Impious, others Slanderous, those are the
Faults of the Poets not Poetry. And as the more delicate any wine is, the more
hurtful its Excess is to the Body; so Poetry is so much the more excellent by
how much its abuse is noxious. Plato, who advised the banishing of it out of
his imaginary Common- Wealth, calling it a sweet Poison, deserved more than it
to be really interdicted. There not being in all the Poets such Fables,
Impieties and Impurities, as that of his Convivium, his Phoedrus, and some
other Pieces. In the mean time he is forced to admire them, to call them the
Sons and Interpreters of the Gods, yea Divine and the Fathers of Wisdom. For
the Raptures cannot be called Folly, unless in that Sense as Aristotle says,
To Philosophize well, a Man must be besides himself. But there Wisdom being
extreme, and their Motions unknown to the vulgar, therefore they call that
Fury, which they ought to call the highest pitch and point of Wisdom, termed
Enthusiasm or Divine Inspiration, because it surpasses the reach of Man. And
indeed every one acknowledges in Poetry some Character of Divinity. And
therefore it is received by all the World, and serves for a guide and introducer
to great Persons, who otherwise would not give audience, but like that well in
Verse, which they would blame in Prose. Which obliged Sylla to reward the Good,
that they might be encouraged to continue their Divine Works, and the bad Poets
on condition that they made no more. And it is of these, as of some Rhymes of
our times that they speak, who blame Poetry; in whose reproaches the true Poets
are no more concerned than Physicians in the infamy of Mountebanks. The Fables
of the Ancient Poets are full of Mysteries, and serve for ornament to the
Sciences, and to Divinity it self. Nor has variety of Wit appeared in any
Science more than Poetry, which serves not barely to teach and instruct, as the
other Liberal Sciences, but withal to recreate and delight, which is an
excellent Method to prevent the Disgust, which Disciplines bring even in their
Rudiments.

And if they have complained in all Ages of not advancing their fortunes, this
does not argue any demerit of theirs, but rather the want either of judgment or
gratitude in others.

FINIS.

