C. R.

CHARLES the Second by the Grace of God, King of England, Scotland, France and
Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc. To all to whom these Presents shall come,
Greeting. Whereas JOHANNES SEGERVS WEIDENFELD Gent. has by his humble Petition
represented unto us, That with much Study, and great Expense he has composed a
Tract De Secretis Adepto^um, which he is desirous to Print in Our Dominions,
and has therefore humbly besought us to grant unto him Our Royal License and
Privilege for the sole Printing and Publishing thereof: We have received good
Testimony of the Usefulness of the said Tract, and being willing to give all
fitting Encouragement to such commendable Works; have thought fit to condescend
to that his Request; and We do accordingly hereby grant Our Royal License and
Privilege unto him the said JOHANNES SEGERVS WEIDENFELD, his Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, for, and during the space of fourteen Years, to be
computed from the day of the first setting forth of the same: And Our Royal
Will and Pleasure is, and We do hereby Require and Command, That during the
said Term of Fourteen Years, no Printer, Publisher, or other Person whatsoever,
being our Subjects, do presume to Imprint, or cause to be Imprinted without the
Knowledge and Consent of him the said JOHANNES SEGERVS WEIDENFELD, his
Executors, Administrators, or Assigns, the aforesaid Tract, or any Part
thereof, or to sell the same, or to import into our Kingdom of England any
Copies thereof, Imprinted in any Parts beyond the Seas, upon pain of the Loss
and Forfeiture of all Copies so Imprinted, Sold, or Imported, contrary to the
Tenor of this Our Royal License, and of such other Penalties as the Laws and
Statutes of this Our Realm will inflict: And of this Our Pleasure, the Master,
Wardens and Assistants of the Company of Stationers, are to take Notice, that
the same may be Entered in their Register, and due Obedience be yielded
thereunto. Given at Our Court at Windsor, the 18th. Day of August 1684. in the
Six and Thirtieth Year of Our Reign.

By His Majesty's Command. SUNDERLAND.

FOUR BOOKS OF JOHANNES SEGERVS WEIDENFELD, Concerning the SECRETS of the
ADEPTS; OR, Of the Use of Lully's Spirit of Wine: A PRACTICAL WORK. With very
great Study Collected out of the Ancient as well as Modern FATHERS of ADEPT
PHILOSOPHY, Reconciled together, BY Comparing them one with another, otherwise
disagreeing, and in the newest Method so aptly digested, that even young
Practitioners may be able to discern the Counterfeit or Sophistical
Preparations of Animals, Vegetables and Minerals, whether for Medicines or
Metals, from True; and so avoid Vagabond Impostors, and Imaginary Processes,
together with the Ruin of Estates.

ISAACUS HOLLANDUS.

2. Oper. Miner. Cap. 3. Page 420. Vol. 3. Theatr. Chym.

I discoursed you plainly, using no Allegories; should I tell you of Selbach,
Kalcabria, Manessi, and of a red Matter, or of the Sky-colored Muerach,
Illabar, and Calfaria, or the like, you would not easily apprehend me; but I
have opened you the way, and removed every Obstacle, that you may not err.

London, Printed by Will. Bonny, for Tho. Howkins in George-Yard in
Lombard Street, MDCLXXXV.

Authori Sacrum.
QUod nemo est ausus citior, quod nemo Sophorum
Praestitit, in calamo claret in orb tuo
Hactenus in sophicis sparsim tumulata tenebris
Ars jacuit, dubiis inveterata strophis.
Fabula nasutis; avidisque Tarantula stultis;
Oedipus ignaris; and Labyrinthus avis.
Hic asinum fingebat equum, mox certior alter
Pone aures leporem se tenuisse putat.
Sic inhians Lapidi, Lapidis vice volvere saxum
Conatur chymici nescia turba gregis.
Hoc quantum tua nunc removendo industria saxo
Contribuat, sophiae judicat ipse tyro.
Semisophique tuos psallent sine fraud labores,
Very candoris propria signa tui.
Et ciniflona cohors, exspes, prostrata, resumptis
Viribus, antiquum (macte!) subibit onus.
Ne vero sine re sis infelicior ipsis,
Perge laborantem continuare manum,
Participesque Sacro digitos carbone notare,
Ut videant sibi Te reddere nolle parem.
Quo tua sedulitas tibi nomen and omen Adepti
Aspirante Dei conciliabit open.
Posteraque emeritas cantabit natio lauds
Et referet grates ubere dote pias.
Sic Amico suo cecinit ALBERTVS OTHO FABER, Reg. Maj. Britannicae Med. Ordinar.

To the Right Honorable ROBERT BOIL, A CHIEF MEMBER OF THE ROYAL SOCIETY:
Long Life and Health.
THE Arcanums of Paracelsus being applauded by many men with so many and such
ample Encomiums, yet not enough, incited me Ten Years since, first to undertake
the consulting of Paracelsus himself about his Medicines. Two Years thereof had
elapsed, in which I turned over his Books day and night, with an indefatigable
and invincible Mind, yet with unequal Success, and scarce any Benefit at all:
For in the Books of Paracelsus, besides the usual way of concealing Secrets,
common to the Adepts, I found another much greater difficulty withal, yet less
frequented by the Adepts; Paracelsus, as Corrector of the Adepts, having
proposed to himself therein, the instructing of not only raw initiated
Scholars, but even expert Masters of the more secret Chymy, and for this reason
he abbreviates his Receipts with wonderful Accurtations, Learned indeed to the
Learned, but to us seem as lame and impe^fect; and besides, they are so
disguised with most intricate Terms of the true Philosophical Chymy, as to
illude not only shallow, but profound Capacities: Which Impossibility (I had
almost said) of understanding, Paracelsus aggravates, by intermixing Common
with Secret Receipts; which is not for a Scholar, but a most experienced Master
to distinguish.

But of these Difficulties, the first and greatest Obstacle withal, was my own
unhappy Preconception of some Alkahest: For being now out of the hope of
attaining to the preparation of this Liquor by other men's Books, as well as
Paracelsus his own De Viribus Membrorum, I betook my self to other places,
treating of the Circulatum minus, and Specificum corrosivum (as synonimous
Terms of the Alkahest with some men) to which I added the Aqua or Oleum Salis,
Aqua Comedens, Aqua Regis, Circulatum majus, and one after another, being
persuaded that some one only universal Menstruum was intended by all, that I
might find the Method of preparing this Liquor in all places compared together,
which I could not in each severally; but at length despairing, and being
overcome by the manifold and almost incredible, yet unsuccessful pains I took,
I resolved to decline Chymy and Medicine, as Arts too deep for my
understanding: When behold! on a sudden the Eyes of my Mind were opened, and I
saw all these things differ, not in name only, but also in matter, preparation
and use; so instead of one Liquor Alkahest, which I sought for, I found in
Paracelsus many Menstruums, with the several Uses of them all in Medicine; now
knew I how to prepare, and according to Paracelsus, distinguish things into
Essences, Magisteries, Astrums, Arcanums, and those which he calls the less
Medicines; so that which was in Paracelsus most difficult to be understood by
others, became more clear to me than any thing else; and so I obtained the End
sooner than the Beginning: Yet the Joy from thence accrewing, fell shorter than
expectation; for having tried several Experiments in vain, I came to understand
that these Menstruums of Paracelsus contained something abstruse and unknown,
to be understood, not in the least according to the Letter: whereupon,
examining them more exactly, and comparing their Qualities with the Nature of
the Liquor Alkahest, I found a vast difference between it and them; for it is
said, There is one Liquor Alkahest, and that universal; but many are the
Menstruums of Paracelsus, that indestructible, that destructible; that not
mixing with Bodies, these abiding with them; that preserves the Virtues of
things, these alter them; that ascends after the Essences of things in
destillation, these before their dissolutions, etc. I was at a stand sometime
which part to take; one while I wished for one indestructible Liquor, rather
than many destructible Menstruums, supposing that one better than many; another
while changing my Mind, I desired the Menstruums, as sufficient for many Uses I
knew before.

Truth overcame at length, enabling me now to demonstrate the most, if not all
the Medicines of Paracelsus in Guido and Basilius: On the contrary, I perceived
the Arcanums of Paracelsus, (commonly so called) as prepared by that Liquor
Alkahest, or the like, to be more and more different, yea contrary to the
Authentic: wherefore as to the Preparation of Medicines, I began to abstain,
yea desisted from further enquiring into the obscure Matter, Preparation and
Use of that Liquor Alkahest, namely, that which I find described in one place
of Paracelsus as a Medicine, but not in the least as a Menstruum: Which
Obstacle being removed, I found an easy way from Paracelsus to Lully,
Basilius, and other Philosophers of the same Faculty, who I saw agreed all
unanimously in confirmation of the Paracelsian Menstruums; yea Light adding
Light to Light, appeared so clear, that their preparation, variety, simple and
literal sense showed themselves all at once, one only Word remaining unknown,
yet expressing the universal Basis of all the Adepts, and that is Spirit of
Wine, not Common, but Philosophical; which being known and obtained, the
greatest Philosophical, Medicinal, Alchymical, and Magical Mysteries of the
more secret Chymy, will be in the power of the Possessor. In no Books of the
Adepts, hitherto known of me, have I found any thing rare, that owes not its
original Being to this Spirit; so that I dare affirm, that whatsoever Chemical
Spirits lower and higher, fixed and volatile, are able to do, the very same,
and more will this our Spirit perform: This it was that moved me to employ all
my Study and Endeavors, turning over every Stone in quest of the Spirit of
this Wine, and continually ruminating upon those abstruse, and variously
disguised Terms whereby they clouded it, as the Key of all Philosophy, behold
the Fame of your great Name welcomed me to Wild, the Metropolis of Lithuania;
and observing that You in expounding Natural Philosophy, abstained from all
manner of Intricacy, and as the first and only Person indeed using a plain and
candid Series of Words in applying common Examples of Vulgar Chemistry, I
rejoiced with my self, thinking, What could not this great man do, if Master of
the more secret Chymy? I resolved with my self therefore to take a Journey into
England, for your sake alone, that I might confer with you about the Menstruums
as well as Medicines, and other Secrets of Paracelsus; from whom also I
promised to my self very great Assistance in some other things not yet known:
Nor indeed has my hope deceived me; for besides the easy admission, common to
all Strangers and Foreigners, you have been pleased to vouchsafe me a more free
Access, received me courteously, and commended my Studies, and thereby raised
my Mind to greater Things: Which Favors do oblige me to Dedicate this part of
my Studies to you your self; Earnestly and Humbly beseeching you kindly to
accept it, and continue your Love and Friendly Countenance to him that is and
ever will be

Your Honor's Most Obedient Servant, J. S. W.

TO THE STUDENTS OF THE MORE Secret Chymy.
UNder Heaven is not such an Art, more promoting the honor of God, more
conducing to Mankind, and more narrowly searching into the most profound
Secrets of Nature, than is our true and more than laudable Chymy. This is it
which shows the Clemency, Wisdom, and Omnipotence of the Creator in the
Creatures; which teaches not only Speculation, but also Practice and
Demonstration, the Beginning, Progress, and end of things; which restores our
Bodies from infinite Diseases, as by common means intolerable to pristine
health, and diverts our Minds from the Cares and Anxieties of the World (the
Thorns and Briars of our Souls) to Tranquillity of Life, from Pride to Humility,
from the Love and Desire of worldly Wealth to the Contempt thereof: And in a
word, which raises us from earth to heaven; Yet for all that may we say of it
with the same truth, that amongst all the Arts, which have yielded any benefit
or profit to the World, there is none, by which less honor has hitherto
accrued to God Almighty, and less utility to mankind; for lest a Science of so
great dignity and utility should be too common, or ill managed by the ignorant
and impious, the prudent Possessors of the same made it their business so to
describe it, as to make it known to their Disciples only, but exclude unworthy
altogether from it: But in process of time, the Adepts arriving to a greater
perfection of Knowledge and Experience, invented sometimes one, some^imes
another shorter Method in their Work, altering Fornaces, Fires, Vessels,
Weights, yea, and the Matter it self; who being thereby also constrained to
make new Theories and Terms of Art, according to the new invented Practice, it
happened, that the Scholar of one Adept understood not the new Theory, much
less the practice of another; which also sometimes happened to the Adepts
themselves, those especially, which were under the document of some certain
Patron in some particular Method and Process; for they had not the power of
discerning further than they had learnt; whereupon they commonly suspected all
the Notions of other men, especially those that differed from theirs, though in
themselves good and right, as fallacious and contrary to Nature, or applied
other men's Theories, Sentences, and Terms of Art unknown to themselves, to
their own private Process, with which they were acquainted, as I shall by many
Examples elsewhere declare; by which very thing they involved this Art in such
a Chaos of obscurity, that hitherto neither Masters nor Scholars have scarce
had the power of communicating any benefit to the learned World.

It is to be wondered at, but rather lamented, to see such imperfect
Philosophical Systems, as have been hitherto bequeathed to us by the Masters of
this Art, not seldom contradicting both Nature and themselves, whereas the
Miracles of Nature might by virtue of this Art have been truly and plainly
without any convulsion or contraction of words expressed; in which respect I
dare, with Philosophical License here affirm, that most of the Adepts have by
their Writings declared themselves to the World better Chemists than
Philosophers.

For what I pray could they have better done in Medicine, than to have applied
themselves to this Subject, imitating the diligence and industry of Paracelsus?
But alas! amongst all, I find perhaps three or four, who have been careful and
cordial herein; and therefore the less to be admired, that this noble and
necessary Art, has made no greater progress, witness Common Chemistry, where
the names of famous Medicines are noised about, themselves being unknown, and
Shells given for Kernels.

Lately indeed we had not only hope, but promises also from the Rosy-Crucian
Fraternity, as if they had a mind to make this our Age more happy by their
Studies; but no effect being hitherto heard of, we cannot but fear, their fair
promises will never be performed.

On the contrary, Experience teaches, that instead of an universal good
derived from the Fountain of this Art, the World has rather been involved by
it in great and many Miseries: for the Adepts affirming, yea more than often
with oaths confirming, that they in their Writings treated more clearly and
truly of the Art, than any other Philosophers, have thereby instigated many
young Novices of all Degrees and Faculties, to begin their Chemical Labors
according to the Method of their Prescriptions, exposing themselves not only to
intolerable Expenses, but also being as it were obstinate in a certain
confidence of their understanding the Authors genuine meaning, do rather die
amongst the Coals and Fornaces, than recede from their Imaginations, once
imprinted in them for true: Whereupon some of the more Learned Inquirers
ruminating with themselves, how rarely, and with what great difficulty some of
the Adepts attained to the Art by the reading of Books only, thought it a point
of Prudence to desert the Authors, together with their Books, persuading
themselves to be able to find out a nearer and easier way by virtue of their
own Genius and Reason, trying, repeating, altering, etc. Experiments and
Conclusions; but herein were they disappointed of their desired success, no
less than as a Mariner sailing without a Compass, and so such Inquirers would
have acted more advisedly, if they had inquired in themselves, whether they had
overcome all the Difficulties obvious to them, before they applied themselves
to this more secret Art, and doubtless many of them would have hearkened to the
Counsel of Theobald of Hohenland (who copiously described the Difficulties of
this Art collected out of Philosophers Books) and avoided it, as worse than the
Plague, or a Serpent: For who of you (says our Savior) intending to build a
Tower, will not first sit down, and compute the Charge, whether he has
wherewith to finish it, lest having laid the Foundation, and not being able to
perfect it, all that beheld it, should begin to deride him, saying, That man
began to build, and could not finish the Building, Luke 14.38.

But I am sensible that these Admonitions will rather be slighted than
accepted, especially by those who are loath to have the magnificent Towers
built by themselves in the Air, demolished: For notwithstanding the
impossibility of removing the aforesaid difficulties by some men, they
endeavor to persuade others, that they can teach them, what as yet they know
not themselves, and so will rather persist in deceiving, than desist from that
which they know to be Weakness and Error: Others think themselves very able to
overcome all manner of difficulties, and therefore it is in vain to dissuade
them from this Art: Others indeed perceiving all the difficulties, and an
undoubted incapacity in themselves of facilitating them, are, though free from
all fraud and arrogance, yet by some natural or secret impulse so incited to
this Art, as not to be driven from it by any Argument.

Wherefore having a sense of the frailty which mankind is afflicted with, to
them will I dedicate my Studies relating to Medicine. Deceivers I will
restrain, shame those that ascribe more to themselves than due; but the true
Disciples of this Art, I will lead by the hand, that they may not for the
future be subject to the derision, reproaches and scoffs of Satyrs, together
with the loss of health, as well of Mind as Body, and at length verify in
themselves the lamentable Prediction of Geber, saying, Most miserable and
unhappy is he, whom, after the end of his work, God denies to see the Truth,
for he ends his Life in Error; who being constituted in perpetual labor, and
surrounded with all manner of Misfortune and Infelicity, loses all the Comfort
and Joy of this World, and spends his Life in Sorrow, without any benefit or
reward, Lib. 2. Invest. cap. 38. So with the same Argument will I vindicate
this the best of Arts from the Injuries of Defamers, who being deceived, by not
knowing the Principles, accuse it as fraudulent, impossible, and so ridiculous,
as that they deter the Lovers of it, and incite them to vilify all the
demonstrations and famous Testimonies of the same; and lastly, That the Honor
and Glory of God hitherto buried in the Ashes of it, may from thence rise
again, as a Phoenix, I will set before your eyes, that which you have not been
hitherto able to find in so many Volumes of this Art, namely, Diana naked, or
without Clothes; that is, I will take from her Face and Body, the Vizards of
Tropes, Figures, Parables, barbarous Names, etc. by which she has been
hitherto disguised, lest she should be obvious to the knowledge of wicked men.
I will expose Diana to you, namely, the very Truth of our Art (with so much
study and labor sought in vain) not covered indeed so much as with the Veyl of
necessary expression, but her most secret parts shall be exposed to your view,
concerning which the Adepts gave exceeding caution to their Disciples, adding a
Curse withal, not to divulge them to the unworthy Rabble. Wherefore if you
desire to know the Menstruums of Diana, wherewith the Adepts prepared their
Philters, the Liquors of Life and Death, if you would know the way how they
prepared their Tinctures, either universal or particular for Metals; if lastly,
you covet to know how they made precious Stones, Pearls, perpetual Lights,
together with other Secrets of the Art, read the Receipts of the four Books
following; Receipts I say, which were either not understood, or altogether
slighted by almost all of you, because of the ruggedness of their Style, which
sometimes also you esteemed vain, false, and impossible, compiled in a manner
merely to deceive you; yet most true, collected not out of trivial vulgar
Chemistry, but out of the best Books of the best Adepts, the Treasury of Diana;
Receipts, I say, so concatenated and elaborated by as well the congruity, as
wonderful dexterity of the Masters, that where you take away or deny one of
them, you cannot but reject all the rest as false: on the contrary, he that
owns one amongst all to be true, must repute all the rest true; and
consequently vindicate the Authors of them, our most venerable Masters from all
the Infamy of Lying and Scurrility. Variety springing out of Unity, the
Fountain of Truth, and returning into it, as into its Ocean, illustrates the
excellency of those Receipts: I could never yet satisfy my self, whether there
be infinite, or only one Receipt in our Chymy, divided into diverse parts, and
designed for several Uses: Variety I observe in the various and distinct parts
of these four Treatises, but Unity in every part, yea in the Individual of
every Part, you will always find three confirming one Treatise: In the the
First Book of Menstruums, you will find also the Medicines of the Second, and
Alchymical Tinctures of the Third, and Secrets of the Fourth Book; which very
thing is also to be understood of the Second, Third and Fourth Books. Lastly,
These Receipts are not only true, but also clear, described by plain and common
Words, to be understood not only according to the Letter, but also by their
clearness, illustrating and explaining Places more obscure otherwise not
intelligible, so that by one only Process you will sometimes explain more than
ten Theoretical Books, never explicable but by this Light.

Now these Receipts I was willing to communicate to you, ye indefatigable
Students of this Art, for the Reasons already given, as also that you may
thoroughly apprehend the absolute necessity of Lully's Spirit of Wine in our
Chymy, before I treat with you concerning the Matter and Preparation of it. No
man desires that which is unknown to him, or pursues that which he knows not
the benefit of: Wherefore I was desirous first to demonstrate the several Uses
of this Spirit by the Experiments of the Adepts, which if you find true, they
will be of such service to you hereafter, as to be much to your detriment to be
without them; but if false, slight and give no credit to them, but accuse the
Masters, the Authors of them, of Lying, Deceit and Villainy; but such wickedness
I never expect from you, whatsoever Adversaries, the blind and ignorant of this
Art, will do, we little regard, and if a Zoilus or Momus appear according to
his Custom, let him chaw the Shell, that is, the homely Style, the slender and
slight Observations and Conclusions given upon the Receipts, all which we give
him freely; but touch the Kernel he cannot.

But if either now or hereafter you reap any joy or benefit by the sight of
Diana, attribute it not to Diana, though of Ephesus, nor to me, but to God
Almighty, who has by his Light brought us out of this Cimmerian Darkness: The
time perhaps will come, wherein I may be further useful and assistant, in
procuring liberty for you to embrace Diana in your Arms, as also discourse
familiarly with her concerning her Doves, Forest, Fountain, Milk, Aqua vitoe,
etc. for at present you read the Inscription upon her Forehead, Touch me not.
Wherefore I advise you, not to touch the Secrets of Diana unless you have to
try the Fate and Fortune of Acteon.

Inscius Actaeon vidit sine vest Dianam,
Praeda suis canibus non minus ille fuit.
Actaeon, hunting in the Woods alone,
When he the naked Goddess saw unknown,
He (for who could her Fury stay?)
Was to her Fury and his Dogs a Prey.
We may indeed behold her, but not embrace her yet a while; for this is
permitted to none but Adepts, and such as are Masters of the Philosophical
Wine; but if you object with the Poet, Quid juvat Aspectus, si non conceditur
Vsus?
It Is not the Sight, but Use that gives Delight.


To these Things I answer you, That by viewing Diana naked,

1. You will find, that all the Secrets of Chymy depend upon one only Center of
the Art. namely, the Spirit of Philosophical Wine.

2. You will understand, that all the Preparations of all the Secrets are done
according to the signification of the Words.

3. You will perceive, that all Processes of what Method and Matter soever, if
not without the Spirit of Philosophical Wine, are true, and will never be false.

4. Whatsoever is rare or select, dispersed here and there by the best of the
Adepts, you will have here picked and digested into order, so, as that there
will be nothing wanting, but the enjoyment of them

5. You will moreover have the convenience of choosing the best and shortest out
of all the Processes.

6. Or you will be enabled to find out also more of your selves, if these
please you not.

7. You will see that he who has performed even the least thing in this Art,
may consequently also perform the greatest.

8. One only clear Process will open the understanding of more, otherwise most
obscure.

9. You may know also, that the Adepts themselves have been sometimes in the
dark, and oftentimes understood not the style of another Writing: That some
have corrected others, and so made the Art more perfect.

10. And to say all at once; No man, though never so Learned, though never so
Eloquent, though never so subtle an Impostor, will be able for the future,
either by his Authority, Persuasion, or subtilty, to deceive any man, and drive
him out of our common Road into an untrodden Path, except he be willing himself.

Nor will you alone be free from the Deceipts of other men, but your own
Mistakes also; by which you have hitherto most miserably lost all, Time, Pains,
Money, Health, and what not? You have made your very Life it self vain,
unprofitable, and offensive to your selves as well as others.

Yea and such are the glittering Rays of our Diana, that I fear they will
dazzle your eyes, like as the Israelites were at the sight of Moses descending
from the Mountain.

You will scarce believe me, should I affirm, that the Secrets of the Adepts
are to be understood and prepared according to the Letter; if you argue it to
be improbable that the Adepts should have exposed their Mysteries to the view
of all men, they themselves having advertised you of the contrary. What then?

Is not this our Art, says Artesius, cabalistical, and full of Mysteries? And
you Fool believe we teach the Secrets of Secrets openly, and understand our
Words according to the Letter; be assured (I am not envious as others) he that
takes the Philosophers Sayings according to the common sense and signification,
has already lost the Clew of Ariadnes, and wanders up and down the Labyrinth,
and it would be of the same benefit to him, as if he had thrown his Money into
the Sea. The same thing advises Sendivogius in the Preface of the twelve
Treatises: I would, says he, have the candid Reader know, that my Writings
admit not so much a verbal construction, but such rather as Nature requires,
lest afterward he should have Cause to bewail the expense of time, pains and
cost in vain, etc. Because, as Arnold says in his Speculum, An intention
according to the Letter nothing avails, and to operate according to the
intention of the Letters, is the dissipation of Riches. For, says Geber, Where
we spoke most openly we concealed the Art, speaking to an Artist not
Aenigmatically, but in a plain series of Discourse. Yea Roger Bacon proceeds
further, saying, When I swear I say true, believe it a lie, that is, as to the
Letter, and therefore when I tell you of Stalks, understand Lead, etc. lib de
Art Chymica, page 56. All that I say is false, therefore nothing I say is
true; wherefore I pray, believe me not; but when I say true, take it to be
false; and if this, the contrary: So that which is false will be turned into
true, and that which is true, into false: I tell you these things, that you may
beware of things that are to be avoided, and believe things credible, in
writing properly, I write not, etc. p. 301. And though I say, Take this and
this, believe me not, operate according to the Blood, that is, the
Understanding, and so of all; leave off Experiments; apprehend my meaning, and
you will find, believe me being already a lighted Candle, page 345.

These and the like may you allege to confirm your Opinion; but give me leave
to suggest to you the distinction that is to be made between the Theoretical
and Practical Books of the Adepts: In the Theoretical Books there is scarce any
thing to be understood literally, all things being parabolical, aenigmatical,
etc. But in the Practical Books all things are clear and intelligible,
according to the Letter: Philosophical Wine alone excepted, the foundation and
beginning of all Secrets: For example, Take the magnum Testamentum of Lully, in
the Theoretical part of which, is Philosophically, that is, by various
Sophisms, described the Nature, Matter, and Preparation of Lully's Wine; but in
the Practical part of this Testamentum, the Use of this Wine is declared
according to the Letter: From hence will you also easily observe, That those
Adepts which reject the Literal Sense are rather Theoretical than Practical: We
treating at present of the practice of the Adepts, or the Use of Philosophical
Wine, will prove that most of the Secrets delivered to us by them, are
according to the Letter.

But some of you will urge, that the Adepts themselves have even more than
often declamed against the Literal Sense of Practice, against the very
Descriptions (commonly called Receipts) of Experiments; but let these our
Companions know, the Adepts wrote against two sorts of Receipts.

The first comprehends the Receipts of Smoaksellers, Deceivers, wicked men, who
pretend they either had them from the Disciple of some Adept, or found them in
the Walls of some old Cloister or Sepulcher; against whom hear Dionysius
Zacharias, Page 781. Vol. 1. Th. Chym. saying, Before I left the College of
Arts, I entered into familiarity and friendship with many other Scholars; they
had diverse Books of Chemical Receipts, which being lent me, I transcribed with
very great diligence, my private Master, who had also a long time before began
to labor in this Art, consenting; so that before I went away, I had gathered a
very large Book of such Receipts, I went presently with my Master to the Place
where I was to study Law, began to turn over my Writings; whereof some
contained Projections of One upon Ten, others upon Twenty, Thirty; a Third, a
half part; for the Red of eighteen Carrachs, twenty, etc. into Gold of Crowns,
Ducats, and of the highest color that could be; One was to endure Melting,
another the Touchstone, another all Trials: Of the White likewise, one was to
be of Ten penny, another of Eleven, another Sterling Silver, coming white out
of the Fire, another white from the Touch: In short, I thought if I were able
to perform the least of those things greater felicity could not happen to me in
this world.

Especially when I read the Inscriptions of great Persons before such Receipts;
one of the Queen of Navarr, another of the Cardinal of Lorain, Turine, and
infinite others, that by such Disguises and Titles, Credit might be given by
unwary men.

Bernhard also complains of the same Receipts, page 771. ejusd. Vol. If I had
had, says he, at first, all the Books, which I afterward procured, doubtless
I should have sooner attained to the Art, but I read nothing but false
Receipts, and erroneous Books; besides I happened to confer with none but the
most perverse Thieves, wicked Men, and Impostors.

The other sort contains Receipts of Adepts themselves, against whom some other
Adepts have also sometimes written: As for example, the same Bernhard, Page
748. Vol. Theat. Chym. saying, To withdraw the true Speculators of this Art
from common Errors into the right Way, that they may not waste their Wealth,
and lose their Labors, Name and Reputation, insisting upon the false Receipts
of Books, as those of Geber, Rasis, Albertus magnus, Trames, Lumen, Canonis
pandectarum, Demophon, Summa, and other Seducers, I will first declare my own
Errors, etc. And in page 750. goes on, Infinite is the number of them, whom to
write is needless; and there is great plenty of Books written upon this Subject
under Metaphorical Words and Figures, so as not to be easily understood by any
but the Sons of Art; the reading of which, leads men out of the right way,
rather than directs to the Work; in the number of which, are Scotus, Arnold,
Raymund, Johannes Mehung, Hortulanus Veridicus, etc.

My Business therefore is to satisfy you, and say, That the Authors of the
first sort of Receipts deceive actively, wittingly, and willingly: But the
Receipts of the later sort, written by Adepts themselves, seduce only
passively: And this for two Reasons; either in respect of the Adept being less
experienced in the Art, and unacquainted with the Practice of his more Learned
Consort; for it is impossible for one Adept, though never so expert in his
Method, to know the various Experiments of all the other, much less the
peculiar Theorems, private Meditations, different Denominations of things, etc.
formed or derived from the same: Or in respect of your selves, who extort from
those Receipts, as to the Literal Sound, more, than the Adepts themselves
allow, not at all observing that the Spirit of Wine being once and always
understood, the rest you will easily understand. For knowing this, says
Flammel, in his Hieroglyphics, page 28. I perfected the Magistery easily; for
having learnt the Preparation of the first Agent, I following my Book according
to the Letter, could not err if I would. And a little after; Then following my
Book from word to word, I made Projection. But why these? Plenty enough of
Examples in this Treatise will instruct you in all these things that are to be
understood according to the Letter, except Wine, Lunary, Vegetable Mercury, and
other things synonymous to the Matter of the Spirit of Philosophical Wine, or
things prepared by the same Spirit, Vegetable Sal Harmoniack, Philosophical
Vinegar, etc.

For this Spirit of Wine being prevaricated, the Adepts knew, that all the
rest, though never so plainly discovered to the Sons of Art, could not
contribute the least benefit to the Reader: Wherefore I fear not the
indignation of the Adepts, nor the Anathema's which they thundered out against
the Betrayers of their Secrets, having herein done nothing more, but (to speak
ingenuously) less, than they themselves. I have according to my capacity,
methodically digested those things which were here and there confusedly
dispersed, but added nothing of my own, and so expect neither Honor nor Thanks
from you; but this only, that I may know, if our Studies please; and I shall
supply those things that are here wanting and desired, somewhat more largely;
for I will not refuse to assist you yet further by the industry of my Studies:
So that nothing remains, but upon our bended Knees to return most humble Thanks
to the Father of Lights, in vouchsafing us this Art by the Writings of his
Servants, and the High Priests of Nature, without which it would be beyond the
power of man to arrive to so great a degree of Knowledge.

Now celebrate with me the Urns of our pious Masters, who have for the Welfare
of Mankind, rather dispersed, than buried their Talents; and may you oblige
your selves to the same good Office, if you have any of their Writings not yet
published.

Finally, It is my earnest Suit to the Adepts now living, that they would
please to employ themselves freely in expounding Nature, correcting Philosophy
and Medicine; And lastly, refuting all the deceitful Sects of Philosophers, as
well in the Academies, as private Schools, for the advancement of the Glory of
God, being singularly eminent in this Art. So be it.

The First Book OF MENSTRUUMS.
RIPLEY, Cap. 2. Medullae Philos. Chym.
We will here demonstrate the clear Practice, how such Menstruums as be
Unctuous and Moist, Sulphurous, and Mercureal, well agreeing with the Nature
of Metals, wherewith our Bodies are to be artificially dissolved, may be
obtained.

London, Printed for Tho. Howkins in George-Yard in Lombard Street, 1685.

The Translator to the Reader.
YOur Business it is, not mine, otherwise than as a Reader, to judge of this
Work, but the ample and public Encomiums of Learned Societies beyond the Seas,
already declaring their Sentiments of its Rarity and Excellency, are convictive
Authorities far beyond my Opinion; and therefore I shall be silent: only this I
think necessary to let you know, that our Author, having little spare time
himself, left his Latin Impression to be by others corrected, which has been
the cause of many Errors, and indeed in some Places so gross, that the Author
himself could scarce retrieve his own Meaning: This to prevent in the English
Translation, he has been pleased to use all Care to have it exactly import his
own Mind. I must also tell you, that though I have taken no small pains in
endeavoring to make this weighty Work speak true and perfect English, yet my
Copy not being punctually observed, you will find many small Mistakes, besides
the Errata's inserted at the latter end of the Book, which you may please, as
you read, to correct.

Farewell. G. C.

A Catalogue of Menstruums.
I. Simple Vegetable Menstruums made of Philosophical Wine only.
1. THE Heaven, Essence, or Spirit of Wine of Lully. 1 2. The Essence, Soul or
Spirit of Wine of Rupescissa. 9 3. The Spirit of Wine of paracelsus. 11 4. The
Essence of Wine of Guido. 12
II. Simple Vegetable Menstruums made of Spirit of Philosophical Wine, and the
hottest Vegetables, Herbs, Flowers, etc. being Oyley.
5. The Anima Metallica, or Lunaria Coelica of Lully. 16 6. The Aqua Vitae of
Paracelsus. 21 7. Another. Ibid. 8. The Aqua Vitae of Ripley. 23 9. The
Compounded Aqua Vitae of Ripley. Ibid.
III. Simple Vegetable Menstruums made of Spirit of Philosophical Wine and
Oyley Sals, as Sugar, Honey, Tartar Common, etc.
10. The Mellifluous Heaven of Parisinus. 31 11. The Spirit of Honey of Lully.
34 12. The Spirit of crude Tartar of Guido. 36 13. The Spirit of crude Tartar
of Paracelsus. Ibid.
IV. Simple Vegetable Menstruums made of Spirit of Philosophical Wine and
Volatile Salts, as Sal Armoniack, Salt of Blood, Urine, etc.
14. The Spirit of Sal Armoniack of Trismosinus. 38 15. A Water of Sal
Armoniack of Trismosinus. 40 16. The Gelative Sulphur of Lully. Ibid.
V. Simple Vegetable Menstruums made of Spirit of Philosophical Wine, and Fixed
Salts of Vegetables and Minerals not Tinging.
17. The Coelum Vegetabile of Lully. 46 The Volatile Salt of Tartar of Lully. 48
18. The Spirit of Wine of Basilius. 52 19. The Fiery Spirit of Wine of
Basilius. 54 20. The Spirit of Calx vive of Basilius. 55 21. The simple Spirit
of Calx vive of Basilius 57 22. The Tartarized Spirit of Wine of Basilius. 58
23. The Vegetable Acetum acerrimum or Ignis Adepti of Ripley. 59 24. The Aqua
fortissima of Rupescissa. 60 25. Vegetable Mercury acuated with the Salt of
Tartar of Lully. 61 26. The simple Vegetable Menstruum produced from 3
Individuals of Lully. 62 27. The Circulatum minus, or Water of Salt circulated
of Paracelsus. 65 28. The sweet Spirit of Salt of Basilius. 70
VI. Simple Vegetable Menstruums made of the Spirit and Tartar of Philosophical
Wine.
29. The Coelum Vinosum of Parisinus. 73 30. The Coelum Vinosum of Lully. 76
Vegetable Sal Harmoniack of Parisinus. 78 Vegetable Sal Harmoniack of Lully. 80
Vegetable Sal Harmoniack of Lully. 81 Another. 83 Animal Sal Harmoniack of
Lully. 85 Vegetable Sal Harmoniack made by the Accurtation of Lully. 89
Another. 90
31. Coelum Vegetabile of Lully circulated. 92 32. The less Vegetable Menstruum
of Lully. 93 33. The Vegetable Menstruum per deliquium of Lully. 94 34. The
Vegetable Mercury of Lully. 95 35. The rectified Aqua Vitae of Lully. 96 36.
The Circulatum minus of Guido. 97 37. The Animal Heaven of Parisinus. 98
VII. Vegetable Menstruums compounded of the aforesaid Simple Menstruums.
38. The Circulatum majus of Guido. 103 39. The Menstruum acutum of Guido. 104
40. The Coelum majus of Parisinus. 105
VIII. Vegetable Menstruums compounded of Simple Vegetable Menstruums, and
Common Argent vive, or other Metals.
41. The Ignis Gehennae of Trismosinus. 110 42. The Alchymical Mercury of
Ripley. 113 43. The Exalted Water of Mercury of Ripley. 114 44. The Glorious
Water of Argent vive of Lully. 115 45. The incalcinated Menstruum of Lully. 115
46. The Mercurial Water by three Vessels of Lully. 116 The Mercurial Sal
Harmoniack, or Mercury of Mercury of Lully. 119
47. The Menstruum of Guido for Precious Stones. 122 48. The Lunar Menstruum of
Lully. 123 49. The Circulatum majus, or Acetum acerrimum of Lully. 124 50. The
Circulatum majus of Parisinus. 126
IX. Vegetable Menstruums compounded, made of Simple Vegetable Menstruums, and
Things tinging being first fixed.
51. The Circulatum majus, or Metallic Acetum acerrimum of Paracelsus. 137
X. Vegetable Menstruums compounded, made of Vegetable Menstruums compounded,
and Metallic Bodies.
52. The Neapolitan Menstruum of Lully. 144 53. The Precious Menstruum for
Pearls of Lully. 146 54. The Mercurial compounded Menstruum of Lully. 147 55.
The sweet Spirit of Mercury of Basilius. 148 56. The incalcinated Menstruum of
Parisinus. 149
XI. Vegetable Menstruums compounded, graduated, made of the compounded
Vegetable Menstruums impregnated with the Influences of Heaven and Earth.
57. The Etherial and Terrestrial Waters of Metals of Lully. 154
XII. Vegetable Menstruums compounded, most highly exalted, made of compounded
Vegetable Menstruums graduated.
58. The Ethereal and Celestial Limes of Lully. 163
XIII. Simple Mineral Menstruums made of the Matter of Philosophical Wine only.
59. The Green Lion of Ripley. 172 60. A Menstruum made of the Gum Adrop of
Ripley. 174 61. A Menstruum made of Red Lead of Ripley. 179 62. The Simple
stinking Menstruum of Ripley. 181 63. The Menstruum of Sericon of Ripley 182
64. The Green Lion of Roger Bacon. 192 65. The Green Lion of Paracelsus. 198
66. The Stinking Menstruum made of the Gum Adrop and Common Vitriol of Ripley.
Ibid. 67. The Stinking Menstruum made of Azoquean Vitriol and Nitre of Lully.
199 68. The Water calcining all Bodies of Lully. 201 69. The Stinking Menstruum
for reducing Metals into Argent vive of Lully. 202 70. The Stinking Menstruum
made of Azoquean Vitriol, Common Vitriol, and Nitre of Ripley. Ibid.
XIV. Simple Mineral Menstruums made of the Acid or Saline Essences of Salt.
71. The Water or Oil of Salt of Paracelsus 211 72. The Water of Salt by
another Description. 214
XV. Simple Mineral Menstruums made of the Spirit of Philosophical Wine, and
Acid Spirits, as Aqua fortis, Spirit of Nitre, etc.
73. Aqua fortis mixed with the Spirit of Wine of Paracelsus. 222 74. Aqua
fortis mixed with the Spirit of Wine of Trithemius. 223 75. Vinegar mixed with
the Spirit of Wine of Basilius. Ibid. 76. The Spirit of Salt of Basilius. 225
77. The Spirit of Salt of Guido. Ibid. 78. The Aqua fortis mixed with the Spirit
of Wine of Lully. Ibid. 79. Aqua fortis mixed with the Spirit of Wine of an
Anonymous. 226
XVI. Simple Mineral Menstruums made of Philosophical Vinegar, and Volatile
Salts, as Common Sal Armoniack, Urine, etc.
80. The Oil of Sal Armoniack of Guido. 229 81. The Water of Sal Armoniack of
Isaacus. 230
XVII. Simple Mineral Menstruums made of Philosophical Vinegar and fixed Salts
non tinging, as well vegetable as mineral.
82. The Aqua comedens of Paracelsus. 233 83. The fixative Water of Trithemius.
234 84. The Aqua mirabilis of Isaacus. 235 85. The resuscitative Water of
Basilius. Ibid. 86. The Water of Sallabrum of Paracelsus. 236
XVIII. Simple Mineral Menstrums made of Vegetable Sal Harmoniack and Acids not
tinging.
87. The Aqua fortis of Isaacus Hollandus. 240 88. The Aqua Regis of Ripley.
244 89. The Kings Bath of Basilius. 245 90. A Philosophical Water for the
solution of Gold of Basilius. Ibid. 91. The most strong Aqua fortis of
Paracelsus. 247 92. The Aqua Regis of Guido. Ibid. 93. The Aqua Regis of Lully.
248
XIX. Mineral Menstruums compounded of Philosophical Spirit of Wine, and Acid
Spirits not tinging, Spirit of Vitriol, Butter of Antimony, etc.
94. Spirit of Vitriol mixed with the Spirit of Wine of Lully. 251 95. The
Butter of Antimony mixed with the Spirit of Wine of Basil. 253 96. The Water of
the fourth Gradation of Paracelsus. 254 97. The Water of the sixth Gradation of
Paracelsus. Ibid.
XX. Mineral Menstruums compounded of the Spirit of Philosophical Wine, and
other tinging things, Vitriol, Cinabar, Antimony, etc.
98. The Oil of Vitriol of Basilius. 261 99. A Menstruum of Basilius made of
Hungarian Vitriol. 293 100. The Mineral Menstruum of Isaacus 294 101. The
stinking Menstruum of Lully made of Vitriol and Cinabar. 294 102. The same.
Ibid. 103. The stinking Menstruum of Lully made of Vitriol, Cinabar and Nitre.
295 104. The stinking Menstruum of Lully, made of Vitriol, Nitre, Alume,
Tartar, etc. 296 105. The dissolving Water for the Red of Isaacus, 297 106.
Another. 298 107. Again another, 299 108. A dissolving Water of Isaacus for the
White. 299 109. Another. 299 110. A Red Water shining Day and Night of Isaacus.
300 111. Another. 301 112. Again Another. 303
XXI. Mineral Menstruums Compounded, made of Simple Mineral Menstruums and
Mercury, the rest of Metals, and other tinging things.
113. The Spirit of Venus, or Spirit of Verdigreece of Basilius. 306 114. The
Water of Paradise of Isaacus. 310 115. The Mercurial Vinegar of Trismosinus.
312 116. The Mercurial Water of Trismosinus. Ibid. 117. The Mercurial Water of
Albertus Magnus. 313 118. The Mercurial Water of Paracelsus. 315 119. The
stinking Menstruum of Lully. 316 120. The Mercurial green Lion of Ripley. 317
121. The stinking Lunar Menstruum of Lully. 317 122. The stinking Solar
Menstruum of Lully. Ibid 123. Philosophers Vinegar made of the Mercury of
Silver of Isaacus. 318
XXII. Mineral Menstruums compounded of the Philosophers Vinegar, and other
Simple Mineral Menstruums, and things tinging being first fixed.
124. The Menstruum of Venus of Isaacus Hollandus. 322 125. A Menstruum of
Vitriol of Isaacus Hollandus. 324 126. The Circulatum majus of Isaacus. 332
127. The Oil of Vitriol shining by Night, of Trismosinus. 335 128. The
Circulatum majus of Ripley. 337 129. The Metallic Acetum Acerrimum of Ripley.
338 130. The Circulatum majus of Isaacus, made of Sulphur. 339
XXIII. Mineral Menstruums compounded made of Mineral Menstruums compounded,
and Metallic Bodies, and other tinging Things.
131. The Oil of Mars and Venus of Basilius. 346 132. The S irit of Universal
Mercury made of Vitriol of Basilius, 347 133. The Oil of Mars and Venus,
acuated with the Sulphur and Salt of Sol of Basilius. 351 134. The Spirit of
Universal Mercury, acuated with the Sulphur and Salt of Luna of Basilius. 353
135. The Spirit of Universal Mercury acuated with the Sulphur of Sol and Luna
of Basilius. 354 136. The S irit of Universal Mercury acuated with the Sulphur
of Sol, and Mars of Basilius. Ibid. 137. The Spirit of Universal Mercury
acuated with the Sulphurs of Sol, Mars and Antimony of Basilius. 355 138. The
Spirit of Universal Mercury acuated with the Sulphur of Mars, Jupiter and
Saturn of Basilius. Ibid. 139. A compounded Mercurial Water for the red Work of
Isaacus. 356 140. The Philosophers Water made of three Spirits of Isaacus. 357
141. The compounded Water of Silver of Lully. 358 142. The stinking Lunar
Menstruum acuated with the Essence of Sol of Lully. 360
XXIV. Mineral Menstruums compounded of vegetable and mineral Menstruums mixed
together.
143. The Vegetable ^ire dissolved in the calcina^ive Water of Lully. 363 144.
The Vegetable Heaven dissolved in a mineral Menstruum of Lully. 364 145. Ice
compounded of Vegetable and Mineral Menstr. of Lully. Ibid. 146. The Aqua
mirabilis of Ripley. 365 147. The stinking Menstruum acuated with the Sal
Harmoniack of Lully. 366 148. The stinking Lunar Menstruum acuated with the
vegetable Sal Harmoniack of Lully. 366 149. The Spirit of Mercury made with
Vitriol, and the fiery Spirit of Wine of Basilius. 367 150. The mixed Menstruum
of Paracelsus. Ibid.
THE PREFACE.
TO exempt Diana from being exposed Naked to the Petulant Lust of Insatiable
Men, as also to the Scorns and Contempt of the Ignorant, as a Common
Prostitute; the Adepts have taken care not only to cloth, but cover her almost
with several sorts of Garments: To this kind of Apparel, Antiquity has been
pleased, yet not properly enough, to refer an Allegory of the Procreation of
Man, deduced from the Analogy of Seed anciently received, however ill applied
to the Mineral Kingdom.

First, They reckon Coition; Secondly, Conception; Thirdly, Impregnation;
Fourthly, Birth; Fifthly, Nutriment: If therefore no Coition, no Conception;
without Conception, no Impregnation; without which no Birth can be premised.

Which Disposition the Ancient Morienus himself confesses to have been derived
to him from Antiquity. Hermes, whom they call Father of the Adepts, in his
Tabula Smaragdina, has described to us the Father, Mother, and Nurse of the
Chemical Infant. No wonder therefore, that such an Ancient and Easy Doctrine
as this, should have found so easy an access to Posterity: it would be besides
the Intention and Scope to offer those things, which might be inferred by us
against this Analogy of Seed: Here let it suffice to remember only, that the
greater part, as also the more ancient Adepts, comparing the Chemical Magistery
to the Generation of Man, did under the Notion of this Allegory, call their
Dissolvents Menstruums, or Feminine Seed, but the Things which were to be
Dissolved, Masculine Seed. My Son, says Lully, The Vegetable Menstruum is of
the Nature of a Woman's Menstruum, because a Mineral Menstruum proceeds from it
by Dissolution, (of Minerals and Metals) and is made artificially as Nature
requires; for it has the property of an incorruptible Spirit, which is as a
Soul, and has the Conditions of a Body, because it generates and produces
Seed as a Woman; therefore we call our D. (Dissolvent) Menstrual Blood, or
Menstruum, because it is Generative and Nutritive, and makes the said C, and
(C) (Metals) grow and increase, till they be converted into M ( Sulphur of
Nature, or Philosophers Mercury) or into Q, ( Tincture, or Philosophers Stone)
for as Menstrual Blood perfects the Embryo by nourishing, and altering one
Principle into another, and one Quantity into another, and one Form into
another, yet the Principles and Quantities appearing in every Alteration, under
diverse Forms, differing from the first Forms themselves, till a certain
Substance appears in one entire Quantity, dependent upon several Matters, which
is a Body, with Spirit and Soul, reduced into Action: And thus it is with our
Infant (Philosophers Stone) Lully, Distinct, 3. Can. 4. Lib. de Essentia, When
K. (Color) appears yellow, then let the Artist know, that the Body of our
Infant is formed, made, and completely organized, and begins to be prepared for
the reception of the vegetable Spirit into it, and Nature continues in that
preparation till the yellow K. vanishes away, and a red K. (Color) appears;
and then may the Artist be assured that the said Infant is perfect both in Body
and Soul: so that he may let the Fire alone till it grows cold; which being
cold, the Artist will find our Infant round as an Egg; which he must take out
and purify (for it is a hard Stone in the middle of many Superfluities, as the
Infant of a Woman appears after Birth: Can. 11. Distinct. 3. Lib. Essent.) and
let him take and put it into some clean Glass Vessel, etc. 3 Distinct. 3 Part
Lib. de Essent.

Parisinus, Ripley, Espanietus, and other later Adepts, the Disciples of Lully,
had this Analogy of Seed from him, being doubtless the most Learned of the
Chemical Philosophers. Of this living Heaven, says Parisinus, Raymund speaks
in his Third Book de Quintessentia, in the Chapter beginning, Coelum and
Mercurius noster; Our Heaven has the property of an incorruptible Spirit,
which is as the Soul of it, and has the Conditions of a Body in it, generating
and producing Seed, as a Woman, and herein it differs from the other Principles
(of the Art) It is also sensual, because it is apprehended by sense, namely, by
sight, taste and smell, as is declared in the first Distinction in the Chapter,
which begins, Proeterea est principium movendi, scilicet, corpus sive forma:
And a little after, speakidg of the aforesaid living Heaven, he says, And in
this point our Understanding knows that D. (his living Heaven, or Dissolvent)
has a Vegetable property, the similitude of which, R and S (Gold and Silver)
do transmit into the Sulphur of Nature, which is the Spirit of Metals, or
Stone, or transforming Poison, according to the signification of Raymund, which
signification he uses in his Alphabetum figuroe arboris Philosophicoe, and
therein produces this following Sentence in Capite de figura Quintoe
Essentioe: As the Vegetative part of the Mother or Nurse, transmits her
Likeness into the Son, which she generates, which property the Son retains, so
our Mercury. The Intention of the Philosopher (Lully) is to demonstrate, that
the Philosophers Sulphur, or Stone, or transforming Poison receives all its
benefit by the excitation of the vegetative Virtue, which is in this Divine
Vegetative Heaven.

The same Author in the Continuation of his Doctrine, says, And also the
Understanding knows, that the said Metals R, and S, (Gold and Silver) retain
the property of Menstruum, with which they extend their similitudes into
exotic substances, transmuting the said substances into their own kind, which
is the reason why we call it Vegetable Mercury; as also because it is extracted
out of Vegetables. The same thing at the end of the said Chapter he speaks
afresh: And our Understanding also knows, that principle is as a Woman
conceiving the Man's Seed, and bringing forth in the same form and virtue, as it
was in the beginning. From whence we necessarily conclude, that the Elements of
this Stone, namely, Gold, ought to be moved by virtue of a living Quintessence,
and the aforesaid Vegetable Heaven, which way I have sufficiently proved and
demonstrated. Parisinus in Lib. 1. Elucidarii, page 221. Vol. 6. Th. Chym.

Ripley, having the same Master as Parisinus, expounds this Doctrine more
briefly, thus; As an Infant in the Womb of the Mother, does by the concoction
of temperate heat, convert the Menstruums into its own Nature and Kind, that
is, into Flesh, Blood, Bones, yea, Life, with all other Properties of a living
Body; so if you have the Water of Sol and Luna, it will attract other Bodies to
its kind, and make their Humors perfect by its intrinsic Virtue and Heat;
Ripl. Lib. de Merc. Phil.

We, says Espanietus, to deal plainly and truly; affirm, that the whole work
may be perfected by two Bodies only, that is, Sol and Luna, rightly prepared:
For this is that Generation which is performed by Nature with the help of Art,
in which the coition of Male or Female is required, and from whence the
Offspring more noble than its Parents, is expected; Sect. 20. Arcan. Herm. Sol
is the Male, for he yields the active and informing seed: Luna is the Female;
which is called the Matrix and Vessel of Nature, because she receives the seed
of the Male into her womb, and nourishes it with her Menstruum, Sect. 22.
Arcan. Herm. Phil. But the Philosophers do not by the name of Luna, mean common
Luna, which also acts the parts of a Male in their (white) work; let no man
therefore attempt to join two males together, it being wicked and contrary to
Nature, nor can he hope for any Offspring from such a copulation, but put
Gobritius to Beja, Brother to Sister.

Conjugio junget stabili, propriamque dicabit. That he may have from thence the
noble Son of Sol, Sect. 23. Arcan. Herm. Phil. I would have the Reader know,
says Sendivogius, that Solution is twofold, though there be many other
solutions, but of no effect: the first is only true and natural; the second
violent, under which are all the other comprehended; the Natural is that, by
which the pores of the Boby are opened in our Water, that the digested seed
may be injected into its Matrix: But our Water is Celestial, not wetting your
hands; not common, but almost like Rain: The Body is Gold, which yields seed:
our Luna is not common Silver, which receives the seed of Gold. Tract. 10. Novi
Lumin. Saturn taking the Vessel, drew up ten parts of the Water, and presently
took some of the Fruit of the solar Tree, and put it in, and I saw the fruit of
the Tree consumed and resolved as Ice in warm water. This water is to this
fruit, as a Woman. The fruit of this Tree can be putrified in nothing, but in
this water only; for no other water can penetrate the pores of this Apple, but
this: and you must know that the solar Tree sprang also out of this Water,
which is extracted from a magnetical virtue out of the Rays of Sol and Luna,
and therefore they have great affinity one with the other: In the Dialogue of
Mercury.

Now here we in this Book intend to treat of this Feminine Seed, or dissolving
Waters of the Adepts. Great indeed, yea vast is the Treasure of our Chymy; but
altogether inaccessible by those that have not the Keys thereof; without which
the Adepts themselves could neither dissolve nor coagulate Bodies. If you know
not the way of dissolving our Body, it is in vain to operate, is the Advice of
Dionysius Zacharias, page 798. Vol. 1. Th. Chym. But he that knows the Art and
Secret of Dissolution, has attained to the Secret of the Art, says Bernhard,
page 40. suoe Epistoloe. For this cause it is, says Parisinus, that the wise
men say, To know the Celestial Water, which reduces our Body into a Spirit, is
the chief Mystery of this Art, in Eluc. page 212. Vol. 1. Th. Chym. For without
these Menstruums things heterogeneous can never be perfectly mixed. Coral,
though never so finely pulverized, cannot be mixed with the purest Powder of
Pearls: Yea Gold mixeth not with Silver (much less with Bodies less perfect)
though both be melted together; the Particles of each do indeed touch one
another in their extreme parts, being in a mass or heap consisting of things
heterogeneous, yet they are and do remain all distinct, unblemished and
unaltered in their Figures and Properties, no otherwise than as a heap composed
of Barley and Oats: But in the more secret Chymy there is no Body, no
heterogeneity, but what has its own peculiar Menstruum, and with which as
being homogeneous to it, it runs into one Concrete, rejoicing in the
inseparable Properties of either. So long therefore as you intend to join
Metals with Metals, dry things with dry, without the Menstruums of Diana, so
long (to use the Phrase of Espanietus) do you presume to join males together,
which is a thing wicked and contrary to Nature. Hearken therefore to Bernhard,
Page 757. Vol. 1. Th. Chym. Persuading you to leave Stones and all sorts of
Minerals, likewise also Metals alone, though they are the beginning and our
matter. Metals are not only the matter, but are also called by Lully, the form
of the Stone; yet without these Menstruums they signify nothing. The Form,
says he, which is the Efficient Principle, Former and Transformer of all other
Forms of less virtue and power, is described by C, or (C) (Metals) cannot of it
self only be the Magistery of the greater work, etc. Very commodious it is for
that Principle to be known, because hereby the Understanding knows it to be one
of the two Substances, from which our Infant is produced, having in it the
condition of a male, from which proceeds a sperm in the belly of our D.
(Menstruum or Dissolvent,) Lul. Did. 3. Lib. Ess. Heaven or Mercury,
(Menstruum) is the fourth Principle signified by D. It is the Cause and
Principle moving C, and (C) from Power to Action, ruling and governing them in
its belly, as the Woman the Infant which she procreates in her Matrix. And in
this point knows the understanding of an Artist, that D (Menstruum) has action
upon C, and (C) ruling, governing and reducing them into Action, even as the
Heavens above do by their motion, bring things Elementary, into action, And an
Artist is to understand that of the two substances, of which our Stone is
compounded, and by which it is generated, this, namely, D, (Dissolvent) is the
more principal. Ibid. In the Book de Medicinis secretis, page 336. he goes on;
You must know, says he, that hitherto I have not told you the most secret
thing and matter of the whole Magistery, which is our incorruptible
Quintessence, extracted out of white or red Wine, which we call Celestial
Crown, and Menstruum, after the sublimations, putrefactions, and final
depuration of it; which Quintessence is indeed the foundation, principal
matter, and Magistery of all medicinal things: My Son, if you have it, you will
have the Magistery of the whole thing, without which nothing can be done.

But you, My companions, know, what mean the Menstruums of Diana; you know, I
say, they are the highest secrets of the more secret Chymy, much more secret
than the Menstruums of Women; that the same also were never acquired but by the
extreme Pains and ingenuity of an Adept, most cautiously described, and
recommended to us principally as the Keys of the Art: You easily believe Lully,
saying, Without these Menstruums nothing can be done in the Magistery of the
Art. Mag. Not. page 329. Or Christopher Parisinus, That the great secret lies
in these Menstruums, insomuch if they be not known, nothing can be done as to
the transmuting of Metals. Elucid. page 222. Vol. 6. Th. Chym. Wherefore I
think it enough to declare to you in short, that these Menstruums, which
hitherto you have with so much study, to little purpose sought in the
Theoretical Books of Adepts, are now offered to you, being found by me, in
Practical Books, no longer shrouded with Obscurity, but disrobed, and exposed
naked to the sight and understanding of all men: But you have no cause to fear
the Spirit of Philosophical Wine which you perceive in any Menstruum, it being
familiar and most gentle, because Philosophical. Nor have you need of many
Conjurations, to make it appear to you; for in all Pages of the Theoretical
Books of Adepts, it offers it self willingly and expects you, provided you pray
to God, that he would graciously vouchsafe to open your Eyes; for without his
permission or special appointment, it dares not manifest it self to you. By the
Menstruums of the Adepts, understand not therefore yours, though they be most
secret to you, because I fear they are yet but vulgar, which dissolving a dry
Body, are transmuted with it into a Salt or Vitriol, not with a true, but
seeming coalition and mixture, which a searching Fire easily discovers,
presently separating these same heterogeneous substances again: On the
contrary, the unctious Spirit of Philosophical Wine does by its Vnctuosity
mollify a dry Body, and transmute it not into a Salt or Vitriol, but into an
Oil: It easily joins things heterogeneous by its own equal temperament, and is
by its homogeneity easily joined with things homogeneous to it, by which also
it is augmented, according to that of Bernhard: No Water dissolveth bodies, but
that which is of their species. and which can be inspissated in bodies; for a
Dissolvent ought not to differ from that which is dissolved, in matter, but
proportion and digestion; Page 43. of his Epistles. For Nature is not
meliorated, but by its own nature; our matter therefore can be no otherwise
meliorated than by its own matter. Parmenides says the same, L. de Alchym.
page 768. Vol. 1. Th. Chym. This Spirit of Phylosophical Wine may be united to
all things, and is able to unite all things inseparably. But they that suppose
another water, are ignorant and unwise, and will never come to the effect,
says Parisinus in Eluc. p. 222. Vol. 6. Th. Chym. Of which Morienus, page 52.
thus; As to this Magistery, let Fools seek other things, and seeking err; for
they will never attain to the effect of it, till Sol and Luna be reduced into
one body, which cannot come to pass before the Will of God. Which Arnold, if I
mistake not, thus expresses: You will sooner join the Sun and Moon in the
Heavens, than Gold and Silver in the Earth without our Menstruums.

But you that have hitherto desired one only universal, immortal,
indestructible Menstruum, I mean, the Liquor Alkahest. or Ignisaqua, that
undeclinable word, instead of one, whereof you never yet knew the Name, Matter,
Preparation and Use, behold! I offer a great many kinds of universal
Menstruums, in their Descriptions more clear, in Virtues equivalent, if not
better than this your Alkahest. What others have either obscurely, or
impertinently said and written of this Liquor Alkahest, we little regard, as
Opinions and Conjectures. By the Menstruums of the Adepts, we intend not all
manner of Dissolvents, prepared without the Spirit of Philosophical Wine, and
only corroding, but not in the least altering the more minute Particles of
Bodies: Nor do we understand an immortal Liquor, not permanent with things
dissolved in it: But by Menstruum we mean a volatile Liquor made several ways
of the Spirit of Philosophical Wine and diverse things, not only separating
Bodies, but also continuing with them, and altering them with the addition of
it self, so as to be no more two, nor again, what they were before. For out of
this Dissolution (the solemn Wedlock, inseparable Union and Combination of Body
and Menstruum) emergeth a new Being, containing the unblemished Properties of
the thing dissolved, and the thing dissolving, not at all separable by Art or
Nature.

These Menstruums I have distinguished into Vegetable and Minerals, not as if
the Vegetables were made of Vegetables only, and the Mineral of Minerals, but
every Menstruum, that has not manifest acidity, acting without ebullition and
motion, is called Vegetable, though it be made of mere Animals or Minerals by
the Spirit of Philosophical Wine. On the contrary, a Menstruum becomes Mineral,
so soon as manifest acidity is mixed either with the Spirit of Philosophical
Wine, or a Vegetable Menstruum; for by adding the acidity, it now dissolves
Bodies with violence and effervescence. I have subdivided both kinds into
Simple and Compound, but not as if the Simple consisted of fewer Ingredients,
but because they are of more simple or less virtue. Simple Menstruums tinge
Bodies dissolved in them less, but the Compounded more.

OF Vegetable MENSTRUUMS. The First Kind. Simple Vegetable Menstruums made of
Philosophical Wine only.
I. The Heaven, Essence, or Spirit of Wine of Lully, Described, Can. 1. Did.
1. Lib. De Quinta Essentia.
TAke Wine Red or White, the best that may be had, or at least take Wine that
is not any way eager, neither too little nor too much thereof, and distill an
Aqua ardens, as the custom is, through Brass Pipes, and then rectify it four
times for better purification. But I tell you it is enough to rectify it three
times, and stop it close, that the burning Spirit may not exhale, because
herein have many men erred, thinking it ought to be seven times rectified, But
my Son, it is an infallible sign to you when you shall have seen that Sugar
steeped in it, and being put to the flame burns away as Aqua ardens. Now
having the water thus prepared, you have the matter out of which the
Quintessence is to be made, which is one principal thing we intend to treat of
in this Book. Take therefore that, and put it in a circulating Vessel, or in a
Pelican, which is called the Vessel of Hermes, and stop the hole very close
with Olibanum or Mastick being soft, or quick Lime mixed with the White of
Eggs, and put it in Dung, which is naturally most hot, or the remainings of a
Wine Press, in which no heat must be by accident diminished, which you may do,
my Son, if you put a great quantity of which you please of those things at a
corner of the House, which quantity must be about thirty Load: This ought to
be, that the Vessel may not want heat, because should heat be wanting, the
circulation of the water would be impaired, and that which we seek for
uneffected; but if a continual heat be administered to it by continual
circulations, our Quintessence will be separated in the color of Heaven, which
may be seen by a diametrical Line, which divides the upper part, that is the
Quintessence, from the lower, namely, from the Faeces, which are of a muddy
color. Circulation being continued many days together in a circulating Vessel,
or in the Vessel of Hermes, the Hole, which you stopped with the said Matter,
must be opened, and if a wonderful Scent go out, so as that no fragrancy of the
world can be compared to it; insomuch as putting the Vessel to a corner of the
House, it can by an invisible Miracle draw all that pass in, to it; or the
Vessel being put upon a Tower, draws all Birds within the reach of its Scent,
so as to cause them to stand about it. Then will you have, my Son, our
Quintessence which is otherwise called Vegetable Mercury at your will, to apply
in the Magistery of the transmutation of Metals: But if you find not the influx
of Attraction, stop the Vessel again, as before; and put it in the place before
appointed, and there let it stand till you attain to the aforesaid Sign. But
this Quintessence thus glorified, will not have that Scent, except a Body be
dissolved in it, nor have that heat in your mouth as Aqua ardens: This is
indeed by the Philosophers called the Key of the whole Art of Philosophy, and
as well Heaven, as our Quintessence, which arrives to so great a sublimity,
that either with it by it self alone, or with the earthly Stars (Metals) the
Operator of this work may do miracles upon the Earth.

Annotations.

THE twenty four following Kinds of Menstruums will prove, that amongst the
Dissolvents of the Adepts, no one is made without the Vegetable Mercury, or
Spirit of Philosophical Wine; for it is the foundation, beginning and end of
them all: Yea it is according to the various and distinct degrees of its
strength, sometimes the least, sometimes the greatest of all the Menstruums. It
is the least and weakest, when it does by its simple Vnctuosity dissolve only
the unctuous or oily parts of Vegetables, but either reject or leave untouched
the Remainder being less oily and heterogeneous to it self: it becomes the
strongest when we temper its Vnctuosity with Arids, (that is, dry things, not
Oily) for so it is made homogeneous to things dry-oyly, and to things merely
dry. In respect of which Homogeneity, the Menstruums of the Adepts differ from
the common, because they do by reason of the said Homogeneity, remain with the
things dissolved inseparably; yea, are augmented by them, but not with the
least saturation, transmuted and melted into a third substance, and so cannot
part without the diminution or destruction of their former Virtues. The
permanent Homogeneity of Menstruums with things to be dissolved, is the reason
why Essences are made with simple Vegetable Menstruums, but Magisteries with
the same compounded, and so these operate more strongly, those more weakly.
This is it, to comprehend all in a word, which shows us the various kinds of
Menstruums distinct one from another in so many several degrees, now to be
described and illustrated by our Annotations.

But that you may more easily understand the following Receipts and me also, I
thought it necessary to preadmonish some certain things concerning the Nature
and Property of this Spirit of Wine, lest you should judge amiss of a thing not
sufficiently understood.

First, You are not to take the Spirit of common Wine, though never so much
rectified, for the Philosophical Spirit of Wine; for so the following Receipts
of all Menstruums would be erroneous and seducing.

Having occasion (says Zacharias) for a most excellent Aqua-Vitoe for the
dissolving of a mark or half a pound of Gold, we bought a large Vessel of the
best Wine, out of which we did by a Pelican obtain great plenty of Aqua vitoe,
which was often rectified in many Glass-Vessels bought for that end: then we
put one Mark of our Gold, being before calcined a whole month, and four Marks
of Aqua vitoe into two Glass-Vessels, one Retort entering into the other, being
sealed, and both placed in two great round Furnaces: we bought also Coals to
the value of thirty Crowns at one time, to continue Fire under it for the space
indeed of a whole Year. We might have kept Fire for ever before any congelation
would have been made in the bottom of the Vessels, as the Receipt promised, no
solution preceding; for we did not operate upon a due matter, nor was that the
true water of Solution, which ought to dissolve our Gold, as appeared by
experience, page 783. Vol. 1. Th. Chym. Ripley admonishes us of the same
thing, who says, Some think that this Fire (this Fiery Spirit of Philosophical
Wine) is drawn from Wine according to the common way, and that it is rectified
by distillations often repeated, till its watery Phlegm, which impedes the power
of its Igneity, be wholly taken from it. But when such a sort of Water (which
Fools call Pure Spirit) though a hundred times rectified, be cast upon the
Calxes of any Body, be it never so well prepared, we do nevertheless see, that
it is found weak and insufficient as to the act of dissolving a Body, with the
preservation of its Form and Species, Cap. 2. suoe Medul. Phil. Common Wine
(says he a little lower) is hot, but there is another sort much hotter, whose
whole substance is by reason of its aerity most easily kindled by Fire, and the
Tartar of this unctuous Humor is thick; for so says Raymund: That Tartar is
blacker than the Tartar from the black Grapes of Catalonia; whereupon it is
called Nigrum nigrius Nigro; that is, Black blacker than Black: and this
humidity being unctuous, does therefore better agree with the Unctuosity of
Metals, than the Spirit extracted from common Wine, because by its liquefactive
virtue Metals are dissolved into Water; which operation the Spirit of (Common)
Wine cannot perform; which, how strong soever, is nothing else but clear water
mixed with a kind of Phlegmatic Water, where on the contrary, in this our
Unctuous Spirit distilled, there is no Phlegmatic aquosity found at all. But
this thing being rare in our Parts, as well as other Countries, Guido Montanor
therefore the Grecian Philosopher found out another unctuous humidity, which
swims upon other Liquors, which humidity proceeds from Wine; to the knowledge
hereof attained Raymund, Arnold, and some other Philosophers, but how it might
be obtained, said not.

O tortas adeo mentes! assuetaque falli
Artificum vario rerum per inania ductu
Pectora! cum duris quid mollia vina metallis?
Apta epulis, atque apta bibi suavissima vina?
Hic tamen expressam proelis torquentibus uvam
Accipit, and phialae postrema in part reponit,
Cujus in extremo rostrum connectitur ore, etc.
Thus facetiously sings the Poet and Adept Augurellus, Lib. 2. Chrysostom. page 206.
Vol. 3. Th. Chym.

2. That you take not any Oil, though an hundred times rectified, instead of
the Spirit of Philosophical Wine; for all oily matters, whether distilled or
expressed, natural or artificial, alone, but much more mixed with other things,
as Alkalies, Acids, etc. do by distilling, digesting, etc. in Bath, Dung,
Vapor, etc. become thick, pitchy, yea, at length dry, insipid, black as a Coal,
and sometimes like a Tyle, capable of being made red hot; which is a manifest
sign, that they want rather a Dissolvent, than are themselves Dissolvents.

3. It is necessary to observe that the Spirit of Philosophical Wine appears in
two forms, either like an Oil swimming upon all Liquors, or like the Spirit of
Common Wine (to the Nature of which it comes sometimes nearer, and therefore
does from the Analogy borrow its Name) not swimming upon watery Liquors, but
mixible with them and its own Phlegm; yet separable by simple Distillation, it
easily by this means leaving its Phlegms behind it; but if being rectified, and
kindled, it burns wholly away, it affords us the common sign of perfect
rectification of the common Spirit, but however, they are not two, but one only
Spirit, differing in degree of purity and subtilty. Which to prove, is not
necessary, examples being obvious to us in almost every Description of the
Vegetable Menstruums.

4. Lastly, Distinction must be made between the first and second Spirit of
Philosophical Wine, Father and Son. The first does in its preparation require
Laborem Sophiae, the most secret, difficult and dangerous work of all true
Chemistry. The second is easily made with the former Spirit according to the
Rule of perfect Chemistry: An Essence makes an Essence, a Magistery a
Magistery. Differ they do in Order, not in Nature; they are both of one Virtue,
though of different preparation: for this, as has been lately said, is of a
more easy, that of a mor difficult preparation. Essences they are both, the
former artificial, the other natural, in Medecines therefore unequal, though
alike in Chemistry, as Menstruums, but they are easily distinguished one from
the other by their Epithets. The first has these more general Names in the
Latin Tongue, Essentia Vini, Alcool Vini, Mercurius Vini, Vinum Vitae, Vinum
Salutis, Aqua Vitae, Aqua ardens, Vinum adustum, Vinum sublimatum, etc.
Examples of which you will have in these and the like Receipts: Take beaten
Gold, and let it be resolved into Liquor by the Essence of Wine; Paracels. in
Descript. Auri Diaphoret. Lib. 3. de male curatis. Take Flints, and dissolve
them in the Essence of Wine, as Salt in Water, etc. Paracels. in Descript.
Essentioe silicum, cap. 18. de Morbis Tartar. page 327. Take the Crocus of Sol,
and the Alcool of Wine, corrected, etc. Paracels. in Tinct, Croci Solis, lib.
de proeparat. page, 81. The Alcool of Wine exiccated or corrected, is, says
Paracelsus, when the superfluity of the Wine is taken away, and the Vinum
ardens remains dry and dephlegmed, without fatness, leaving no Faeces in the
Vessel, page 507. But as to this, you will have many more Examples, especially
in the following Book of Medecines.

The Second Spirit of Philosophical Wine has its Sirnames annexed to these
more general Names, indicating the radix of its Original, of which the
following Receipts may be for Examples. Take the Leaves of Sol four scruples,
of the Alcool of Wine drawn from a Pine, from Balm, ana. etc. Paracels. in
descript. Balsami Solis, page 90. Chyr. major. The Extraction of Mummy is made
by mixing it with the Essence of Wine drawn from Celandine, etc. Parac. in
descript. Tincturoe Mumioe, cap. 10. Lib. 3. de Vita long. page 65. Take the
Essence of Wine drawn from Celandine, Mercury of Saturn, etc. Paracels. Lib. 8.
cap. 10. de Tumoribus, Pustulis, etc. page 138. Chyr. major. In these and the
like Receipts he does by the Alcool of Wine, drawn from the Pine, Balm,
Celandine, etc. mean the second Spirit of Philosophical Wine, or the Essence of
those things made with the former Spirit, which also is proved out of the fifth
Chapter of the third Book of long Life, page 63. Where Paracelsus calls the
Essences of Herbs the Elixir of Life, or the Wine of Health, made from this or
that Herb: which (he says) will be manifested in the example of Balm. Digest
Balm (with the first Spirit of Philosophical Wine) a Philosophical Month in an
Athanar, then separate so, as that the duplicated Elements may appear apart,
and the Quintessence, which is the Elixir of Life, will presently show it self,
in Nepitha sharp, in Lolium yellow, in Tincium blackish, in Lupulus thin and
white, in Cuscuta harsh, in others likewise to be judged according to the
Prescript of Experience. Moreover that Spirit being extracted, and separated
from the other, behold the Wine of Health, (Essence of Balm) in which the
Pseudo-Philosophers have earnestly labored some Ages, yet never acquired any
thing. And a good part of them that followed Raymund (intending to follow him
according to the Letter, understanding Wine red or white) emptied some Butts of
Wine in extracting the Quintessence of Wine, but found nothing at all but burnt
Wine, which they unhappily used for the Spirit of Wine: sufficient it is to
have thus admonished the Spagyrist, which way the Quintessence may be had in
Herbs.

This twofold, the first as well as second Spirit of Wine may be made not only
out of the Vegetable, but the Animal Kingdom also: So is it read of the Aqua
Vitae and Phlegm of the Wine of Urine, in the 16th. Experiment of Lully,, and
in Paramiro Paracelsi, page 57. Many have diligently labored to find in man
his own Health, Aqua vitoe, Lapis Philosophorum, Arcanum, Balsamum, Aurum
potabile, and the like. Which they did rightly; for all those things are in
him, as also in the external world. So also has he a description of the Liquor
of Flesh, page 505. Take of the Liquor of Flesh six ounces, of Mummy, etc. Here
by Liquor, he means the Wine of Flesh, which is proved by Paracelsus himself;
saying, Where and according to this it is to be noted, that the Wine of Balm is
a Secret in an Asthma: Here also it is to be observed, that by Pulmonaria, not
the Herb, but the Liquor, that is, the Wine of it has place in this Cure: In
which words, the Liquor and Wine of Pulmonaria, are synonimous. So in Lib. 8.
de Tumoribus, cap. 3. By the Liquor of Hermodactils. And cap. 9. By the Liquor
of Balm; and lib. 9. cap. 4. By the Liquor Parthenion, And cap. 5. By the
Liquor of Bdellium, etc. The Wines or Essences of them all ought to be
understood. Though neither the first nor second Spirit can be produced out of
the dry Kingdom of Minerals (there are indeed some purely Oily, as Oleum
Petrae, Naphthae, Carbonum fossilium, Succini, Agathis, etc. which are reputed
Members of this Kingdom, the Oleosity of which notwithstanding differs so
little from the Vnctuosity of Vegetables and Animals, that scarce deserve to be
called Subjects thereof) yet for the same reason that the Essences and Liquors
of Vegetables are called Wines, is an Essence of the Mineral Kingdom, sometimes
also called the Liquor and Wine of Minerals; so the Liquor or Essence of
Vitriol or Copper is called Wine of the first Metal, Cap. 12. Lib. 3. de Vita
longa, page 65.

Being now instructed by the light of these Premises, let us come nearer to the
Spirit of Wine of Lully, which we shall find like an Oil swimming upon its
Phlegms, deduced not from the Common, but Philosophical Aqua vitae by
Circulation: But all other Essences being made by the belp of some certain
Essence, this first Essence of Wine alone must by its own virtues emerge its
self out of its own foeculencies and impurities: In this respect the making of
Philosophical Wine (red or white) renders the work of all the most secret
Chemistry most difficult and abstruse; of which we shall by the Blessing of
God) clearly and truly treat in a particular Book; namely, our Fifth. Our
purpose at present is to prosecute the Use of this Wine in the making of
Menstruums, where we find Aqua vitae the first and weakest of all Menstruums,
which, being by circulation alone reduced into an Oil, is made much more
excellent than before. Lully 's Receipt is clear enough; yet however we thought
it advisable to confirm at least, if not illustrate it with the Receipts of
other Adepts. Johannes de Rupescissa, a Scholar of Lully, had so great an
esteem for the first Distinction of his Master's Book of Essence, that he made
it his own with a little alteration: He has described the Spirit of
Philosophical Wine after this manner:

2. The Essence, Soul or Spirit of Wine of Johannes de Rupescissa, described
Chap 5. of his Book de Quintessentia.
REpute me not a Liar, in calling Aqua ardens a Quintessence, and saying that
none of the modern Philosophers and Physicians have attained to it, Aqua ardens
being commonly found every where; for I spoke true of a certain: for the
Magistery of a Quintessence is a thing occult, and I have not seen above one,
and him a most approved Divine, that understood any thing of the Secret and
Magistery of it: And I affirm for a truth, that the Quintessence is Aqua
ardens, and is Aqua ardens. And may the God of Heaven put prudence in the heart
of Evangelical Men, for whom I compose this Book, not to communicate this
Venerable Secret of God to the Reprobates: Behold now I open the Truth to you.
Take not Wine too watery, nor Wine that is black, earthy, insipid, but noble,
pleasant, savoury, and odoriferous Wine, the best that can be found, and
distill it through cooling pipes so often, till you have made the best Aqua
ardens you can; that is, you distill it from three to seven times; and this is
the Aqua ardens which the modern Physicians have not acquired. This water is
the Matter out of which the Quintessence which we intend principally in this
Book, is extracted: because when you have your noble water, you must cause such
a Destillatory to be made in a Glass-makers Furnace, all entire of one piece,
with one only hole above, by which the water must be put in and drawn out; for
then you shall see the Instrument so completely formed, that, that which by the
virtue of Fire ascends, and is distilled into the Vessel through the Pipes, may
be again carried back, in order to ascend again, and again descend continually
day and night, till the Aqua ardens be by the will of God above, converted into
a Quintessence; and the understanding of the Operation is in this; because the
best Aqua ardens that can be made, has yet a material mixture of the four
Elements; therefore it is by God ordained, that the Quintessence which we seek
for, should be by continual Ascensions and Descensions separated from the
corruptible composition of the four Elements; and this is done, because that
which is a second time or oftener sublimed, is more pure and glorified, and
separated from the corruption of the four Elements, than when it ascends only
one time, and so to a thousand times, and that which is by continual ascent and
descent sublimed, comes at length to so great an altitude of Glorification, as
to be almost an incorruptible Compound, as Heaven it self, and of the Nature of
Heaven; it is therefore called Quintessence, because it is in reference to our
Body as the Heavens in respect to the whole World; almost after the same
manner, so far as Art can imitate Nature, in a near and connatural similitude.

Circular Distillation therefore being for many days made in a Vessel of
Circulation, you must open the hole which is in the head of the Vessel, which
is indeed supposed to have been sealed with a Seal made of Lutum Sapientioe,
compounded of the finest Flower and the White of an Egg, and of wet Paper most
carefully picked and mixed, to prevent the least exhaling. And having opened
the Hole, if the Odor (which ought to be super-admirable, above all the
Fragrancies of the world) which shall seem to have descended as it were from
the sublime Throne of the most glorious God, be so great, that setting the
Vessel in a corner of a house, it shall by an invisible force with the
fragrancy of the Quintessence (which is wonderful and highly miraculous)
attract to it self all people that enter in; then have you the Quintessence
which you heard of; to which none of the modern Philosophers and Physicians
(except him that I excepted before) have so far as I have been able to
understand, attained. But if you find not the Odor and Influence of attracting
men, as I said, seal the Vessel as before, and bring it to the heat above
described, in order to compass your desire by Sublimations and Circulations;
namely, in finding out this Quintessence so glorified, into an Odor of
inestimable fragrancy and savor glorified to a wonder, and the influx of
attraction before expressed; and not only so as to yield a wonderful Scent, but
also to raise it self more fully to a kind of incorruptibility: it has not
that heat in your mouth which Aqua ardens has, nor that moistness, that is,
such an Aqueity flowing, because the acute heat of the Aqua ardens; and its
watery moistness is by Sublimations and Circulations wholly consumed, and the
Terreity will remain apart in the bottom: And the Heaven as well as Stars, of
which this our Quintessence is compounded both as to Matter and Form, are not
as that which is compounded of the four Elements; but there is but little of it
glorified so much even to the highest, filled with so noble a form, that the
power of Matter cannot aspire to any other Form, and so remains uncorrupted,
till the Composition be destroyed by command of the Creator: Nor is the
Quintessence which we seek, altogether reduced to the incorruption of Heaven;
as neither is Art equal to Nature: yet notwithstanding it is incorruptible in
respect of the Composition made of the four Elements, because should it be
altogether incorruptible, as Heaven, it would absolutely perpetuate our Body;
which the Author of Nature, the Lord Jesus Christ forbids. Now have I opened to
you much of the Secret, to the Glory of the immortal God.

Paracelsus extracts his Essence of Philosophical Wine not out of Aqua ardens,
but out of Philosophical Wine it self: Thus;

3. The Spirit of Wine of Paracelsus: Described, Chap. 9. of the Third Book of
Long Life, page 64.
YOur Wine being powered into a Pelican, digest in Horse-dung, and that the
space of two Months continually, you will see it so thin and pure, that a
Fatness, which is the Spirit of Wine, will of it self appear in the
superficies. Whatsoever is under this is Phlegm, without any nature of Wine;
but the Fatness alone being put into a Phial, and digested by it self, is of
most excellent energy for long Life.

Guido used the following Method, little differing from the Paracelsian. 4. The
Essence of Wine according to Guido, Described, Page 1. Thesaur. Chym.
TAke White or Red Wine, which is better, distill by Balneo till the Matter
remain in the consistence of Honey, which being divided into two parts in a
duplicated Cucurbit, mixed with the distilled Liquor, and join together again,
and after the digestion of six weeks, a green Oil will swim upon the Matter;
which separate through a Funnel.

From the Receipts, we think these Things following worthy of Observation.
1. That the Wine, Red or White, is not Common, but Philosophical, and that is
the only thing that is obscure in these four Books; to be understood not
according to the Letter, but by Analogy: but Aqua ardens, Aqua vitae, Spirit or
Essence of a Philosophical Wine are the proper Names of it.

2. That the Aqua ardens of Philosophical Wine does in some things agree with
the Properties of Common Spirit of Wine; namely, it goes before its Phlegm in
distillation: it is rectified as the Common, from its Phlegm. Lastly, being
rectified, it is known by burning Linen, Sugar, etc.

3. That this Aqua ardens does by Circulation daily lose its moisture and
sharpness; and is at length converted into a swimming Oil, the Essence and
Spirit of Philosophical Wine. But who ever reduced Common Spirit of Wine, or
Aqua Vitis, by bare Circulation into an Oil? Who, I say, has by continual
Circulation brought that Oil to Dryness; so as to be sublimeable as a volatile
Salt, and that not but by a strong Fire, as Isaacus affirms himself to have
experienced, in the Description of his Vegetable Stone? Of which lower in the
Third Book.

4. That the Oil, or Essence of Wine may be diverse ways made out of
Philosophical Wine.

5. That not only the Time, but also the Scent, Color, etc. of the Essence are
varied according to the variety of Method: The Essence of Lully is like Heaven,
that is, of a Sky-colour; the Oil of Guido is green.

6. That it has not a Scent so fragrant, unless it has a Body (especially a
Metallic or Mineral) dissolved in it.

7. That this Heaven, the first of all Menstruums, is also a Medecin; and is
called the Essence or Specific to a long Life.

8. That it is called Heaven for several Reasons by Lully.

First, Because it works Contraries, like Heaven. Our Vegetable Menstruum,
says Lully, the Celestial Animal, which is called Quintessence, preserves
Flesh from corruption, comforts things elemented, restores former Youth,
vivifies the Spirit, digests the crude, hardens the soft, rarifies the hard,
fattens the lean, wastes the fat, cools the hot, heats the cold, dries the
moist, moistens also the dry: One and the same thing can do contrary
operations. The Act of one thing is diversified according to the nature of the
Receiver; as the heat of the Sun, which has contrary operations; as in drying
Clay, and melting Wax: yet the Act of the Sun is one in it self, and not
contrary to it self.

Secondly, Because like Heaven it receives the Forms of all Things. As the
universal Form (the Macrocosmical Heaven) has an appetite to every Form, so
the Quintessence (of Philosophical Wine) to every Complexion; whereby it is
evidently manifest, that the Quintessence of things is said to be of that
complexion to which it is adjoined; if joined to hot, hot; if to cold, cold,
etc. This therefore the Philosophers called Heaven; because as Heaven affords
us sometimes heat, sometimes moisture, etc. so the Quintessence in men's Bodies
at the Artist's pleasure, etc. Distinct. 1. Lib. Essentioe. To this Heaven we
apply its Stars; which are Plants, Stones and Metals, to communicate to us Life
and Health, Ibid.

Thirdly, Because like Heaven it moves all things from power to act. Therefore
Heaven or our Mercury is the Cause and Principle moving G (C) (Metals) from
power to act: And in this point knows the understanding of an Artist, that D
(our Heaven) has action upon C, and (C) ruling and governing, and reducing it
into action; as Heaven brings that which is in Elemental things, by its own
motion into action, etc. For we call it Heaven, by reason of its motion;
because as the upper Heaven moves the universal Form, and first Master, and
Elements, and Senses, to compound Elemented Individuals; so D moves C, and (C)
and the four Elements to M, (the Sulphur of Nature, or Philosophers Mercury) or
to Q (the Tincture) Distinct. 3. de quarto principio Libri Essentioe.

4. Because like Heaven, it is incorruptible. Aqua vitoe is the Soul and Life
of Bodies, by which our Stone is vivified; therefore we call it Heaven, and
Quintessence, and incombustible Oil, and by its infinite other Names, because
it is incorruptible almost, as Heaven, in the continual circulation of its
motion, page 145. Elucid. Testam.

5. Because it is of the color and clarity of Heaven. Heaven or our Mercury is
the fourth Principle in this Art, and is signified by D, of an azure color and
line, and is signified by that color, because it is celestial, and of a
celestial Nature, as we said before in the description of it, Did. 3. Lib.
Essentioe,

This Essence Johannes de Rupescissa calls Humane Heaven, for the following
Reasons:

We ought to seek that thing which is to the four Qualities of which our Body
is compounded, as is Heaven in respect of the four Elements: Now the
Philosophers called Heaven Quintessence in respect of the four Elements,
because Heaven is in it self incorruptible and immutable, and not receiving
strange impressions, but by the command of God; so also, the thing which we
seek, is in respect of the four Qualities of our Body, a Quintessence, in it
self incorruptible so made, not hot dry with Fire, nor moist cold with Water,
nor hot moist with Air, nor cold dry with Earth; but is it a Quintessence able
to work Contraries, as the incorruptible Heaven; which, when it is necessary,
infuseth a moist Quality, sometimes a hot, sometimes a cold, sometimes a dry:
Such a Radix of Life is the Quintessence, which the most High created in
Nature, with power to supply the necessity of the Body to the utmost term which
God has appointed to our Life: And I said that the most High created the
Quintessence, which is by the Art of man extracted from the Body of Nature,
created by God: And I will name it by its three Names attributed to it by the
Philosophers: It is called Aqua ardens, Anima, or Spiritus Vini, and Aqua
Vitoe. And when you have a mind to conceal it, call it Quintessence; because
this is its Nature, and this is its Name, the greatest Philosophers have been
willing to disclose to no man, but caused the Truth to be buried with them: And
that it is not moist as the Element of Water, is demonstrated, because it
burns; which is a thing repugnant to Elementary Water. That it is not hot and
moist as Air, is declared, because dry Air may be corrupted with every thing,
as appears in the generation of Spiders; but that remains always incorrupt if
it be kept from expiring. That it is not dry and cold as Earth, is expressly
manifest, because it is exceeding sharp, and heats extremely: And that it is
not hot and dry as Fire, is apparent to the Eye, because it infrigidates hot
things, and wastes and eradicates hot Diseases. That it conduces to
incorruptibility, and preserves from corruptibility, I will demonstrate by an
Experiment; for if any Bird whatsoever, or piece of Flesh, or Fish be put into
it, it will not be corrupted so long as it shall continue therein; how much
more will it therefore keep the animated and living Flesh of our Body from all
corruption? This Quintessence is the humane Heaven, which the most High created
for the preservation of the four Qualities of man's Body as Heaven, for the
preservation of the whole Universe. And know of a certain, that the modern
Philosophers and Physicians are altogether ignorant of this Quintessence, and
of the truth and virtue thereof: But by the help of God I will hereafter
declare to you the Magistery of it. And hitherto I have taught you a Secret,
the Quintessence, that is, the humane Heaven, Cap. 2. Lib. Essentioe.

9. Lastly, That many Receipts more obscure, and otherwise intelligible by no
man, are by these illustrated.

The Second KIND. Simple Vegetable Menstruums made of the Spirit of
Philosophical Wine, and the hottest Vegetables, Herbs, Flowers, Roots, etc.
being Oily.
5. The. Anima Metallica, or Lunaria Coelica of Lully; Described in Composit.
Animae Transmut. page 193. Vol. 3. Theat. Chym.
FIrst you must know, that the Matter of our Stone, or of all the Stones of the
Philosophers, together with Precious Stones, which are generated or compounded
by Art, is this Metallic Soul, and our Menstruum rectified and acuated, or the
Lunaria Coelica, which among the Philosophers is called Vegetable Mercury,
produced from Wine red or white, as is clearly manifest, being revealed to us
by God, in our Figura Individuorum, Distinct. 3. Libri Quint. Essent. etc.

But first, it is expedient to draw our Menstruum by Art from Death, that is,
the Impurities and Phlegm of Wine, by the Office of an Alembick, and to acuate
it in distillation with pertinent Vegetables; such as are Apium sylvestre,
Squilla, Solatrum, Carduus, Oliandrum, Piper nigrum, Euphorbium, Viticella or
Flammula, and Pyrethrum, an equal quantity of all, and pulverized. Then the
Menstruum must be circulated continually for the space of ten days in hot Dung,
or Balneo Marioe.

Annotations.

THE Unctuous Spirit of Philosophical Wine attracts none but the Unctious
natural Essences of Vegetables, as we shall observe below in the Book of
Medecines. Essences being thus extracted, as also all other Oily things, crude
or expressed, and all distilled of both Kingdoms, Animal and Vegetable, this
Spirit of Wine does by simple digestion divide into two distinct parts, two
Oils or Fats, whereof one is the Essence of the thing, the other the Body: The
Essence so made we named the Second Spirit of Wine. Both Essences, this by
Division, and that by Extraction prepared, are by longer digestion made one
with the aforesaid Spirit of Wine. For those things which are of one and the
same purity, and of a symbolical Nature, are easily mixed together, and that
inseparably, and so an Essence made by an Essence, is joined to that Essence.
And if we protract Digestion further, one of the Fats, namely, the Body less
Oily, and therefore left hitherto, is at length received also into a symbolical
Nature, by reason of which mixtion, not only is the Spirit multiplied, but also
made fitter for the Dissolutions of dry things, because the Particles of this
Body less Oily incline to dryness; concerning which way we treat in this
Receipt, in the Prescription of which, the Oil drawn out of Oily Vegetables, is
by distillation together with the Spirit of Philosophical Wine, circulated
into a Magistery (or double Essence, Natural and Artificial; of which, lower in
its place) by which the Spirit of Wine is multiplied, and made more homogeneous
to dry Bodies. There is the same Menstruum, but a little otherwise described in
his Natural Magic. page 358. thus; Take Nigrum nigrius Nigro, and distill ten
or eight parts of the same in a Glass-Vessel, and in the first distillation you
must receive only one half; this again distill, and hereof take a fourth part;
and the third distillation you must take in a manner all, and so distill that
part eight or nine times, and it will be perfect, but not rectified under one
and twenty Distillations. Take of this Water a quarter of a pound, and acuate
the same by distilling it with the Vegetables, which are Apium Sylvestre; and
so of the rest, of which was spoken above in Anima Transmutationis, in the
Chapter which begins, First you must know, etc. And then put it into a Vessel
of Circulation in hot dung, or in the remains of a Wine Press with the
preservation of the Species. Which water is also one of the things without
which nothing can be effected in the Magistery of this Art.

That Menstruum which ought to be drawn from the Death of Wine by the Office of
an Alembick, acuated with the said Vegetables, and at length circulated, is the
Spirit of Philosophical Wine, which is by these degrees so exalted, as to be by
Lully deservedly called the Matter of all the Stones of the Philosophers, and
virtuous Stones (that is, Precious Stones) Anima Metallica, and Lunaria
Coelica, which also is called Vegetable Mercury, deduced from Wine red or white.

The Matter of which this Menstruum is made, is called Wine in the former
Receipt: the Menstruum must be extracted from the Death of Wine: But in the
latter it is called Nigrum nigrius Nigro. To these two Lully adds a third
synonimous, page 1. Test. novissimi. Take red Wine, which we call the Liquor of
Lunaria and Nigrum nigrius Nigro. By which synonimous Terms none but a Fool can
understand Common Wine; for the common Spirit herefrom distilled, is altogether
insufficient to perform such and so great things; yea, all the Arcanums of the
more secret Chymy, which we are solicitous to describe, would be prostituted to
all men, were this one only Word literally understood: by Wine therefore is
meant a Philosophical Secret hidden from all the unexpert.

It is expedient to draw from the Death of Wine, by the Office of an Alembick,
that is, we must rectify so often till it become most pure, without the Foeces
and Phlegm of Wine, which is by Lully called the Death of the Spirit. It is
(says he) purged from all its Superfluity, and Phlegmatic corruptible matter,
which is its Death, and which mortifies its Spirit, which has the power of
vivifying its Earth; let therefore the corruptible Phlegm be purged and
separated from it by a subtle method, which I will tell you: For what reason?
because if it be not well purged, its Earth will never become white, nor will
Matrimony be made between the Body and Spirit; and so that Spirit is called the
Spirit of the Stone in Apertorio.

The Method of Rectification omitted in the former Receipt, is described in the
latter, as also in Epistola accurtatoria: This Rectification of Philosophical
Wine Sendivogius understood not, as appears by the Sixth of his Epistles, Brux.
25. Martii 1646. Where thus: The second Article (my Companion) of the Pagesian
work, endeavors to repeat the mysterious way of extracting and preparing
Mercury, more than needed, the Authority of Lully being misunderstood, and the
Precepts of other Philosophers ill applied, he commanding the tenth part of his
Magnesia first ascending by distillation to be saved, as the only useful, and
truly Mercurial substance; but the other nine parts proceeding by continuance
of distillation, to be cast away as of no use, to this end, that the said tenth
part reserved, might at length be restored to the Earth remaining after
complete distillation, (which Earth is foolishly supposed to be the Salt and
Sulphur of Mercury) and by repeated cohobations, inhumations, digestions and
sublimations described by him, united; but it is a grievous Error, for that
which Authors declare concerning the tenth part containing the Spirit, and of
inhumations in its own Earth, is otherwise referred than to the extraction and
preparation of Mercury, as shall be elsewhere in time demonstrated; nor for the
said extraction and preparation of Mercury is there any Rule to be used besides
the bare distilling of Magnesia, whereby the Spirit and Oil are together
elevated to a Siccity even of the Foeces, and separation of the Spirit from the
Oil, and rectification of the same Spirit oftentimes repeated: But these things
we will in their proper place more amply treat of in the Method of operating.

Parisinus, a Disciple of Lully, will correct Sendivogius, who learnt of Lully
to rectify his Spirit of Philosophical Wine after this manner.

Take A ( Chaos, our Vegetable Mercury, in which the four Elements are found
confused, page 271. Vol. sext. Theat. Chym.) and put it in a Vessel to be
distilled through Y ( Balneo, page 276.) and in this temperate distillation
gather its B. ( Celestial ardent Spirit, page 269.) continue that distillation
this way and method till you attain to the Signs declared in our Apertorial,
and till you know that the said B. is dissolved and separated from its
Elemental Nature, continuing this Magistery even to the fourth Revolution: Then
put this Celestial fiery Matter into a pure Vessel, and distill slowly with
ordinary fire, and take only a tenth part; in the second distillation take
half, and in the third, two parts of three; and in the fourth, take four parts
of five, and more: Then take that last Celestial Water, and distill it three or
four times by the Rule abovesaid, taking the whole without any separation
appointed. This observe, and admire the necessity of this Mystery and
Foundation, and you will understand the reason why dull and ignorant men make
the worst Bread with the finest and purest Flower, because they mix the course
part with the fine: The same thing happens to presumptuous Artists, who
persuade themselves that they are able to find out the beauty of our
Quintessence with the exuberated Spirit negligently purified, without an exact
separation of the pure from the impure. in Elucid. page 230. Vol. 6. Theatri
Chym.

Which way notwithstanding of rectification so exactly to observe, there seems
to me to be no necessity; rectification of the Spirit being good enough, which
way soever done, either with fewer or more cohobations, provided it be
separated from the impurities of the Wine, which you will know (says Lully)
when it burns a piece of Linen by reason of its vehement heat, that is, as
elsewhere more clearly, till a Linen Cloth moistened with this Spirit, and
kindled, be wholly consumed. This rectified Spirit is in distilling, sharpened
with the oily Vegetables nominated in the Receipt, the Oils of which, being
nearest to it, it easily carries with it, and is impregnated with the same,
and acuated by the aridity contained in them: Yet are we not obliged to use
these Vegetables only, and no other, or is it necessary to mix all of them
together, as if one or two would not suffice. The Oil of any Vegetable, or
drawn out of a Vegetable with the help of the Spirit of Philosophical Wine, or
already made, and added to the Spirit of Philosophical Wine, will here satisfy
us. I will give one form or other in confirmation of this kind of Menstruums;
of which sort is,

6. The Aqua Vitae of Paracelsus, Page 508. Tom. 1.
TAke of the Alcool of Wine exsiccated three pounds, of the Flowers of
Rosemary, Macis, Lavender, of each half an ounce; of Cubebs, Cloves, Cinnamon,
of each two ounces; of Mastick, half an ounce; of both sorts of Storax, half a
dram of each; of Doronicum, three ounces; and cohobate seven times.

The following Use besides the Alcool of Wine exsiccated, testifies, that this
Water is made with the Spirit of Philosophical Wine. Take of the Leaves of
Gold, Number. 20. of Pearls not perforated, Granats, Rubies, of each half a
dram; digest for a Month: Then take of this Oil three or four grains with
Malago wine, or the water of Majoram or Sage. This Menstruum is Vinum Essatum
or Essentificatum, or Spirit of Philosophical Wine impregnated with the
Essences of the Oily Ingredients, with which Paracelsus dissolves Gold and
Precious Stones into a most noble Oil or Elixir, which he says is a Secret
against the superfluity of Women's Menstruums. The Description of this Water
being clear, requires no other Light: I will therefore propose another Receipt
more obscure.

7. Another Aqua Vitae of Paracelsus, Page 115. Chyr. Min.
TAke of the waters of Melissa, Roses, Cheirus, Sage, Balsamus, of each one
pound: of all the Peppers, Cubebs, Ginger, Cinnamon, Mastick, red Myrrh, Mace,
Cloves, of each two ounces; of the Juice of Honey, half a pound; of rectified
Aqua Vitae, sive pound: Let them be all digested together for the space of nine
days, and after that separated, and distilled in a Pelican into a Spirit. Then
to this Liquor add an Apple roasted and broken, and let them be digested
together with the following Spices upon Ashes for three days; of which take
five grains every day. The Spices are these; Take of Cinnamon, Cloves, Mace, of
each two ounces; of Cheirus, Anthos, of each half an ounce; of Amber, two
drachms; of Musk, five grains; of Zibeth, half a dram; of Ginger, Cubebs,
Nutmegs, of each one ounce and half; of Amomus, two drachms; of Zedoary, two
ounces and half; of Grains of Paradise, one ounce and half. After Digestion of
them all, separate, and keep the Matter in Glass Vessels very close stopped.

From the Dose it self of this Prescription, it is manifest that the operation
is merely Philosophical; for if by Aqua vitae he would have understood the
Common Spirit of Wine, it would be altogether ridiculous to give only five
grains for a Dose. We meet with many more Menstruums of this kind, which little
differing from the pristine Nature of the Spirit of Philosophical Wine, were
less observed by some Adepts; wherefore Christophorus Parisinus, a Noble
Sicilian, does not very much commend this acuation of the Spirit of
Philosophical Wine. Some (says he) have made (the aforesaid Spirit) acute with
Vitriol, which way is very good; some with Nitre; some with Cinnabar; some with
these two, some with all three; some with their Earth, which way displeases
me, because a thick Unctuosity and ponderosity was hereby introduced; some use
Vegetables, as Herbs, Roots, Flowers, and Seeds known to you, which have strong
(Vegetable) Mercuries in them; wherefore they that handled it after this
manner, augmented rather its Vegetable Form (Vnctuosity) than that they made it
more soluble. Parisinus in Elucidario, page 231. Vol. 6. Theat. Chym. For this
reason, Ripley following the same Master as Parisinus, believed these things to
be covered with a Mantle of Philosophy; for so he writes in his Medulla
Philosophioe. Raymund says, it ought to be drawn out from the Death and Faeces
of Wine for the space of one hundred and twenty days, by continual rotation, in
a Balneo of of the hottest Dung, and that it must be acuated with hot Vegetable
things, as Piper nigrum, Euphorbium, Pyrethrum, Anacardus, Squilla, Solatrum,
Apium Sylvestre, and such like; for without the virtue of these things, as he
says, it is not sufficient to dissolve Metals, except in a long time; but that
nothing of doubt or ambiguity may appear, I say, that all these things are
covered and shrouded with a Philosophical Mantle: For his meaning is, that in
this Spirit may be had another resoluble Menstruum, because without such a
resolutive Menstruum Solution can never be made: And that resoluble Menstruum
is generated only from the Metallic kind, and is by our resolutive Menstruum
produced into act, Ripley, page 168. Medul. Philos. Ripley did by the resoluble
Menstruum produced into act by the Menstruum resolutive (that is, the Spirit of
Philosophical Wine) mean a certain Mercurial Water; of the Preparation of which
lower: where likewise it will appear that by the aforesaid Vegetables Ripley
thought Lully intended running Mercury; yet nevertheless his following
Menstruum proves, that these Vegetables have been sometimes also taken by him
literally.

8. The Aqua Vitae of Ripley. Page 338. Viatici.
THE Menstruum being distilled from the first Faeces, circulate it with the
hottest Species, such as are, Black Pepper, Euphorbium, Pyrethrum, Anacardus,
Grains of Paradise, and the like, for the space of 100 days in Balneo; and
after that, distill only half of it, and make your putrefaction with it, etc.

It is here manifest that Ripley took these Vegetables, Not Argent vive,
because, Circulation being finished, he distilled only one half of the Spirit,
as the most subtle part of the Vegetables; in which case that Metal (Mercury)
though dissolved, would remain in the bottom. But whereas Lully acuates the
Spirit by distilling, and then circulates; Ripley does this by circulating, and
after that distills. To this Aqua Vitae he sometimes adds Oils, or Essences
either of Metals or Vegetables, as follows;

9. The Compounded Aqua Vitae of Ripley, Page 343. Viatici.
CIrculate the strongest red. Wine with known Vegetables, for the space of 120
days, with continual Rotation in Balneo, and then draw only the purest Spirit
by distillation; to which put the Oil of the purest Luna, made without a
Corrosive; and let them be circulated together 100 days more, and then is the
Water of the nature of the Basilisk, because as a Basilisk kills a man at an
instant by the Aspect alone, so this Water being put upon Argent vive does
without any other Fire, suddenly in a manner congeal it into the purest Silver:
And note, if the Fire (Oil or Essence) of Celandine be put in, or the Fire of
the Flowers of Thyme, after the first Circulation, and they circulated together
without the Oil of Luna, the Argent vive will be much better congealed, etc.
But that which begets the greater scruple, is the Paraphrase of Lully himself
upon this place. We, says he, would not have you ignorant of that you may
extract our Argent vive (Veget.) from its Mine another way: The way (my Son) is
to take the Herb which is called Portulaca marina, Apium, Squilla, etc. distill
the Faeces which remain calcine, draw off the Salt with the distilled water,
and abstract the water from it, purify the Salt by often dissolving and
coagulating, and you will have the Salt of the acuating Vegetable Herbs: These
(says he) I meant, when I said, acuate with acuating Vegetables, that is, the
Salts, not the simple Herbs: Wherefore you might say, it follows, that this
Receipt of the Metallic Soul has not at all been described, so as to be
understood according to the Literal Sense; but I have my Answer ready, namely,
that Lully acuated the Spirit of Wine with crude Vegetables also, it is easily
proved by the third Distinction of his Book of Essence, in Figura individuorum,
alleged by him, where he rehearses the nearest Individuals, acuating the
Spirit of Philosophical Wine, as are red Wine, new Honey, Celandine, Flowers of
Rosemary, Herb Mercury, red Lilly, Tartar, Man's Blood, and white Wine. Why he
chose these, not others, and these only, it is not my business to answer: that
which we learn from thence, is, that he commended two of those Individuals to
us before the rest, Tartar and Honey, of which thus. There are some
Individuals, in which Mercury (Vegetable) has a free Act in some respect, in
Tartar it has one free operation only, and in Honey two, and this an Artist
ought to know, that he may be certified in this Art, and the first Truth
thereof. He prefers Tartar, not for the sake of the Tartar, but the Alkali made
from thence, and that he resolves as the best of Alkalies per deliquium, and
circulates it being purified with the Spirit of Philosophical Wine, according
to the Doctrine prescribed in prima Tabula individuorum, in the second
Experiment, and in other places. The Alkali of Tartar may be supplied with the
Alkalies of Honey, Celandine, and the rest of the Individuals named by Lully,
with which the Adepts did also sometimes acuate their Spirit of Wine, as shall
be declared below in tht Fifth Kind of Menstruums: But these things make also
against the Literal sense of our Receipt, and do prove that the Salts of the
Vegetables, not the crude Vegetables themselves were taken in the Receipt. But
though he made choice of Tartar, because of the strongest Alkali to be from
thence prepared, yet did he not for the same reason intimate, that Celandine,
the Flowers of Rosemary, Herb Mercury, red Lilly, and man's Blood were better
than the rest, because with these he proceeds another way; for he separates the
Elements from them with the Spirit of Philosophical Wine, from which he takes
only the Fire or Oil, which he circulates with the Spirit, and so acuates it,
as is clearly enough evident in secunda Tabula Individuorum.

But because Honey surpasses not only its own collateral Individuals, but also
the Tartar it self (for he says that the Spirit of Wine in Tartar has one,
but in Honey two free Operations) and therefore attributes his peculiar process
to Honey, namely, by distilling the whole Comb, the Honey together with the
Wax, with the Spirit of Philosophical Wine through an Alembick. Now between
both processes of Honey, and the rest of the Individuals our Receipt keeps a
middle station. If Honey be volatilized as to the whole substance, it becomes
thereby a Magistery, which being joined to the Spirit of Philosophical Wine,
yields us a Menstruum of the Third kind. But the Fires or Oils of Celandine, of
the Flowers of Rosemary, common white and red Wine, etc. are by separation of
the Elements made with the Spirit of Philosophical Wine, Essences, which being
added to the said Spirit of Wine, do not alter, but multiply it rather, because
an Essence is added to an Essence, that is, the second to the first Spirit of
Philosophical Wine. But if Celandine, the Flowers of Rosemary, as also the
Vegetables of our Receipt be distilled with the Spirit of Philosophical Wine,
it does extract and elevate all their Vnctuosity with it self, rejecting the
aridity of them, being more simple, subtle, volatile, and less loaded with dry
Particles, than the Vnctuosity of crude Honey; and so by being circulated with
the Spirit of Philosophical Wine; it is made indeed a Magistery, yet more
inclining to the nature of an Essence, and therefore less dry, and less
altering the Spirit of Wine, than that of Honey, and so being now deservedly
united with the aforesaid Spirit, it makes a Menstruum different from the
Menstruums of the Third Kind. So the Literal Sense of our Receipt does hitherto
stand unmoved. But not to derogate from the Authority of the Author, and his
own Commentator Lully, it is necessary to suppose, that, the Spirit of
Philosophical Wine being distilled upon the aforesaid Vegetables, he did
sometimes out of the remainder prepare an Alkali by calcination, and acuate his
Spirit with it, and so make a Menstruum of the Fifth Kind.

From these and the like Receipts, we observe,

1. That Wine, Lunaria, Nigrum nigrius Nigro, the Matter of the Menstruum of
Vegetable Mercury or Soul of Metals, is not Common, but Philosophical Wine; nor
that the Spirit of this Wine is the Common, but Philosophical Aqua ardens.

2. That a Menstruum of this kind is the unctuous Spirit of Philosophical Wine
acuated, that is, tempered with the common Vnctuosity of Vegetable Oils. Mix,
digest, and distill any common distilled Oil with the Spirit of Philosophical
Wine, and you will obtain a Menstruum of the Second Kind much sooner; yea, you
will make the same in a moment, if you mix the Essence (Spirit) of
Philosophical Wine with the Magistery of an oily Vegetable.

3. That one oily Vegetable (Saffron or Macis) of so many, is sufficient for
the acuation of the Spirit of Philosophical Wine; nor yet will you err, if you
take Triacle; which Spirit of Triacle, made with this Spirit of Wine, will be a
Menstruum of this kind.

4. That these Menstruums are Medecines.

5. That these Menstruums made out of mere Vegetables, are properly called
Vegetable Menstruums, though some which we call Vegetable Menstruums compounded,
are by reason of the addition of Metals or Minerals, sometimes by the Adepts
called Mineral Menstruums: so Lully in the 34th. Experiment, calls his
Circulatum majus made of Gold and Silver, the true Mineral Menstruum. But we
distinguish them from the Mineral Menstruums, because they are corrosive, being
prepared with the acidity of Mi^eral Salts. But these are most sweet, without
any Corrosive, and do kindly dissolve things that are to be dissolved.

6. That a Menstruum is called the Soul of Metals. Soul is diversely taken among
the Adepts.

First, For perfect Metal, Gold or Silver. So Arnold in Flore Florum:
Philosophers call the Soul a Ferment, because as the Body of man can do nothing
without its Ferment or Soul, so is it in the thing propounded; for Ferment is a
Substance which converts other things into its own Nature. And you must know,
there is no Ferment, except Sol and Luna, that is, Gold and Silver appropriated
to those Planets, etc. Ferment therefore must be introduced into the Body,
because it is the Soul thereof. This is that which Morienus said, except you
cleanse the unclean Body, and make it white, and infuse a Soul into it, you
conduce nothing to this Magistery.

Secondly, For Metals, and other things, volatilized with a Philosophical
Menstruum. So Lully calls Gold and Silver volatilized in the preparation of his
Circulatum majus, Menstruum, or animated Spirit. Take, says he, the animated
Spirit of Sol, and the animated Spirit of Luna, join them together, etc. So the
Tinctures of Gold and Silver volatilized by a Menstruum, as also of imperfect
Metals, are by him called Souls. So in the 20th. Experiment he has the Animal
Water of Saturn; in the 21th. Experiment, the Soul of Mars. Yea separating the
Elements from all things, he calls the tinged distilled Liquors Souls or
animated Spirits, because by them is the dead, dry and fixed Earth again
revivified, volatilized, and reduced into a Sal harmoniack. See the
Revivification of the Salt of Tartar by its own Water, in the Volatization of
it given in the Second Experiment.

Thirdly, For Menstruums themselves. For Menstruums are the Souls of Metals, by
which the Metals, otherwise dead, are animated and revivified: so Lully of this
our Menstruum, the Soul of Metals, page 195. Comp. Anim. Transm. Otherwise,
says he, Metals cannot be dissolved, unless they be animated with a Vegetable
Menstruum, by the power of which, Resolution is made in things resoluble. And
in Elucid. Testam. page 145. Aqua vitoe is the Soul and Life of Bodies, by
which our Stone is vivified. So also Ripley in Libro Mercurii, page 108. says,
The Sperm of Metals is also called Metallic Aqua Vitoe, because it
administreth life and health to Metals, being sick, dead, etc.

Fourthly, For the Vnctuosity as well of the Metal as Menstruum. Of both says
Ripley, page 150. Medulloe Phil. There is some certain Similitude of the
Trinity to be perceived in the Body, Soul and Spirit (of our Work.) The Body is
the substance of the Stone; the Spirit is the Virtue (that is, the
Quintessence, which excites Natures from Death) and the Soul is to be taken for
the Ferment, which cannot be had but out of the most perfect Body (Gold) in
Sulphur (of Gold;) there is a Terrestreity for the Body, and in Mercury
(Menstruum) an aereal serenity for the Spirit; and in both a natural Unctuosity
for the Soul: For they are all fermentable in the Unctuosity of the Body, being
mixed and inseparably united with it throughout its most minute parts, by which
Soul is the Stone formed, because nothing can be any way formed without it.

7. That this Menstruum, is called Vegetable Mercury, produced from red or
white Wine. The Adepts have many Mercuries.

The First is, Common Argent vive, running or sublimed.

The Second is, The running Mercury of Bodies, extracted out of Metals by the
Spirit of Philosophical Wine.

A Third is, Any Salt Alkali, especially fixed with the Spirit of Philosophical
Wine.

Lully calcines Celandine, and from thence extracts a Salt; of which thus;
Repeat this Magistery so often, till you have extracted all the Salt, which is
the Mercurial Part of that Individual (Celandine.) These things therefore being
done, take all these Dissolutions (Lixivia's) and transmit them through a
Filter, or Linen Cloth, that they may be purged from Terrestreity; then
distilled by Balneo congeal, and the moisture being gone over, in the bottom of
the Vessel will remain a Mercury or Salt, of a white color; and by this means
you will have extracted out of this Matter a Mercury, which has almost
innumerable Virtues of acuating the Vegetable Spirit, drawn from
(Philosophical) Wine, so as to have the power of dissolving all Metals with the
conservation of the Vegetative and Germinative Form.

In Magia Naturali, He calls Tartar calcined, and impregnated with the
Vegetable Menstruum, by being four times distilled, then resolved per
Deliquium, and coagulated by the Name of Mercury. And says he, page 379, you
will have the Salt of Art, or Testamentary Mercury, without which is nothing
done. Sometimes the Salt, or Caput Mortuum, in the separation of the Elements,
called exanimated Earth, he calls Mercury. So in Exp. 6. The inanimated Earth
of Urine, dissolved in Water, filtred and coagulated, he calls Mercury: Then,
says he, Keep our fixed Sal armoniack, our animal Sulphur, our fixed animal
Mercury. Lay a little of which, upon a Fire-hot-plate, and if it melt as Wax
without fume, it is a sign you have Argent vive fixed and perfectly depurated,
wherewith you will be able to produce many Experiments. This is that Mercury,
which has afforded us most convenient relief.

The Fourth Mercury, is either Vegetable or Animal; of which says Ripley in
Pupilla, page 300. There are more Mercuries than the two abovesaid (Mineral
the red and green Lion) namely, the Vegetable and Animal Mercury, because both
may be extracted out of some Liquors, as out of Blood and Eggs. Lully Distinct.
3. Libri Essentioe in Figuris and Tabulis Individuorum, describes the
Vegetables and Animals, in which are found these Mercuries most readily. There
is, says he, lastly this other Secret of Nature, for the Artist of this Art to
know, and really have the knowledge of the Individuals, in which our Mercury is
found most easily. Wherefore let the Artists of this Art know, that our Mercury
is found in every Elemented Body, yet in some so remote, as to anticipate the
Life of Man, before the Artist of this Art can possess it, being extracted, as
is expedient: Wherefore we do in that place reveal those things which contain
it most nearly. Of this Mercury, says Lully, Libro Mercuriorum, page 8. When
we say common Mercury, we speak of that which the Philosophers understand; and
when we say vulgar, we speak of that which the Rustic understands, and which
is sold in Shops: Which Ripley in the 326th page of his Concordance, thus
expresses; When I speak of Mercury, understand Mercury more common than
common.

The Fifth is, The Spirit of Philosohical Wine, which Lully in Exp. 3. calls
Vegetable Mercury. So, says he, will you have a Vegetable Salt extracted from
this Individual (Honey) which Salt is most precious, and has the power of
acuating the Vegetable Mercury, and dissolving the two Luminaries, etc. in Exp.
5. Salts he prepares out of Portulaca, Apium, Squilla, etc. with all which,
says he, you may acuate the Vegetable Mercury extracted out of Wine, either
jointly or severally; of which lower in the fifth kind of Menstruums.

The Sixth is, The Philosophical Menstruum it self; for our present Menstruum
is called Vegetable Mercury, produced from white or red Wine.

The Seventh is, The animated Spirit or Air of every Body, in the separation of
the Elements, which Mercury being a Fire or Oil, is called Sulphur in almost
all Receipts.

The Eighth is, Sal armoniack Vegetable, Animal or Mineral, the Sulphur of
Nature, which is also called our Mercury, Mercury Sublimate, and Philosophers
Mercury. Necessary it is we should observe these things in the following
Descriptions of Menstruums, except we would some times confound the things
themselves with the Names.

The Third KIND. Simple Vegetable Menstruums made of the Spirit of
Philosophical Wine, and Oily, Salts, or (such as can neither be called fixed
nor volatile) hitherto called Essential Salts, such as are Sugar, Honey, Tartar
of Common Wine, and other Vegetables.
10. The Mellifluous Heaven of Parisinus. In practica Elucid. p. 231. V. 6.
Theat. Chym.
THe way of acuating this Celestial and Burning B (Spirit of Philosophical
Wine) is to take of the Substances declared to you what quantity you will: But
we take the Substances of Flowers United ( that is, the Substance of New Honey,
page 269.) which we put in a Vessel to distill all the Aquosity through Y (
Balneo Marioe. page 270.) Then we pour in three parts and more of B upon that
Substance prepared after this manner; shutting the Vessel with its Cover,
called Antenotorium, and put it in Putrefaction for the space of one Natural
Day; then with three Distillations by Z. ( Fire of Ashes, page 270.) we distill
till we obtain all the Mercurial Part with the whole Juice of the Blessed
Substance by that Method, then repeat the aforesaid Magistery with New
Substance of Flowers, and making this Regiment four times, at the end of which,
you have reduced B solutive from Power into Act by Virtue of the Manna of the
Flowers United.

Now take a strong Glass Vessel, able to hold as much Water, as a common
Pitcher, with a Neck one span and a half long, to which another Glass Vessel,
containing a fourth part only of the Pitcher, must be joined, and well luted:
Into this Vessel put four Pounds of C ( the said Menstruum made of Honey) to
Circulate in Balneo, or Horse Dung, the space of thirty or forty Days, at the
expiration of which time, you will have C converted into D ( into the
Quintessence in its Perfection, drawn from excellent Wine, which is the Form of
the Universal Body reduced into B, and B into C, and then Circulation to be
made. This Quintessence is Vegetable, because, all the rest of the sharp Waters
destroying Metals, this alone does by its Virtue vegetate, augment and multiply
them. Wherefore this Water is the Mystery of Art, because it is Burning,
Calcines, and dissolves Bodies, if it be perfectly rectified, page 269.) But
the Sign of knowing, whether this Conversion be made, will be a sediment in the
bottom of the Vessel, like that, which appears in the Urine of a sound Man.
When the Glorious Body draws nigh, after thirty Days in the end of Perfection,
then will you see D, or the Quintessence in greater clarity and splendour than
any Diamond. The clarity whereof surpasses all Precious Things, so as that it
is difficult to judge, whether that Divine Liquor be in or out of the Vessel:
Then you must separate our Heaven from its Sediment or Hypostasis with
Industry, keeping it in a Vessel well luted in a cold place, that nothing may
from thence expire. This Quintessence is by the Philosophers called Spiritus
Vivus, because it gives Life to humane Bodies, and Metalls, as also Aqua
Argenti vivi, Aqua Vitoe, Aqua Coelestis, Aqua Divina, Stella Dianoe, Anima,
Spiritus Mercurii nostri Vegetabilis, Fumus, Ventus, Coelum Nostrum. To
conclude, infinite Names have been given it, which notwithstanding signifies
one and the same thing.

Annotations.

THe antecedent acuition of the Spirit of Philosophical Wine with Oily
Vegetables, did not so well please Christopher Parisinus, and therefore instead
thereof he substituted this, which he found better than the other. The great
Mystery and Treasure (says he) which we teach you in this Chapter, is, how you
ought to make B (the Celestial and Ardent Spirit) acute, which we signify by
C, wherefore give Ear, for I know not how I ought to propound this Doctrine,
lest this Secret should be prostituted to all Men: For all the Philosophers
that ever have been, have absconded this Secret under diverse Figures, because
without all doubt this is the thing, which is the Principal, or one of the
Principal Keys of this admirable Science. This I would have you certainly
believe, that B has no solutive Nature actually, but only potentially; for if
B were not acuated by the way and means manifested to you, it would have no
power of Dissolving: Some made it acute with Vitriol, which way is good enough:
Some with Niter: Some with Cinnabar: Some with these two, and some with all
three: Some with their Earth, which way displeases me, because this way thick
Unctuosity and Ponderosity was introduced: Some have used Vegetables, as Herbs,
Roots, Flowers, and Seeds known to you, which have powerful Mercuries in them;
for this Reason it is, That they which handled it this way, augmented rather
its Vegetable Form, than made it solutive: Some used Flowers United for
acuition, which is the Principal Way, and of our Intention, which is found in
the Alphabetum apertoriale: Some not knowing the true way of acuating this B,
spent much time in preparing diverse Waters, before they could put any Body into
B, as happened to us in the beginning, seeking that Practice, which is now
manifested to you by the Practice of our Summetta, which though it has
succeeded well, yet with very great Labor. The Mystery of this dissolutive
part is difficult, and tedious, and therefore I will undertake the Repetition
of it; for having made B acute by this Method, which we now manifest concerning
the solution of Bodies, to be perfected without trouble in a little time, you
will be certain. But I confess, when I was with you at that time, wherein we
made the first beginning of dissolving, we did not understand Raymund Lully in
this dissolutive part; but having read him over again returning to our Studies,
Practicing, Praying, and Fasting, a perfect Illumination of Mind came to us:
this way therefore will I manifest under the Seal of Silence, page 231. Vol. 6.
Theat. Chym.

Parisinus does by these Words make us more assured, that the Spirit of
Philosophical Wine has no power of dissolving any but Oily things, because it
is Oil it self; but in order to dissolve dry things also, it is necessary for
it to be acuated, that is, so tempered, as to be made homogeneous also to dry
things, and so dissolve them, which to be a Work difficult and tedious, his own
Experience proves; out of many acuators therefore of the Adepts, he chooses
Honey before the rest, whose principal acuating faculty, he calls the great
Mystery and Treasure of the Art. For according to Lully, the Spirit of
Philosophical Wine in Honey has two free Operations, that is, this Unctious
Spirit is easily United to the Vnctuosity of Honey, and by the same means also
easily tempered with the aridity of Honey. In a Word, there are other indeed,
yea all the following Menstruums stronger than this, but none more easy to be
prepared, and better for a young Beginner. Lully made the same Menstruum after
this manner.

11. The Spirit of Honey of Lully. Cap. 19. Lib. Mercur.
TAke of Aqua Vitoe, and put into this Vegetable Humidity a third part of a
Honeycomb, with all its Substance, Wax, and Honey together, ferment, or digest
it in a gentle heat for three Hours, and the longer it stands, the better it
is: then let it be Distilled in Balneo, and repeat the Distillation and
Fermentation nine times, renewing the Comb every second Distillation.

Parisinus it seems to me learnt not only the Spirit of Philosophical Wine, but
also the preparation it self of this Menstruum, from his Master Lully, though
the preparation he corrected a little: Parisinus digests one Pound of Honey
inspissated with three or four Pounds of the Spirit of Philosophical Wine, for
a Day in Balneo, then Distilling three times mixeth them together. The Work he
repeats three times, so as at these four times to have joined four Pounds of
Honey together with so many Pounds of Spirit, and Circulates both each time.
Lully digests the Honeycomb three Hours with three parts of Spirit, and in two
Distillations joins both together: He repeats the Work four times, so as in
eight Distillations to have United four parts of Honey with three of Spirit;
the Menstruum now joined together, he Distills once more, that in nine times or
cohobations, he makes his Spirit of Honey. Parisinus made choice of three
Ingredients for his Medicine: The most High Creator created three Mines; among
Minerals, one, and that is of Sol and Luna: among Vegetables, the Wine; among
Animals, the Be, page 222. Elucid. Lully of these three thus, cap. 46. lib.
Mercurior. Amongst all Minerals, Vegetables, and Animals, fixed Gold is chosen
for the making of Medicines; and above all the Virtues among Vegetables and
Animals, are the Virtues of the Juice, or Broth of Lunaria, and the Fly of
Besena, which makes Honey.

Parisinus in his Alphabetum apertoriale has indeed the same way of acuating
the Spirit of Wine; but he in the same place superadding the Salt of Honey,
extracted out of the Caput mortuum calcined to the Menstruum, this acuition is
referred not to this, but to another Kind.

But the Honey seems to have this special Privilege, as if Menstruums of this
third Kind, could be made of it alone; yet you must know that all Oily Salts,
(as are Sugar Cristallized, Manna Cristallized, crude Tartar of common Wine,
etc.) do on one side prove their affinity with Oily things, but on the other
side with dry, and so do by that their Oleosity, introduce their own aridity
into the Oily Spirit of Philosophical Wine, but by their aridity temper the
Oleosity of that Spirit. Wherefore the same things are to be understood of
Sugar and Manna, as have been spoken of Honey; one Example or two we will add
of crude Tartar, being dryer then the things aforesaid.

12. The Spirit of Crude Tartar of Guido. Page 51. Thesaur.
TAke of crude Tartar two Pounds, of Spirit of Wine three Pounds, Distill and
Cohobate ten times upon its own Caput Mortuum.

Paracelsus prepared this Spirit of Tartar after this manner:

13. The Spirit of Crude Tartar of Paracelsus. Lib. 8. Paragraph, page 505.
TAke crude Tartar, beat and digest it seven or eight times in the Alcool of
Wine, and Distill it into a Liquor, in which is no Alkali.

Out of the Receipts we observe the things following:

1. That the Spirit of Philosophical Wine has in dry things no dissolving
faculty without acuition.

2. That this acuition is the Mystery of the Art, being difficult and tedious.

3. That it is best made with crude Honey, white Sugar Candy, and Manna
purified.

4. That such Menstruums as these are somewhat hard to be made with crude
Tartar.

5. That Lully by Aqua Vitae, Parisinus by the Celestial and Ardent Spirit,
Guido by Spirit of Wine, and Paracelsus by the Alcool of Wine, meant not common
Aqua ardens, which if a Man try an experiment with the Spirit of common Wine,
he will by his own Experience find the Truth of the Matter confirmed.

6. That Menstruums of this Kind are the Magistery of Honey, Manna, Sugar,
crude Tartar, mixed with Spirit of Philosophical Wine, they are made extempore,
thus: Take of the Essence of Philosophical Wine, and the Magistery of Honey or
Sugar, equal parts of each, mix.

7. That these Menstruums are Medicaments.

8. That not only the Spirit of Philosophical Wine, but also the Menstruums
themselves have been Circulated, by reason of which Circulation the Menstruums
are called Circulatums; and though it be not always expressly declared in
Receipts, that they should be Circulated, yet it ought to be understood in all:
for this Circulation is the Purification and Melioration of the Menstruum. By
F, says Parisinus, in Alphabeto Summetta, page 9. mei M. S s. We mean Aqua
Vitoe Circulated thirty Days at least, in which Operation it is Purified from
its Terrestreity, so as to raise it self to the Celestial Virtue of a
Quintossence, which is called our Heaven, Influencing upon the Elements such
effects, as you may deservedly call miraculous: We therefore Name it
Quintessence and Aqua Vitoe, because it vivi^^es Bodies. Without this F, no
alteration can be made in Bodies, which caution may serve you for a general
Rule. It is otherwise called Vegetable Water, whereof we have more than often
made mention in several places of our Summetta, which we sent you, affirming
the difference between F and D to be greater, than between a clear Day and a
dark Night, as will appear in the Operation of it in particulars as well as
generals, which Virtue proceeds notwithstanding from our Circulation.

The fourth KIND. Simple Vegetable Menstruums made of Spirit of Philosophical
Wine, and Volatile Salts, such as common Sal Armoniack, Salt of Blood, Urine,
Soot, etc.
14. The Spirit of Sal Armoniack of Trismosinus. In Tract. Aquil. nig. page 13.
Aur. Veller. Germ.
TAke of Sal Armoniack one Pound, of common Salt melted one Pound and a half,
being very well pulverized and mixed, sublime them; the Matter sublimed sublime
again with new Salt, and that to be repeated so often, till the Sal Armoniack be
made like an impalpable Spirit, (Powder) then imbibe with the Spirit of
(Philosophical) Wine, and the Vessel being very close, set it in Balneo to be
dissolved; being dissolved decant, and putrify with new Spirit of Wine added
the space of eight Days in Balneo, then Distill gently one half in Balneo, and
being Distilled pour it again to the remainder, and Distill again, but with a
stronger Fire, that all may ascend through the Alembick: Being Distilled,
rectify it so often, till it be without Faeces.

Annotations.

HItherto of things Oily acuating the Spirit of Philosophical Wine: now follow
those things which are less Oily, Volatile Salts, which though they seem not to
be Oily, yet that they are so is easily demonstrated by the following
preparations of Salts Harmoniack, whose Earths, otherwise most fixed and
flowing like Wax, are by the Vnctuosity alone of the Menstruum made Volatile,
but this will not now be our inquiry: It suffices us to use crude and common
Sal Armoniack, Salt of Urine, Blood, etc. for the acuition of the Spirit of
Philosophical Wine, which Salts do by their aridity alter their Vnctuosity of
this Spirit, more than the aforesaid Oily Matters, and consequently make the
Vegetable Menstruum stronger. The same Receipt has Trismosinus Libro novem
Tincturarum in Tinctura Quarta, page 59. as also in Tinctura Pitrumorisonis
Philosophi Angli, page 90. of the aforesaid Book. Trismosinus sublimes crude
Sal Armoniack several times upon Salt fused, to be acuated by the acidity of
this Salt, and then the better dissolved by the Spirit of Philosophical Wine.
Geber de investigat. Magist, page 284. Sublimes Sal Armoniack with an equal
proportion of Salt. Aristotle the Chemist perfected this sublimation after this
manner, page 74. Volum. 3. Theat. Chym. Take of Sal Armoniack one Pound, of
Spuma Maris six Ounces, of Sal Gemme, of common Salt and Alum, of each two
Ounces, grind them all together, and Sift through a thick Hair Sieve, then put
the Matter into an Aludel, and sublime, and the Sublimation repeat.

The Sal Armoniack being thus sublimed, is impregnated with the Spirit of Wine,
(not common, for then would the process not succeed, but Philosophical Wine)
and then dissolved per deliquium: For the Vnctuosity of this Spirit cannot
dissolve the substance of Sal Armoniack, being heterogeneous to it, but
successively, and by slow degrees. Wherefore this dissolution will better
succeed according to the Method of Lully. Dissolve, says he, Sal Armoniack in
the Phlegm of Vinum of Lotium, (Philosophical Wine made of Urine) pass it
through a Filter, and remove the Water by Balneo, and the Salt will remain
coagulated and white; dissolve again with the Phlegm, and Distill it away by
Balneo. Then take such a quantity of Aqua Vitoe (Spirit of Philosophical Wine)
as you have of Phlegm, and pour them together upon the same Salt, and the
Vessel being covered with its Antenotorium (Blind Alembick) set it in Balneo
twenty four Hours; the Antenotorium being taken away, and an Alembick put on,
Distill by Balneo with a most gentle Fire, when the Salt is coagulated, congeal
it again, repeat the same Magistery, dissolving by turns after this manner, and
congealing three times; and so have you reduced the said Salt into a Vegetable
Virtue, by the help of the Vegetative Spirit, by which you dissolved and
congealed it. Lully in Exp. 16. Sal Almoniack is easily dissolved in the Phlegm
of Philosophical Wine, and so is by this means sooner joined with the Unctuous
Spirit of Philosophical Wine, than if it were immediately cast into this
Spirit. That Trismosinus knew also this Method, and sometimes made use of it,
appears by the following Menstruum.

15. Another Water of Sal Armoniack of Trismosinus. In Tinctura Gereton, page
98. Aur. Vel. German.
TAke of Sal Armoniack Crude two Pounds, let it be dissolved in Wine
(Philosophical) Cristallize it, let the Cristals be dissolved per deliquium;
the solution divide into two parts, one of which distill into the other with a
Fire sufficiently strong, rectify the parts being joined together into a strong
Water of Sal Armoniack. The Sal Armoniack therefore being dissolved either in
the Phlegm of Philosophical Wine, (that is, Aqua ardens not rectified) or
Philosophical Wine it self, Cristallized, and resolved per deliquium, is either
by it self, or with the addition of new Spirit of Wine, Distilled into a Water
of Sal Armoniack.

This Kind of Menstruums is made not of Sal Armoniack only, but also of the
rest of the Volatile Salts, thus:

16. The Gelative Sulphur of Lully. In Exp. 8.
TAke of the aforesaid animated Spirit (of Urine) one part, and of Aqua Vitoe
perfectly rectified four parts, which pour upon the animated Spirit, and
forthwith stop the Vessel, that it may not respire, which Vessel must be a
large Bottle, which shake and move with your Hands, so in the twinkling of an
Eye or Moment, you will see all the Water converted into Salt; but if any part
of Phlegm be in the (Philosophical) Aqua Vitoe, it will be immediately
separated from the Salt in the Form of Water; the Aqua Vitoe therefore ought to
be very well purged from all Phlegm, that, when the work is done, no Matter may
remain with the Salt, but be wholly converted, which will be better and more
useful, and by this means you will have the Animal and Vegetable Salt, which we
will call Coagulative and Gelative Sulphur, because it has the property and
virtue of dissolving the two Luminaries, and reducing them from power to act,
their Vegetative and Germinative Form being preserved. Lully sometimes sublimed
this Offa or Pap of Urine, in the Ninth Experiment following, thus:

There is, says he, besides, another way of Copulating the aforesaid Animal
Spirit with the Vegetable Spirit, namely, thus: Take of the Animated Spirit,
rectified as above, what quantity you will, and pour it upon three parts of our
(Philosophical) Aqua Vitoe perfectly rectified, which Copulation ought to be
made in a Body large and high, to which an Alembick may be suddenly fitted: the
said Copulation therefore being made, you must have presently ready some
Cotton-Wooll dipped in Oil, and very well squeezed, wherewith the Mouth of the
Distilling Vessel must be forthwith stopped, and it must be let in within the
Neck downward, a hands breath, fastened with a strong Flanel thread, that upon
occasion you may draw out the said Cotton-Wooll, ^hen put to it an Alembick
with a Receiver, very close stopped, and set it in a Furnace of Ashes, giving
it at first a gentle heat; but then by degrees increasing the Fire, till it be
sublimed: which sublimation you must keep in a Vessel firmly stopped, because
with this Salt and other Means you will be able to do Wonders.

Parisinus in his Apertorium, page 15. M. S. S. mei, does by this Salt of Urine
acuate his C. or Spirit of Philosophical Wine, which being acuated, he then
Circulates by the way used, and before described in the Circulation of his
Coelum melleum. Lully has also sometimes used the Volatile Salt of Blood, for
the making of these Menstruums, as in his twelfth experiment. Take Blood ground
(Blood drawn from sound and choleric Men, dried on a clean Table, that the
Phlegm may be separated from it, and then pulverized, Exp. 11.) put it in a
Glass Body with a long Neck, and having fitted an Alembick to it with a
Receiver, Distill first with a gentle Fire, till the moisture exhale, then
increase the Fire till the Salt be sublimed, which will be very white, gather
it warily, and keep it; for it is of very great Virtue and Efficacy. You have,
my dearest Son, all the Medicines (Salts) which have properties with the two
Luminaries, as also with the other imperfect Metals, without which this Art of
Transmutation cannot obtain its desired end.

The Things which I observe from the Receipts are:

1. That by Wine, Spirit of Wine, and Aqua Vitae common, is not meant Aqua
Ardens, with which it is impossible to reduce or distill common Sal Armoniack
into a liquid substance, and though it might, yet that Menstruum would be
Common, not Philosophical, being made without the Spirit of Philosophical Wine.

2. That these Menstruums are made of all Volatile Salts.

3. That the Menstruums of this Kind are the Magisteries of Volatile Salts. Mix
the Essence of Philosophical Wine with the Magistery of any Volatile Salt, and
you will in a moment make a Menstruum of this fourth Kind.

4. That these Menstruums may be also made by Parisinus his way of Coelum
melleum, namely by Circulation, and therefore called Circulatums, common Sal
Armoniack Circulated, Salt of Urine, Blood, Hartshorn, etc. Circulated, or the
Water of Sal Armoniack Circulated, the Water of the Salt of Blood Circulated,
etc.

5. That it is very uncertain what Philosophical Menstruum Trismosinus meant by
Spirit of Wine: For diverse Menstruums have been by the Adepts signified by the
same Name of Spirit of Wine; for the most part they meant the simple Spirit of
Philosophical Wine, sometimes the same acuated after a different manner, that
is, the simple Vegetable Menstruum. So Basil in his Book of Conclusions,
prepares the Oils of Metals with Spirit of Wine; by which he declares himself
to have meant not the simple Spirit, but a simple Vegetable Menstruum, in the
preparation of the Oil of Mercury, he commanding this open Metal to be by the
Spirit of Wine, rectified first with Salt of Tartar, (which Menstruum we shall
have in the following Kinds) reduced into an Oil; with the rest of the Metals
being more compact, do more require: Sometimes also they did by the Spirit of
Wine intend Vegetable Menstruums compounded; so Lully, among the other Names of
Circulatum majus, reckons up also Aqua Vitae. This Menstruum, says he, the
Wise Men called by almost innumerable Names, the Acetum acerrimum, which
converts Gold into a Spirit; this is Aqua Sicca, Aqua Solis, Aqua Vitoe, in
Exp. 25. Yea, Mineral Menstruums also the Adepts more than often call by the
Name of Aqua Vitae. So Albertus in suo Composito de Compositis, page 939. Volum
4. Theat. Chym. Distills a Mercurial Mineral Water; of which thus: Behold, this
is the Aqua Vitoe, the Acetum Philosophorum, and Lac Virginis, by which Bodies
are resolved into the first Matter.

Though therefore it be uncertain to Divine what Spirit of Wine out of such a
vast number of Menstruums Trismosinus intended; yet shall we not much err from
the Truth, if we take any Menstruum whatsoever, eith^r Simple or Compounded,
Vegetable or Mineral, instead of this Spirit; for we may with all promiscuously
perfect the same Philosophical Work, differing only in degrees, as being
stronger or weaker, which common Spirit of Wine makes altogether impossible,
and fallacious: Yet notwithstanding Directions there are, which may in this
ambiguity make us more certain; as,

1. Any ambiguous, or unknown Name of any Menstruum, i^ easily known by its
Synonima's, if there be any in the same Book, or other Writings of the same
Adept, as for Example: If in the Description of the Balsamum Samech of
Paracelsus, you know not what the Circulatum minus is, the Synonima's (produced
by Paracelsus himself, Lib. 10. Arch. in the Description of the Circulatum
majus, (where it is called Primum Ens Salis, and Arcanum Salis) denoting
moreover the Nature, yea, and preparation of the Menstruum, delivered here
perhaps less clearly (quatenus Menstruum) but elsewhere more plainly under the
Title of Essence or Primum Ens) do put it out of all doubt, that it is the
Arcanum of common Salt. But I said, Synonima's in the Writings of the same, not
of another Adept, because oftentimes others intended another thing by these
Names, yea that Name which has in one Book the same signification with the
rest, has commonly in another, though of the same Author, a signification
different from them; and therefore that Synonymum must, if possible, be had out
of the same Book, which must then be compared both with other Writings of the
same Author, and also with the Writings of other Adepts, to confirm the meaning
of the Author about the identity of the Synonimum, which was doubted of.

2. But if there be no Synonima's in Books of the same Author, it is not
convenient for this unknown Name to be explicated by the Writings of other
Adepts, because the Adepts themselves have sometimes also erred, in giving an
explication either better than was fitting, or altogether contrary, to an
obscure Name and Place; yet is it not only lawful, but necessary also, to
observe what they say, especially the Scholars or Followers of the same Author;
for though they show not the Authors Meaning, yet do they their own as to that
Matter.

3. But if Synonima's cannot discover the Name, some expression used in the
Receipt will perhaps explain more easily, provided it be rightly examined by an
industrious Observer of those Receipts; as,

1. If it be not known, whether the Adept means a Mineral (Acid) or Vegetable
Menstruum, it must be enquired by the Particulars following:

First, Whether that Menstruum dissolves Bodies with force or heat, for then it
must be Mineral, this Sign betraying the acidity of Minerals Salts: because
Vegetable Menstruums dissolve Bodies always sweetly, and slowly.

Secondly, Whether the dissolution digested for a time be converted into a
Black Color, or Black Powder swimming upon the Menstruum, for that signifies a
Vegetable Menstruum, because the dissolutions of Mineral Menstruums do contain
Bodies twice dissolved, once with the Spirit of Philosophical Wine, wherewith
they become Black, then with the corrosive or acid Spirit of Salts: Therefore
the Black Powder and Color are Signs of a Vegetable dissolution, whereto is
added a Milky Opacity, common indeed to both Menstruums, for all weak or
weakened Menstruums, containing as it were their aridity less dissolved and
precipitated, as also Vegetable dissolutions longer digested after blackness,
do become Opacous and Milky, and so continue, till they are made diaphanous and
most clear, by drawing of the Phlegm, the acid part, or the Spirit of
Philosophical Wine being better concentrated: yet these three Signs we never
observe in the use of the Mineral Menstruums.

Thirdly, Whether the Adepts admonish the Operator to beware of air or fume in
Operation, or Poison in the use of the thing already prepared; for that is a
Sign that his Menstruum is, or was Mineral, because Poisons derive themselves
Originally from acidity, for Pearls and Corals, yea Gold and all other Arids,
though otherwise most Innocent; do, by being prepared with a Mineral Menstruum,
become the worst of Poisons.

Lastly, If you see Mineral Bodies distinguished into two Oils, swimming
distinctly and severally upon the Menstruum, say, that also was a Mineral
Menstruum, because this cannot be done by any Vegetable Menstruum, though never
so strong.

2. If it be not known, whether either the simple or compounded Vegetable
Menstruum is to be taken, we observe the things following as to the use of them:

First, If in the dissolution of a Metallic or Mineral Body, a White Body or
some residue be left, then may ye know it to be a simple Vegetable Menstruum,
because it extracts only the Tinctures or Essences of things, dissolving the
Oleosity, but not the Aridity of things, on the contrary Vegetable Menstruums
compounded, as also Mineral Menstruums, which are stronger than the Simple, do
dissolve the whole Body, not leaving any Foeces.

Secondly, If the whole Body of a thing dissolved be turned into Oil, swimming
upon the Menstruum, that was a Vegetable Menstruum compounded, for that only
are they able to do: The simple Vegetable Menstruums are not strong enough, but
Mineral Menstruums are too strong; those therefore dissolve not the whole Body,
but these dissolve not only the whole Body, but reduce it, being dissolved into
Oil, not one only, but twofold: So the Temperatum of Paracelsus, (a Menstruum
otherwise sufficiently unknown) is by use known, to be the Circulatum majus, or
a Vegetable Menstruum compounded, because he reduces Metals by it into a
swimming Oil, or Magistery.

Thirdly, If in the dissolution or digestion of the thing dissolved, you see it
made Black, or cast forth a Black Powder, say it is was a simple Vegetable
Menstruum, because Vegetable Menstruums compounded, and Mineral, as being
stronger, do better retain their Body dissolved in them.

3. But the doubt, whether the simple Vegetable Menstruum, or Spirit of
Philosophical Wine is to be taken, length of time alone resolves; for the
sooner Essences are made in the Mineral Kingdom, the stronger are the
Menstruums; and on the contrary: But in the Animal and Vegetable Kingdoms it is
difficult, if not altogether impossible, to discern by the length of time alone
the dissolutions of the Bodies as being more opened; of which sort are Oils,
Salts, as also the open Metal Mercury, especially sublimed, being more amply
opened by the acidity of Salts.

The Fifth KIND. Simple Vegetable Menstruums made of the Spirit of
Philosophical Wine, and the fixed Salts of Vegetables and Minerals not tinging.
17. The Coelum Vegetabile of Lully, made of the Salt of Tartar.
In the 34th. Experment.
TAke the best Aqua Vitoe, rectified so, as to burn a Linen Cloth, as you have
seen, operating with me, and therefore no need of amplifying to you the
Magistery of this Water: Take therefore of Aqua Vitoe four Pounds, and put it
in a Glass Urinal (Cucurbit) which is very sound; then take of the Vegetable
Salt sublimed of the second Experiment (Volatile Salt of Tartar) one Pound,
grind very well, and put it in the Aqua Vitoe, Iute the Vessel with its
Antenotorium (Blind Alembick) firmly, with Wax Gummed, that nothing may
respire, then putrify two Natural Days; after that take away the Antenotorium,
and put on an Alembick with its Receiver, the Joints being very close, and
distill upon hot Ashes. Take notice, that the Receiver must be very large and
sound, that it may not be broken by the force of the Aqua Vitoe, and thus
continue your distillation with a slow Fire, till all be distilled through the
Alembick: But if any part of the Salt remain in the bottom of the Vessel, pour
it again upon the Water now lately distilled, and distill as before, making the
Joints as close as may be; the distillation repeat in this order, till all the
Salt be passed through the Alembick in the Form of clear Water. Then put of the
aforesaid Salt one other Pound into an Urinal, and pour the same distilled
Water to it; cover the Vessel with its Antenotorium, as before, putrify as
before, then distill as before; and when all the Salt is passed over with the
Water, take again as before of new Vegetable Salt one Pound, and pass it all
through the Alembick again, as before, with the distilled Water; and by this
means you will have those four Pounds of Aqua Vitoe united with three Pounds of
the Vegetable Salt, which has the power of dissolving the two Luminaries (Gold
and Silver) and all the other Metals, with preservation of the Vegetable Form.
But now we intend to reduce this simple Menstruum into a Celestial Form: Take
therefore this simple Menstruum, and put it in a sound Glass Vessel (a
Circulatory) four parts of which must be empty, but the fifth full: Stop the
Vessel so as not to evaporate, and Circulate in Dung or Balneo sixty Natural
Days; and by this Method will you have a clarified Menstruum, in which you will
see a Sediment, wherefore empty the Celestial Water into another Vessel, and
have a care that no Sediment pass over with the Water, which you must keep very
close in Balneo.

Annotations.

AS to the facility of preparation, the Coelum melleum of Parisinus is better
than the rest of the Menstruums, but this of Lully has preference among simple
Vegetable Menstruums, for it is the Sapo Sapientium, compounded of fixed
Alcalies, and the Unctuous Spirit of Philosophical Wine. Fixed Alcalies are not
easily joined with the Spirit of Philosophical Wine, but when they are
thoroughly mixed together, they are easily sublimed into Sal Armoniack, Sulphurs
of Nature, or Philosophers Mercuries, the chief Instruments of the more secret
Chymy.

Lully having prescribed several Acuators of the Spirit of Philosophical Wine,
speaks at length of acuating this Spirit with these Salts Philosophically
Volatilized: Let, says he, our Menstruum, which is the Quintessence of Wine,
be depurated from all Phlegm, and acuated with the Philosophers Armoniack,
because it cannot otherwise dissolve Gold, nor Precious Stones: But let the
Philosophers Sal Armoniack be well purified, that is, sublimed, and cleansed
from all terrestreity and uncleanness, according to the manner of the
Philosophers; of which Philosophical Sal Armoniack we have indeed treated
largely in our Book, De intention Alchimistarum, Dedicated to the most
Illustrious King Robert, in the Chapter De Salibus Ammoniac, etc. and in
Clausura Testamenti, otherwise called Vade mecum, in the Chapter which begins,
Partus Veroe Terroe. There you may read from first to last the Magistery of
making and purifying, together with the Virtues and Energies of this Salt: And
know, my Son, that whatsoever we Write in that Chapter, we mean that Salt and
nothing else: Read and Peruse that Chapter, because nothing can be done in the
Magistery without that Salt, for that is the thing with which we acuate our
Menstruum, to dissolve as Gold, and Precious Stones, and Pearls, as well for
humane Medecines, as for a Metallic and Lapidifick Magistery, and to make
Pearls and Precious Stones.

In which Receipt of Lully, we have the Volatile Salt of Tartar given us
freely, hitherto sought in vain, with very great pains and cost, of which the
Theoretical Philosophers have in their Theories exhibited nothing but what is
most obscure. I speak, says Sendivogius, all things openly; the Extraction
only of our Sal Armoniack, or Philosophical Mercury, I have not so openly
revealed: Send. in Epilogo 12. Tract. page 337. Now, out of his second
Experiment alleged, we have the following Description of Sal Armoniack, or
Volatile Salt of Tartar, thus:

The Volatile Salt of Tartar of Lully. Out of the Second Experiment.
TAke the best Tartar, pulverize, and put it in an Earthen Vessel not glazed,
to calcine the space of three Days, or till it be White: Which being done,
dissolve it in the Aqua Vitoe, first distilled ( in the Spirit of Philosophical
Wine, not yet rectified) thus; namely, Put this individual, being calcined and
White, into an Urinal, and pour in the Aqua Vitoe so, as to be seven Fingers
above it, and cover the Vessel with its Antenotorium (Blind Alembick) and set
it on a Furnace of Ashes to simper two Hours, then pour that which is dissolved
into another Vessel carefully, but that which remains undissolved dry: then
again pour in new Aqua Vitoe, and again boil it upon Ashes: empty the
dissolution again, as before, and keep it with the other former dissolution:
the matter remaining in the Vessel, dry again, and take it out of the Vessel,
because it must be again calcined, to be the more easily dissolved; which being
calcined, dissolve again with new Aqua Vitoe, and boil it upon Ashes: this
dissolution keep with the other, as above, and repeat this Magistery so often,
till all this individual be calcined, and dissolved: then put all the
dissolutions in an Urinal, fitting an Alembick with a Receiver to it, and
closing the Joints very fast, distill by Balneo, till the matter be congealed,
or till no more will distill by that degree of heat, then remove the Receiver,
and stop it to prevent respiring, and then set the Urinal upon Ashes; and if
any corruptible part (Phlegm and unprofitable Earth) remain with the matter,
let it be burnt, and the Vessel having remained two or three Hours, in a Fire
somewhat remiss, and not any thing more distilling through the beak of the
Alembick, let the Vessel cool, and then pour the same Water ( Aqua Vitoe, or
Spirit of Philosophical Wine) which you kept before stopped in the Receiver, upon
the matter again: This matter therefore being dissolved, distill the Water again
in Balneo, as before, which having taken away, the Receiver you must keep well
stopped from respiring: then set the Urinal in Ashes, and dry the matter; being
dried, dissolve it in again with the Water which you kept in the Receiver; and
if you see the dissolution is not clear and diaphanous, you must transmit it so
often through a Filter or Linen Cloth, and so often dissolve and congeal it by
turns, as before, till it be free from all Terrestreity, and appear clear and
splendid: then may you be assured, that the impure and corruptible part is
separated, and you will see the whole matter transmuted into an Oil. But now,
most dear Son, you must proceed to the composition of our Mercury, and Sal
Armoniack, the Powers and Virtues whereof are so many and so great, as scarce
to be comprehended within the expression of Man. The way of which operation is
thus: You must know the weight of the Salt or Oil, which you beheld in the
bottom of the Vessel depurated, and pour to it so much of our Spirit (that is
Aqua Vitoe rectified so, as to burn a Cloth steeped in it) as will be four
Fingers above it, or let there be six parts more of the weight of the Aqua
Vitoe, than is the Salt or Oil: the whole being mixed together, put into an
Urinal with a Cover or Antenotorium well luted, that it respire not: putrify
in Balneo the space of two Natural Days, then take off the Antenotorium, and
put on an Alembick, with a Receiver, close the Joints well, and distill in a
Furnace of Ashes with a slow Fire: which distillation must be continued till
the Beak or Head discover no Veins, but suddenly after the Veins disappear, lay
aside the Receiver with the distilled Water ( Spirit of Philosophical Wine) and
stop it close, for now comes the animated Spirit ( Spirit of Wine impregnated
with the Essence of Tartar) which has the power of vivifying its Body (or
Caput Mortuum) then continue the same distillation, in the end augmenting the
Fire, that if any part of Phlegm remain, it may exhale and be removed by that
degree of heat: Lastly, the Vessel being cold, take out the matter and grind
it: know the weight of the matter, and pour to it four parts of Aqua Vitoe more
than is the Earth (Caput mortuum) and covering the Vessel close with its
Antenotorium, putrify as before, then putting an Alembick to it with a
Receiver, well luted, distill as before, in a Furnace of Ashes: the Soul being
with its Spirit gone over, with the same Signs of Veins, as before, appearing,
repeat the same Magistery three times: For then will you have the Spirit
perfectly animated, and the Body exanimated and calcined: This Spirit with the
Soul (of Tartar) is indeed capable of disposing every Physical operation, but
in this place we will use it for the vivifying of the calcined Earth: Take
therefore the aforesaid Earth out of its Vessel, and grind it, then put a
little of it upon a red hot plate, which if it melt like Wax without fume, is a
sign of perfect exanimation; if this sign appear not, this Magistery must be
reiterated, till you have obtained that sign. Then know the weight of the
Earth, upon which pour a fourth part of the animated Spirit, and the Vessel
being covered close with its Antenotorium, set it in Balneo two or three days
to be congealed, or till it be congealed; which done, remove the Antenotorium,
putting on a Head, and distill in a Furnace of Ashes without a Receiver, that
if there be any part of Phlegm, it may be from thence removed, for that which
comes out from this distillation will be insipid, of no savor or esteem in the
Form of Rain Water: Then again pour on a fourth part of the animated Spirit, as
before, and congeal in Balneo, as before, then distill the Phlegmatic moisture
by Ashes, as before, and thus repeat the aforesaid Magistery, till the Earth
has drunk up and attracted to it all its animated Spirit, and attained to such
a sign, that if you put a small quantity of it upon a Fire-hot Plate, the major
part fume away, which will be a sign that the matter is disposed for the
subliming of our most precious Mercury, which has the power of dissolving any
Metal whatsoever with the preservation of its Vegetive and Germinative form.
Take therefore the aforesaid pregnant Earth, and put it into a Bolt-head
(Sublimatory) with a long Neck, which you must lute very well with Lutum
Sapientioe, and the luting being dried, set it with the matter into a
distilling Furnace, administering in the beginning a gentle Fire, till the
Bolt-head grow hot, whose Mouth must be stopped with Cotton-wooll, and continue
that gentle heat the space of six Hours, then augment the Fire somewhat six
Hours more; but if it begins not by that degree of Fire to sublime, increase
the Fire gradually to a more violent degree, till it begin to sublime, which
Fire continue the space of twenty four Hours, at the expiration of which time,
the Vessel being cold, take from thence our Sulphur sublimed (the Vegetable
Sulphur of Nature) our Mercury (Vegetable) our Heaven (dry) our Sal Armoniack
(Vegetable) our Stone not yet fermented, and called by many more other Names,
whose faculty is to acuate its Spirit ( of Philosophical Wine) as shall be made
appear by the Experiments hereafter following:

This Volatilization of the Salt of Tartar is sufficiently tedious, yet easy
and clear, according to the tenor of the Receipt. In the following kind of
Menstruums, we shall have diverse examples of making such Sal Harmoniacks,
wherefore we will thither reserve those things which are to be admonished about
this way of making the Volatile Salt of Tartar. Lully mixeth three pounds of
this Volatile Salt with four of the Spirit of Philosophical Wine successively
by various distillations, and reduces the mixture by circulating sixty Days
into the Vegetable Heaven. But here we are to be advised, that the Sal
Armoniack of Tartar in its own dry Form is a Vegetable Menstruum; and so
according to the prescribed method of the Receipt, it is not always necessary
to reduce that into a liquid substance; for that and the Menstruum made from
thence are therein different; because in the making of Heaven, the Vnctuosity
of the Spirit of Philosophical Wine being superadded, and now prevalent, has
absorbed and dissolved the aridity of the Sal Armoniack; but this being this
way too much diluted in a greater quantity of that Oleosum, loses much of it
strength, and becomes less fit for the dissolutions of d^y Bodies: But now if
the volatile Salt of Tartar be a Menstruum in a dry form, some have unadvisedly
said it serves instead of a Philosophical Menstruum, which notwithstanding is
rightly and very well said, if a corrosive Menstruum, which we call Mineral, be
understood, whose place the volatile Salt of Tartar, or Vegetable Menstruum,
may upon several occasions supply.

Now as this Sal Armoniack reduced into a liquid substance by the Spirit of
Philosophical Wine, makes our Vegetable Heaven; so being dissolved with the
Spirit of common Wine it makes the Spirit of Wine of Basilius dissolved with
Vinegar, our Vinegar dissolved with Aquafortis, the Philosophers Aqua Regis;
and so of many others. At present the aforesaid Spirit of Basilius has its
place.

18. The Spirit of Wine of Basilius. In Fine Libri Revelat.
TAke generous White Wind (common) and distill after the usual manner, to make a
strong Aqua Vitoe thereof in a Copper, which rectify in a Phial, and separate
the Phlegm: this Aqua Vitoe is thus proved: If it burn all away, and leave no
Aquosity behind it, being kindled in a Glazed Vessel; but if any remain, distill
yet once or twice, the Joints being very close, that the Volatile Spirit of the
Wine may not exhale: The Aqua Vitoe being thus distilled, and exactly rectified
(but have a care that in the time of distilling you put not a Candle to it,
lest it hurt you) join three Ounces of Tartar perfectly sublimed with a
quantity of this Aqua Vitoe in another Phial, so as that the Phial be half
full, put an Alembick to it with a Receiver large enough, and distill in Balneo
Marioe most gently, because of the Volatile Spirits, a little of the Aqua Vitoe
being left in the bottom, and as you distill, cool the Alembick with wet
Clothes: thus is the Spirit sooner resolved, and passes into the Receiver.

This is that Spirit of Wine which Basilius used in several places, especially
in his Conclusions, where by the Spirit of Wine he reduces as well Metallic
as Mineral Bodies into Oil: Whosoever has imagined to himself another Spirit
instead thereof, must have a care lest he prove the truth of this saying to his
own detriment: There is yet indeed another description of that Spirit of Wine
in Appendice Elucidationis, which notwithstanding differs not from the former,
except that in the former description it was read the Volatile Salt of Tartar;
but here it is read Sal Armoniack, perfectly sublimed; but that they are
Synonyma's, is even now manifest by the Receipt of Lully: For whatsoever Salt,
either fixed or volatile, is joined with the Spirit of Philosophical Wine and
sublimed, is called our Volatile Salt, our Sulphur of Nature, and our sublimed
Mercury, which may be used promiscuously as Salt Philosophically sublimed; for
both those Salts (of Tartar and Sal Armoniack) were by Basilius made perhaps
out of one and the same matter: But this his Menstruum is not so strong as the
Coelum Vegetabile of Lully; though prepared out of the same Salt of Tartar just
as that: For Basilius diminishes the virtue of this Salt, by adding the Spirit
of common Wine: Lully accomplisheth the same work, but with the Spirit of
Philosophical Wine: yet Basilius sometimes also made his Menstruum stronger
than the Coelum Vegetabile of Lully, by separating the Spirit of common Wine
from the Philosophical Sal Armoniack, which indeed he performed two ways:
First, by kindling the Menstruum in a Copper Vessel designed for this use, to
burn away the Spirit of common Wine, but leave the Vegetable Sal Armoniack by
it self, reduced into a liquid substance. The way is this.

19. The Fiery Spirit of Wine of Basilius. In the Place as above.
TAke the antecedent Spirit of Wine, being fit for this preparation of the
Fiery Spirit, make an Instrument of Copper, which may be taken up in the
middle, below and above the Holes, as also above the middle of the Vessel, put
on an Alembick with a Pipe, let them be all of Copper, except the Receiver,
which must be of Glass, which put in a wooden Vessel into Water, and cover it
above with wet Clothes, in the wooden Vessel let there be a passage, by which
the Water, when hot, may fly out, and cold be poured on: all things being thus
prepared, the Spirit of Wine prepared is put in through the lower Holes, so as
to touch the Holes, then is it kindled, and the Mercury is driven upwards
through the middle Holes, and resolved by the coldness of the Water, and
passes out of the Alembick into the Receiver: Thus is the true Spirit of Wine
prepared, but in the work never cease from refrigerating, and pour on new Aqua
Vitoe, lest it burn too low. In the Addition or Appendix of manual operations,
Basilius described this Spirit thus: Take Wine burned ( rather Wine to be
burned, made of the Sal Armoniack of Tartar, and Spirit of Common Wine) which
put in a strong Vessel that can endure the flame of Fire, and kindle it with a
Match of Sulphur, and forthwith apply an Alembick of Iron or Copper, with a
large Receiver, and the true fiery Spirit of Wine is resolved and distilled
into a Liquor: this is the true airy and fiery Spirit of Wine.

Secondly, He impregnates Calx Vive, or Quick Lime, with the Menstruum
described in Numb. 18. from which he distills a Menstruum yet stronger, called
Spirit of Calx Vive. Calx Vive, says he, is strengthened and made more fiery
by the pure and not sophisticated Spirit of Wine ( made of Sal Armoniack and
Spirit of Common Wine very often cohobated, to which Calx add the Sal alkali of
Tartar, the dried Faeces of the same Salt being also added, from which, being
thoroughly mixed, distill the true Spiritus Gehenneus, or Spirit of Hell, in
which are great Mysteries hidden: the method of acquiring this Spirit I have
told you, which observe, keep, and accept for a farewel-Gift. Basilius in
Repet. Lapidis, in Cap. de Calce viva. Mark, says he, in the End of this Book,
De Medicinis supernaturalibus. I told you of the Virtues and Qualities of
Precious Stones, but there are also found many Stones despicable and ignoble,
yet of great Virtue, as Experience testifies; though the ignorant and unskilful
will scarce give Credit to these sayings, and cannot conceive those things with
their dull Brains, yet will I demonstrate it by an Example of Calx vive, which
Calx is according to the judgment of the Vulgar, of little value, and
contemptible in obscurity; yet nevertheless there is powerful Virtue in it,
which appears in the application of it against most grievous Diseases: but its
triumphant and transcendent efficacy being in a manner unknown to most Men, for
the sake therefore of those that inquire into Natural and Supernatural
Mysteries, do I discover the secrets of this Book: as a farewell also will I
reveal the Mystery of Calx vive, and declare first the way of distilling the
Spirit of it, which work does indeed require an expert Artist, well informed
before, in this preparation.

20. The Spirit of Calx vive of Basilius. In Fine Lib. de Med. Supernatur.
TAke of Calx vive what quantity you will, grind and prepare it on a Marble
into an impalpable Powder, whereto pour of the Spirit of Wine ( Menstruum in
Numb. 18.) so much as the pulverized Calx is able to imbibe, no Spirit swimming
upon the Calx. Then apply an Alembick, lute well, and put a Receiver to it,
abstract the Spirit from it in a most gentle Balneo; this abstraction must be
repeated eight or ten times: this Spirit strengthens much the Spirit of the
Calx, which is thereby made more fiery. Take the remaining Calx out of the
Cucurbit, grind it very well, and add to it of the Salt of Tartar (Alkali) a
tenth part, and as much as all of the Earth of the Salt of Tartar, or matter
left in extracting the Salt of Tartar, and well dried, distill them all being
well mixed out of a Retort well luted, three parts of which must be empty, in a
Receiver large and firm: Take notice, that the Receiver, into which the Beak of
the Retort is put, must have a Pipe one Fingers breadth, to which another
Receiver is to be applied, in which must be a little quantity of Spirit of Wine
( Menstruum in Numb. 18.) then distill with a soft Fire, and the Phlegm will
ascend into the first Receiver; the Phlegm being distilled, increase the Fire,
and then will come a white Spirit, in the Form of the white Spirit distilled
from Vitriol (Philosophical) which will not descend into the Phlegm, but
through the aforesaid Pipe into the other Receiver, there joining it self with
the Spirit of Wine, even as Fire is easily joined with Fire. Take notice, if
this Spirit of Calx be not rightly prepared or impregnated with the like Spirit
of Wine, by the aforesaid cohobations, it is in distilling mixed with its
Phlegm, extinguished, and loses its Virtue; so difficult a thing it is to
drive deeply into Nature, she reserving many things to her self: This Spirit
being now mixed with the Spirit of Wine, take away the Receiver, pour out the
Phlegm, and keep the Spirits of the Calx and Wine wearily: Observe, both these
Spirits are separated not without difficulty, for they embrace one another, and
in distillation ascend together: Wherefore, if you kindle the Spirits being
mixed and united in a Glass Vessel, the Spirit of Wine is burned, but the
Spirit of the Calx remains in the Glass, which keep diligently: This is a great
Arcanum, few Spirits do exceed its efficacy, if you knew the use of it, its
qualities can scarce be described by way of Compendium. This Spirit dissolves
Crabs Eyes, andthe hardest Cristals: these three distilled together through an
Alembick, and many times cohobated, make a Liquor, three drops of which taken
in warm Wine, do break and dissolve the Gravel and Stone in Man's Body, this
Liquor expells the very root or cause of that Disease without any pain to the
Patient: This Spirit of Calx at the beginning is of a Sky-Colour, but being
gently rectified appears white, transparent and clear, leaving some few Faeces
behind it: This Spirit dissolves the most fixed Jewels, and Precious Stones,
and on the contrary fixes all Volatile Spirits by its transcendent heat: This
Spirit overcomes all Symptoms whatsoever of the Podagra, though never so knotty
and tartarous, all which it dissolves and radically expells.

If Spirit of Wine, acuated with Vegetable Sal Harmoniack be kindled, the
Spirit of common Wine is burned, but the Sal Harmoniack being incombustible,
ascends in the Form of a Liquor, and is called the Fiery Spirit of Wine of
Basilius, but the same Spirit of Wine joined with the Sal Harmoniack being
absorbed by the Calx vive, and then distilled into it self, and then kindled,
the Spirit of common Wine is indeed consumed by the Flame as before, but the
Spirit of the Calx, or rather the Vegetable Sal Harmoniack ascends not as
before, but remains in the bottom of the Glass because more digested, and made
more fixed: But for the greater elucidation of these Spirits, we thought good
to add another Description of the Spirit of Calx.

21. The Simple Spirit of Calx vive of Basilius, In manualibus Operationibus.
TAke pure Calx vive, burn it in a Potters Furnace with a most strong Fire, to
reduce it to an exact maturity, grind it very fine upon a Marble, and put it in
a Cucurbit, pour to it Spirit of Wine made of Philosophical Tartar (as I shall
teach in my method of making Aurum potabile) that the Calx may be made like
thin Pap; this being done, distill from thence the Phlegm, till the Calx be dry,
pour on new Spirit of Wine, and draw of: repeat it six times, then grind the
matter very curiously, and put it in a Cellar to be dissolved per deliquium,
and within a few days a Liquor will run from it, which being gathered and
distilled by a Retort in Sand, first sends forth a Phlegm to be kept by it
self, after that a Spirituous Liquor, which also keep apart: Now take Cristals
pulverized, mix them with the same weight of Vive or Mineral Sulphur, burn this
matter, continually stirring it, till all the Sulphur be burned away, then
reverberate in an open Fire the space of three Hours; this done, pour the
aforesaid Liquor to this matter. Take also Crabs Eyes, to which also pour the
same Liquor of quick Lime in another Glass, let them be digested fourteen Days
in a heat strong enough, and from both will ascend an humidity upon the
superficies, which decant finely into a little Glass, and rectify in Balneo,
and a Liquor will remain in the bottom; three grains of which administered in
Wine have produced very great and admirable effects. This Medicine cures also
radically the Stone of the Bladder and Kidneys, as well in Men as Women.

The Spirit of Wine made of Philosophical Tartar, which Basilius promised to
give in his method of making Aurum potabile, will confirm all the aforesaid
Menstruums of Basilius; for those are made of Sal Harmoniack, or the Volatile
Salt of Tartar being diverse ways prepared; but this Spirit of Philosophical
Wine is acuated with the Salt of Tartar, not indeed the common Alcali; but that
being reduced together with the Spirit of Philosophical Wine into a liquid
substance: for we are to be admonished that it is not always necessary to make
the Coelum or Heaven of Lully, and the rest of the Menstruums of this kind,
with the Salt of Tartar, as being Philosophically Volatilized, but that
sometimes also the same Menstruum may be made of the Salt of Tartar without the
sublimation or reduction of it into the Vegetable Sulphur of Nature, by
cohobating only the Spirit of Philosophical Wine upon Salt of Tartar, till it
ascend by distillation in the Form of a Milky Liquor. It is thus done,

22. The Tartarised Spirit of Wine of Basilius. In manal. Operation.
THe first thing to be known is that the Philosophers Tartar, wherewith the
Lock is opened, is not like common Tartar, as most Men imagine, but is another
Salt, though springing from the same Fountain: This Salt is the only Key to
open, and dissolve Metals, if prepared as follows. Take the Ashes of a
fruitful Wine, and draw a Lee or Lixivium as strong as may be out of them with
hot Water, which evaporate by boiling it to a dryness, that the matter may
remain reddish, which reverberate in a reverberating Furnace three days, or
thereabouts, with an open Fire, till it become white: then dissolve it in
Spring Water, suffer it to settle, decant the clear, filter to separate the
Faeces, being filtred, coagulate, and you will have the white Salt of Tartar,
from which the true Spirit is distilled after this manner: Take Spirit of Wine
rectified to the highest degree, and altogether void of Phlegm, ( described in
Numb. 19.) and pour it to the Salt of Tartar in a Phial with a long Neck, so as
to be three Fingers above it, lute an Alembick to the Phial, fit a Receiver to
it, and digest with a gentle heat, then draw off the Phlegm most softly, and
the Spirit of Tartar is opened by Virtue of the Spirit of Wine, and by reason
of reciprocal and admirable love they both ascend together; the Faeces
remaining, if any be, as also the Phlegm must be cast away; thus will you have
the true Spirit of Wine, wherewith Aurum potabile is made.

This truly is a most Noble Menstruum, so as for its excellency to deserve a
higher Place than this among the Simple Vegetable Menstruums; whereas it ought
to have been more rightly transferred to the seventh Kind of Menstruums; but it
very much at present Illustrating the Menstruums of Basilius, and so of greater
utility here than there, we will not remove it from hence, yet will we add some
examples more clear of such sort of Menstuums. Thus it is done,

23. The Vegetable Acetum acerrimum, or Ignis Adepti of Ripley, made of Tartar
calcined. Page 331. Concord. Raym. and Guide.
TAke the Tartar of Wine, and calcine it to whiteness. Take of this calcined
Tartar one Pound; and being pulverized, put it in a great Glass Cucurbit, and
pour to it half a Cup, or a little more of the strongest Spirit of
(Philosophical) Wine, stop the Mouth very close, and let them stand in cold
Water twenty four Hours, then put a Receiver to it, and distill in Balneo with
an easy Fire, yet so as to be distilled; which easy distillation must be
continued, till the Phlegm ascend, which must be known by the taste, then let
it cool, and again put new Spirit of Wine to the aforesaid Tartar, the same
quantity as before, doing all things as before: which work you must repeat
fifteen times, but when the Vessel is opened in every Imbibition, above all
things have a care of the sudden fume of this Ignis Adepti: This work being in
fifteen times complete, lay aside three ounces of this fiered Tartar for a
part, to multiply the Mercurial Oil, as lower will appear. Take the other part
of this fiered Tartar, and distill it in Sand with a most strong Fire, which
Fire being so distilled has a white Color, and is our Natura ignita, our
Mercury, our Aqua Vitoe, lastly the Key of our Science.

This Menstruum is the same, as to the Ingredients and Virtue, with the
Vegetable Heaven of Lully, but it must be Circulated like that Heaven, in order
to lose its milky and duskish Color, and acquire the diaphaneity and clearness
of this. This Receipt has also Johannes de Rupescissa, which it is convenient
to compare with this, especially he varying somewhat in Circumstances, by
dissolving per deliquium Tartar impregnated with the Spirit of Philosophical
Wine before the distillation of it.

24. The Aqua Fortissima and Vertuosa of Johannes de Rupescissa. Cap. 43. Lib.
Essentiae.
THe most Blessed God, the Creator of Secrets, has made so many wonderful
things in Nature, that neither can our Understanding perceive, some few
excepted, nor Tongue express the wonderful things of God without stammering:
and among the Secrets, I will reveal to you a Water of Divine Action, and the
Magistery of it, is, to take the best white Tartar calcined, and put it in an
Earthen or Glass Vessel, and pour to it the best (Philosophical) Aqua Ardens
you can get, put on an Alembick, and distill the Aqua Ardens very weak, then
take it away, being little or nothing worth, except for washing of the Eyes or
other parts: Then take you Tartar, and you will find it twice as strong, and
this you may prove each time by your Tongue; put other Aqua Ardens to it again
many times more, because it will be every time strengthened above measure, and
you may bring it to so great a degree of strength, that no created action can
be compared to it: But if you would make it a hundred times stronger, grind it,
and put it upon a Porphyry or Marble, to be converted into Water, which then
must be distilled through an Alembick.

There is yet another way of preparing this Vegetable Heaven, not by
sublimation of the Alcali, nor cohobation, but simple Circulation, namely by
digesting the Alcali of Tartar, in the Spirit of Philosophical Wine, till it
swims upon the Spirit of Wine like an Ovl. It is thus done,

25. Vegetable Mercury acuated with the Salt of Tartar of Lully. In Prima
Camera Individuorum, did. 3. Lib. Essen.
IN the first Chamber is signified, that our Mercury is in the power of H
(crude Tartar) and in order to draw it out, the Artist must put the said H into
E (that is, in a Glass-Makers Furnace) three Natural Days, and there must be a
great quantity of it, because but little will be made from thence, which H
(Tartar now calcined) you must grind subtly, and put it into H of Arboris
Philosophical (into dissolution per deliquium) upon a Marble, in a very cold
place, and covered because of dust; and H will be converted into T, (oleum per
deliquium) which T must the Artist distill through a Filtre in a Glass Vessel,
and the Artist having separated T from H, will be able to extract our Mercury
out of the said T two ways. First, by the Magistery of the Chapter beginning,
Non reputes me, etc. ( by Circulation like the Essence or Spirit of Wine of
Lully.) Secondly, by the Magistery of the Chapter, Non proetermittam (by the
separation of the Elements, of which not in this place.)

Lully sometimes used the Salt of Tartar depurated instead of the Oil of Tartar
per deliquium, as in the First Experiment. You have, says be, another sign
more certain of the purification of this Individual ( the Salt of Tartar)
namely, when this most precious Salt will remain in the Vessel upon Fire in the
Form of an Oil, but being removed from the Fire, will suddenly be congealed.
But dearest Son! Let not the Prolixity of time be irksome to you, in dissolving
and congealing this Matter so often, to take away Corruption, which remaining,
it can never be joined with its Spirit extracted from the most precious, and
its nearest Individual, which is the best Wine, freed from all manner of
Humidity and Corruption: Then Circulate it in a Circulating Vessel, and so
reduce it into a Quintessence, and it will forthwith embrace its Spirit: this
Circulation we performed at first in thirty days, but afterward completed the
same in forty days, which Circulation was much better than the the first,
because the longer it is circulated, the more is it purified, and adepted for
any of our Physical Operations, which order when need requires, you also must
observe.

Menstruums of this kind may be diverse ways made not only out of the Alcali of
Tartar, but other fixed Alcalies may be also taken instead of that, as proves
the following Menstruum.

26. The Simple Vegetable Menstruum produced from the three Individuals of
Lully. In Experim. 25.
TAke Aqua Vitoe so acute, as to burn a Linen Cloth, which transmit again
through an Alembick, that it may be perfectly rectified: Then take the Salt of
Celandine, Salt of Man's Blood, Salt extracted from Honey, as you have them
above in their Experiments, all which Salts put together in an Urinal
(Cucurbit) and upon every Ounce of those Salts pour four Ounces of the
aforesaid Aqua Vitoe, cover it with its Antenotorium, (blind Head) then having
a little time digested put on an Alembick, with a Receiver annexed, lute the
joints well, and distill in Ashes, suffering the Salts to go over together with
the Water: If any thing remain, pour to it again its distilled Water, and when
all is come over, pour in new Salt again, to wit, one Ounce, and pass it
through the Alembick as before. Thirdly, add again another Ounce of Salt, as
above, and distill, repeating this Magistery three times, every time adding new
Salt: These things being done, Circulate this Water in a Vessel deep and narrow
the space of fifty Natural Days, but observe that the Vessel respire not.
Circulation being finished, you will in the bottom of the Vessel see a Sediment
like the Urine of a sound Man, which will be white; empty the Water warily into
another clean Vessel, and be careful that the Sediment pass not over with the
Water, but remain in the bottom of the Vessel: stop the Vessel of the
Circulated Water so as not to respire, and keep it in Balneo.

The preparation of the Salt of Celandine is in the Fourth Experiment. Then
take the Ashes of Celandine, gathered in the Month of May at full Moon, with
its Roots and Flowers, and put them in a Glass Vessel, and thereto pour the
water of Celandine distilled in Balneo, that you may from thence extract a
Salt; and let the matter boil two hours in a most soft Fire of Ashes; empty the
dissolution into another Vessel, but dry the undissolved Earth; and when the
Vessel is cold grind it, pouring again new water upon the Ashes as before; make
it boil, and decant the dissolution, as before. This Magistery repeat, till you
have extracted all the Salt, which is the Mercurial part of that Individual:
then take all those dissolutions and filtre them, that they may be purged from
Terrestreity; then distilling by Balneo, congeal; for the Liquor being gone
over, in the bottom of the Vessel will remain a Mercury or Salt of a white
color; which Salt you must dissolve and by turns congeal three times; and by
this means you will have extracted the Mercury out of this matter, which has
virtues almost innumerable in acuating the Vegetable Spirit drawn from Wine,
and has the power of dissolving all Metals with the preservation of their
Vegetative and Germenative Form.

The fixed Salt of Man's Blood is thus prepared in the Eleventh Experiment.
Take Blood drawn from found and choleric men, and put it on a clean Table, and
so let it dry that the Phlegm may be separated from it; then take the Blood,
grind it very well, and put it into a Glass Body, and with a slow Fire distill
the water, which being distilled keep apart; and having augmented the Fire a
little but not too intensely, lest the Salt perhaps should sublime; let only
the moisture and superfluous Oil exhale till it will distill no more; then the
Vessel being cold, take the burned Earth, put it into a Vessel stopped close to
keep it from respiring; for in respiring it would vanish away into Smoke: set
the Vessel in a reverberating Furnace, but the heat must be exceeding
temperate, that the Salt of the Matter which is volatile, and not fixed, may
not exhale; and that the Vessel may not by the violence of the Fire be broken,
as has happened to us; and let the matter stand in that degree of heat the space
of two days, and it will be calcined; which done, let the Vessel cool, and
being cold, open it; and upon the calcined matter pour its own Phlegm, that is
the water, which you distilled at first; let it boil upon ashes two hours, that
some part may be dissolved, and that which is dissolved decant into another
Vessel, and again with new water do as before; and thus repeat till you have
extracted all the Salt; then draw off the water by distillation in Balneo; and
in the Vessel will remain the Salt as white as Snow, of a great many virtues;
and if you acuare the Vegetable Fire with it, it will without doubt dissolve
the two Luminaries with the conservation of their Vegetative Form: And with it
may be made a most excellent Aurum potabile, to preserve the radical moisture
in men, and expel many diseases.

The Third Experiment teaches the preparation of the Salt of Honey, after this
manner: Take new white Honey together with the Comb, put it in a Glass Vessel
to putrify the space of sixty days; then distill, etc. Then take the Earth
(Caput mortuum) which remained in the Urinal, and being perfectly ground, put
it in an Earthen Vessel, made of Valentinian Chalk, or of that which Crucibles
are made of; or if you cannot have this Vessel, put the same Earth between two
Crucibles, one joined to the other, and very well luted; then set them in a
reverberating or Glass-makers Furnace, and there let them stay four or five
days, so will the Earth be white; but if you do this work in a reverberating
Furnace, have a care that the Fire be not too violent, for so would the Earth
evaporate; and if the Fire be too weak, it will never be calcined, a moderate
heat therefore is requisite; thus, no such error can happen as we have met
with; for when we began this work, we lost all the Earth by the violence of
Fire; but to the purpose; this Earth being calcined, as aforesaid, and the
Vessel cold, take it out and grind it; then pour the water which you distilled
by Balneo to it, and let the matter boil two hours upon ashes, and empty the
water into another Vessel from the Earth, which Earth you must dry with a
gentle Fire. Upon the same ashes pour new Phlegm, and let it boil, as before,
decant by emptying and keeping, as before, the dissolution of the Body; and
thus repeat the Magistery, till you have evacuated all the most precious Salt
out of it, and converted it into water: Then take all those dissolutions, and
filtre them through a clean Linen Cloth, which water you must distill by
Balneo; at length in the bottom of the Vessel will you have a most Precious
Salt, or Vegetable Mercury: Which done, know the weight of the said Congelation
or Salt, and pour to it a third part of the Water, which you kept before, and
which you rectified seven times in Ashes, (the acid Water of Honey) and stop
the Vessel with its Antenotorium, and set it in Balneo five Days, then having
taken away the Antenotorium, and put on an Alembick, you must with a temperate
Fire by distillation exhale all the moisture that will distill, and that will be
insipid, for the Earth has received, and in it self retained the Virtue and
Acetosity of the Water: Then again imbibe the Earth with new Water as before,
and repeat the Magistery by imbibing, digesting, and distilling so often as
before, till the Earth has attracted and imbibed all its Water: And so by the
help of the living God will you truly have the Vegetable Salt drawn from this
individual, which Salt is most precious, and has the power of acuating the
Vegetable Mercury, and dissolving the two Luminaries, and all the other
imperfect Metals: And with this may Metals be reduced into their first Matter.

To these Salts requisite for this Menstruum of Lully, I will add the fifth
Experiment, which teaches to prepare Alkalies from Portulaca Marina, Apium
Sylvestre, Squilla, Euphorbium, Pyrethrum, Rosmarinus, Herb Mercury, Solatrum,
Oliandrum, etc. with all which you may acuate the Vegetable Mercury drawn from
Wine, either jointly or severally.

This sort of Menstruums is made not only out of the Alkalies of Vegetables,
but also out of Mineral Salts, such as common Salt, Sal Gemmae, Alum, etc. Thus
it is made.

27. The Circulatum Minus, or Water of Salt Circulated of Paracelsus Lib. 10.
Archidox.
TAKE the true Element of Water, or instead thereof another Salt which has not
been as yet boiled to plain Dryness, or also Sal Gemmoe putrified; pour two
parts of the water mixed with a little Juice of Raphanus to it, putrefie in
acurate digestion, the longer the better; let it afterward congeal, and
putresie again for a Month; then distill in a Retort, the remainder urge with a
strong Fire, that it may melt; reverberate in a Retort, with a continual Fire,
dissolve upon a Marble, the water slowing from hence pour to it, and putrefie
again; distill again even to an Oleosity; join it with the Spirit of
(Philosophical) Wine and that which is impure will fall down, which separate;
but let the pure be cristalized in a cold place; pour on again that which is
distilled, and cohobate so often till a fixed Oil remains in the bottom, and
nothing sweet goes over; Digest moreover for a Month, then distill, till the
Arcanum of Salt pass over through the Alembeck: Nor let long labor grieve you,
for this is the third part of all the Arcanums, which are hidden in Metals and
Minerals; and without which nothing can be made useful or perfect.

The same Circulatum has Paracelsus described in his Treatise of reducing
Metals into their first matter or running Mercury; (which is the fourth
Treatise in Rosario novo Olimpico Benedicti Figuli ( which Description we
thought good to compare with this, that they may illustrate one another. Take,
says he, Sal Gemmoe most finely pulverized; put it in a strong Crucible, and
increasing the Fire by degrees, melt the Salt, being melted, keep it so for the
space of three Hours; the Salt being cold, pulverize it again, and melt it in a
new Crucible, according to the aforesaid method, and so proceed five or six
times; then to the pulverized Salt, pour so much of the hot Juice of Raphanus
that it may be dissolved (mix the Salt, and squeeze it with a little of the
Juice, with a wooden spoon, in a wooden Vessel; being dissolved, strain it
through a sleeve, and set it apart; add again a little of the Juice, and repeat
till all the Salt be dissolved) coagulate or draw off the water by an Alembick;
reduce the Salt into Powder; putrefie in Balneo six days; then distill with an
open Fire, like Aqua Regis, observing the degrees of Fire, till nothing more
ascends; force it with a most strong Fire for an hour that it may be thoroughly
calcined; pulverize the Salt, being yet hot, very small on a Marble, and let it
be dissolved by it self in a moist place; putrefie all that is dissolved in
Balneo three days; then distill gradually, by the Rule of Art, all the Liquor
through an Alembick in Sand; the remaining Body being well pulverized dissolve
on a Marble, putrefie, and distill as before; repeat this three times; the
remainder reduce into Powder, and put in a Cucurbit; to which pour these three
distilled waters, putrefie five days, and again distill in Sand; thus putrefying
and distilling, all the Salt will at length ascend through the Alembick, except
a little Caput mortuum to be cast away: but the water distilled from the
substance of the Salt, putrefie for a Day and a Night, and rectify twice or
thrice, and you will have the water of Salt.

This Menstruum made of Sea Salt, or Sal Gemmae, Paracelsus made choice of
before the rest of the simple Vegetable Menstruums, as the best, because
according to his Doctrine, it is the Matrix or Center of Metals and Minerals.
Because, says he, being instructed by Experiments, and having in other Books
also made mention, that the primum Ens, or fifth Essence of the Element of
Water, is the Center of Metals and Minerals, and having elsewhere also added,
that every product ought to dye in that in which it received life, In a German
Manuscript these Words are thus read, Das ein iegelich frucht in seiner Mutter,
darinnen es das leben uberkommen, sterben muss, That is, every Fruit ought to
dye in the same Matrix in which it obtains its Life, that afterward it may
receive a new Life better, and so by the deposition of the old Body be reduced
into the primum Ens, or first Being: The way therefore of extracting the Center
of Water, in which Metals ought to depose their Body, will I here add.

This Menstruum we will explain by its Branches; whereof the First is, Oil of
Salt dissolved per deliquium. In the first process he dissolves Sea Salt, or
Sal Gemmae, in water mixed with the Juice of Raphanus, putrefies, and with a
stronger Fire distills; but the Caput mortuum (the remaining Salt rather) he
dissolves on a Marble per deliquium. In the second Receipt he dissolves Sal
Gemmae, being first five or six times melted in an equal quantity of the Juice
of Raphanus made hot, then coagulates, putrefies, and distills like common Aqua
fortis; the remaining Salt reduced into Powder, being as yet hot, he dissolves
per deliquium in a moist place. Sometimes he does without this stinking Juice
of Raphanus more compendiously prepare that Oil of Salt per deliquium, and that
is, from Salt calcined with Nitre: The Receipt is to take of common Salt, and
the Salt of Urine equal parts, to be by the Rule of Alchymy calcined two hours,
then resolved in a Cellar after the usual manner, etc. From this calcined Salt
is distilled a Spirit, which resolves Gold into Oil; but if it be again
extracted, and to the highest degree prepared, a most excellent Aurum potabile
will be had, but without that extraction (Distillation) the Gold is only
resolved; then is it a most pure Art for Goldsmiths in guilding, and for
Iron-smiths a constant and precious Treasure to guild with; yet they that
prepare it ought to be skilful Alchymists. Libro de rebus Not. Cap. 4. de Sale.
page 190. That Paracelsus, by the Salt of Urine intended Nitre is easily proved
by what follows. In what place soever (says he) the Urine of Man or Beast is
poured forth, at the same succeeding time is Sal Nitre produced; for Urine
gathered and prepared into another Salt, is called Sal Niter. ibidem. But the
same Receipt, Tract. de Sale, page 171. Puts it out of all doubt, being thus
described. Take Salt and Sal Nitre in equal proportion; let them be calcined by
themselves till they melt, then resolve them into a Liquor.

The Second is, The Oil or Essence of Salt. In the first process he takes the
Oil of Salt per deliquium, and cohobates it so often with the Spirit of
Philosophical Wine, till the Salt remains at the bottom in a form of an Oil,
and no Phlegm ascends; but if instead of the Spirit of Philosophical Wine any
Vegetable Menstruum be taken, as for example; the Menstruum which we treat now
of, being already prepared, or Salt circulated, there is no necessity for the
Salt to be dissolved per deliquium, but is with less pains reduced into an Oil
or natural Essence. Though, says he, there are more ways to extract the Ens
primum of Salt, yet this is most commodious and most expeditious; and after
this, there is that other way which we mentioned, speaking of the Elixir of
Salt, namely, that new Salt mixed well with the dissolving water, which is the
distilled Spirit of Salt, the Circulatum minus made of Salt, the water of Salt
circulated, (the Arcanum of Salt, the Menstruum which is now in hand) must be
putrified, and distilled so long, till the substance of the Salt be dissolved,
and reduced into a perpetual Oleosity, the Body in the Form of Phlegm being
abstracted from it. The place alleged is in Lib. 8. Archid. de Elixeriis page
31. Take Salt well prepared, most white, and pure, put it into a Pelican, with
six times the weight of the dissolving water (by the dissolving water is our
water of Salt (circulated) to be understood. Lib. 10. Archid. page 38.) Digest
them a month together in Horse-dung; then separate the dissolving water by
Distillation, and pour it on again, and separate, as before, and that so often,
till the Salt be converted into Oil. This way of making the Essence of Salt
with the Circulatum minus, is much better, and more exquisite than that former
preparation performed by the Spirit of Philosophical Wine, though Paracelsus
affirms the former method to be more useful, and more expeditious than the
latter; which is to be understood of the use of both, not the preparation: For
the Essence of Salt is both sooner and better prepared with some Circulatum
minus, than with the simple Spirit of Philosophical Wine; from which Essence of
Salt which way soever made, is prepared the Arcanum of Salt; which reason will
have more commodious, and more expeditious, in extracting the Essences of
things, than the Oil of Salt, not yet so graduated. In the second Process,
Paracelsus commands, indeed, the Oil of Salt made per deliquium to be
putrefy'd; but as to the means of putrefaction, whether with the Spirit of
Philosophical Wine, or some simple Vegetable Menstruum makes no mention,
without which notwithstanding the Salt would not ascend in the Alembick, and if
it were distilled, yet would it be of no use in extracting Essences: He
putrified therefore the Oil of Salt per deliquium, for some time with the
Spirit of Philosophical Wine, then being putrifyed, distill (...) with a
stronger Fire, the residue of the Salt he again dissolved on a Marble, and
being dissolved, putrified and distilled it with new Spirit of Philosophical
Wine, or some Simple Vegetable Menstruum, so often, till he had distilled the
whole into Spiritual Water of Salt.

The third Branch consists in the Reduction of the Essence of Salt into the
Arcanum of the same; for the Natural (that is, Saline,) Essence of Salt, does
by being cohobated sometimes with the Spirit of Philosophical Wine, ascend
together with it, becomes sweet, and is transmuted into the Arcanum of Salt, or
Artificial Essence, of which Arcanums more in the second Book of Medecines.
Common Salt therefore distilled with the Spirit of Philosophical Wine through
an Alembick, is the Circulatum minus of Paracelsus, the Aqua salis circulati,
the Primum ens salis, the Arcanum salis, the Aqua solvens, the Spiritus salis
distillatus, the Matrix and Center of Metals and Minerals, etc. It is called
Circulatum, by reason of the Circulation or Digestion of the Essence of Salt
for a Month with the Spirit of Philosophical Wine, or which is more probable,
because of the common Circulation of all the Vegetable Menstruums for the space
of 30, 40, or 60 Days, after the Menstruum was already made, so that this
Circulation, though omitted in our Receipt, must be understood in these
Circulatums of Paracelsus: It is not therefore called Circulatum minus, as if
common Salt had less Virtues in dissolving, than the other Salts, but because
it has those only, and not the quality of tinging superadded, as the greater
Circulatums: after the same manner as Salt is made a Circulatum, may also
Vitriol be made a Circulatum, Alum a Circulatum, Tartar a Circulatum, etc. This
way also, says Paracelsus, is the Arcanum or Magistery to be made of Vitriol,
as also of all other Salts, Lib. 10. Arch. Cap. 3. Page 38.

Lastly, As the saline Essence of Salt loses its saltness, and becomes sweet
by being digested and cohobated in the Spirit of Philosophical Wine; so the
Common Spirit of Salt well mixed and digested with the Spirit of Wine, becomes
a sweet Menstruum. It is thus done:

28. The Sweet Spirit of Salt of Basilius. Lib. Partic. sub Sulphur Solis and
Rep. 12. Clav.
TAke of the Spirit of Salt wholly dephlegmed one part, of the best Spirit of
Wine free from all Phlegm, or the Sulphur of Wine, made as I shall tell you
lower (the Description of which we lately had in the precedent Pages) one half
part, fit an Alembick well luted, and distill strongly, so as that nothing
remains: To the Distillation add one other half part of Spirit of Wine, and
distill, and that repeat three times, putrefie fifteen days, or till it become
sweet, which must be done in a gentle Balneo; thus will you have the Spirit of
Salt and Wine without any corrosion for extractions.

But though this Menstruum may deserve its Praises, yet it can scarce be
reckoned amongst Menstruums of this Kind, where we discourse not of acid
Spirits, but fixed Salts; it must therefore be considered as an Appendix of the
circulated Salt: to the Illustratino of which it will not a little conduce.

From the Receipts we observe,
1. That by Aqua Vitae, or Spirit of Wine, the Adepts did not in the least
intend Common, but Philosophical Aqua ardens; for Common Aqua ardens will never
perform that which is desired in these Receipts, and it being granted, that it
seems to perform, yet Menstruums so made, cannot be Menstruums of the Adepts,
but Common, of no efficacy or esteem in the more secret Chymy.

2. That Basilius has indeed sometimes used common Aqua ardens for his
Menstruums, but never by it self, but mixed with Vegetable Sal Armoniack, or
Philosophical Salt of Tartar (that is, with the Spirit of Philosophical Wine)
volatilized; which Salt, being brought into a liquid substance by virtue of
this Spirit, is his Menstruum; for he separates again from thence the Spirit of
Common Wine, either by Flame, or by quick Lime.

3. That the greater quantity of Sal Armoniack is joined with the Spirit of
Philosophical Wine, the stronger are these Menstruums made; wherefore Basilius
his Menstruums of this Kind, from which all the common Aqua ardens is
separated, are to be reputed among the best.

4. That these Menstruums are the Magistery of fixed Salts, by Paracelsus
called the less Circulatums, or Arcanum of the Alkali of Tartar, Beans,
Wormwood, as also common Salt, Alom, Nitre, etc.

5. And therefore that these Menstruums are Medecines.

6. That these Menstruums may be made several ways; as these out of the Sal
Armoniack of Lully, by the method of Paracelsus his Circulatums, and so on the
contrary, provided the Alkalies or fixed salts be volatilized, and distilled
together with the Spirit of Philosophical Wine through an Alembick.

7. That the Spirit of Philosophical Wine is not easily mixed with these Salts,
but by certain degrees: First, He extracts the Tincture or Soul from them, that
is, the more unctuous parts; which being more volatile than the rest, are then
easily distilled into a volatile Tincture, or (to use Luly's phrase) into the
animated Spirit; then the remaining Earth, being now fixed by the same means,
is again volatilized by absorbing the said animated Spirit by degrees, and
sublimed into Sal Armoniack.

8. That these Sal Armoniacks are sublimed with a very strong fire.

9. That these Salts are called Harmoniack, by reason of the Harmony ar
Perfection of their mixtion. So have you says Lully, the formal Harmoniack
mixtion of all the Elements; wherefore wonder not, if we call it Sal Armoniack;
for so it is called, because of its exalted and sublimed property the pure and
first Matter of Nature, Lib. Mercur. page 155.

10. That the volatile Salt of Tartar, the volatile Salt of Wormwood, Carduus
Benedictus, etc. common volatile Salt (by Paracelsus called Sal enixum) are
rightly termed Sal Harmoniacks, Philosophical Vegetable Mercuries, and Sulphurs
of Nature, etc.

11. That the Spirit of Salt, Nitre, Vitriol, Aqua fortis, etc. are by being
cohobated with the Spirit of Philosophical Wine made sweet.

The Sixth KIND. Simple Vegetable Menstruums made of the Spirit and Tartar of
Philosophical Wine.
29. The Coelum Vinosum of Parisinus made of the Salt of Philosophical Wine. In
Appendice Eluc. Page 271. Vol. 6. Theat. Chym.
TAke the Philosophers first Matter, called Chaos (Vegetable Mercury, the
Philosophers Wine) distill its Spirit (ardent) and Watery Element (Phlegm) in
its convenient Vessel, as we shall teach in its proper place, till its Body
remain in the bottom like melted Pitch, which by two distillations wash with
its Watery Element, then pour its Spirit to it, four Fingers above it, mixing
the Matter well, till it be well united, and set the Vessel to distill in Balneo
with an easy heat: then put it into Putrefaction six Days in a convenient
Vessel, and distill in Ashes, (the animated Spirit) then take other Spirit,
(ardens) and that being poured to it, put it again into Putrefaction six Days,
and so repeat this Magistery, till you see that the Spirit has imbibed and
extracted the Soul out of the Body, an infallible sign of which will be, when
you see its Earth hard and dry: for then may you be assured, that the Body is
for its health-sake dead, which you may vivify and make incorruptible, and it
will no more fear Death, nor Corruption in this World. Now take the aforesaid
Body, first weigh it, then put it in a convenient Vessel, and pour to it an
eighth part of its Spirit (animated Spirit) which extracted its Soul, then put
your Vessel in a Fire of digestion, (which we shall speak of afterward) and
continue the Fire till you see that the Earth has imbibed its Liquor: then
open your Vessel, put on an Alembick, and gather that little sweat, which will
have the taste of hot Water: Imbibe now your Matter for a second time with a
seventh part of the aforesaid Spirit, which contains the Soul, and proceed in
the methodizing of the aforesaid Magistery: Now for a third time imbibe with a
sixth part, for a fourth time imbibe with a fifth part, for a fifth time imbibe
with a fourth part, and do not multiply the weight of the aforesaid Spirit, but
continue it so, observing the aforesaid Method, till the Matter, which has
drunk up its Spirit, and is again united with its Soul, be white. Take now the
aforesaid Earth, and put it in convenient sublimation, the lower part of the
Vessel being luted below the Matter, and make the pure part sublime from the
impure, and so will you have our Mercury, which is clear and shining as a
Diamond. This is that which the Philosophers do by diverse Metaphors, call the
first Vegetable Matter, Sal Armoniack, our Mercury, our Sulphur of Nature,
whereas notwithstanding it is one and the same thing. Take the other Simple
Spirit, which you first extracted out of your Chaos, that which has not
extracted its Soul, and make it more pure and subtle by the way following: Take
of the Vegetable first Matter (Sal Armoniack) which you made before, one Pound,
and put it in a convenient Vessel in Balneo, till the Matter dissolve it self
(per deliquium) then putting to an Alembick, distill the superfluous Water, then
pour on three Pounds of the aforesaid Simple Spirit (ardens) and the Vessel
being conveniently stopped, as will be manifested below, put it into
Putrefaction for one Natural Day, after the manner following: Get you a Brass
Vessel, about one span and a half broad, and three spans and a half long, which
toward the Orifice must have a Copper Bottom pierced with many Holes, the
Cover whereof, which is to go into the Vessel, and stop it well, must have one
or two Holes: but the Glass Vessels, which you would put to that Copper Vessel,
ought to be conveniently covered: in the lower part of those Copper Vessels of
Putrefaction must be common Water, those Copper Vessels put upon a Furnace,
making a moderate Fire under, by the strength of which the fume or vapor of
the Water will ascend, and heat the Vessels, in which your Matter is; the whole
work of our Supreme Magistery will be matured and prepared by this Method, then
distill conveniently in Ashes with a heat, scarce unlike to the heat of the Sun,
till you have drawn all the Juice from it, then dissolve the Matter by pouring
to it of the aforesaid Simple Spirit three parts, in respect of the Matter,
which remained in the Vessel, after the aforesaid Juice was abstracted from it;
Repeat the Magistery a fourth time, proceeding and observing all things exactly
as above: So will you have the Spirit of your Chaos, which is by the
Philosophers called Fire depurated, reduced from power into act with the Virtue
of the Vegetable Matter. Take therefore a Glass Vessel, strong, able to contain
the measure of a common Urne, pure and long, whose Neck must be strong, and two
spans and a half long, whose Cover must be another Glass, called Antenotorium,
with a Neck turned downward, containing the fourth part of a common Urne, to be
put into the aforesaid Vessel: Into this Circulating Vessel put four Pounds,
and no more, of the depurated Spirit, which you brought from power to action,
by Virtue of the Vegetable Matter, as I taught you before Circulate in Balneo,
or Dung the space of sixty Days, and when Conversion is made of the Spirit
deduced from power to action by the first Vegetable Matter, then this you will
thereby know, that in the bottom of the Vessel will be a Sediment, like the
Urine of a sound Man: Then will you see a Quintessence brighter and clearer
then a Diamond, which exceeds the Stars in splendor, so as to be doubted,
whether it be contained in the Glass or not: which you must dexterously
separate from its Sediment, and keep in a Vessel close stopped in a cold place:
This is that Virtue which the envious have hidden, and obscured by innumerable
Metaphors, calling it Spiritus Vivus, Aqua Argenti vivi, Aqua Vitoe, Aqua
Celestis, Aqua Dianoe, Anima Menstrui Vegetabilis, Fumus, Ventus, our Heaven,
Menstrual Blood, Urine sublimed, Menstruum, our Water of Sulphur, our Blessed
Stone, giving it infinite other Names, which we mention not here, but have by
Experience seen and known them to be one and the same thing.

Annotations.

MOst of the Adepts knew no other but this way of acuating the Spirit of
Philosophical Wine, for they believed there was one only thing, and one only
Method: but this is not the last amongst the difficult Methods, nor much
different from the Coelum Vegetable of Lully made of the Alkali of Tartar. The
Tartar of this Wine is less Oily than common Tartar, and therefore adjoined to
this, as a higher Kind; but that we may the better understand the Receipt, it is
convenient to compare it with its Original, taken out of the last Testament of
Lully.

30. The Coelum Vinosum of Lully. In Testam. Noviss.
TAke Red Wine, which we call the Liquor of Lunaria, and Nigrum nigrius nigro,
and distill an Aqua ardens in Balneo, and rectify it, till it be without Phlegm,
which you will know, when it burns a piece of Linen Cloth, by reason of its
heat, which you will make it do in five times, sometimes in three, and having
such a sign, divide it into two parts, and keep one part for the making of the
Menstruum, and with the other part abstract the Soul from the Earth (a pitchy
mass) by the way which I shall tell you. The way, my Son, is, to distill the
Phlegm, till it remain in the form of liquid Pitch, then put to it of the Water
(ardens) which you rectified, so much, as to swim three Fingers above the
Matter, and the Vessel being very close, set it in Dung or Balneo six Days to
digest, after that distill all the Water, in which is the Soul, upon hot Ashes,
then increase the Fire a little, and take out the Oil; which keep: then pour in
of the other Water (ardens, or Spirit of Philosophical Wine) as before, and put
it in Putrefaction six Days, as before, and then distill in Ashes, first the
Water, then the Oil, and thus continue the Magistery the same way, till you
have extracted all the Soul from the Earth, keep it, because it is the animated
Water, and keep the Oil for the Tincture: Then take the Earth being dry and
hardened, and calcine till it grows white, being white, give the Soul in the
Water reserved to it. My Son! the way is this, Take the Earth being white and
depurated (Salt) and know the weight, put it in a Vessel of Glass, and pour
upon it an eighth part of the animated Water, the Vessel being very close, and
place it in Balneo three days, till you see the ardent Spirit condensed in the
Balneo, and rectify it, till it be without Phlegm, then having put on an
Alembick, draw off the Liquor without taste, because the Soul has embraced the
Spirit, which is in that part; and imbibe a second time with a seventh part of
the animated Water, and digest as before, and distill away the moisture: A third
time imbibe with a sixth part, digest and distill away the Water: A fourth time
pour on a fifth part of the animated Water, as before: The fifth time give a
fourth part, and digest as you know; and continue with the fourth part always
digesting and drawing of the Liquor, till our Earth be pregnant and white: Then
take the Earth being pregnant, and put it in a subliming Vessel luted and very
close in a Fire of the third degree, the space of twenty four Hours, and
sublime the pure from the impure: And thus my Son will you have the Vegetable
Mercury sublimed, clear, resplendent in the Form of a wonderful Salt. Know you
must my Son, that the Philosophers and we do call it properly Vegetable
Sulphur, Sal Armoniack, our Sulphur, the Sulphur of Nature, and many other
Names we also give it. Take, my Son, of this Vegetable Sulphur, which you made,
one Ounce, put it in a Glass Vessel, and pour upon it three Ounces of the
Water, (Aqua ardens rectifyed to the highest) revealed to you before, and the
Vessel being covered close, put it in Balneo for one Natural Day, then Distill
in Ashes, till all ascend that can, then know the weight of the Salt remaining
at the bottom of the Vessel, and pour to it three times its weight of the
aforesaid Aqua ardens, and put it in our Balneo the space of one natural Day,
then Distill in Ashes, and thus do three times: Then is all the Vegetable Salt
come over the Helm with its own Water, and mixture is made, and the Water
clear, which we call Simple Menstruum. My Son! Take a Glass Vessel, which must
be white Glass and sound, and it must be a large Vessel, and put into it four
Pounds, or six (at most) of this Menstruum thus simply dissolved, and the
Vessel being well shut and sealed, put it in Balneo or Dung, the space of sixty
Days, and it will in that time be converted into a Quintessence exceeding
Glorious and Odoriferous, which you will know, when you see in the bottom of
the Vessel a Sediment, like that in the Urine of a well Complexioned Youth, and
it will be clear and resplendent, as a Star of Heaven: Keep it in a hot and
moist place, as is a Balneo, separating it first from its Sediment, and sealing
the Vessel well as may be.

Both Receipts agree in all things, except that Lully calcines the dead Earth,
and by dissolving in common Water and calcining, purifies it; Parisinus not so:
this Earth notwithstanding seeming by this way of putrefying to be made fitter
for the Reception of its Spirit; The Receipts consist of these two parts, the
preparation of the Vegetable Sal Armoniack, and the Reduction of the same Salt
into a liquid Substance or Menstruum: The preparation of the Sal Armoniack is
effected by two Operations: In the first, the Soul is extracted out of the Body
by Virtue of the Spirit, to exanimate and fix the Earth, and make it melt like
Wax on a red hot Plate: In the second, the Soul is stored to this fixed Earth
by times, and this variously, to make it Volatile: In both Receipts as well of
Lully, as Parisinus, the animated Spirit is restored to the Earth so
exanimated, in an eighth, seventh, sixth, fifth, and fourth part of its weight,
till it wholly evaporates upon a fiery hot Plate; this method of impregnating,
or revivifying the Dead Body will be confirmed and illustrated by the

Vegetable Sal Armoniack of Parisinus. In Apertorio Cap. F. and L. and part
secunda Citharoe vel Violettoe, and Cap. 5. Elucid. page 235. Vol. 6. Theat.
Chym.
OUr Vegetable Mercury is that Principle to be admired above all other things
of this Art, which consists in the preparation and ablution of its most
precious Earth, which is of so great Virtue, as not to be comprehended by the
wit of any Men, those only excepted, who have attained to the miraculous
effects of it. Our purpose is to take the matter remaining ( in the
distillation of Philosophical Wine) like melted pitch, to which pour of its
Death (Phlegm) the height of four fingers above it, agitate; that the tincture,
or unctuous superfluous part of it may be dissolved, let the matter settle,
decant the tincture, to the remaining matter pour new Phlegm, agitating and
decanting so often, till no more tincture ascends, and the Earth remains white,
sparkling like a Diamond, which dry in the Sun or some such heat; being dried
and pulverized, pour to it of C, that is, its (ardent) Spirit, so much as will
swim upon it the space of four Fingers, digest in a blind Head three natural
Days, then distill with a slender heat of Ashes, till the Veins disappear, take
away the Receiver, stop it well, put another to, distill away all the Phlegm
with a Fire somewhat stronger, cool the Vessel, take out the Matter being
hardened, pulverize, and putting it in the same Vessel, pour to it of C the
breadth of three Fingers, lute, and putrefie three days, take away the blind
Head, distill through an Alembick, till the Veins ascend, then change the
Receiver, as before, repeat these Operations, till the Earth remain white, and
fume not upon a hot Plate: Now take a Phial, put the aforesaid Earth into it,
lute well the Neck of the Phial, and set it to digest, or calcine rather in
Ashes, and you will have your most precious Earth now sit to receive its Spirit
(animated) or Soul, with the conservation of its radical moisture. Take this
Earth, put it in a round Vessel, a hands breadth deep, broad about the Orifice,
and imbibe it with its Soul, or animated Spirit, as we shall declare, cap. L.
thus have you so full an Instruction of this Matter, that it is impossible for
you to err, if you be a faithful Christian. I promised (he goes on cap. L.) to
give you full direction for the making of all sorts of Sulphurs for our
Magistery, that is, Mineral, Vegetable, and Animal Sulphur. Wonder not, that I
did first sublime, and vivify the Mineral Sulphur of Nature, I doing this, to
give them in order, and that you might the better attend your Practice and
Theory: though I know, you are not ignorant, that no dissolution can be made
without either Vegetable or Animal Sulphur. Now to our purpose; Take the
Vegetable Earth prepared, as I taught you cap. F. imbibe it with its animated
Spirit, giving an eighth part of it, (in respect of the Earth) cover the Vessel
with a Blind Head, digest eight days in Balneo, then lay aside this Head, and
draw of all the insipid moisture in a gentle heat of Ashes, or of the Sun: then
imbibe with a seventh part, digesting in Balneo, and distilling in Ashes, as
before; then imbibe with a sixth, then a fifth; lastly a fourth part, and with
this quantity repeat the rest of the imbibitions, till the Earth has drank up
two parts and more of its weight: Then take the Earth out of the Vessel,
pulverize, and put a little of it upon a red hot Plate, if the greatest part of
it fume away, put the powder into a Sublimatory, and sublime the Philosophers
Sal Armoniack, giving the beginning of Vegetation to both the terrestrial
Luminaries (Gold and Silver) without which, neither the Vegetable nor Animal
Work, yea nothing at all can be done in this Magistery.

This Volatilization of the fixed Earth the Adepts performed other ways also,
not always observing the order of the aforesaid weights of the animated Spirit,
in the resuscitation or impregnation of the dead Body: For sometimes they
imbibed this exanimated Earth with an eighth part of its animated Spirit so
often, till it became animated again, and was made Volatile. Thus Lully made his.

The Vegetable Sal Armoniack of Lully. Libro de materia Vegetabili in practica
quarta.
TAke excellent Wine either red or white, distill by the Rule of Art an ardent
Spirit, burning Cotton, evaporate the Phlegm till the Matter remain thick, as
melted pitch, to which pour of the ardent Spirit so much, as to swim four
Fingers above it: digest for a week in Balneo, then distill the animated Spirit
by Ashes, to the Earth pour new ardent Spirit, repeating so often, till the Earth
remain dry, and in the Form of powder: Moreover, you must from the Earth distill
an Oil in Ashes with a Fire sufficiently strong, so as that the Earth being
laid on a red hot Plate, casts forth no fume. That Oil, as also the Phlegm are
of no value in the present Work. Calcine or Reverberate the said Earth in a
close Vessel, to which pour of the animated ardent Spirit an eigth part in an
Alembick, digest in Balneo three days, then gently draw off the superfluous
moisture, being insipid as common Water, imbibe as before, and continue so often,
till the Earth in a close Vessel, to which pour of the animated ardent Spirit
an eighth part in an Alembick, digest in Balneo three days, then gently draw
off the superfluous moisture, being insipid as common Water, imbibe as before,
and continue so often, till the Earth be made Volatile, which you will know, if a
little of it put on a red hot Plate be almost wholly evaporated: This
impregnated Earth sublime with a subliming Fire the space of twenty four Hours:
The Volatile and sublimed Salt sublime by it self yet twice, which is to be
with the ardent Spirit dissolved, distilled, and forty or fifty days Circulated
into an Odoriferous Liquor.

Sometimes they impregnated the Earth from the beginning to the complete
saturity of it, with a fourth part of the animated Spirit, thus:

The Vegetable Sal Armoniack of Lully. In Apertorio suo.
TAke of the best Juice of Lunaria, that you can find, one Pound or two, and
put it into a Vessel with an Alembick, the seams being well joynted and luted,
set it in a little Furnace, and underneath make a Fire of one wiek, and with
such a gentle heat let the aforesaid Spirits be distilled, and so long, till it
begins to make Veins: When therefore the Phlegm begins to show Veins, then is
it a sign, that the Spirit is distilled, which contains in it all the
perfection of Life, and then take that distilled Spirit, and keep it very
choicely in a Glass well stopped with white Wax, then put another Receiver under
the Alembick, and receive the second Water, because it retains yet something of
the aforesaid Spirit, though not so strong as the first: distill from that
second Water so long, till nothing else comes but Phlegm, which is no otherwise
then as common Water, tasting a little, if it has yet any Virtue, than may you
distill yet more, but if it be as the other Water pure in taste, then lay aside
the Receiver with that second Water, and put another Glass to receive all the
Phlegm, distilling so long, till nothing more distills, and then let all the
Phlegm be poured away, because it is that, which brings Death to our Precious
Stone, and this the vulgar knows not, but we know. Now have you the Earth,
which remained in the bottom of the Vessel black, like melted Pitch: For that
calcination of the Earth cannot be done with a strong Fire, as Sophisters
believe, but it is done by its own Spirit, which keeps it from burning, because
its Spirit draws the Soul from its Body, and repels its superfluous Phlegm, and
mortifies the Earth, and then vivisies it: Now therefore calcine the aforesaid
Earth in this manner; Take the second distilled Water (Aqua ardens mixed with
Phlegm) and pour it upon the black Earth (Pitch) in its Vessel, and mix well,
till it be dissolved, because the Earth is presently dissolved. Then put on an
Alembick, and lute well, and distill the Spirit with one wick, as I told you
before, till you see Veins, then again separate the Receiver of the Alembick
with the Spirits, and set it apart, and put another Receiver to, and distill on,
looking if there be yet any Spirits there, if not, then the Water which is
distilled, has a taste like hot common Spring Water, which put away again,
because such Water is Phlegmatic, which causes Death to our Stone: And after
the whole distillation take the Vessel with all the Matter, which you will then
find more hard than before, and this is the reason, because that Spirit has
attracted the Aereral Soul to it from its Body, it being the place in which the
Soul is contained: that Operation repeat so often, till you see your Matter
calcined in the bottom in the Form of a black Powder, or even so long, till you
see no more Phlegm arise, so as the last Water to be of as great virtue,
strength, smell and taste, as the first: And you must not be ignorant, that in
the third distillation those two Spirits (ill and well rectified) are to be
mixed together upon their Earth, so long, till the Earth and Spirits have those
signs aforesaid, namely, the Earth be calcined, and the Spirits yield no
Phlegm. Then take the Earth, and with it a fourth part of its weight of the
Spirit, and put the Matter into your Vessel, which we call Retentorium, and
place it in a Furnace, continuing an easy heat so long, till the Spirit be
altogether coagulated in the Earth. Know Son! that the Body, which was Dead,
puts on white Garments, as, if God please, you shall see, when you try the
things aforesaid. Son! this must you repeat with new Spirit so long, till you
see the Earth altogether white as Snow: and then is the Earth big and
impregnated with Eternal clarity, which will bring forth an Infant, according
to this way: When the Earth is very white, then Son! take it out of its Vessel,
and grind it into a most fine powder, and this do upon a Glass Plate, then
again put it into a Vessel, luting the Joints of it well, and set it on a
little Furnace, and kindle a Fire, continuing it for thirty Hours, and in the
corners and sides of the Vessel you will find our Infant, born and resuscitated
in the likeness of a powder, most white, most fair, and in such clearness, as
the Body of Silver: Keep it therefore in high esteem, because it is your Terra
foliata, and it is called the Spirit of sublimed Bodies, converted into Terra
foliata; so winto the same the Soul, etc.

Sometimes they impregnated this Earth without observing any weight, as thus:

Another Vegetable Sal Armoniack of Lully. In Luce Mercuriorum.
TAke Wine red or white, putrify it in Balneo twenty days at least, that the
parts of it may be disunited, and the better separated, then by distillation of
Balneo, with a most gentle Fire draw off the Aqua ardens, which put in
rectification so often, till nothing of the Phlegm remains: then draw off the
Phlegm by distillation with a Fire of Ashes, till a certain matter remains in
the bottom of the Vessel like liquid Pitch, and the said Phlegm put apart: then
take the said matter, and pour to it of the Phlegm so much, as to swim four
Fingers above it, and put it for two days in Balneo, then one day in a Fire of
Ashes, that it may boil leisurely, and you will find the Phlegm much colored,
which empty into another Vessel: set it in Balneo again for two days with new
Phlegm, and for one day in Ashes, then empty it into another Vessel, and thus
proceed till the Phlegm will be no more colored, and if Phlegm be wanting,
then take the colored Phlegm, and by distillation draw off one half, or a
third part of it by Balneo, and operate with it as before; but when that Phlegm
is no more colored, then will there remain in the bottom of the Vessel an
Earth almost white, the Phlegm having attracted all the Oil out of it: if you
would separate them asunder, put them in distillation of Balneo, then the
Phlegm only rises, and the Oil will remain in the bottom of the Vessel most
red. Take this Earth, and pour to the same of Mercury, (Vegetable, or Aqua
ardens) so as to swim two Fingers above it, and put it in a Fire of Ashes for
one natural Day, so as to boil gently, then draw off (distill) the Earth by a
Fire of Ashes as before, and put it apart: And of new Aqua ardens pour to the
said Earth so much, as to swim two Fingers above it, and set it in Ashes for a
Natural Day, then draw it off by distilling in Ashes as before: and thus
proceed till there be no more Spirit (elsewhere called Soul) remaining in the
Earth, but all passed over with the Aqua ardens, which you may know by the
Earth remaining in a most impalpable powder, and putting it on a Firehot Plate
it will yield no smoke, which will be a sign, that it is without Spirit (Soul):
which Earth put then into digestion in an Athanor, and there let it stand ten
days in a continued Fire. Then take of the Aqua ardens, in which the Spirit
(Soul) is, and pour it upon the said Earth, swimming one Finger above it, and
put it in an Athanor for one Natural Day: then set it in Balneo, and by
distillation draw off the Aqua ardens without the Spirit (Soul) the Spirit
remaining in the Earth, then pour on other Aqua ardens; and thus reiterate,
till the Earth has drank up all its Spirit, which you will know by putting the
Earth upon a red hot Plate, because the greatest part of it will turn into
Smoke; which Earth digest for six Natural Days in an Athanor, then put it in
Ashes, increasing the Fire, till by the sublimation the Vegetable Mercury
rises at the sides of the Vessel, and in the bottom remains the Terra damnata,
which is not an ingredient to our Work: Which Mercury gather speedily, and
whilst it is new; after its rising, mix it with its Water for two days, and it
becomes a Water which has wherewithal to dissolve all Metals with the
preservation of their Form, and this Water we call Vegetable Menstruum.

Animal Sal Armoniacks may also be made the same way as Vegetable Sal
Armoniacks thus is made.

The animal Sal Armoniack of Lully. In Testam. Novissimo.
SOn! there is another way of this animal Sulphur of Nature, in which there is
most accurate knowledge, as in Vegetables, which you must perform by the method
which we shall teach you; and Son! the way is to take the Urine of Young Men of
good Complexion, and put it in a Glass Vessel forty days, till it be putrified:
then take a Cucurbit, and putting on an Alembick in Balneo for the space of
forty hours, distill a clear Water, and the Spirit will remain in the Earth (the
Soul as Pitch) dry it being well luted, and rectify the Water seven times, and
the white Salt (Volatile) which it made in every distillation gather warily,
that it may not feel the Air, and put it in its Water (Spirit.) Then put the
Earth and Water (Pitch and Spirit) together in Balneo or Dung for four days,
then distill in the same Balneo, and put it again upon the Ea^^^, digest and
distill again as before four days; then take the Water by it self, and put it in
Dung the space of two Natural D^ys, and distill in Balneo, and again putrify in
Dung, and continue this order five times: Then is the Water (Spirit) perfectly
rectified and clear. This work being ended, restore the Water to the Earth
(Pitch) and set it in Dung, then distill in Balneo, and dry up the Earth and the
Alembick being taken off, and another Cover put on, sublime for the space of
twenty four hours the animal Sulphur of Nature: Then gather it together, and
upon the Earth, which remained, pour its (animated) Water, and put it in Dung,
and distill in Balneo, dry and sublime as before, repeating, till all the
Sulphur be sublimed. Son! We have revealed to you every way of knowing our
Vegetable Sulphurs, and also the animal Sulphur, with a Declaration of the
whole Magistery. Now, with the help of God, we show you, that there is one way
and means in the animal and in the Vegetable, without any variation.

This Receipt being less clear, in making no mention of the Spirit of
Philosophical Wine, and yet of no worth without it; I will therefore add his
sixth Experiment of the rational Animal, where thus: Very great, certainly, and
incomprehensible Gifts has the most high God vouchsafed to us; in the
acknowledgment of which, our Duty is both Day and Night to love, worship, and
revere him with our whole heart, and everywhere extol his Name with all our
might: for besides his creating us out of nothing, and redeeming us with his
most precious Blood, he has also made Man partaker of all the Blessings
contained in the greater World, and for this reason is called Microcosm; for it
has by divine inspiration been revealed to us, that all Virtues as well Animal
and Vegetable, as Mineral are in Man himself, and this very thing I will prove
to be true by this wonderful Experiment: Take the Urine of Boys, which must be
from the eighth to the twelfth Year, and no more; which Urine gather from those
Boys in the Morning, rising out of Bed, a great quantity of which it is
convenient for you to have, which must be very well putrified in a Glass
Vessel, the Vessel being stopped, not to respire, two parts of which Vessel must
be full, the other empty, and thus ought it to be placed in Horse Dung to
putrify, till the Urine grows black, which commonly happens within forty or
fifty days: but that the Urine may putrify and grow black in a shorter space of
time, this we have had for a secret, and proved it by true Experiment, tha^
^ixing and joining a Cup of Aqua Vitoe, (Philosophical) but first highly
rectified with the aforesaid Urine, will accelerate Putrefaction: Putrefaction
being done, put the Urine in an Urinal, (Cucurbit) with an Alembick and
Receiver carefully stopped, two parts of which Vessel must be full, but the
third empty, and distill in Balneo with a gentle Fire one part of three, or till
it produces Veins in the Head, which Veins being vanished and gone, remove the
Receiver, and being very close stopped keep it with the distilled Water, which
is the Mercury (Spirit) of it, in a place as cold as you can: then continue the
distillation, increasing the Fire, and its Phlegm will be distilled, which
requires a stronger Fire to go over the Helm: and thus continue distilling,
till the Body appears in the likeness of Honey, or melted Pitch, then let the
Vessel cool, and keep the Phlegm, which shall distill: Then take the first
Mercury, or first Spirit, which you distilled in the beginning, and rectify it
thus: Put it into a large Cucurbit an Arm and a half high, then put into the
Mouth of the said Vessel Cotton enough to stop the Mouth of it; which Cotton
must be first moistened with Oil, and pressed out, and tied to a Hempen Thread,
that when you have a mind, you may draw it out of the Neck of the Vessel, and
that the Cotton may not fall into the Cucurbit; then put an Alembick to the
Cucurbit with a Receiver, the Joints being very close, besmeared with
Wheat Flour and Linen Swaths, that is, impasted with the Pap of Flower bound
fast to the Neck of the Cucurbit, to keep the Vessels from respiring, which
past (Chemical Lute) being dried, put the Cucurbit to a Fire of Balneo, boiling
gently, and the matter will be sublimed into a most precious Salt: Yet Son!
take notice of this, that the Beak of the Alembick must be large and wide, lest
the Salt rising and subliming out of the Cucurbit should stop the Mouth of the
Beak of the Alembick, when it flows over into the Receiver; for if so, the
Vessels would be broken, as it has also happened to us, when we brought this
Experiment to practice; when you see all the Salt gone over by distillation,
there will remain in the Cucurbit a certain Phlegmatic Water, which throw
away, as nothing worth; but the Salt empty with care, and keep it in a Glass
Vessel very close stopped, which Salt will be Volatile, and we will use it
either for the dissolving of Bodies, or for the making of Medecines. There is
also another way of rectifying or purging the aforesaid animal Spirit or
Mercury: Take therefore that animal Spirit, and distill by Balneo, and half the
Liquor being gone over, remove the Receiver, and throw away that which remains
in the Vessel: that which is distilled, distill again, taking two parts of it,
what remains in the Vessel throw away again as before, and what is gone over,
distill again a third time, and take little less than all of it, and thus will
you have the animal Spirit or Mercury perfectly rectified, wherewith you may
exanimate your Earth, which you had before remaining in the likeness of liquid
Pitch: Take therefore that liquid Pitch, or rather Earth dissolved, and pour
upon it so much of the aforesaid animal Spirit, as to rise four Fingers above
it, the Vessel with its Antenotorium lute, with Wax gummed, that it exhale not,
then shake the Vessel or Urinal very well, that the Spirit may be incorporated,
and the Earth being well joined with the Spirit dissolved, put it in
putrefaction for two Natural Days, then take away the Antenotorium, and
immediately put on an Alembick with a Receiver, lute well to prevent respiring,
and distill by Ashes: Have a care of the fumes when you open the Vessel, for
they are exceeding strong. All the Spirit therefore being by distillation gone
over, increase the Fire, that the Soul may be imprinted into the distilled
Water, and lastly again increase the Fire thus gradually, till some other Salt
or Sulphur be sublimed: When no more will sublime, cool the Vessel, and gather
the sublimation, and lay it with the animated Spirit lately distilled; then
take out the hard and burned matter remaining in the Vessel, and grind it, and
pour again to it of new Spirit as above, cover the Vessel with its Antenotorium
again as above, and putrify, then take away the Antenotorium, and putting on an
Alembick with a Receiver well stopped, distill the animated Spirit by Ashes;
which being distilled again as before, increase the Fire at last, that some
part of the Oil may be forced over, and the other part of the Sulphur sublimed;
but when you see nothing more will distill, nor any thing sublime, suffer the
Vessel to cool, and keep the animated Spirit last distilled with the other
distilled before: So also, if any part of the Salt ascends by sublimation, mix
it together with the aforesaid Spirit as before, and keep them all in a Vessel
close stopped: then again pour new Spirit upon the Earth, so as to rise three
Fingers above it, and joining an Antenotorium to it, putrify as before, and
then distill in Ashes as before: but when nothing more will distill, increase the
Fire as much as possible by adding fuel, that the Earth may be calcined, and in
this third Operation converted into a Beretine or ash Color, then the Vessel
being cold, and the Receiver with the animated Spirit taken away, keep it with
the rest of the animated Spirit, but put the Earth into a Vessel of Earth or
Chalk, which must be sound, and able to endure Fire, covered with the like
Vessel, giving it as strong a heat as can be made with wood, and so continue
two days, then by that time you will have calcined the Earth; the Vessel being
cold, draw out the said Earth, which will be almost white, or of an ash Color
clear and bright, pour so much of its Phlegm upon it, as will swim four Fingers
above it, and let it boil in Ashes four Hours, and then decant the Liquor
warily into another Vessel, and keep it; dry the remaining Earth, and pour to
it again of new Phlegm as before, then make it boil as before, then decant as
before, and dry the Earth; thus repeat the Magistery till all the Earth is
dissolved, or the most part of it imprinted into that Phlegm, which probably
will happen in the third or fourth dissolution: if any thing remains
undissolved, throw it away, for it is an empty Earth of no Virtue, but the
Earth which was dissolved in the Phlegm, pass through a Filtre, and then again
through a most fine Linen Cloth, which done, congeal the dissolution in a most
gentle Fire of Ashes, in a Glass Urinal, to which must be put an Alembick with
its Receiver: which being congealed, dissolve again in the same Water lately
filtred, then pass it through a Cloth again, and lastly congeal it as before:
But this Magistery you must reiterate, till it yields no more Terrestreity in
the Filtre: Then keep our Physical Sal Armoniack, our Animal Sulphur, our fixed
Animal Mercury, whereof lay a little upon a hot Plate, and if it melt as Wax
without smoke, it is a sign you have the Argent vive fixed, and perfectly
depurated, wherewith you will be able to accomplish many Experiments: This is
that Mercury, which has afforded us most seasonable succor, as shall be
manifested in the following Experiments.

To this exanimated Earth restore the animated Spirit by various imbibitions,
according to the ways described in the preparations of Vegetable Sal
Armoniacks, because, says Lully, there is but one way and method in the
animal, as in the Vegetable, nothing varying.

But the ways of making these Salts being very tedious, we will for a
conclusion add Lully's way of abbreviation.

The Vegetable Sal Armoniack made by the accurtation of Lully. In Testam.
Noviss.
THis Sulphur (of Nature) may, my Son! with the help of God be wonderfully
abbreviated, and the way is this: To take our liquid Pitch (after the Phlegm is
drawn off) and put it into a Cucurbit, in a Fire of the third degree, and
extract the Oil, till the Earth remains dry and burned. My Son! calcine as I
have taught you, and purify the Earth, and to separate the Salt from it, and
upon it pour a forth part of the Spirit, which is in the second Water,
(distilled out of the Rich) and digest as above; then drawing off the Liquor
(superfluous, insipid, and to be cast away) pour again a fourth part, digest
and dry as before, till the Earth be pregnant, the sign will be, that nothing
more (of the aforesaid Phlegm or Liquor) will distill, sublime, and you will
have the Vegetable Sulphur clean and pure, and of the same Virtue with the
first. I charge you, my Son! with the fear of God, not to reveal this most
excellent way of abbreviation to any Man.

Parisinus in his way of making Vegetable Sal Armoniack, declares the Oil
extracted out of the Pitch of Philosophical Wine, to be superfluous and
inconsonant, Separate, says he, all the superfluous unctuosities, which do
burn the perfect and precious Elements mixed and latent in that Vegetable
Matter, and are repugnant to that composition: and a little after; After the
separation of the superfluous unctuosity, and aereal substance, which blacks
and burns the other precious Elements of this composition, pour to it its
ardent and celestial Spirit. Yea, Lully himself has in some Experiments before
declared, that Oil, as also the Phlegm of this Wine to be of no Virtue in the
present Work: nevertheless in this accurtation of Sal Armoniack, he not only
uses the said Oil, and indeed (which you may wonder at) for the abbreviation,
of a most tedious labor, but also affirms that Sal Armoniack thus prepared, is
of the same Virtue with the rest. Sometimes he used also the Water or animated
Spirit, together with the Oil, for present abbreviation, thus:

Another Vegetable Sal Armoniack by the Accurtation of Lully. Lib. de materia
Vegetabili in practica septima.
TAke the best red Wine, distill the ardent Spirit, according to Art, so as to
burn Cotton, after that the Phlegm, upon the matter remaining in the bottom of
the Alembick, being thick as liquid Pitch, pour the Phlegm half a foot above
it, let it boil three Hours, decant the tinged Phlegm, pour on other, repeating
so often, till no more will be tinged, if you have not Phlegm enough, you must
draw off the tinged Phlegms in Balneo, which being evaporated, a Vegetable Oil
will remain in the bottom of the Glass, the tincture being drawn out of the
Phlegm, the matter will remain like a dry Earth, upon this dry Earth pour of
the ardent Spirit the height of four Fingers, let it boil two Hours, that which
is in the mean time distilled pour again to the Earth, let it settle two Hours,
then decant the animated Spirit from the Spirit or Soul of the Earth, pour new
Spirit upon the Earth, doing as before, three times: The Earth being black and
calcined, put into a Glass with a long Neck, and pour the Vegetable Oil
(aforesaid) to it, digest in Ashes ten days, then decant, and put it into an
Alembick, to which add a fourth part of the ardent Spirit animated, digest in a
vaporous Balneo for twenty four Hours, then continue the superaddition of the
other three parts of the animated Spirit every twenty four Hours, then distill
away the superfluous, insipid, and useless Liquor gently by Ashes, and
augmenting the Fire by degrees, sublime the Volatile Salt, etc.

Hitherto of the various preparations of Vegetable Sal Armoniacks. We will now
proceed to the other part of the Coelum Vinosum, namely, the several ways of
reducing these Salts into a liquid substance. The Adepts did for the most part
distill through an Alembick one part of Vegetable Sal Armoniack with three parts
of the Aqua ardens, to which Liquor they added again one part of the aforesaid
Salt, and distilled, and that they repeated three, and sometimes four times, to
make the weight of the Salt and Water equal; for the greater the quantity of
the same Salt, the stronger is the quality of the Menstruum, then lastly they
circulated the Menstruum, thereby to make it more pure and excellent: But
though this Method was more in use among the Adepts, yet either their curiosity
or sedulity found out also other ways; so instead of the Aqua ardens, wherewith
they prepared the Vegetable Sal Armoniack, as well as the Menstruum, they
sometimes took Aqua ardens circulated, or the Heaven, or Essence of
Philosophical Wine, described in Numb. 1. It is thus done,

31. Coelum Vegetabile of Lully Circulated. Lib. de materia Vegetabili in
practica quinta.
TAke the best white Wine, distill the ardent Spirit till it burns Cotton; put
this Spirit into a Circulatory two thirds empty, strengthen the Mouth with Wax,
and Bury it in hot Dung, with its Mouth downward, for the Spirit to be
circulated and digested the space of forty five Days, or till it swims above
more pure and clear, ( in the Form of an Oil, see the Heaven, or Essence of
Philosophical Wine, in Numb. 1.) having seen this sign, take out the Glass
warily, and with a Needle perforate the Wax, that the impure may flow out, then
suddenly turn up the Circulatory, that the pure or more fine may remain, which
we call the ardent Spirit circulated, which is of a most delicious Sent: now
take the residue, from which the Spirit of Wine was drawn, and distill the
Phlegm; and upon the matter remaining like melted Pitch, pour the said Phlegm,
so as to swim four Fingers above it, digest two days in Balneo, decant the
tinged Phlegm, and pour on other, and that repeat so often, till the Phlegm
will be no more tinged, which is a thing useless in this operation: Now the
Earth calcine in a Reverberatory, pulverize, put it in an Alembick, and imbibe
with an eighth part of the ardent Spirit circulated, digest in Balneo, and
distill some certain superfluous moisture by Ashes: continue this imbibition,
digestion, and distillation, till the Earth be impregnated with the dry Spirit,
which was in the ardent Spirit circulated, of which the sign will be, if it
does almost all evaporate, being a little of it cast upon a red hot Plate: This
impregnated Earth being put into a Sublimatory, sublime according to Art into a
Volatile Salt, which digest in Balneo two days and more, with six parts of the
ardent Spirit circulated, decant the dissolution gently, and if any thing
remain undissolved, proceed with it as before, this dissolution circulate
thirty days, and it will be a Quintessence to be compared in Virtue with the
Aurum potabile of the Ancients.

As these Menstruums are made either weaker or stronger according to the
variety of weight, so also are they more or less pure, by longer, or shorter,
or altogether neglected circulation, for some Menstruums there are of this
kind, which the Adepts circulated not: For an Example take the following.

32. The less Vegetable Menstruum of Lully. Lib. de materia Vegetabili in
practica prima.
TAke the best Wine (red is the best) two pounds of it, put into a Cucurbit
with a blind Head, and luting the joints well, put it in Balneo, to putrify
kindly the space of forty five days, then fit an Alembick to it, and augment
the heat, that the ardent Spirit may be distilled, which rectify thrice by it
self, or till it is free from all Phlegm, and burns Cotton; keep this ardent
Spirit well stopped in a cold place: take the matter remaining in the first
distillation, and draw off the Phlegm, till it remain thick like liquid Pitch,
upon which pour of the Spiritus ardens so much, as to be the space of four
Fingers above it, digest three days in Balneo, then distill gently by Ashes
three days, and by Virtue of a stronger Fire, the ardent Spirit will carry over
the Soul with it, which it could not do in Balneo; keep the distillation: To
the remaining Matter pour new Spirit, doing so often, till all the Soul be come
over, and that you will know, if by being projected in a small quantity upon a
red hot Plate, it yields no smoke, because the matter is now deprived of its
Soul, which we call dry Earth, which imbibe with an eighth part of the animated
ardent Spirit, digest for three days in Balneo, then distill gently in Ashes the
superfluous Liquor, being insipid as common Water: make the second imbibition
with a seventh part, and so continue doing as before, till the Earth be made
heavier by a fourth part of its weight, and it will be disposed to a reduction
into a Volatile Salt by the way of sublimation: This Earth therefore being well
pulverized, put into a Sublimatory, administering Fire according to Art, and
that which you find sublimed white as Snow, is the Volatile Salt, which keep in
a Vessel well stopped: Take of this Volatile Salt one part, of the ardent Spirit
six parts, digest in Ashes, and the dissolution is the Vegetable Quintessence
apt to dissolve the perfect Bodies of Sol and Luna, to make an Elixir, and
other Medicines precious and grateful.

Vegetable Sal Armoniack dissolved in Aqua ardens (one part of the Salt to six
of the Spirit) makes the present Menstruum; but the following is prepared from
Sal Armoniack resolved per deliquium.

33. The Vegetable Menstruum per deliquium of Lully. Lib. de materia Vegetabili
in Practica secunda.
TAke the best White Wind, putrify it in Balneo twenty days, or longer, then
distill the Spiritus ardens according to Art, till it burns Cotton; then draw
off the Phlegm, till the matter remains in the bottom of the Vessel thick as
liquid Pitch, to which matter pour so much of the Phlegm, as will swim four
Fingers above it, digest in Balneo two days, and in Ashes one day, decant the
tinged Phlegm; pour new Phlegm to the matter, doing as before, till no more
will be tinged, and the matter remains at the bottom of the Vessel like a white
Earth, upon this Earth pour the height of two Fingers of the ardent Spirit,
digest for a day in Ashes, and the Soul which is in the Earth, will enter into
the ardent Spirit, decant the ardent Spirit being animated, pour off the ardent
Spirit again upon the Earth, doing it so often as before, till the Spirit draws
out no more Soul, and the Earth remains in the Form of a most fine powder,
being despoiled of all its Soul, which you will know, if it smoaks not upon a
fiery Plate; this Earth digest ten days in Ashes, then put it in Balneo, and
pour of the tinged Phlegm so much, as will swim two Fingers over it, distill in
Balneo, cast away the distillation as a thing of no Virtue, then again pour the
tinged Phlegm upon the Earth, repeating as before, till no Phlegm remains, and
the Earth is impregnated with all the tincture that was in the Phlegm: This
done, imbibe the Earth with the animated ardent Spirit, digest with an easy
heat in Balneo, till the Earth is well dried, then again imbibe, and so often as
before, till the animated ardent Spirit is absorbed by the Earth, and is made
Volatile, which you will know, if a little of it cast upon a burning Plate
fumes away for the most part; then put this matter into a sublimatory, and
sublime with a subliming Fire, and that which is sublimed, is the Volatile Salt
of the Vegetable matter: put that Volatile Salt into a Phial, digest in Balneo
for a day, and it will be reduced into a Water, which we call Vegetable
Menstruum, which is a wonderful dissolvent for the radical dissolving of the
two Luminaries.

These Menstruums the Adepts made sometimes not of Vegetables Sal Armoniack,
but by the way following.

34. The Vegetable Mercury of Lully. Lib. de Mat. Vegetabili in practica sexta.
TAke the best odoriferous Wine, put it in a Circulatory large enough, stop the
said Vessel very well with Sulphur melted, and putrify in Balneo twelve or
fifteen Days, then distill the Spirit and Phlegm according to Art, till the
Spirit burns Cotton; upon the matter remaining like liquid Pitch pour six parts
of the Phlegm, digest two Days in Ashes, shaking the Vessel now and then,
decant the Phlegm being tinged, pour on other, and doing as before, till it
has extracted all the tincture, and a black Earth remains at the bottom of the
Alembick: put the tinged Phlegm in an Alembick, and distill in Balneo, and that
which remains at the bottom of the Vessel will be the Vegetable Oil, pour the
ardent Spirit to the height of four Fingers upon the black Earth, distill by
Ashes, and that which is distilled will be the ardent Spirit impregnated, to
the matter pour new ardent Spirit, repeating as before three times, and in the
last increasing the Fire about the end: Calcine the Earth with a Fire of
Reverberation into whiteness, out of which extract the fixed Salt with a little
of the Phlegm, the fixed Salt being pulverized, put in an Alembick, pour to it
the animated ardent Spirit about two Fingers, distill gently in Balneo the
insipid and useless moisture, repeat as before, till the animated Spirit
ascends without diminution of its Virtue, and then will you have the fixed Salt
acuated, which put in an Alembick, and pour to it the Vegetable Oil three
Fingers high, digest in Ashes for a day, increase the Fire, and distill
whatsoever can ascend; the distillation keep warily, because it is the
Vegetable Mercury: But if any of the Salt remains in the Alembick, you must
repeat the same operations, till at length all the Vegetable Mercury passes
through the Alembick, which will extract the Tincture of Gold, being calcined
with common Mercury and Salt, and lastly with Sulphur, which is an excellent
Aurum potabile.

Sometimes they prepared these Menstruums by cohobation alone, without any
imbibition: For Example.

35. The rectified Aqua Vitae of Lully. In potestate Divitiarum.
TAke Wine, separate the Spirit warily, as soon and as purely as you can,
because you will never separate it so warily, but that it will contain in it
some of the purest part of this Phlegmatic Substance, or Water: this Spirit
being once separated, is called Mercury, that is, Aqua ardens, the sign of
which is, that if you dip a Linen Cloth in it, it will turn into a flame (if
first kindled) and not be burned, but if you separate often times, (rectify) it
is called Lunaria rectified, that is, Aqua ardens rectified, whereof the sign
is, that a Linen Cloth dipped in it, burns all away: Separate now all the
superfluous Phlegm, till none at all remains, and at the bottom will reside a
Pitch; then mix the Lunaria, that is, the Aqua ardens rectified, with that
substance made like soft Pitch, shaking it well, till it be incorporated, and
set it to distill, and that which goes over, is called Man's Blood rectified,
which Alchymists seek for. That Blood is also called Air or Wind, and of this
thing spoke the Philosopher, when he said Wind carried him in its Belly: from
the remainder separate the superfluous Oil (called above Vegetable) by
distilling it through a Glass Alembick, till nothing remains, which Oil keep a
part, till I shall tell you; but the residue will be a substance black and dry,
which reduce to a fine powder, and mix by little and little with the rectified
Man's Blood, and let them stand together for the space of three Hours, and then
distill, and then this Water is called Aqua ignea rectificata, or Fiery Water
rectified: then calcine the Caput mortuum in a Furnace of Reverberation, till
it be made like Lime, and this Calx or Lime mix with the Fiery Water rectified,
and distill seven times, and then is it called Aqua Vitoe rectified.

The same Menstruum has Paracelsus in his Book, de Elixire Vitae, and the
Author of the Appendix of the third Volume of Theatrum Chymicum. These
Menstruums differ not from the aforesaid made of Sal Armoniack, but only in
preparation; in those the whole Earth of the Philosophical Wine is by its own
Spirit reduced into a liquid substance, with which is performed the same Work,
but after another manner: Hitherto ought to be referred the Menstruum of Guido,
made thus:

36. The Circulatum minus of Guido. In Thesauro Chymiatrico.
TAke of the Spirit of (Philosophical) Wine one pound, of the Salt of (the
same) Wine four ounces, mix, the Joints being well luted, distill through an
Alembick in Balneo, pour back the distillation, and cohobate four times, and it
will be prepared. Lully reduces his Sal Armoniacks with some difficulty into a
liquid substance: but Guido distills the Salt of Philosophical Wine by four
cohobations into the same Menstruum: the cause of abbreviation is to be sought
in the preparation of that Salt, which is twofold, common or secret; of the
common, says Guido thus: The ardent Spirit of Wine being distilled, draw off
the Phlegm, till the matter remains in the substance of the thinner sort of
Honey, which will in a cold Cellar yield Cristals like Nitre, which are called
the Salt of Wine, which take out and keep; the remainder evaporate a little
while, and take more, etc. Of the secret way of making this Salt, says Guido
also, page 8. These. Take of the Salt of Wine, and Spirit of Wine, of each four
ounces, digest the space of eight or ten days, draw off gently in Balneo, and
the Phlegm only will ascend, and you will have six ounces of the Salt of Wine,
to which Salt add again an equal quantity of its Spirit, and digest again ten
days, and draw off the Phlegm, pour new Spirit to the remaining Salt, and
proceed as above, and thus may you increase the Salt of Wine as you please:
This latter way of making the Salt of Wine, is not only the multiplication, and
addition as well of the quantity, as quality of it, but moreover is also the
volatilization of it: It is no wonder therefore, that the Salt, whose half part
was Spirit of Philosophical Wine, should so easily ascend with the same Spirit;
yet is it to be well observed, lest we temper the aridity of the Salt of Wine
too much, with too great an addition of Vnctuosity, and instead of a Menstruum
of this Kind, make a weaker of the second Kind.

What has been declared of Vegetable Menstruums is also to be understood of
animal Menstruums; for an Example we will instance.

37. The animal Heaven of Parisinus. In Apertorio.
TAke the Urine of Children, between eight and twelve Years of Age, of good
disposition and health, get that which is good, and a good quantity, and put it
in many Glass Vessels, which you must not fill above two thirds, that it may
the better circulate: To every ten measures of Urine mix of our C.
(Philosophical Aqua ardens) half a measure, which must be without any Phlegm,
the Vessels being very well sealed with Wax, let them putrefy fifteen days, and
then you will find the matter black, and separated from its Terrestreity: And
you must know, the longer it remains in putrefaction, the more perfect will be
the work, every five days the Dung must be changed: then pour it out into the
Vessel, which we described in the Vegetable Work, and the Joints being well
luted, distill till you see the sign, which we spoke of in Chap. B. but for a
more certain sign, distill only two parts, then take away the Receiver, and put
another to, continuing the distillation, till it remains like Syrup or melted
Pitch, then take these two parts reserved, and distill by the same Balneo,
receiving three parts of four, the remaining fourth cast away, but distill half
of these three, and again distill three parts of four parts of this half, which
distill twice by themselves, and thus will you have your Flower rectified, with
which we extract Acetum acerrimum out of its own Earth: Take therefore this
Earth, being in the form of Syrup, to which pour the Flower (Spirit) the height
of three Fingers, cover the Vessel with a blind Head, and lute the Joints with
gumm'd Wax, put it in putrefaction three natural Days, and shake the matter in
the luted Vessel now and then, as is convenient, that the saline parts may the
better be dissolved; then take away the blind Head, and put on a common
Alembick, but have a care in this changing, lest the sharpness of the Salts
offend your Eyes: then distill gently in Ashes, and when you have by such a heat
extracted all the Water, increase the Fire, that the Oil or Soul of it may
ascend also together with the distilled Water, whereof one part will be
sublimed, the other part will stick to the superficies of the Earth in the form
of a white powder, let the Vessel cool, gather the sublimation; being gathered,
put it in its Water, make the Vessel very close, because it contains the
animated Flower, (Spirit) then take out the dry Earth remaining, reduce it into
powder upon a Porphyry Stone, pour to it the Flower (or Spirit) the breadth of
three Fingers, putrefy three days, distill in Ashes, increasing the Fire with
Wood as above, repeat the Magistery, till the Earth remains of an Ash Color,
then calcine it in a Reverberatory, as we taught you in the Mineral Work, in
Chap. 2. And so you will have the animal Earth prepared, abounding with so
great Virtue, as not to be expressed. O absolute power! upon which all other
powers depend, into what thing have thou infused such Virtue? No Man will
comprehend so great a secret, none will believe, unless he himself has seen by
Experience, as we have seen. Take the animated Flower, rectify it three times
in Ashes, always casting away the Earths, (Terrestial Foeces) then distill in
Balneo three parts from four, the remainder throw away, this repeat yet once,
then distill the whole, so will you have the animated Flower rectifyed. Take now
a large Vessel (a Cucurbit) and put in the rectifyed Flower, stop the Mouth of
the Vessel with Cotton, put on an Alembick with a Receiver, and with a gentle
heat of Ashes all or the greatest part will be sublimed in the Form of a most
precious Salt, with which (if you will) you may acuate our C, which then you
must circulate according to the Chap. D. D. wherewith you may perfect all your
operations (which we taught in the precedent Chapters) which you will sooner
complete by this Menstruum. But if you desire the animal Sulphur of Nature, it
is necessary for you to sublime presently after you have rectified the desired
Flower, namely, by imbibing the Earth according to the method and order which
we declared in the Vegetable Work, that is, with an eighth, seventh, sixth,
fifth, and fourth part, sublime and use to do as in the Vegetable Work, to wit,
by acuating the animated Flower with its animal Sulphur sublimed, circulating,
and doing all things as in the Vegetable Work. Now Son! you see how I love you,
having repeated such things over and over, and with such pains, lest you should
have occasion to complain of me, and that you should be expert in every thing,
in which I persuaded my self you might err; therefore have we in this Chapter
repeated and described that, which no Philosopher ever did in his great Volume,
and I may easily believe, that no Philosopher has presumed to describe so long
and ample a practice, as this of ours; all which proceeds from my paternal
affection toward you, by which I would oblige you under the pain of God's
wrath, not to reveal it to any one, but rather burn it, as soon as you have
reduced it into use, as you have more than often promised us: My farther advice
is, That you would strenuously endeavor to live according to the triumphant
Gospel of Grace and Peace: reject and avoid Evil Societies and Actions, as we
have often admonished you; but if you do otherwise, you will not please him,
who is the Donor of this Famous Knowledge, of every good Thing, and Grace it
self.

From the Receipts we Note.
1. That those things which were noted in the fifth precedent Kind, may
hitherto also be referred, the Menstruums of this Kind differing only in matter
from the antecedent, these were made of Philosophical Wine only, those of the
fixed Salts of diverse things, but as to the way of subliming, or the way of
making Vegetable Sal Armoniacks, they both agree in all things.

2. That these Sal Armoniacks are called Sulphurs of Nature. In the preparation
of Philosophical Wine there is an Earth found, which is called Sulphur,
existent in the Vegetable Mercury, coagulating its own Mercury; for the sake of
which Earth, they called every other exanimated and fixed Earth, Sulphur; but
the animated Spirit (Essence, Tincture, etc.) they termed Mercury, to be
coagulated by this Sulphur, but both of them being reduced into one Body, and
sublimed, they called Sulphur of Nature, (not more fixed, but) sublimed.

3. These Salts are called Sulphurs of Nature, to distinguish them from Sulphur
against Nature, that is, of every Acid. Fire, says Ripley, differs many ways;
for one is a natural Fire, another unnatural, another elemental, and another
contra naturam: Natural Fire is that which proceeds from the Influence of the
Sun, Moon, and Stars, from which are produced the Spirits of burning Waters,
the essential vapors of Minerals, as also the Natural Virtues of living
things; the unnatural is an occasional Fire, which is called a moist Fire, made
artificially by Philosophers: it is also called a Fire of the first degree,
which is for the mere temperance of heat called Balneo, Stove or Dunghill; in
this Fire is made the Putrefaction of our Stone: elemental Fire is that which
fixes calcines, and burns, and is nourished by things combustible; Fire
against (or contrary to) Nature, dissolves violently, breaks, kills, and
destroys the governing power of the Form of the Stone: for it dissolves the
Stone into the Water of a Cloud with the destruction of the specific Form: but
it is termed Fire contrary to Nature, because the operation of it is contrary
to all natural operations, as Raymond asserts: for all things that Nature has
made, this Fire destroys, and brings to Corruption, unless the Fire of Nature
be added to it, etc. Med. Phil. page 135. Wherefore also there are four Fires
in our art, namely, the Natural, which is the Menstruum Sericonis; the
unnatural, that is, Horse Dung, or Vindemia, and the like: the elemental, viz.
maintained by Wood and other combustible things; and the Fire contrary to
Nature, that is, all corrosive Waters, made of Vitriol, Salt, and such like
things. Viatic. page 342. but of these in another place, namely, the fifth Book.

4. That these Salts are to be used presently after the sublimation of them.

5. That Philosophical Aqua Vitae, though never better rectified, yet contains
in it some certain superfluous moisture, which it expells, either by being
circulated by it self, as in the preparation of Lully's Heaven, or imbibed in
things fixed; as in the ways of making the said Salts.

6. That a Menstruum made of Lully's Heaven, with the Essence or Oil of
Philosophical Wine, is no stronger than the rest, as to the preparation of the
Sal Armoniack, though it may be sooner made with this Oil, than simple Aqua
ardens, but as the Sal Armoniack already made is mixed, and again circulated
not with the thin Philosophical Water, but with the Oil or Aqua Vitae
circulated.

7. That the diverse ways of subliming these Salts do most clearly discover to
us as well the Nature of that Spirit of Wine, as of these Menstruums, and
moreover commends the incomparable Experience of Lully in these things.

8. Animal Menstruums, though extracted out of the Urine, and other parts of Man,
are nevertheless not properly so called, so long as the matter of that Spirit
of Philosophical Wine was Vegetable, and only acuated with an animal thing: yea
the very Spirit of Philosophical Wine made also out of the animal Kingdom, as
also acuated, would notwithstanding differ not from the simple Vegetable
Menstruums in the properties of dissolving, because it would together with the
said simple Vegetable Menstruums, very much vary from the tinging faculty of
the compounded Vegetable Menstruums, from which it ought to be distinguished;
whereas otherwise it might be ranked among the Vegetable Menstruums.

The Seventh KIND. Vegetable Menstruums compounded of the aforesaid Simple
Menstruums.
38. The Circulatum majus of Guido. Page 4. Thesauri Chym.
TAke of the Spirit of (Philosophical) Wine six Ounces, of the Salt of (the
same) Wine four Ounces, the Vessel being well stopped, distill the Spirit in
Balneo, which pour back upon the Salt of Wine, and again distill, and this ought
to be done twelve times: then distill for a Month in Balneo roxido: Putrefaction
being done, take out the matter and distill in a Cucurbit, with an Alembick of
two Heads or Beaks, in Balneo, and the Spirit of Wine will ascend through the
upper Beak into its Receiver, but the Phlegm through the lower into its Vessel:
Take out the Salt of Wine, pour one half of the Spirit of Wine to it, and
distill with a Retort into the other part of the Wine, distill yet once upon the
remainder, and all the Salt will ascend into a strong Menstruum: But if you
desire a weaker, add six (other) Ounces of the Spirit of Wine, and if you would
have it very weak, pour to it a greater quantity of Spirit, but according to
the aforesaid weight, it is made our great Vegetable Menstruum, or Circulatum
majus.

Annotations.

HItherto of Simple Vegetable Menstruums; now follow those which are said to be
compounded, not as if they are compounded of more Ingredients, but because they
are stronger than the Simple, as well in their qualities of dissolving, as
tinging: The Menstruums of this Kind differ not from the former in matter, nor
in the method of preparing, but in weight only; for the more aridity you add to
the unctuous Spirit of Philosophical Wine, the stronger are the Menstruums
made. Guido made his less Circulatum of one part of the Salt of Wine, and four
parts of the Spirit of Wine; but the greater Circulatum he makes of two parts
of the Salt of Wine, and three parts of the Spirit of Wine. The greater
quantity of the Salt, the stronger is the Circulatum. The less Circulatums do
extract the Essences, or Tinctures of things, but the greater Circulatums do
dissolve the whole Body into a Magistery, as will appear in the second Book.

Vegetable Menstruums compounded are made also, if the simple Vegetable
Menstruums be taken instead of the Spirit of Philosophical Wine, in the
Descriptions of them all; as thus:

39. The Menstruum acutum of Guido. Page 8. Thesauri Chym.
TAke of the Vegetable Menstruum (Circulatum minus, described in Numb. 36.) one
Pound, of Sal Armoniack (common) twelve Ounces, distill by a Retort first with a
weak Fire, then a stronger, and the Sal Armoniack will in part ascend, pour it
back, and distill yet once: then again add twelve Ounces of new Sal Armoniack,
distill strongly in Ashes, pour back, and cohobate yet twice, and you will have
our acute Menstruum.

Sal Armoniack reduced into a liquid substance by the Spirit of Philosophical
Wine, is a Menstruum of the fourth Kind, but the same Salt distilled with the
Circulatum minus of Guido, is made not a simple, but compound Menstruum, and
the better for adding so great a quantity of new Sal Armoniack. Parisinus in
the third Kind of Menstruums acuates the Spirit of Philosophical Wine with
crude Honey, by which way it is made a simple Menstruum of that Kind, but if
mixed with its fixed Salt, and distilled through an Alembick, it is made a
compound Menstruum.

40. The Coelum majus of Parisinus. In Apertorio.
TAke B, that is, red Wine putrified, as you know how, put it in a Glass
Cucurbit, with its Alembick, and Receiver well luted, and set it in Balneo,
wherein must be so much Water, as to swim two Fingers above the said Lunaria,
and distill gently, and forthwith you will see Veins appear in the Alembick;
continue the distillation so long as they appear, and these Veins will be like
Tears clear as Cristal, and when Death (Phlegm) comes, which kills the Spirit,
the said Veins or Tears will cease, and appear round as Pearls: then take away
the Receiver, stop it, that the Spirit may not evaporate, and set it in a cold
place, and so have you separated the Soul (Spirit) of it, though it contains a
little of its Death yet in it, and thus continue the distillation (the Receiver
being now changed) till all the odoriferous Phlegm is ascended, and the matter
remains like melted pitch, black and thick, which observe not to dry overmuch,
but according to the said Signs only: And thus will you have two ferments from
our B. beware of revealing to any one this Practice, which we communicate to
you under the peril of your Soul, for you would be the cause of much Evil in
this World, to be committed by the Sons of Iniquity: put it therefore into the
hands of Almighty God, who knows the Will of those that live according to his
Will, and the triumphant Gospel, for the Glory of which you have extracted the
Form out of B, and the same way you may extract from all Individuals Animal and
Vegetable. Cap. secundum significatum, per C.

Take the Soul (Spirit) of it reserved in the cold place, and distill half of it
in Balneo, or till the precious Veins cease from ascending, rectify yet twice,
observing the same Rules, but the third and fourth time, so soon as the Veins
appear, leave off distilling, and try whether it will burn a linen Cloth, if
not, repeat the distillation till it does: then cohobate by it self four or six
times in Balneo: And thus have you acquired a way fit for the rectifying of the
said Matter or Soul, (Spirit) which is of so great Virtue, as not to be
expressed by any Tongue, or the Secrets, which the Eternal God has vouchsafed
to it, recited; as when we were at Venice, that Famous City, we both saw some
Experiments of it; and so keep it well in a cold place. Cap. tertium
significatum per D. D. Having declared the method of rectifying and separating
our ardent Spirit from its Death, depraving its Virtue and Power: you must now
know, that it is not able to dissolve the two Luminaries, and reduce them into
action, except it be first acuated, as I shall tell you: Though this
preparation is to be taught in general, in Cap. F. yet to prevent the loss of
time, so soon as you have rectified your ardent Spirit, otherwise called the
first Flower, I had rather have you forthwith put it into Practice, which we
have in this Chapter signified by these two Letters, D. D. whereof one denotes
the acuition of it, the other its Royal Acuator, that is, Salt extracted out of
Honey, by the way which we have oftentimes showed you, that is, with its most
precious Water ( of Honey, or the Menstruum described in the third Kind, Numb.
10.) and though this Water be good enough, yet this Water, being acuated with
its most precious Salt, of which you will be more certain, will recompense your
Labor, and abundantly sustain you, till you attain to the end of your Labor,
the great Medicine. Now to the purpose, Take white Honey of young Bees, put it
in Putrefaction in large Cucurbits, with their Alembicks in Balneo, and make it
boil continually for an Hour, the rest of the time let it remain in a temperate
heat, and this do for the space of fifteen Natural Days, then pour to the
matter so much of C, as to swim the breadth of four Fingers above it, covering
the Vessels with the blind Heads, and putting them in Putrefaction three
Natural Days; then put on the Alembicks with their Receivers, and the Joints
being well luted, distill in Balneo, and when seven parts of eight are
distilled, or (which is a more certain sign) when you see round tears or drops
ascend, lay aside the Receivers close stopped, that nothing may evaporate, keep
them in a cool place, for the acuition of the matter; then continue the
distillations in the same degree of heat, till nothing more ascends; but if
necessity requires a greater Fire, have a care of making it too strong, and
when nothing will ascend by the said Rule, take away also these Receivers, and
keep them, because they contain the second Water or Phlegm for the extraction
of the most precious Salt: Now put your matter in Ashes, and distill with a heat
of the third degree, the Oil being distilled, suffer the matter to cool, which
being pulverized, reverberate in an Earthen Dish in a Reverberatory for eight
Days, or till it be calcined enough; the sign will be when you find it of an
Ash Color: then pour of the reserved Phlegm to it so much as to cover it the
breadth of two Fingers; the Vessel being covered with a blind Head, keep it in
Balneo two or three Days, decant the Liquor, and pouring on new Phlegm, repeat
so often, till you have extracted all the Salt, which will exceed Snow in
whiteness: And this is that Salt, wherewith we acuate our simple C, ( the
ardent Spirit for a Menstruum of the Fifth Kind) this is that which gives the
beginning of Vegetation to both the Luminaries, reducing them into the Nature
of a Quintessence: And with the same may you also acuate, and augment its own
Water ( of Honey, or Menstruum of the Third Kind) which has the power of
Vegetating all Minerals. With this alone will you support your self in your
necessity, so as to be in duty bound, my Son! to give thanks to the absolute
power: Be careful not to disclose so great a secret to any Man; for we have now
declared it so plainly, that it is impossible to add any thing more. Now take
your decantations, which you drew off in Balneo, that the Salt may remain most
white, which you must dissolve, filtre, and congeal three times, and it will be
fit for all your operations. Now let us descend to the practice of acuition.
Take of the Salt aforesaid one ounce, to which being well pulverized, pour four
parts of C, that is, the first Spirit ( ardent, but because a Menstruum of the
fifth, and not of this Kind, would be made by this Spirit, therefore is C,
being acuated with Honey, or the mellifluous Heaven of Parisinus, a Menstruum
of the third Kind to be taken) in a blind Head, and the Joints well luted,
putrify the space of two Natural Days, then put on an Alembick with a Receiver,
and distill in Ashes: distillation being ended, take a pound of the Salt
remaining in the Retort, and add to it four times the quantity of C,
putrefying, and distilling in Ashes as before, and the Magistery so often
repeat, till all the Salt ascends together with its Celestial Spirit, or C, and
by this way may you acuate and multiply as you please: but remember that one
part of Salt requires four parts of C, ( in this place, the Coelum mellifluum
of Parisinus.) And you must know, I tell you no fabulous Stories, but very
distinctly declare to you the order of true Practice, yet with this Proviso,
That when first you have brought it into action, you would altogether conceal
it, considering with how great obscurity the ancient Philosophers delivered
theirs, which notwithstanding they had not done, but to restrain the ignorant
from being too arrogant, for the same reason also do we desire, that, as we
have more than often admonished you, you would keep secret, and in convenient
time and place work for your self, and the poor of Jesus Christ. Cap. quartum
significatum per E. We ought to return infinite thanks to the goodness of the
Eternal God, in teaching us so bountifully the way of preparing our Heaven, and
making us partakers of so admirable and inestimable a favor. Certain it is,
when I had completed this most secret Science, and seen real transmutation the
first time, I was in a manner astonished, and often lifting up my Eyes to
Heaven, fell prostrate upon the Earth, giving thanks to Almighty God. Now to
the purpose: Take a large Glass of such a size, as I showed you one at
Murarium, into which put two or three pounds of that Menstruum, stop it well,
and circulate in Balneo or Horse-Dung, but have a care lest in changing the
Dung you impede the circulation, and so let it circulate the space of forty
Natural Days, and then you will find your matter clear as Cristal, with a
Sediment in the bottom like Silk, which decant warily into another Glass, keep
it very close in Balneo, and you will have a Simple Vegetable Menstruum, (if
made of the ardent Spirit, and Salt of Honey, but a compound, if prepared with
the Coelum mellifluum of Parisinus and Salt of Honey) our Heaven is in Virtue
beyond expression, herewith do we truly calcine and dissolve the Luminaries,
with the preservation of their radical moisture. This is that which will reduce
imperfect as well as perfect Metals from power into action. And though I may
seem not to have delineated to you the Form of the Glass, yet I know, and do
remember, that I left some of them at your House, and many other of our
Cucurbits, which are every one good. Govern your self according to your
discretion, we having sufficiently manifested to you the way of Truth in this
Chapter.

From the Receipts we observe.
1. That the Menstruums of this seventh Kind differ from the former simple
Menstruums, not in matters, nor in ways of making, but in the weights and use
of the Ingredients.

2. That these Menstruums tinge not their dissolution, which is the property of
compound Menstruums. Every Vegetable Mercury contains indeed its own tinging
Sulphur in its Bowels, sufficient both for it self and others, as will be
demonstrated in the third Book, but especially in the fifth, nevertheless we
affirm, that every Spirit of Philosophical Wine wants Tincture, as being not
acuated with things more tinging.

The Eighth KIND. Vegetable Menstruums compounded of Simple Vegetable
Menstruums, and common Argent Vive, or other Metals,
41. The Ignis Gehennoe of Trismosinus made of the Spirit of Philosophical
Wine, and Mercury Sublimed. Page 7. Aurei Velleris Germ.
TAke of Alum calcined, Nitre, of each two parts, of Salt decrepitated, one
part, mix, take of this mixture and Mercury sublimed, of each one pound,
sublime by the Law of Art, mix the sublimation with new mixture of Salts, and
sublime, and that repeat three times: To this Mercury thus sublimed and
pulverized pour the Spirit of (Philosophical) Wine, and draw it off in Balneo
to an oleity, cohobate sometimes, and the fourth time will ascend the Mercury
together with the Spirit of Wine, rectify the distillation till it leaves no
Faeces, and it will be a Water burning like Hellfire: This Water rectify
again in Ashes, till it ascends without leaving any Sediment; lastly, distill
through a Paper seven times double in Balneo, and you will have a Water truly
Spiritual, which keep in a Vessel close stoped, by reason it is very Volatile.

Annotations.

THe Kind immediately antecedent is indeed computed in the number of the
greater Circulatums, or Vegetable Menstruums compounded, because the Menstruums
of that Kind do in the power of dissolving excel the other Simple Menstruums,
but not in Tincture, which that as well as those do want; but we will now offer
those which shall be better; they will not only dissolve, but in dissolving
moreover tinge the things dissolved in them, and so make them better; they will
not only extract the Essences of things, but transmute whole Bodies into
Magisteries: Amongst these, the Vegetable Mercurial Waters, made of common
Argent vive, and simple Vegetable Menstruums have priority; for many of the
Adepts being so taught by Experience, have called common Argent vive the open
Metal, for it is sooner dissolved than the other Metals, and does by its
aridity more temper the unctuosity of the Spirit of Philosophical Wine, than
the individuals hitherto used in the antecedent Kinds of Menstruums: As
concerning this matter, hear the Philosophers, and above the rest the great
Paracelsus, Prince, without question, of all the Adepts, who says, If you
intend to convert Metals into a Magistery, and tinge the whole Body altogether
into an Essence, you must take the chief and open Metal, to which all the rest
have affinity in Nature, and putrify it in its own Matrix, which is situated in
Water, and is called the Mother of all Metals, ( Paracelsus his Circulatum
minus made of common Salt) purge it from superfluities, and reduce it into its
liquid first being, that is, the Metallic Acetum acerrimum, the primum Ens of
Mercury. Lib. 10. Arch. Cap. 3. page 37. As a temperate Essence (he goes on) is
drawn out of Herbs (as out of a Vine, for example) by which very Essence, the
like Essence may be extracted out of all sorts of Herbs and Roots, so, as that
the Mercury of Wine shows not its own Nature, but the Nature of that with
which it is essentiated; for the like reason out of Metals and Minerals, the
like Mercury or Spirit is extracted out of the open and middle Metal Mercury.
Lib. 10. Arch. page 39. Mercury vive is the Mother of all the seven Metals, and
ought deservedly to be called the Mother of Metals, for it is an open Metal.
Libro de rebus naturalibus, page 87. Wherefore call to mind those things which
have been said before of half perfect Natural Things, among which Mercury vive
is one, which is not brought into compaction, but left in liquidity: Besides
you must know, that every generated thing which is open, as Argent vive, is
like an open House, into which every Man that will may enter, for so lies
Mercury open, that every Physician may take what he will from it, but it is not
so with Gold, Silver, Tin, etc. for that Gate is shut by coagulation, till
opened, dissolved, and reduced into the first matter by Art, which Metals have
indeed many impediments, such as are not in Mercury, for it is open, and wants
nothing but the direction of preparation. Tract. 2. lib. 2. de morbis
metallicis. 723.

Basilius agrees with Paracelsus, saying: In the beginning of Generation the
first of all is Argent vive, being open, and loosely coagulated, because it
has little Salt communicated to it, and therefore is more Spiritual than
Corporeal: the rest of the Metals being derived from its Essence, have more
Salt, and therefore are made more Corporeal. Lib. de rebus natural. and
supernat. Cap. 2.

Chortalassaeus affirms the same saying: Argent vive is of diverse Colors,
white, skyish, ash, blackish, one slow, another swift, yet in it self an open
Metal, and has a Body easily transmutable. Cap. page 359. Volum. sexti Theat.
Chym.

In searching for Sulphur, despair not, says Sendivogius, I tell you by all
that is sacred, it is in Gold and Silver most perfect, but in Argent vive most
easy. Page 213. lib. de Sulphur. Of the ancient Philosophers I will add
Arnold, who in Lib. 1. Cap. 7. Rosarii, says: The Medicine is as well in
Metallic Bodies, as also in Argent vive, as to Nature, because they are found
to be of one Nature, but indeed in these Bodies harder, in the Argent vive
nearer, but not more perfectly. In Argent vive alone it is found more easily
and more nearly, not more perfectly, it being the Father of both those
Luminaries, and all things fusible, for they are all derived from it, and
therefore are they all resolved into it, because Nature embraces its own
Nature more amicably, and rejoices with it more, than with that which is
Heterogeneous. For in it is the facility of extracting that subtle substance.

Among the Metals there is none that sooner mixeth with the Spirit of
Philosophical Wine, and is more easily altered, than Argent vive, wherefore the
Adepts esteemed it as an open Metal; all other Metals and Mineral Bodies are
with very great difficulty dissolved by the Spirit of Philosophical Wine, but
being once counited with this Spirit, they are as well as Mercury, converted
into a third substance, never to be divided into their constitutives, that is,
Metal and Spirit; This open Metal they made more open sometimes by the acidity
of Salts; so Trismosinus did sometimes sublime common Mercury for his Hell
Fire: yet principal care must be taken, that such Menstruums as these made of
Mercury sublimate, be by being dulcified with longer than ordinary circulation,
or repeated cohobations, freed from all the acidity of the Salts; but this
operation being full of danger, yea contrary to the Rule of Vegetable
Menstruums, which excludes every Acid whatsoever, we have therefore thought
good to advise young Beginners to use crude Mercury, as safer than sublimate.
Instead of these we will therefore commend the Menstruums made of crude Argent
vive.

42. The Alchymical Mercury of Ripley. In Concord. Raym. and Guidon.
TAke of crude Mercury well purged one Ounce, of our Fiery Tartar, or former
Vegetable Salt reserved ( in the Fifth Kind in Numb. 23.) three Ounces, grind
both together very fine upon a Marble, till they be incorporated, then put the
matter in a warm Balneo, and let it be all dissolved into a kind of white Milk,
put it all upon a Pound of crude Mercury, and let it be all dissolved into the
like Milk, and thus do in infinitum. This Mercury being dissolved putrify in
Balneo, then distill in Ashes first with a gentle Fire, and an insipid Water
will ascend, which must be thrown away: then the Fire being more increased,
another Water will ascend more thick, which Water indeed dissolves all Bodies,
putrifies, cleanses and fixes them, at the end with a more vehement Fire will
an Oil ascend of a Golden Color, which must be preserved for the dissolving of
the red Ferment, and for the multiplying of the red Elixir, for it is our
peculiar Gold, not yet fixed by Nature.

Elsewhere instead of Tartar fired (that is, the Spirit of Philosophical Wine
dried in the Salt of Tartar, or Vegetable Sal Armoniack made of the Salt of
Tartar, but not yet sublimed) Ripley sometimes used some simple Vegetable
Menstruum, with which he made the exalted Water of Mercury, as follows.

43. The exalted Water of Mercury of Ripley. Cap. 12. Philorcii.
TAke Nigrum nigrius nigro, and distill an Aqua ardens, and fortify it with
Pepper, Squilla, Pyrethrum, Euphorbium, Solatrum, Anacardus, grains of
Paradise, Staphis-agria, and the like in acuity: but this is a great secret.
Take the Water of the fifth fortification, and distill, pour it upon Mercury so,
as to swim two or three Fingers above it, stop the Vessel to prevent exhaling,
put the Mercury in Balneo to dissolve for a Month, that which is dissolved of
it empty into another Vessel, and keep: pour new Water upon the Mercury not
dissolved, and proceed as before, thus continuing, till you have one Pound of
Mercury dissolved: Then put the dissolution together in Balneo the space of
fifteen Days, and after that distill, and that which ascends keep apart in a
Vessel, not to respire, and upon the remaining Faeces pour new Water, and
proceed by Balneo as above, and this Work continue, till all the Mercury is
exalted: But this is not the Work of idle and sloathful Men. Now this Water
thus exalted is by the Philosophers called by many Names, for it is Lac
Virginis, Aqua roris Maii, and Aqua Mercurii.

Nigrum nigrius nigro, and Philosophical Wine, we have proved before by Lully
to be Synonimous: the fortification or acuition of that Water or Spirit, with
Pepper, Squilla, etc. we taught in the second Kind. Mercury, though an open
Metal, is yet hard enough to be dissolved in the aforesaid Menstruum of the
second Kind, but the stronger the simple Vegetable Menstruums are, the sooner
also is it dissolved; an Example you will have in the following Glorious Water
of Lully, where Mercury is in the space of six days dissolved in the Coelum
Vinosum of Lully, by a Menstruum of the sixth Kind.

44. The Glorious Water of Argent vive of Lully. In Testamento Novissimo.
TAke of common Argent vive one Pound, put it in a Glass Vessel, and pour upon
it of the Vegetable Menstruum (above described (...) the Sixth Kind in Numb.
30.) so much, as to swim four Fingers above it, set it in Balneo or Dung six
Days, and it will be all dissolved into a Glorious Water, elevate the Menstruum
gently by Balneo, and at the bottom of the Vessel will remain the Light of
Pearls, and Soul of Metals: This we meant in the Chapter which begins: Oportet
nos cum eo incipere, and cum eo finire. Then take of this Glorious Water of
Argent vive one Pound, and mix it with two Pounds of the Vegetable Menstruum,
coelificated ( of Coelum Vinosum, in Numb. 30.) and it will all become one
Water, with which you will dissolve all Bodies, as well perfect as imperfect,
for the Production of our Sulphur.

The same way almost he prepares that which he calls the incalcinated Menstruum.

45. The incalcinated Menstruum of Lully. In Experim. 34.
TAke common Mercury, brought out of Spain in Skins sealed with a Spanish Seal,
to prevent Sophistication, force it through a fine Skin, then take the
Mercurial Water, extracted from Mercury by the Magistery, as we taught you in
the Experiment of three Vessels, as you know, and so dissolve the Mercury;
being all dissolved, draw the Water from it by Balneo, and in the bottom of the
Vessel will the Mercury remain in the Form of an Oil: This therefore we will
use to be incerated (circulated rather) into our Heaven or our coelificated
Menstruum: Take therefore four Pounds of the coelificated Menstruum (the
Vegetable Heaven described in the Fifth Kind in Numb. 17.) and one Pound of the
aforesaid Mercury reduced into Oil, and join them together, then will you have
at length the incalcinated Menstruum, with which you will dissolve the two
Luminaries, preserving their Form, and not only preserving it, but also
propagating it in infinitum.

The Receipt of this Menstruum is plain, yet must we declare what he means by
the Mercurial Water extracted by the Magistery of three Vessels, the
Description of which Menstruum we read thus;

46. The Mercurial Water by ^^^ee Vessels of Lully. In Experim. 13.
TAke Spanish Mercury, which is brought in Bladders with the Seal of Spain,
that it may not be adulterated; sublime it thus: Take Vitriol dried from all
Phlegm, and common Salt prepared, and decrepitated, or first burned in Fire;
join the Mercury with these two, grinding very well, then sublime in a Vessel,
at first with a gentle Fire, then increase the Fire, till it be perfectly
sublimed: the Vessel being cold, gather the sublimation carefully, and beware
of the fumes, being Venomous; imbibe the sublimation very well with the Oil of
Tartar (per deliquium) and quick Lime, then put the matter into a Retort, and
administer Fire, till Mercury vive is gone over into the Receiver; sublime
again as before, with the same new Matters, then as before vivify by a Retort,
thus repeat the Magistery four times: Then take this Mercury thus prepared, and
make it boil with (Philosophical) Aqua Vitoe, being dried, press it through a
Goats Skin: Then take this Mercury, and put it in Vessels (three Aludells)
which must be firmly and strongly joined together, and covered on all sides
with strong lutum sapientioe, then prepare a Furnace, in which these Vessels
may be fitly placed, so as that they may all have equal heat; but the Receiver
must by no means feel the Fire, so also the Beak of the first Vessel, through
which the Mercury is to pass, must be out of the Furnace: Then give Fire to the
said Vessels, so as to be red hot, both within and without, then put in the
Mercury through the Pipe on the outside of the Furnace, and presently stop the
Mouth of the Pipe with Cotton; and by the sharpness of the Fire, part of the
Mercury will in a short time distill into the Receiver; but one part in the
likeness of Water; separate the Water from the Mercury, and keep it, but that
which remains quick, cast again into the said Vessel as before, so often, till it
be through the sharpness of the Fire all converted into Water, empty the
Receiver every time into another Vessel, and keep it well stopped: Then take of
this Water four Ounces, and of the Oil or Salt of the first Experiment (Salt of
Tartar impregnated with the Spirit of Philosophical Wine) one Ounce, make it go
over together with the said Salt, distilling that Water in Ashes with a most
gentle heat at first, then in the end increasing the Fire, till more will not
distill: Then take new Salt, or Oil of the same first Experiment, and join it
with that Water a little before distilled, and make it go over again,
distilling by Ashes as before; but this Magistery you must repeat five times,
mixing one Ounce of the said Salt or Oil of the first Experiment every time
with three Ounces of the said Water, distilling as before in Ashes, with the
same degree of Fire, and the same weight as before, as well of the Water, as of
the Salt or Oil: And by this means will you by the help of God, have a Mineral
and Vegetable Water united together, which has the power of dissolving
Mercury, and all Metals, especially the two Luminaries: For the multiplication
of this Water you must proceed thus; Take one Ounce of Mercury purged, and five
Ounces of the said sharp Water (now prepared) join these two together in a
small Cucurbit, lute it well, then will the Mercury be forthwith dissolved,
which dissolution put in a little Urinal, with an Alembick and Receiver, the
Joints well luted distilling in Ashes, and it will all come over into a Water,
some Terrestreity of no moment being left in the bottom of the Vessel: Then may
you this way multiply the sa^d Water as much as you will, viz. by taking five
parts o^ it, and one of Mercury purged, dissolving first, and distilling
through an Alembick as before.

He revivisies Mercury sublimate, to be purged after the common way, by the Oil
of Tartar, and quick Lime; being now purged, to digests it in Aqua Vitae, that
is, Philosophical; for common Spirit of Wine would be here of no effect,
wherein this digestion with Philos^phical Aqua Vitae, much of the permanent
unctu^sity sticks to the A^gent vive, altering it exceedingly; then he puts it
into diverse Aludels, joined together, and to the Receiver, and made red hot, in
order to be converted into a Mercurial Water: The way of distilling by Vessels
red hot, I find in many places to have been much in use among the Adepts, but
whether they contrived this way for the abbreviating, or more exquisite way of
operating, or for what other cause, I know not. Basilius, Lib. particularium,
in particul. Solis, distills not Mercury, but Gold often extinguished in the
Philosophical Aqua Vitae through a hot Vessel into a red Liquor. Take of Aurum
fulminans, says he, one part, of the Flowers of Sulphur three parts, calcine
with a gentle Fire till the Sulphur be consumed, the red hot matter extinguish
in the Spirit of Wine, acuated with some drops of the Spirit of Tartar ( the
Vegetable Menstruum made of the Salt of Tartar) decant the Spirit, and the
powder dry at the Fire, to which being dried, add again three parts of the
Flowers of Sulphur, calcine and quench as before: This Work repeat six times,
that the powder of the Gold may be made like Butter, soft and fat, which must
be carefully dried, because it melts with a little Fire, this powder being a
little heated put into a Retort with a Pipe, and made red hot, and the Pipe
being presently stopped, distill the red drops falling into good Spirit of Wine
put before into the Receiver.

If the Gold being diverse times extinguished in the Spirit of Philosophical
Wine is made soft and fat, why might not this be also done in common Mercury,
digested according to the Receipt, in the same Spirit of Wine? But suppose
Lully proposed it only to himself, to reduce Argent vive into a common acid
Liquor, yet does he out of this, with the addition of the Salt of Tartar of the
first Experiment, make a Vegetable Menstruum of the Fifth Kind, with which he
dissolves common Argent vive, and reduces it into a Mercurial Water: then he
dissolves common Mercury by this Mercurial Water, and draws it off so, as to
remain in the Form of an Oil; which Oil of Mercury being dissolved in the
Vegetable Heaven, he circulates, and being circulated, calls it the
incalcinated Menstruum. If instead of the Oil of Mercury you take crude Mercury
reduced into the true first matter of Mercury, and acuate the Vegetable Heaven
with this Mercurial Sal Armoniack, you will make the same, yea a much better
incalcinated Menstruum. The way of making the Sulphur of Nature of common
Argent vive is this following.

The Mercurial Sal Armoniack, or Mercury of the Mercury of Lully. In Experim.
18.
TAke Mercury being twice sublimed with Vitriol and Salt, put the sublimate
upon an Iron Plate, being first very well pulverized, add to it two Ounces of
Tin calcined, then set it in a moist place, and it will be dissolved: sublime
again, and lay it upon an Iron Plate as before, and it will be all dissolved,
and thus may you dissolve as much Mercury as you please: then take this Water,
and rectify it seven times in Ashes, or till it will yield no more
Terrestreity, then distill it in Balneo with an easy heat, and distill one part
of ten, which is of no use, being Phlegm, which it contracted in the moist
place, then know the weight of the Water remaining in the bottom, and to every
four Ounces put one Ounce of the Vegetable Salt of the first or second
Experiment, being both of the same strength, then distill in hot Ashes with an
Alembick and Receiver well luted, which being all distilled, add new Salt to it
again, observing the same weight as before, of the Salt as well as Water, then
distill again as before, and this same way distill four times, to every
distillation adding new Salt as before, and distilling in Ashes, and so will
you have a Mercurial Water fit for all Physical Operations: Then take common
Mercury, washed with Vinegar and Salt, and strained through a Goats Skin, put
it in a Vessel, and if there be one Ounce of Mercury, add four Ounces of the
aforesaid Mineral Water, and having put on a blind Head in Ashes, let it boil
gently, and it will in a short time be all dissolved, empty the dissolution
into another Vessel warily, that if any Terrestreity be left in the bottom, it
may be separated from the said dissolution, as a thing of no effect: you may
this way dissolve as much Mercury as you will. Then take the aforesaid Mercury
dissolved, and putrify thirty Days in Balneo or hot Dung, which must be changed
every ten Days, that the heat may endure, and not be extinguished: having
putrified, remove the Vessel, and putting on an Alembick to, with an Urinal and
Receiver well luted, distill all the Water in Balneo, and the Mercury will
remain in the Vessel white as Snow, then pour to it so much of this Water,
which you now distilled, as to be four Fingers above it; the rest of the Water
keep in its Vessel well stopped in a cold place, then putting a blind Head upon
its Vessel, and sealing the Joints, putrify a Natural Day, then taking away the
blind Head, and putting on an Alembick with a Receiver close luted, distill in
Ashes, and increase the Fire, that the Soul may pass over into its distilled
Water; lastly, distillation ceasing, let the Vessel cool, take away the
Receiver, and keep it well stopped, for that which is distilled therein is the
animated Spirit; but to the matter remaining in the Vessel, that is, the
Urinal, pour again of the distilled Water so much as will swim four Fingers
above it, and having put on a blind Head, putrify as before, and taking away
the blind Head by turns, and putting on an Alembick with its Receiver, wherein
you kept the other part of the animated Spirit, the Joints being well luted,
distill again by Ashes, and lastly increase the Fire, for the Soul to go over
into the distilled Water as before, then the Vessel being cold, keep the
animated Spirit in the Receiver as before, well stopped, and to the matter
remaining in the bottom pour again new Water as before, and putrify as before,
distilling in Ashes, pour the Spirit into the same Receiver, where you kept the
other: thus repeat the Magistery, till the Body remains dead, black, and void
of all moisture, which you will prove by this sign; take a little of this black
Body or Earth, and lay it upon a hot Plate, and if it fumes not, nor flies away
from Fire, then take that Earth, and put into a little Glass-Globe well luted,
and the Mouth well stopped; set in a reverberating Fire the space of twenty
four hours; then remove that calcined Earth, and put it in hot ashes very well
stopped to prevent the attracting of any moisture: Then take the animated
Water, and rectify it seven times in Ashes, which animated and vivifyed Water
divide into two parts, whereof one we will use for the vivisying of the Earth,
the other for the dissolving of Sol and Luna: Then take one part of the said
Water, and know the weight of the Earth reserved before, grind first, put it in
an Urinal, then pour upon it of the aforesaid Water a fourth part of its
weight, and joining a blind Head to it well luted, set the Vessel in Balneo,
not to touch the Water of the Balneo, but for the matter to be heated by the
vapor only, and so let it remain four days; then having taken away the blind
Head, and put on an Alembick, distill in Ashes with a gentle heat like that of
the Sun, and an insipid Liquor will flow over, which cast away, as nothing
worth; then again imbibe with a fourth part of the animated Spirit as above,
digesting as above, and distilling the Liquor by Ashes as above: This Magistery
thus repeat, till the whole Body has reassumed its Liquor or Soul, and
remains white as Snow, which Body take out, dry, and grind; being ground, put
it into a small Cucurbit, strongly luted with lutum sapientioe, and the Mouth
of the Cucurbit, stopped with Cotton, and set the Vessel in a Furnace of Ashes;
but take notice, if the Fire be too violent, the matter will turn into Oil, and
cannot be sublimed, besides there will be danger of breaking the Vessel, as has
happened to us, and therefore we are willing to advise you to continue an easy
heat, till the matter be sublimed: This also observe, that this way of
subliming may also be done in the Fire of an Athanor, but then the matter will
not be sublimed in less than the space of three or four days; which sublimation
will indeed be most white, as the Scales of Fish, or as Talk: Then warily take
out the Magnesia, the first matter of our common Mercury, our Sal Armoniack,
our Sulphur, which keep in a small Cucurbit, well stopped in Ashes, warm as the
Sun, but that which remains in the bottom, and cannot be sublimed, cast away,
because of no efficacy, its precious Seed being vacuated.

Here he dissolves Mercury with calcined Jupiter upon an Iron Plate per
deliquium, with which he cohobates the Vegetable Salt of the first or second
Experiment ( Salt of Tartar impregnated with the Spirit of Philosophical Wine,
or sublimed into a Vegetable Sal Armoniack) in equal weight (yet by degrees)
through an Alembick; (instead of this Menstruum may be taken the Vegetable
Heaven of Lully) with this Menstruum he dissolves common Argent vive, and
reduces it into a white Oil, out of which Oil he draws the animated Spirit,
repeating the Work, till the Earth of the Mercury remains black, fixed, and
without fume on a hot Plate: This exanimated and reverberated Earth he
revivifies, by imbibing it with a fourth part of the animated Spirit seven
times rectified, till it becomes white and volatile, which then he sublimes
into a Mercurial Sal Armoniack, the making of which differs not from the
antecedent Descriptions of the Sal Armoniacks; but if it be mixed with four
parts of Lully 's Vegetable Heaven, that which is called the incalcinated
Menstruum is made from thence, and so much the stronger, as that Sal Armoniack
is stronger than the Oil of Mercury, but if this first matter of Mercury be
circulated according to its time, you will make a Menstruum deserving the Name
of Mercurial Heaven. Guido prepares the incalcinated Menstruum not from common
Mercury, but the Mercury of Metals, Sol or Luna.

47. The Menstruum of Guido for Precious Stones. Page 92. Thesauri. Chym.
TAke of the Vegetable Menstruum acuated ( described in the Seventh Kind in
Numb. 38. or Numb. 39.) four parts, of the Oil of the Mercury of Sol or Luna
one part, mix. He elsewhere page 84. describes the Oil of the Mercury of Metals
thus: Take of the Mercury of Sol (a Description of which we shall have lower in
the third Book) three Pounds, of the red Lion (Gold sublimed, of the
preparation of which in its place in the second Book) twelve Ounces, or equal
weight, mix very well, put it in a Cucurbit with its Alembick, lute well, and
increasing the Fire by degrees, sublime, and the Mercury will ascend partly
quick, partly in the form of a w^^^e or Ash-colored Sublimate, and about the
lower part of the Glass, of a citrine Color, mix the quick Mercury again with
the Sublimate, and again sublime, and that so often, till all the Mercury is
sublimed, which being so sublimed, put into Phials of a large bottom, and in
every one eight Ounces, to putrify in Balneo six weeks, and then six weeks in
Balneo rorido, and the sublimed Mercury of Sol will be resolved into a black
Oil, which rectify through an Alembick, first with a weak Fire, then a
stronger, lastly most strong, so will you have the Oil of the Mercury of Sol.

But besides Mercury, that open Metal, Menstruums of this Kind may be also made
of the other Metals, though more compact, an Example of which we have in the
Lunar Menstruum of Lully.

48. The Lunar Menstruum of Lully. In Experimento 24.
TAke common Mercury, and wash it with Vinegar; when the terrestreity of it is
taken away, let it run through a Goats Skin, then put it into those your
Vessels, of which you had a Form before, ( in Numb. 46.) put the Mercury in
those Vessels, and distill with repetition, till it turns all into Water, as I
taught you above; then take four Ounces of this Mercurial Water, and therein
dissolve one Ounce of the Vegetable Mercury of the second Experiment (Salt of
Tartar sublimed, or Vegetable Sal Armoniack made of the Salt of Tartar) pass it
through an Alembick together with the aforesaid Mercurial Water, then in every
four Ounces of the Water, dissolve one Ounce of Mercury as before prepared,
(that is Vegetable) putrify eight days, then distill by Ashes, increase the Fire
at last, that so it may pass into that which was distilled, in which dissolve
half an Ounce of Silver cupellated, then putrify three Days, then distill in
Ashes, and lastly increase the Fire a little, that all the clearness, or
whiteness of the Luna may go over by an airy resolution in this distillation.

He extracts not the whole Silver, but the more Volatile part of it, (called in
the ways of making Sal Armoniack, animated Spirit) by the Menstruum of three
Vessels already described in Numb. 26. with the Description of it there
declared, you may explain those things which are more obscure in the present
Receipt. He sometimes joins the animated Spirit of Luna, and the animated
Spirit of Sol together, and by circulation reduces them into an admirable
Menstruum, after this manner;

49. The Circulatum majus or Acetum acerrimum of Lully. In Experimento 25.
TAke the simple Vegetable Menstruum of three individuals, described before in
Numb. 26.) then take Luna, calcine it with Mercury, then take principal care to
remove all the Mercury from the calcined Luna, and the same way calcine Sol
with Mercury, then let all the Mercury be taken wholly from it: these two
Bodies put into Glass Dishes each by it self apart, and to them each by it self
apart pour clarifyed Honey, mixing the Calxes of the two Bodies very well with
the Honey upon Ashes so as to boil, then take the Honey from the Calxes, by
washing them in hot distilled Water, and the Calxes will remain in the bottom
of the Vessel, then mix the Calxes with the Honey again, boiling as before, and
mixing with a Spoon as before, and thus repeat your Work three times as well in
the Calx of Luna, as Sol: Then take these two Bodies being calcined and washed,
and put them into a Vessel of solution severally, and pour upon them of the
former coelificated Menstruum (of the three individuals) so much as will swim
three Fingers above it, cover the Vessel with a blind Head, luting the Joints
well with wax gummed, that it may no way respire, set it in Balneo for a
Natural Day, so as to boil gently, then for two other Days put it upon Ashes,
and let it boil gently as before, then empty that part of Sol, which was
dissolved into another Vessel by it self, which solution will be of a yellow
Color: So also take out the dissolution of Luna by it self apart, and pour it
into another Vessel, each of which dissolutions keep in each Vessel as before
in Balneo, but the dissolution of Luna will be of a Sea or Green Color; the
undissolved Earth as well of Sol as Luna dry upon Ashes: Which done, pour again
to each, of the new circulated Menstruums, and the Vessel being covered with a
blind Head as before, set it in Balneo, and make it boil gently as before, and
continue the same boiling upon Ashes, lastly decant the dissolution of each
Body as before into its Vessel, wherein the other dissolutions above were kept
by themselves apart: But this Magistery you must repeat, till all the Sol, and
all the Luna are dissolved; these dissolutions putrify by themselves apart the
space of forty Days, after putrefaction put the dissolutions severally into two
Urinals, with Alembicks and Receivers stopped, and the Joints being well luted,
distill first the whole Menstruum in Balneo, but the Bodies will remain in the
form of an Oil, then again pour upon them so much of their Water lately
distilled, as to swim three Fingers above the Matter, cover the Vessel with a
blind Head, and putrify twenty four Hours, then take away the blind Head, and
put on an Alembick with a Receiver, and luting the Joints, distill with a gentle
Fire in Ashes; lastly increase the Fire somewhat, that the air (the animated
Spirit) may pass over into the Water, last of all likewise force it with a
stronger degree of heat, till the Fire (the Soul being more viscous) ascends
over into the air; the Vessels being cold, pour again the new reserved Water to
the remaining Matter, the animated Spirit of each Body being first luted in its
Receiver, to prevent respiring, cover the Urinal again with a H^nd Head,
putrefying as before, and lastly distill in Ashes as before, last of all as
before, increase the Fire; thus repeat the Magistery, till both the Bodies of
Sol and Luna are by an airy revolution transmitted severally through the
Alembick: But if these Bodies will not entirely come over by distillation (a
little indeed will remain, which keep for the rest of the Experiments) then
take the animated Spirit of Sol, rectify it oftentimes by it self in Ashes, but
be sure not to take away any of the Terrestreities, which will every
rectification remain in the bottom of the Vessel, but rather pour back the
distilled Water always to the same Faeces, till you have performed the Work
seven times complete: And observe the same order in rectifying the Water of
animated Luna reserved before. This done, join these two Waters together, which
Conjunction is called the Conjunction of Father and Mother, Male and Female,
Man and Woman: And thus will you have the Menstruum majus, the Animal,
Vegetable, and Mineral, being joined together, and these three reduced into one
substance you must circulate sixty Days in a Vessel so luted, as not to
respire; Circulation being completed, you will have the Menstruum majus
brought to action, the power of which is so great, as not to be related: This
therefore is that admirable Menstruum which dissolves all Bodies, with the
preservation of their vegetative and transmutative Form: This, I say, is that
Menstruum containing in it such odor and fragrancy, that nothing can be
compared to it: This lastly is the resoluble Menstruum, which is by the Wise
called by almost innumerable Names, the Acetum acerrimum, which converts Gold
into a Spirit: This is the Aqua Sicca, Aqua Solis, and Aqua Vitoe; Parisinus
made this Menstruum, (which he otherwise calls the greater Mercury, or
compounded Menstruum) by this method.

50. The Circulatum majus of Parisinus. In Apertorio. Cap. G.
TAke of the best calcined Luna three Ounces, of Sol also calcined according to
Chapter H, (in which the Calcinations of Metals are after the common way
described) two Ounces to each, being put by its self in its Glass, pour of
Circulated, or the simple Quintessence ( acuated with Honey, or the Coelum
mellisluum described in Numb. 10.) the height of four Fingers, the Vessels with
their blind Heads put in Balneo two Days, and in Ashes two more: when you see
the Waters in some measure tinged, decant them, and the dissolutions keep by
themselves in Balneo well stopped, to the undissolved Calxes pour again of E,
digesting, decanting, and repeating so often, till the Bodies of Sol and Luna
be reduced into a liquid substance, then distill the Composition (Dissolution)
of Sol, and the Composition of Luna in Balneo, and the Bodies will remain in
the bottom of the Glass like an Oil; but to the Waters drawn from the said
Luminaries in Balneo, put Vegetable Sulphur, according to the weights of the
Sol and Luna, and it will in the space of two Days be dissolved in Balneo; so
soon as the said Sulphur is dissolved in every of its Vessels, pour every one
to its Metallic Oil, but to avoid Error, you must know that your dissolved
Sulphur is that which we taught the preparation of in Chapter L, namely, that
which is extracted out of (Philosophical) Wine, otherwise called, Sal
Armoniack, put the Vessels in Putrefaction eight Days, then draw off the Waters
in Balneo every one by it self, then pour of new Water the height of two
Fingers, cover the Vessels with blind Heads, and digest for a Day in Balneo,
then put on common Alembicks, and distill the Waters gently in Ashes, then
increase the Fire, that the air may also ascend into the Waters; the Vessels
being cold, pour new Water to each remainder, cover them with blind Heads,
digest in Balneo for a Night, then distill in Ashes, and this repeat as before,
till you have extracted all the Liquor of the two Luminaries; keep the Earths,
and if a little of it be cast upon a red hot Plate, and burns not, it is an
infallible sign, because the said Earth is deprived of its Soul; keep these two
Earths mixed together in digestion of Ashes, for the receiving of their
Mercuries, (the distilled Airs or Essences) as we shall teach in Chapter L. (in
the way of making the mineral Sal Armoniacks, or Metallic of Gold and Silver).
Now take the Liquors of both the said Luminaries, that is, their Souls or
Mercuries, already passed through an Alembick, and join them together,
distilling through an Alembick in Ashes; if any slimy Earth remains, add it to
the former Earths reserved, and this do six times, always removing the slimy
Earth: Take a large Vessel or Cucurbit, with an Alembick made all of a piece,
in which pour your compounded Menstruum, stopping the Mouth with a Glass
Stopple, luted with the white of an Egg, quick Lime, and course Paper, which
being dried, lute then with our Bitumen, made of an equal quantity of Pitch,
Wax, and Mastick, and Circulate in a Sophical Balneo, as we showed you at Mr.
Angelo's House in the Famous City of Venice, when we made the simple Circulated
Menstruum, and let it be Circulating forty Natural Days, which being expired,
you will see our Menstruum or Mercury clearer than Cristal, and more
odoriferous than any Perfume: This Menstruum, my Son! has the power of
dissolving the two Luminaries, and reducing them from power to action; and you
must know that by this alone, yet with the addition of its red or white
ferment, you will by Circulation make particulars of great projection: This is
that which our Captain Raymund Lully, in his Epistola Accurtatoria, spoke of,
saying, Having dissolved Sol, and drawn the Water from it in Balneo, then know
the Gold is made Spiritual, and irreducible into its former Body, to which if
you add a hundred parts of common Mercury, it will congeal it into true Gold:
Moreover, my Son! if the said Gold congealed into a Gum be dissolved in some
Water, and given to a Patient of what infirmity soever, he will in a very few
Days return to his good temperament; it removes whiteness of hair, and all
other signs of Old Age, restores former Youth, and preserves health even to the
time prefixed by the Eternal God: Know also, that should I describe all the
Miracles (and indeed they may well be called Miracles) and all the effects
performed by this Mercury, which, as I remember, I sufficiently declared to you
by Word of Mouth, and explained the various Sayings of our Captain in the Book
of Quintessence then, etc.

From the Receipts we observe.
1. That these Menstruums are stronger than all the antecedent, as being
acuated with better arids, or dry things, and therefore do not extract the
Essences, but dissolve the whole Body into a Magistery.

2. That these Menstruums are the Magisteries of Metals and Minerals, and
therefore Medecines.

3. That they are made many several ways now known to us.

4. That the Sal Armoniacks of Metals are made the same ways as Vegetable Sal
Armoniacks.

5. That every one of them is properly called Philosophers Mercury, or Mercury
of the Mercury of Gold, Silver, Iron, etc. sublimed; the Mercury of Antimony,
common Sulphur, etc. sublimed, because like common Mercury sublimed, it is most
easily resuscitated by hot Water or Vinegar, into the running Mercury of Gold,
Silver, Iron, Antimony, etc. as we shall be better assured by Examples of the
following Books.

6. That simple Vegetable Menstruums, do as being permanent Waters, continue
also with things Metallic, and stick most perfectly to them, not for Medicines
only, but also for the making of precious Stones, yea Tinctures, as well
particular as universal: As to the simple Vegetable Menstruums, extract the
Essences of Vegetables, and the same compounded, that they do make Magisteries
for a Medicinal use, we shall easily agree; but for the unctuous, and most
inflamable Spirit of Philosophical Wine, made of combustible Vegetables and
Animals, to be a constitutive to any Chemical Tincture, seems to be an
assertion altogether Paradoxical; for which cause are we to be admonished that
the Adepts rejected every Combustible Vegetable and Animal, as a thing useless
for their Tinctures, but never despised the purified Elements of Vegetables and
Animals, made incombustible, or acquiring incombustibility in the process it
self, though they have declared them to be (without the ferment of the Stone)
insufficient, as also Metals alone without these Menstruums, being therefore
mixed with Metals, they make Tinctures as well particular as universal for
Metals, Witness Ripley, saying: If you have a mind to make Gold and Silver by
the Philosophical Art, you must for that purpose take neither Eggs nor Blood,
but Gold and Silver, which are Naturally and Prudently, and not Manually
calcined, for they produce a new Generation increasing their Kind, as all other
Natural Things: But suppose a Man might with benefit effect it in things not
Metallic, in which are Colors found in Aspect pleasant, as in Blood, Urine,
Eggs, and Wine, or in half Minerals taken out of Mines, yet would it be
necessary for the Elements of them to be first putrifyed, and joined in
Matrimony with the Elements of perfect Bodies. Libro. 12. portar. portu. 1. The
Elixir, he proceeds, is not to be made of Wine, as Wine, nor of Eggs, Hair, or
Blood, as merely Eggs, Hair, or Blood, but of the Elements only, and therefore
we are to seek, in order to obtain the Elements in the excellency of their
simplicity and rectification; for the Elements, says the Philosopher Bacon in
his Speculum, are the Roots and Mothers of all things living: But the Elements
of the things aforesaid are not Ingredients to the making of Elixirs, but by
the Virtue and Commixtion with the Elements of Spirits ( whereof he recites
four, Argent vive, Sulphur, Arsenick, and common Sal Armoniack,) and Metallic
Bodies, and so, as Roger Bacon says, they are Ingredients, and do make the
great Elixir. Mid. Phil. Chym. Cap. 3. We, says he further, take neither of
the first Principles, they being too simple, nor of the last, they being too
gross and fecualent, but only the middle, in which is the tincture and true
Oil, separated from any unclean Terrestreity, and Phlegmatic Water; therefore
says Raymund thus: The unctious Liquor is the near Matter of our Physical
Argent vive: And though those Bodies, in which those Mercuries are hidden, be
sold openly by Apothecaries at a low Price, according to the saying of the
Philosopher in this manner: Our Sulphurs we have from the Apothecaries at a
mean Price, yet if you understand not the Art of separating the Elements,
according to the Doctrine of Aristotle, in is Epistle to Alexander, in the Book
of the Secrets of Secrets, where he says, Separate the subtle from the gross,
the thin from the thick, and when you have drawn Water out of Air, Air out of
Fire, and Fire out of Earth, then have you the full Art: except, I say, you
understand this, you will do little or nothing in my Work. Pupilla Alchym. Page
298. It appertains not to this place to prove these things by more Examples, it
is enough to have instanced these few by way of anticipation, the following
Books treating more copiously of this Truth.

7. That the Name (Hell Fire) the Menstruum of Trismosinus, is the proper and
common Name of Mercurial Menstruums: for most of the Adepts do affirm Mercury
to be of a most hot, yea Fiery Nature: some few deny, accounting it the coldest
Metal.

Amongst the Affirmers was the great Paracelsus, saying: We find Mercury to be
inwardly of the greatest heat, and no way to be coagulated, but by the greatest
cold. Libro. 6. Archid. magic. Whoever think Mercury to be of a moist and cold
Nature, are convinced of an open Error, it being of its Nature most hot and
moist, by reason of which it always and perpetually sloweth; for if it was of a
moist and cold Nature, it would be like frozen Water, and be always hard and
solid, and it would be necessary to melt it by the heat of Fire, as other
Metals, which indeed it requires not, having a Natural Liquation and Flux
through its own heat, which keeps it in a perpetual Fluxion, and makes it
quick, that it can neither dye, nor be congealed. Coelum Phil. Sect. de calore
merc. page 124. No Name can be found for this Liquesaction (Fluxion of Argent
vive) much less the Original of it, by which it may be called, and no heat
being so vehement, as to be equivalent to it, Hell Fire ought to be compared to
it. Coelum Phil. can.. 1.121. Basilius taught the same, saying: The Fiery
Spirit of Sulphur being invisibly incorporated in Mercury, therefore it prefers
it self in Fluxion, not to be coagulated, etc. For Mercury is a mere Fire, and
therefore cannot be burned by any Fire; no Fire touches it so, as to destroy
it, for either, etc. Currus triumph. Antimonii, Page 40.

And Sendivogius: I Mercury am Fire, etc. My Spirit and the Spirit of Fire love
one another, and so far as able, one accompanies the other, etc. If any Man
knows the Fire of my Heart, he sees Fire is my Food, and the longer the Spirit
of my Heart eats Fire, the fatter it will be, the Death of which is afterward
the Life of all things, etc. I am Fire within, Fire is my Food. Dialog.
Mercurii Page 515. Volum. 4. Theat. Chym.

Ripley did by the most hot things of Lully ( acuating the Vegetable Menstruum,
without the Virtue of which things, it would not be able to dissolve Metals,
but in a long time) understand Mercury: I am, says he, forced to say, that all
these things which Raymond speaks (of things most hot) are covered with a
Philosophical Veil, for his Saying is, That dissolution must be made with
Spirit of Wine, but his intention also is, that in this Spirit ( of
Philsophical Wine) may be had another resoluble Menstruum, which is only of the
Metallic Kind. Medul. Phil, Page 168. For that is Raymund's Water, which Mary
the Prophetess speaks of, saying, Make your Water as a running Water, by Divine
Inspiration extracted out of the two Mineral and Vegetable Zaiboth (Mercuries)
that is, circulated together into a Cristalline Water, etc. because, as says
Raymund, there being in Mercury a Point of Igneity, by the power of which is
dissolution made, it is requisite to animate it with the Water of Vegetable
Mercury, otherwise it can dissolve nothing: And this is the Water containing
all those things which you want, and by Virtue thereof are Pearls made. And
this Vegetable Water being compounded, does by Virtue of the Mercury (Mineral)
presently dissolve all Bodies, and by reason of its Vegetability ( Vegetable
Menstruum) revivify every Body, and by its attractive Virtue, (Symbolical
Nature) produce an Oil from every Body, and Mercury draws to it self its like,
that is, the Mercury of a Body. Of this Water, says Raymund, in Compendio Art.
Transm. ad Regem Robertum: You know, most Serene Prince, that our Stone is made
of nothing but Argent vive alone, that is, compounded of Vegetable and Mineral:
And therefore said the ancient Philosophers, the Stone is made of one thing
only, that is, Argent vive, Viatic. page 345.

Mercurial Waters are called Ignes Gehennae, by reason of this Fiery Nature of
Argent vive, the corrosive Specific was because of the Mercurial Water called
by Paracelsus Ignis Gehennae. Libro. de Specif. Page 29. The Circulatum majus,
prepared from Mercury, he calls a living Fire, most extreme Fire, and
celestial Fire.

If you would bring into action, says he, (the Life of Antimony hidden in its
Regulus) you must resuscitate that Life with its like living Fire, or Metallic
Vinegar, with which Fire many of the Philosophers proceeded several ways, but
agreeing in the Foundation, they all hit the intended Mark, etc. Yet that Fire,
or Corporal Life in common Mercury is found much more perfect and sublime,
which manifestly proves by its flowing, that there is a most absolute Fire, and
celestial Life hidden in it; wherefore whoever desires to graduate his
Metallic Heaven (the Arcanum Lapidis, or Antimonii) to the highest, and reduce
it to action, he must first extract the first liquid Being, as the celestial
Fire, Quintessence, and Metallic Acetum acerrimum out of the Corporal Life,
(common Mercury) etc. Libro. 10. Archid. Cap. 6. Page 39.

Amongst the Deniers, who judge Mercury to be of a cold Nature, is first
Bernhard, illustrious for Learning as well as Lineage, saying: Whereas Mercury
is compounded of the four Elements, they therefore being heated by the common
and general Causes, the Natural heat is excited by its own motion, by such
motion as this are the Fire and Air in Mercury moved likewise, and by little
and little elevated, these Elements being more worthy than the Water and Earth
of Mercury, nevertheless moistness and coldness are predominant, etc. Lib.
Alchym. Page 766. Volum. 1. Theat. Chym. Argent vive being most cold, may in a
short time be made most hot, and may the same way be made temperate with things
temperate by the Ingenuity of an Artist. Epist. ad Thomam, Page 57. Art. Aurif.
Arnoldus de Villa Nova in the Book, called Rosarium, is observed to have
declared, that crude Mercury, that is, Argent vive, which is by its Nature cold
and moist, may by sublimation be made hot and dry, then by revivification made
hot and moist like the Complexion of Men, etc. The said Arnold, though a
Reverend Doctor, and Ingeni^us in other Sciences, yet perhaps handled
Experiments in this Art without the Doctrine of Causes; but he says, that in
the first Purgation, the crude Spirit (Argent vive) is sublimed with the less
Minerals and Salts, and that Mercury it self, which is in its Nature cold and
moist, may be made a Powder by Nature hot and dry, as he says, this is indeed
of no benefit to our Philosophical Work: but suppose a Man may make such a
Powder, as he speaks of, out of Mercury, namely, dry and hot by sublimation
with saline Things, yet these Purgations are vain and impertinent, yea hurtful
as to the perfecting of our Work, etc. And if it be said by way of instance,
that as by Purging the impurities of Mercury, the said Arnold dried it by
sublimation, so also, as you say Thomas, moistened it by revivification, and
made the Mercury hot and moist, suitable to his own (humane) Body in Nature,
this indeed impedes not my Reverend Doctor, nor impugnes the Truth of the
Philosophical Art; yea rather the Error appears in this Natural Art: For, as it
is clear, Arnold teaches, (if you regard the sound of Words) that Mercury
being thus dried, by hot Water, into which it is cast, is revivifyed, and he
says, made hot and moist, whereas when first sublimed, it was hot and dry: But
what Philosopher can truly say, that Mercury, or any other Metal, is by simple
Water, though never so hot and boiling, changed as to its internal quality in
Nature, acquires moistness Natural to it self, and so is revivifyed? In this
revivification therefore Mercury requires nothing, forasmuch as common Water
decocts not, nor alters it, because it enters it not, and that which enters
not, alters not, because every thing to be altered must first be mixed: Some
superficial impurities of Mercury, such Water may indeed wash away from it, but
cannot infuse a new quality into it: For such a Nature as Mercury had when
reduced into Powder, and mortified by sublimations, such a Nature exactly will
it keep being revivifyed by Water: This I am willing to say with Reverence and
Honor to the said Arnold, but I consider and defend the Truth of Nature and
Experiment. About the end of his Epistle to Thomas.

But be it what it will, it consists not with our Prudence to adhere to any
Opinions, of what Authority soever, but to Truth alone; in which respect we say
Argent vive is neither cold, nor hot, yet that being of easier dissolution than
the rest of the Metals, it is most fit for this kind of Menstruums; and that
the Mercurial Waters prepared from it, may by Chemical Liberty be called
Hell-Fires, though besides these Waters the Adepts call also other Menstruums
Infernal Fire, of which sort is the acetum acerrimum of Ripley in the Fifth
Kind: But the following Arguments taken out of the Text it self do prove, that
Arnold, Lully 's Master, was as to his reducing of Argent vive into the first
Matter or Essence, not sufficiently understood, and misobserved by Bernhard,
taking Aqua servens for common boiling Water: Arnold divided the Second Book of
his Rosary into four Principal Works; which are, Solution, Ablution, Reduction,
and Fixion, as appears by the first Chapter of the aforesaid Book: Of the first
Work, namely, the Dissolution of the Stone, in the second Chapter, thus: You
must dissolve the Stone (Gold or Silver) being dry and thick, into Argent vive,
that it may be reduced into its first Matter; and all this is done by Argent
vive only, it alone having the Power of converting Sol and Luna into their
first Matter; but Argent vive having a terrestrial and adustible seculency in
it without inflammation, and substance of aqueity, you must of necessity take
away that which is superfluous, and supply what is wanting, if you desire a
complete Medicine; but the Earthly feculency is to be wholly taken away by
sublimation, etc. This sublimation or depuration of Mercury he describes in the
third Chapter following: The Craft (Way) therefore of removing the Earthy
superfluous substance from it, is to sublime it once or twice with Vitrum
(Vitriol formerly so called) and Salt, till the substance of it becomes most
white, having ascended most white, cast it into Aqua fervens, till it returns
into Argent vive; then take the Water from it, and Work with it, because it is
not good to operate with it, except it be first purifyed this way: and
therefore says Avicen, The first things to begin with, is the sublimation of
Mercury, after that, the solution of it, that it may return into its first
Matter, and sublime it wholly: Then put clean Bodies in the same, weighed into
this clean Mercury, etc.

If we respect the sound of the Words, Bernard in his long Argumentation
corrected Arnold deservedly, but if the Sense of the Words, here is nothing
deserving Correction: Aqua fervens, the Name of Arnolds Menstruum, is the chief
and almost only thing concealed by Arnold in the whole Practice of his Book,
which had he manifested, he would have prostituted all the more secret Chymy;
but that he meant not common boiling Water, is proved by the following
considerations.

1. Gold or Silver must be dissolved into Argent vive, or the first matter,
first Being, Essence, etc. by Argent vive, not common, but Philosophically
prepared: Nothing reduces Gold into a first Matter, but a first Matter; as
here the first Matter of common Mercury, clean Mercury, or the Mercury of
Mercury. The Adepts have a Rule, That a first Matter prepares a first Matter;
Therefore as Mercury prepares Mercury; an Essence an Essence; a Magistery a
Magistery; so the Philosophers Mercury, or the primum Ens, Essence, etc. of Sol
or Luna, cannot be prepared but by the Philosophers Mercury, primum Ens, or
some Essence; wherefore by Aqua fervens in this Receipt, we understand the
Essence of Mercury, but not in the least common boiling Water.

2. Clean Argent vive, or the first Matter of Mercury, made of Argent vive
sublimed by Aqua fervens, cannot be running Mercury, because it is in the Form
of a Liquor: For,

First, The dissolution of Gold made with this clean Mercury is to be filtred.
Grind time after time, and imbibe, and boyl-in-Balneo, then distill through a
Filter, till it ( meaning the Metal dissolved in the Menstruum, Chap. 3.) goes
through.

Secondly, In the Dissolution of Gold, the Tincture only is extracted, the Body
being left. Be patient, says he, and extract not the Tincture hastily, nor
seek to have things perfect hastily or swiftly, for the first Error in this Art
is haste, etc. Bodies dissolved are reduced to the Nature of a Spirit, and are
never separated, as neither Water mixed with Water, and that because Nature
rejoices in Nature, as the Spouse is joined with the Bridegroom; but those
things which are not dissolved, have not pure parts, except they be mollified.
Therefore, my dearest, you want wherewith to operate in the dissolution of the
Stone, that is, you must separate their purer parts from them, that the Work
may be effected with lighter, the heavier parts being cast away. Cap. 3.

Thirdly, Mercury, or the first Matter of Gold prepared with clean Mercury, is
also liquid. Chap. 3. The beginning of our Work is to dissolve our Stone (Gold
or Silver) into Mercury, or into a Mercurial Water, Chap. 4. No wonder
therefore if Mercury prepared by Aqua fervens be called Water: It is says he,
expedient to dissolve Bodies by Water, that is, by Argent vive. Cap. 3.

Fourthly, Because it extracts an Oil from every thing. Put, says he, of the
purest Mercury so much as to swim four Fingers, or more, which is better upon
the substance of the Body, from which you would extract an Oil, then kindle a
gentle Fire under it till you see the Oil, that is, the Air of it, by little
and little ascend, or be elevated upon the Mercury; gather it warily, and keep
it apart, etc. Cap. 10.

3. This Process of Arnold is ordinary, and called by the Adepts, The way of
separating the Elements, which cannot be done without either a Vegetable or
Mineral Menstruum.

4. Aqua fervens among the Adepts is the usual Name of Menstruum. Dissolve,
says Lully, the purest Sol in its own Aqua fervens, then separate the Phlegm,
and the Sol will remain below, etc. Codicil. cap. 43. Page 203. That Fire burns
Gold more than Elemental Fire, because it contains heat of a terrestrial
Nature, and resolves without any fortitude (force, effervescence, or corrosion)
which common Fire cannot do; we therefore enjoin you to make the Magistery of
the hottest things you can get, and you will have an Aqua calida, which
resolves every strong thing. Vade mecum. Page 272.

Which Form of Speech Bernhard himself knew, out of Morienus: Saying, Know that
our Laton is red, but of no benefit to us, till it be made white: Know also,
that Aqua tepida: calida, and fervens, Synonima's of one Menstruum) penetrates
and whitens, even as it self is (white,) and a moist vaporous Fire effects all
things: Again Bendegid, Johannes Mehungus, and Haly: You that seeking Day and
Night spend your Money, waste your Wealth, and Time, tormenting your Wits in
vain about the subtilties of Books, I admonish you out of Charity, through
Compassion, as a Father moved toward his Son, that you would, I say, whiten the
red Laton by a white odoriferous Aqua tepida, but tear so many Sophistical
Books, so many Methods, and leave such great subtilties; believe me, that it
may be well with you. Lib. Alchym. 770. Vol. Theat. 11. Chym.

5. It is by the blackness of the dissolution proved, that Arnold's Aqua
fervens was a simple Vegetable Menstruum; the black appearing above, says he,
gather apart, because that is the Oil, and the true sign of dissolution,
because this which is dissolved, attains to the end of sublimity, and is
therefore separated from the lower parts, ascending upwards, and aspiring to
higher places. Cap. 3. Rofarii.

These things we are willing to say, not impeaching the Reverence and Honor of
Bernhard, but we contemplate and defend the Truth and Experiment of Arnold.

The Ninth KIND. Vegetable Compounded Menstruums made of Simple Vegetable
Menstruums, and Things tinging, being first fixed.
51. The Circulatum majus, or Metallic Acetum acerrimum of Paracelsus. Lib.
10. Arch. page 38.
IF common Mercury ought to be reduced into the first liquid Being, then is it
first to be mortified, and deprived of its Form, and that is done by several
sublimations with Vitriol and common Salt, that at last it may be made like
sixed Cristal: Then dissolve it in its Matrix, namely, in the primum Ens of
Salt, ( the Circulatum minus made of Salt, or the Water of Salt circulated
described above in Numb. 27.) putrify a Month; add to it new Arcanum of Salt
(Circulatum minus) that the impure may be precipitated to the bottom, but the
pure turned into Cristals: sublime the same in a close Reverberatory, being
sublimed, turn it up continually, till it comes to a redness; this sublimation
extract with the Spirit of Wine rectifyed to the highest (Philosophical Wine)
separate the Spirit of Wine (by distillation) the remainder (the dry Tincture
or Crocus of Mercury) dissolve upon a Marble, (per deliquium) and digest for a
Month, pour new Spirit of Wine to it, digest for a time, and distill; Then will
the Arcanum of the primum Ens, or first being of Mercury rise over in a liquid
substance, which is by the Philosophers called Metallic Acetum acerrimum, and
in our Archidoxyes Circulatum majus: And the same is to be understood of
Antimony, Gemms, and all other Metals.

Annotations.

THere is a great difference between this and the precedent Kind, though they
both treat of Mercurial Waters: The antecedent were made of crude Mercury: This
Circulatum of Paracelsus, is indeed made of Mercury, but first fixed: The
precedent were most clear; these greater Circulatums are indeed most clear, but
also most red, and so much better in their Tinctures than the precedent. The
Receipt we will consider as divided into its parts, in the first of which
Paracelsus sublimes Argent vive so often, till it be made like fixed Cristal,
that is, like mineral or common Cristal, clear and transparent: As this part is
common, so it less needs explaining. In his Book, De Renovat and Restaur. he
takes only Mineral Gold or Antimony for the same Work, which Bodies
notwithstanding are more bound up than the open Metal, Mercury; and for this
reason it may seem to be fit enough for dissolution in Circulated Salt without
sublimation: For the illustration of the Receipt, we will add the Description
of the said Book.

Take of mineral Gold or Antimony most finely ground one Pound, of Salt
Circulated four Pounds, being mixed, digest them together in Horse-Dung for a
Month; from thence will spring a Water, wherefore the pure must be separated
from the impure, coagulate it into a Stone, which calcine with Wine cenificated
(lenificated) and separate again, and dissolve upon a Marble: Let this Water be
putrified for a Month, from it will be produced a Liquor, wherein are all such
Signs, as in the primum Ens of Gold or Antimony, wherefore we deservedly call
it the primum Ens of those things: It is no otherwise to be understood of
Mercury, and other things also.

In the second part, he dissolves Mercury being so sublimed, in Salt
Circulated, the primum Ens of Salt, the Arcanum of Salt, the Water of Salt
Circulated, ( Synonima's of Paracelsus his Circulatum minus) putrifies or
digests, precipitates with new Circulated Salt, filters, and lastly reduces it
into Cristals, or Philosophical Vitriol. In the Receipt of Lib. de Renov. he
adds the weights of things: Take, says he, of mineral Gold or Antimony one
Pound, of Salt Circulated four Pounds, and then digests, and separates the
impure from the pure, and coagulates into Cristals. Sometimes he dissolves
Bodies by some mineral Menstruum, which he draws off two or three times from
them, and sweetens them again by taking away all the acidity so far as he is
able with common Water: Thus he dissolves common Sulphur in the strongest Aqua
fortis (Paracelsus his Aqua regis, to be described in the eighteenth Kind)
cohobates three times into a black Matter, which he sweetens with distilled
Water, Libro de morte rerum.

For it is much at one, whether Gold or Antimony be dissolved by the Circulatum
minus only, and reduced into a Philosophical Vitriol; or whether Argent vive,
for the abbreviation of time, be in the sublimation of it first impregnated
with the acidity of Salts, and so made more open for the Work, and then mixed
with the Circulatum minus, purified by digestion and precipitation, and lastly
reduced into a Philosophical Vitriol; or whether to make the time yet shorter,
Sulphur be mixed with a mineral Menstruum, that is, an acid, and the Circulatum
minus mixed together, and then freed from the acid, so as with the Circulatum
minus to be made the same Philosophical Vitriol; for which way soever
Philosophical Vitriol is made, it comes to one and the same effect: but of
these Vitriols hereafter in the Receipts of mineral Menstruums.

In the third part, he sublimes the Stones or Cristals of the Mercury in a
close Reverberatory (that is, a Philosophical Egg) always turning it up, till
the Vitriol of the Mercury is at length fixed into a most red Precipitate. This
part the Sublimations of Sulphur and Antimony in a close Reverberatory will
illustrate. The strongest Aqua fortis being often drawn off from the Sulphur,
the remaining matter being made thereby black, and then sweetened, he
reverberates, that is, sublimes in a close Reverberatory, and being sublimed,
turns up the close Reverberatory, or Philosophical Egg so often, and continually
till it comes to a redness, as Antimony, says he, which will become first
white (sublimate) then yellow, thirdly red, (precipitate) as Cinnabar; which
being obtained, you ought to rejoice, for it is the beginning of your Riches:
This reverberated Sulphur gives a most deep tincture to any Luna, reducing it
into most excellent Gold, and preserves a Man's Body in most perfect Health:
This reverberated fixed Sulphur (observe) is of so great Virtue, as is not
fitting to declare. Libro. de morte rerum. page 95.

The Reverberation of Antimony is in page 67. Chyr. majoris. hus: Take of
Antimony reduced into a most fine Alcool, ( into Philosophical Vitriol with the
Circulatum minus, by the way of Mercury in the Circulatum majus; or again into
a black and sweetened matter by the way of Sulphur,) what quantity you will, let
it be reverberated in a close Reverberatory for the space of one Month
(continually turning up the Reverberatory, till the matter will be no more
sublimed) and it will be Volatile and Light, first White, then Yellow, then
Red, lastly of a Purple or Violet Color: The Antimony being thus fixed by
sublimation, he extracts the tincture, by the Spirit of Philosophical Wine,
which tincture he calls the most Noble, most Precious, and only not Divine
Essence of Lily.

In the fourth part he dissolves Mercury being precipitated, and extracted by
the Spirit of Philosophical Wine, per deliquium, and digests with new Spirit of
Philosophical Wine, and cohobates, till it ascends through the Alembick into
the primum Ens or Essence of Mercury, Mercury Circulated, the Circulatum majus
prepared from Mercury, etc.

In the Receipt we observe,

1. That Argent vive, Antimony, Sulphur, yea Gold, Silver, and all the other
Metals, being dissolved in some simple Vegetable Menstruum, then reverberated,
or by sublimation fixed, dissolved per deliquium, and distilled into a liquid
substance, are Argent vive, Antimony, Sulphur, Gold, Silver, etc. Circulated,
or the Circulatum majus made of Mercury, Antimony, Sulphur, etc.

2. That these Menstruums are called Circulatums, because they were by the
ancient Philosophers Circulated for the space of thirty or forty, sometimes
sixty Days.

3. That these are called the greater Circulatums, to be distinguished from the
less Circulatums, being less excellent, the greater having greater strength,
and communicating tincture to things that are dissolved in them.

4. That these Circulatums are the first Beings, or graduated Essences of
Metals and Minerals, and amongst things Volatile nothing can be more excellent
than they, they being exalted from a fixed Essence or Astrum, into a much more
Noble Essence, called an Arcanum.

5. That these Circulatums are Medicines, or Medicinal Arcanums.

6. That these Circulatums ore most red. Sublime the Stones, says Paracelsus,
till they come to redness. He extracts the tincture of Lily out of Antimony
reverberated to a Purple or Violet Color; but makes the Soul of Metals out of
Sulphur reverberated, of which thus: What Hermes said, that the Soul alone is
the means of joining the Spirit to the Body, was not impertinently spoken: For
Sulphur being that Soul, and maturing and excocting all things, as Fire, it
will be also able to bind the Spirit with the Body, and incorporate and unite
them together, so as from thence to produce a very Noble Body: The vulgar
combustible Sulphur is not to be reputed the Soul of Metals, but the Soul is
something more than a combustible and corruptible Body, and therefore: cannot
be burned by any Fire, being all Fire it self, and indeed it is nothing else
but the Quintessence of Sulphur, which is extracted out of Sulphur reverberated
by the Spirit of (Philosophical) Wine, and is of a red Color, and clear as a
Ruby: Which is indeed a great and notable Arcanum to transmute white Bodies,
and to coagulate running Mercury into fixed and tested Gold: Accept this as
commended to you to make you Rich, and you have reason to be content with this
only Secret for the transmutation of Metals. Lib. 1. de gener. rerum, Not. page
87. If Mercury, Antimony, and Sulphur fixed by reverberation, and the Spirit of
Philosophical Wine drawn off, be red, and diaphanous as a Ruby, it follows that
the same Bodies, volatilized with the Spirit of Philosophical Wine, do become
more red. From hence we observe, that the Menstruums of Diana are of diverse
Colors, sometimes white, milky and opake; sometimes most clear, sometimes
again most red and most transparent; so that the Arguments of Bernhard, denying
the diaphaneity of Menstruums, may be easily resolved: Where Fools, says he,
do out of the less Minerals extract corrosive Waters, into which they put any
sort of Metals, and corrode them: for they think that therefore they are
dissolved by a Natural solution, which solution indeed requires permanence
together, that is, of the dissolvent, and the dissolved, that from both, as
from the Masculine and Feminine Seed a new Species may result: I tell you
truly, no Water dissolves a Metallic Species by Natural Reduction, but that
wh^ remains with it in matter and form, and which the dissolved Metals are able
to recongeal; which happens not in any sort of Aqua fortis, but is rather a
defiling of the Composition, that is, the Body that is to be dissolved: Nor is
that Water pertinent to Bodies in solution, which remains not with them in
congelations; Mercury is of this sort, and not Aqua fortis, or that which Fools
esteem Mercurial Water, clear and diaphanous: For if they divide and obstruct
the Homogeneity of Mercury, how will the first proportion of the Feminine Seed
stand and be preserved? Page 60. Epist. ad Thomam. The Elixir and Azoth (he
goes on) that is, the Vital Spirit ( Spirit of Life, Philosophical Aqua vitae)
and fugitive Soul (animated Spirit) are not diaphanous nor transparent, nor
clear as the Tear of ones Eye, nor any dissolving Spirit. Page 94. Ejusd.
Epist. Which cannot be done in a diaphanous, clear and transparent Liquor:
because, if the aforesaid Elixir and Azoth, that is, Spirit and Soul had or
could show any diaphaneity, the Earth would now in proportion have dismissed
the Water, and separated it self from it, whereas otherwise it would have
inspissated and coagulated the parts of it, caused an opacity in the Elixir and
Azoth, and made the Metallic Form to stand congelable: For in restringing
fixed Metallic Species, the restringer must of necessity act upon the
restringible, and the congealer upon the congelable, which cannot be done in
the aforesaid diaphanous and clear Water: otherwise it is in Vegetables, in
which a simple and diaphanous Water is by decoction inspissated in those
Vegetables, which notwithstanding vanishes and evaporates at length by the
Trial of Fire, because it is not permanent and fixed in the Composition, not
having an Earth Naturally Homogeneous to it in Composition with it, as Argent
vive has; which Earth is indeed the cause of permanent fixion in things
Homogeneous; wherefore simple Water cannot by congelation be fixed with
Vegetables, as Mercury with Metals: If therefore Mercury has received
diaphaneity in the Philosophers Work, it will remain in the quality of an
irrestringible substance, and will not be congealed upon Laton as to a
Metallic Form, Species, and Proportion, which carries the congelation of it
self neither with it, nor in it, as Water does Earth, which Earth, as
aforesaid, is indeed Mercurial, and the first cause of inspissation,
coagulation, and fixation: If therefore that Water remains not in Metallic
Proportion, how can the like Species be produced from this Composition? They
therefore, that think so to extract a clear transparent Water out of Mercury,
and work many wonders by it, are in an Error; for suppose they can make such a
Water, yet would it be of no advantage to the Work, nor to the Nature and
Proportion of it, nor could it restore or erect a perfect Metallic Species;
for so soon as Mercury is altered from its first Nature, so soon is it excluded
from being an ingredient to our Philosophical Work, because it has lost its
Spermatick and Metallic Nature: By these things therefore it is known, what
Truth your Opinion contains, and wherein it is contrary and absurd, you
asserting it to be necessary, in order to perfect the great Elixir, to have a
Gum, in which are all things necessary to it, containing the four Elements, and
is a most clear Water as the Tear of an Eye, made Spiritual, which causes Gold
to be a mere Spirit: For one Body penetrates not another, but a pure Spiritual
substance congealed, is that which penetrates and tingeth a Body. Be it, as you
say, my Honored Doctor! that Natures are not joined without a Gum, or Oily
Matter, etc.

Had Bernhard disputed only against every Mercurial Water not permanent, made
diaphanous with Aqua fortis, or any other vulgar Menstruum, and not also
against the most clear Mercurial Water of Thomas de Bononia, then the Arguments
aforesaid had been of great strength; but now the objections against the
limpidity of Menstruums as well of this as other Adepts, are of no validity.
The same Earth, which being less than well dissolved, is the cause of opacity
in Bernhard's permanent Menstruum, the very same exactly dissolved is the cause
of limpidity with Thomas, inspissating and coagulating the Water, as well, if
not better, than if it had been less dissolved. The diaphaneity of Menstruums
is defended by Lully, Parisinus, and most of the Adepts: Lully proclaims his
Coelum Vinosum to be clear, bright, and resplendent as the Stars of Heaven. In
Test. novis. page 8. Of which very Menstruum Parisinus thus, in Appendice
Elucidarii, page 273. Vol. 6. Theat. Chym. Then will you see a Quintessence
brighter and clearer than a Diamond, which exceeds the splendour of the Stars,
so as to be doubted, whether it be contained in the Glass, or no.

The Tenth KIND. Vegetable Menstruums compounded made of Vegetable Menstruums
compounded, and Metallic Bodies.
52. The Neapolitan Menstruum of Lully. In Exper. 13.
TAke Luna, and calcine with common Argent vive, that is, by amalgaming, and
then grinding the Amalgame with common Salt prepared, then evaporate the
Mercury with a most gentle Fire, then take away the Salt with hot Water
distilled, and so you will have Luna calcined. Take the calcined Luna, and pour
to it four parts of the Mercurial Water ( described by the three hot Vessels
before in Numb. 46.) and the Vessel being covered with its Antenotorium set
upon Ashes, so as to boil gently, and you will perceive a Green or Sea Color,
which Liquor pour warily into another Vessel, so that the Faeces be not
disturbed, the Matter remaining at the bottom dry with an easy Fire, like the
heat of the Sun: Then know the weight of the said Calx, and pour again four
parts of the said Mercurial Water upon one part of the said Calx, and the
Vessel being covered with its Antenotorium, as above, let it boil again gently,
the dissolution pour into another Vessel as before, and join it with the first
dissolution; but remember to keep, the said dissolved Matter continually in
Balneo, till the whole Work of dissolution is completed; repeating the
Magistery so often, (...) the whole Body of Luna be fully dissolved and decanted
over, which has indeed happened to us at the second time, and set it in
putrefaction fourteen Days: Then put it in an Urinal, with its Receiver and
Alembick, very well luted, and distill in a Furnace of Ashes, then increase the
Fire, that the Soul of the Body may ascend into its Water: The Vessel being
cold, examine the weight of the Earth of Luna remaining in the bottom, for I
believe of one whole Ounce there will not remain above two Eights (Drachms) of
the Body not dissolved, the rest will be perfectly dissolved, (that is,
distilled;) But if more of the undissolved Earth remains, then pour to it so
much of its Water lately distilled, as to be three Fingers above it, and the
Vessel being covered with an Antenotorium, put it in Balneo for a Natural Day,
then taking away the Antenotorium, and putting on an Alembick with a Receiver
very close, distill by Ashes; at the end of the distillation increase the Fire
as before: This repeat, till the whole Body of Luna be passed through the
Alembick by an airy revolution; and thus will you by the Help of God have a
Menstruum, with which you may dissolve Sol.

Annotations.

HItherto we have by Argent vive acuated either the Spirit of Philosophical
Wine, or Menstruums made with this Spirit, which had so good a faculty of
dissolving, that most of the Adepts being content with these Mercurial Waters,
desisted from inquiring after stronger Menstruums. The Mercurial Water, which
Lully terms Glorious, he says, is sufficient, yea, a proper Menstruum to make
the Philosophers Mercury, or Metallic Sal Armoniack, out of all Metals and
Minerals. You must know, says he, my Son! that in the Truth and Faith of God,
no Sulphur of Nature of any Metal can be sublimed without this Water of common
Argent vive. Test. Noviss. Page 12.

But in this Tenth Kind of Menstruums, the Adepts made yet other Menstruums,
adding moreover diverse Bodies, according to the intended several uses to the
aforesaid Mercurial Waters: Lully, to make a more Noble Menstruum for the
dissolution of Gold, added Silver to the Mercurial Menstruum: If perhaps he
wanted a Menstruum for Pearls, he joined Pearls with the Mercurial Menstruum:
If he had a mind to make Aurum potabile, he prepared a Menstruum out of Gold
and Silver, as more suitable to this purpose, yet with some Mercurial
Menstruum, and so of others, as you will observe in the following Examples.

53. The precious Menstruum for Pearls of Lully. In Comp. Animoe transmut. Page
Vol. 3. Theat. Chym.
TAke the Liquor of Lunaria of the third or second rectification (Philosophical
Aqua ardens rectifyed) pour it upon Argent vive, so as to swim three Fingers
above it, and putrefie three Natural Days, and a great part of it will be
dissolved with the Water of Lunaria, which decant, and pour fresh Liquor upon
the Faeces, putrefie in Dung or Balneo, and repeat till all the Mercury is
reduced into Water, then join all the distillations together, and draw off in
Balneo, and when you see it in a manner thick, so as to be half a Pound of the
Water of Mercury and Argent vive, (Vegetable and Mineral) putrify six Natural
Days, then put in Pearls, and they will within ten Hours be dissolved, then
exuberate them by the way, which I taught in the exuberation of Metals, till
they be converted into a Sal(Harmoniack, or Sulphur Naturoe of Pearls) whereof
dissolve one Ounce in a Pound of its Menstruum aforesaid, and distill four
times, then put in Pearls, and they will in half a quarter of an Hour be
dissolved, by reason of the greater subtilty of the Menstruum. As Silver is
joined to the Mercurial Menstruum made by the three Fire-hot Vessels, for the
Neopolitan Menstruum, ( which may be so called, because it was revealed to
Lully at Neapolis by Arnold de villa nova) so this Menstruum for Pearls is made
of the Sal Armoniack of Pearls, and the Mercurial Menstruum, or Glorious Water
of Mercury, which if they be Circulated together a convenient time, you will
make thereof a Coelum perlatum.

54. The Mercurial compounded Menstruum of Lully. In Experim. 34.
TAke three Ounces of Luna, and three Ounces of Sol, calcine them severally
with Mercury, as in the former Experiments, ( in the Neopolitan Menstruum) then
evaporate it from the said Metals, being calcined, put them severally in
distinct solutory Vessels, and put upon them so much of the incalcinated
Menstruum (described before in Numb. 45.) as will swim four Fingers above it:
cover the Vessel with an Antenotorium, putrify in Balneo two Days, and two
Days more in Ashes with a heat like that of the Sun, decant the dissolution,
and dry the remainder: being dried, pour upon them of the incalcinated
Menstruum again as before, putrefying in a close Vessel in Balneo, then upon
Ashes, and emptying the several dissolutions (of Gold and Silver) into their
several Vessels as before: If any thing remains undissolved, dry and dissolve
as before, till all the remainder be fully dissolved, then putrify both
dissolutions twenty Natural Days, being putrifyed, take the dissolutions, and
put them severally into their Urinals with their Receivers, and having luted
the Joints well, distill the Waters of both (Metals) in Balneo; in the bottom of
the Vessels will remain the Bodies like melted Honey or Oil, pour upon those
(Oils) again of their own Waters ( The Menstruum now drawn from the Oils)
distilled only by Balneo, so as to swim three Fingers above the Matter, cover
both Vessels with their Antenotoriums, and putrify for a Natural Day: then
take away the Antenotoriums, and put on Alembicks, lute well, and distill upon
Ashes, lastly increase the Fire, that the Soul or Element of Air may pass over
into both their distilled Waters, and last of all increase the Fire to the
highest degree, that the Element of Fire may pass into the Air: But to the
Composition of Luna this Redness or Fire is not necessary: Distillation being
completed, let the Vessels cool, take the Receivers from them, and keep them
very well stopped, that they may not respire, and put distinct Schedules or
Inscriptions upon them, that when you have occasion, you may not take one for
the other: Then again to the Earths (of Gold and Silver, left in distillation)
pour their Waters distilled by Balneo as before, and having put an Antenotorium
to it, putrify as before, then distill by Ashes, each Vessel having its own
Receiver, wherein you kept the Souls of those Bodies, and thus repeat the
Magistery till the Earths are exanimated and destitute of radical moisture:
Then take those Earths, grind well, and join them together, then put them in a
Glass Egg, and keep them in hot Ashes, till I tell you what to do with them:
Then take the animated Spirit of Luna, and rectify it seven times in Ashes,
then take the animated Spirit of Sol, and after the same manner rectify it
seven times in Ashes; the limosities (remaining Earth) which the Spirit of Sol
will in every rectification eject, keep very close, being the Element of Fire
(in the form of an Earth.) Having rectifyed, take the animated Spirit of Sol,
and the animated Spirit of Luna, and join them together, then Circulate in a
large Vessel, as that wherein we Circulated the simple Menstruum: continue this
Circulation sixty Days, in which time you will have a true Mineral Menstruum
(not acid, but made of Minerals, as Mercury, Gold, and Silver,) by which you
may operate innumerable Experiments.

Hereto ought to be referred the Menstruum which is called by Basilius.

55. The sweet Spirit of Mercury of Basilius. Cap. 3. Libri de rebus not. and
supernat.
TAke of Natural Cinabar, or Oar of Mercury, and of the best Oar of Gold equal
parts, to which being pulverized and mixed, pour the Oil of Mercury made of
Mercury sublimed, and putrifyed (that is, Oil of Mercury sublimed alone, no
other Ingredients being added, except the Spirit of Philosophical Wine, or some
Vegetable Menstruum, without which it cannot be made) digest them for a Month,
and you will have a Celestial rather than Terrestrial extraction, draw off the
extraction in Balneo, and the Phlegm being taken away, in the bottom will
remain a ponderous Oil, dissolving all Metals in a moment; to which add of the
Spirit of Wine (Philosophical, or Fiery Spirit of Wine of Basilius) three
parts, Circulate in a Pelican to a Blood redness, and incomparable sweetness;
being Circulated, pour it upon Tartar calcined to whiteness, and distill the
Spirit of Mercury with a strong Fire, the Spirit of Wine remaining with the
Tartar.

We must distinguish between this Spirit, and another of the same Name, lest
one be taken for the other: For Basilius prepared also a Spirit of Mercury from
the white Spirit of Vitriol, of which you may read in several places, in the
Book de particularibus, especially in the particular of Luna; a Description of
which Spirit is lower among the Mineral Menstruums, because it is acid: But the
other, namely, this our Spirit of Mercury, is most sweet and fragrant, which
you have also in the particular of Luna, as also in the seventh Chapter of the
Book de rebus not. and supernat. where he dissolves the Crocus of Luna in the
white Spirit of Vitriol, as also in the most fragrant Spirit of Mercury.

Parisinus for Alchymical Tinctures made a Mercurial compounded Menstruum, of
his Circulatum majus, and the first or middle substance of common Argent vive,
thus:

56. The incalcinated Menstruum of Parisinus. Cap. G. Apertoris.
TAke of the Circulatum majus (described before in Numb. 50.) one Pound, of
Mercury prepared, as we shall teach in the tenth Chapter, two Ounces, mix, and
observe that true putrefaction be made with this Menstruum: But when first it
is incalcinated, that is, mixed with such Mercury, it is no more used for Men's
Bodies, but only as Medicines for Metals, now the said tenth Chapter is this,
as follows:

Of reducing common Mercury into the first Matter or Middle Substance. Now my
Son! we will give you full instruction and demonstration of decocting and
reducing common Argent vive into its first Matter, or middle substance, and as
in the foregoing Chapters we declared the way of reincrudating the two
Luminaries, so now we will demonstrate the ways and means of decocting the said
Mercury. First, we will teach the way of distinguishing good Mercury from bad,
sophisticated and corrupted, which way is, to take common Mercury, brought out
of Spain in Skins sealed, or if you cannot have this, take any other, and put a
little of it in a Silver Spoon heated so, as to make the Mercury evaporate, and
if the remainder of it be of a white or citrine Color, it is good; but if of
another Color, bad, and not at all sit for our Work, because sophisticated:
Then take of Roman Vitriol two Pounds, melt it in a glazed Vessel, being
melted, add one pound of Mercury, and as much of common Salt prepared, stir and
shake till they be all mixed, evaporating the moisture with such a heat as that
of the Sun; then take out the Matter, grind, and put it in a Sublimatory, and
sublime the Mercury by the usual degrees of Fire: The Vessels being cold, take
out the sublimation, to which being put into a Retort, pour of the Vegetable
Water without Phlegm (Philosophical Aqua Vitoe rectified) about three or four
Fingers, let it boil in Balneo two Hours, then distill in Ashes, that the
Vegetable Water may ascend; then cover the Retort with Ashes, and increasing
the Fire, the Mercury vive will ascend into the Aqua ardens, decant the Water
from the Mercury, which again sublime with new Matters, and that six times,
always casting away the Faeces: But take notice that these seven sublimations
must always be transacted in Aludels, because you will no other way separate
the adustible powder ascending in the Aludels: And to instruct you, that you
may not err, I will more distinctly repeat the method of the said seven
Sublimations: The way is this, to take a Glass Vessel like one of the narrower
sort of Cucurbits, with its blind Head, perforated in the upper part of it,
into this put two parts of Vitriol very well pulverized, of Mercury one part,
and of Salt prepared one part, mixing all well, the Matter being now gently
dried, put on a blind Head, or rather an Aludel, yet observing not to cover the
Cucurbit with Ashes above one third, the moisture being evaporated by an easy
heat, stop the Hole of the Aludel with a little Cotton, and increasing,
sublime, all being cold, take out that which is sublimed, as well out of the
Aludel, as the Cucurbit, in which (if not yet cold) dissolve the Faeces with
hot Water, and so you will easily cleanse the said Vessel for its use. Now mix
new Matters with your sublimation, and sublime as before, and this repeat seven
times; then grind the sublimation into a most fine Powder, put it in the
aforesaid Cucurbit with its blind Head, or Aludel, and also with its common
Alembick, because of the operation differing from the former; the sublimation
being put into a Cucurbit, pour to it of the simple Animal or Vegetable
Menstruum (the Animal Menstruum described in Numb. 37. or Vegetable in Numb.
29. but here above he ordered him to take Vegetable Water rectified, that is,
Aqua ardens) so much, as to be three Fingers above it, cover it with a blind
Head, and digest in Ashes twelve Hours, then taking off the blind Head, put on
a common Alembick, and draw off the Menstruum in Balneo, lay aside the Alembick
again, and put on an Aludel, set the Vessel in Ashes so deep, as to cover the
Matter in the Glass, give Fire by degrees, till all the moisture is exhaled,
the Hole in the upper part of the Aludel stop with Cotton, increase the Fire,
that the Mercury may be sublimed: Sublimation being ended, and the Vessels
cold, take away the Aludel, and what you find sublimed in it, is not for our
purpose; for it is that adust part, which is no Ingredient to our Magistery:
Then gather the sublimation from the sides of the Cucurbit, which will be clear
as Cristal, and have a care that it be not mixed with its Faeces, grind, sift,
and put it into the same Vessel, being cleansed from the Faeces, and pour the
Menstruum drawn off in Balneo to it, cover the Vessel with an Aludel, digest
twelve Hours as before, lay aside the Aludel, put on a common Alembick, distill
in Balneo, lay aside this Alembick, put on an Aludel, and sublime in Ashes, the
Faeces, as also the adustive part being cast out of the Aludel, gather the
middle substance out of the Cucurbit dexterously; with this method you must
sublime seven times, or till it leaves no Faeces in the Cucurbit: Having
obtained this sign, take the said substance, grind, and put it in a Glass
Vessel, pour to it the simple either Animal or Vegetable Menstruum, the height
of three Fingers, cover the Vessel with a blind Head, digest gently two Days in
Ashes, then decant the dissolution into another Vessel, and that which remains
in the Vessel, dry with a temperate heat, like that of the Sun, to which pour
new Menstruum, covering the Vessel with a blind Head as before, and repeat the
same method, till all the dissolvible part is dissolved, and in the bottom of
the Glass will remain an indissolvible Earth, to be cast away, as nothing
worth: Now take away dissolution, that is, your decantations, and distill in
Balneo, and the Menstruum being distilled, put on an Aludel, and in Ashes
sublime the Cristalline substance, which may truly be called the first Matter
of Mercury; this is that middle substance, with which we incalcinate our
Menstruum, (Circulatum majus, described in Numb. 50.) and make infinite
particulars, as we have taught you before: This also is called the Mineral
Stone. Now, my Son! will you be able to proceed by infinite ways, yet following
these which I have showed you; and remember, that Mercury thus reduced, is
that, which our Captain Raymond speaks of, making mention of the Mineral Stone,
as also in the last Chapter of his Book, named Vade mecum, and in many other
places of his Volumes. This is that Mercury which Arnold de Villa nova; treats
of in his Rosarium, and we declare to you, except Mercury be reduced into the
first Matter with the said Vegetable or Animal Water, it is altogether
impossible to do any good with it, by reason of its great Corruption,
occasioned by the crudity of it.

From the Receipts of this Kind we observe:
1. That Menstruums may and ought to be made according to the designed uses,
for they are desired not only to dissolve Bodies promiscuously, but rightly
also, that the tinctures of things dissolved may not by any Heterogeneous
tinctures of the Menstruums be inquinated, but rather illustrated.

2. That these Menstruums being once compounded, the oftener the Composition is
repeated by adding new Matter, are endowed with so much a greater Virtue;
whereas on the contrary it is manifest, that common Menstruums are this way
debilitated.

3. That these Menstruums are most fragrant, and of exceeding sweetness and
redness, yet nevertheless called Acetum acerrimum, which dissolves Gold into a
Spirit.

4. That these Menstruums are the Essences or Magisteries of Metals made by
Magisteries or Essences, and mixed together into compounded Circulatums.

5. That these compounded Circulatums may be made not only of Gold and Silver,
but also of imperfect Metals and Minerals.

6. That Sal Armoniack may be made of Corals, and other arids, as well as
Pearls.

7. That Parisinus his first Matter of Mercury is an Essence rather than a
Magistery, it is indeed sooner prepared than the Mercurial Sal Armoniack of
Lully, but is not of the same, but less Virtue.

8. That Parisinus defends Arnold de villa nova in his way of subliming
Mercury, (described in the Rosarium) against his Consort Bernhard.

9. That this first Matter of Mercury is a Poison; wherefore Parisinus the
Author gives caution that it is not to he used for humane Medicines, but Metals
only, yet if this incalcinated Menstruum be Circulated as the rest, it becomes
harmless, and an excellent Medicine.

The Eleventh KIND. Vegetable compounded Menstruums graduated, made of the
compounded Vegetable Menstruums, impregnated with the influences of Heaven and
Earth.
57. The Etherial and Terrestrial Waters of Metals of Lully for the making of
Precious Stones. Canon. 43. distinct. 1. Lib. Quint. Essen.
TAke the Water of Mercury, made by the way, which we declared in our
(Novissimum) Testamentum, and in Libro Mercuriorum (the Mercurial Menstruum, or
Glorious Water of common Argent vive, described before in Numb. 44.) and in
that Water, Son! you must dissolve one half Ounce of the purest Luna, after the
filtred dissolution, separate the Water from the Faeces ( distill the Menstruum
from the Silver through an Alembick) in which the limosity of the Silver will
ascend: This Water, Son! resolves all other Bodies, and Argent vive it self, by
Virtue of which, Son! Pearls are reformed by the way which I told you in our
Testamentum, and in the Compendium super Testamentum and Codicillum missum Regi
Roberto.

The second Water is thus made: Take half an Ounce of Lead, and of the
aforesaid Water as much as suffices, when you see the Lead dissolved, separate
the Water by filtred distillation (filtre the dissolution of the Lead) and
throw out the Faeces, as nothing worth, then distill the Water by Balneo ( draw
off the Menstruum in Balneo) and keep the Faeces (the dissolved Lead) for
occasion.

The third Water is thus made: Take of Copper one Ounce, and dissolve it in as
much of the first Water as you please, and let it rest in its Vessel, in a cold
place, for a Natural Day, then separate the Green Water through a Filtre, and
pour out the first Faeces, (that which remains in the Filtre must be cast away)
then distill the Water through an Alembick, and keep the second Faeces.

The fourth Water is thus made: Take one Ounce of the purest Tin of Cornwall,
which is purer than any other, and dissolve it in a quantity of the first
Water, and distill (through a Filtre) that Water (dissolution) with its
limosity, and the Faeces which remain cast away, then distill the Water through
an Alembick, and keep (the residue, or Tin dissolved) the second Faeces.

The fifth Water is thus made: Take of the purest Iron one Ounce, and dissolve
it in a sufficient quantity of the first Water, then distill through a Filtre,
and cast away the Faeces, distill the Water through an Alembick, and keep the
second Faeces.

The sixth Water is thus made: Take of the purest Gold one Ounce, and dissolve
it as I told you in my Testamentum, that is, with pure Lunaria (the simple
Vegetable Menstruum without Argent vive and Silver) mixed with such a weight of
the fifth Water (now prepared from Iron) and do, as you did with the other.

You may also, Son! dissolve all those Metals in this order: Having made the
first Water, in it dissolve the Metal, which we commanded you to dissolve after
the second way (to wit Lead) then do with it as we told you before. In this
second Water dissolve the third Metal, (Copper) and in the Water of the third
Metal dissolve the fourth Metal, (Tin) and in the Water of the fourth Metal
dissolve the fifth Metal (Iron) and in the Water of the fifth Metal dissolve
the sixth Metal (Gold.)

Take which of those Waters you like best to dissolve a Metal. Son! these
limosities of Metals are called Quintessences, or Mineral Mercury, which the
Philosophers esteemed in the Alchymical work (in Alchymical Tinctures) and the
lapidifick, (in the making of Precious Stones) and in the Medicinal Work (in
the preparing of Medicines.) But Son! in the Alchymical Work those
Quintessences ought to be more subtle, and to be done by dividing the Elements
as we (in the third Book of this Volume) shall declare, but in (making
Precious) Stones, the Quintessence (aforesaid) are not so, in such a subtle
Matter, but in Medicine either of them (this twofold way of preparing) may be
used.

Having spoken of the Quintessences of Minerals (of Metallic Waters) how we
are to make them, it is now convenient to speak of the division of them in
general. And my Son! do thus; When your Metals are dissolved, you must divide
every Water (being first filtred, and distilled from its remainder) and every
divided Water (now distilled) into two parts, and one part of every part you
must put with its own Faeces (the remaining Metal, which the Water had left in
distillation) into a Glass Alembick, and distill a Limus deserti, which is Air
made out of two Bodies, (or Metals) in the Furnace, which we designed you first
with a gentle Fire, shining with great Mineral Luster, and with great limosity
appropriated to receive Celestial Virtues: And put every one of those Waters
into a Glass Vessel, with a long Neck and round, and then stop the Mouth of it
with common Wax, and after that with Mastick, and every of those Vessels put in
the open Air so, as that neither Stone, nor any other hurtful thing may touch
the Glass. Son! Take the material Faeces, from which you resolved the Limus,
which are the second Faeces left in the distillation of the Waters which you
put in the Air. (Take the Caput mortuum from the distillation of every Limus
desertus, or the third Foeces, for the first remaining in the Filtre were cast
away, from the second the Limus desertus was distilled; now the Foeces of the
Limus desertus, are those which he here calls the second) and put them in a
Glass Vessel with a long Neck, which may contain two hands breadth, and put in
part of its own Water, which was reserved from that aforesaid limous substance,
and stop the Vessels with a Stopple of Wax, and with Leather and Mastick, as
you did to the other, and Bury them (Waters of Metals) in a Garden, in an Earth
half a Yard deep, and put also something about the Neck of the Vessels, which
may appear above ground, for the preservation of them, and let them be there
for one whole Year: Son! the Waters which are put into the Earth are of one
Nature, and those which are put in the Air of another; for Son! those which are
put into the Earth have a hardening, coagulating, and fixing Virtue and Quality;
and those which are in the Air, have the Virtue and Property of being hardened,
coagulated and fixed: The Year being ended, you will have all that is desired
in the World for this Work, etc.

Annotations.

YOu will perhaps wonder, that we have assigned this so high a place to these
Menstruums, they being inferior to many Menstruums of the antecedent Kinds, as
to Ingredients, as well as to the method of preparation; but though it be so,
nevertheless these Menstruums are by being exposed to the Air for a Year, or
for so long a time committed to the Earth, made better and more excellent than
the aforesaid Menstruums, as will appear hereafter by the use of them: We will
at present explain the methods of making these Waters: The Waters of the first
method he makes thus: He dissolves Lead, Copper, Tin, Iron, and Gold in the
Glorious Water of Argent vive, acuated moreover with Luna, filtres every
dissolution, casting away the Foeces, draws off the filtred dissolutions in
Balneo to dryness, divides the distilled Waters into two parts, in one of which
he dissolves its own Metal left in the drawing off of the dissolution, which he
then distills into a Liquor, which he calls Limus desertus, Quintessence, or
Mineral Mercury, and hangs it in the air for a Year, to be his Etherial Water:
The Caput mortuum of the Limus desertus he dissolves in the other part of the
Water reserved, and Buries it in the Earth for his Terrestrial Water. In
Compendio Animae transm. page 208. Volum. 4. Theat. Chym. He adds also the
Waters of common Mercury and Silver to the rest; the Mercury Water is thus
made; Take of common Mercury one Ounce, and dissolve it in the dissolving Water
(aforesaid) in the digestion of I. (Ashes) distill through a Filtre, regard not
the Faeces, but keep the second (left in the bottom) after distilling through
an Alembick.

The Water of Luna is thus made: Take one Ounce of the purest Silver, dissolve
it in what quantity of the dissolving Water you please, distill through a
Filtre, and cast away the first Faeces, then distill through an Alembick in the
digestion of H. (Balneo) and keep the second Faeces, you must keep the second
Faeces of all the Waters in their own Vessels, every one by it self. Moreover
(in Compendio Animoe) he divides not the distilled Waters into equal parts, as
in Libro Essentioe, but draws off the dissolutions of Metals by distilling one
half for the Terrestrial Water, and distills the other half for the Etherial
Water. You must indeed, says he, be cautious in resolving the Limus, because
you are to make two Waters or parts of every Limus, distilling one half of the
Limus, which you must keep apart, because the Terrestrial Water is made of that
first part, and you must likewise distill the other (half) part, which the
Aerial Water is made of, which is hung in the Air as aforesaid, for a Year,
Page 209. Volum. 4. Theat. Chym.

The Waters made by the latter method are more compounded than those of the
first, the first were prepared promiscuously with the Lunar Menstruum, the
second not so; for the Water of Lead is made by the Lunar Menstruum, of which
Water of Lead is made the Water of Copper; of this Water of Copper is made the
Water of Tin; from the Water of Tin he prepares the Water of Iron, but the
Water of Gold is made with the Lunar Menstruum, to which is added half of the
Water of Iron. O wonderful mixture! I will not say, confusion of Metals! yet
doubtless the most acute Philosopher had reasons for it. This method is also in
Lapidario, Cap. 9. and sequentibus.

From the Receipts we observe:
1. That the Etherial Waters are the Essences of Metals, exposed to the
influences of the Heavens for a Year.

2. That the Terrestrial Waters are the Bodies of Essences, dissolved in their
own Menstruums, and Buried for a Year.

3. That the Essences of not only Metals, but the whole Mineral Kingdoms do by
such a method yield Etherial and Terrestrial Waters.

4. That these Waters acquire their principal Virtues by being impregnated with
the Stars of Heaven.

The Adepts held diverse Opinions concerning the Influences of the Heavens. Some
would have the Situations, Aspects, and determinate Times of the Planets to be
highly necessary to this Work, but others thought the contrary: Amongst the
Affirmers let us hear Thomas Norton, an English Adept, who thus in the Sixth
Chapter of his Ordinal. Page 99. of Theat. Chym. Britannicum.

THe Fifth Concord is known well of Clerks,
Between the Sphere of Heaven, and our subtle Werks;
Nothing in Earth has more simplicity,
Than the Elements of our Stone will be:
Wherefore they being in Work of Generation,
Have most Obedience to Constellation.
Whereof Concord most kindly and convenient,
Is a direct and fiery Ascendent;
Being Sign common for this Operation,
For multitude of their Iteration:
Fortune your Ascendent with his Lord also,
Keeping the Aspect of Shrews them fro;
And if they must let, or needly infect,
Cause them to look with a Trine Aspect.
For the white Work may Fortunate the Moon,
For the Lord of the fourth House likewise be it done;
For that is Thesaurum absconditum of Old Clerks,
So of the Sixth House for Servants of the Werks:
Save all them well from great Impediments,
As it is in Picture, or like the same Intents.
Unless then your Nativity pretend Infection,
In contrariety to this Election,
The Virtue of the mover of the Orb is formal,
The Virtue of the Eighth Sphere is here Instrumental:
With her Signs and Figures, and parts aspectual,
The Planets Virtue is proper and special.
The Virtue of the Elements is here material,
The Virtue infused resulteth of them all:
The first is like to a Work-man's Mind,
The second like his Hand ye shall find;
The third is like a good Instrument,
The remnant like a thing wrought to your Intent:
Make all the Premises with other well accord,
Then shall your Merits make you a great Lord.
Amongst the Denyers is Lully himself: Who thus; we say not, that it is the
business of an Artist to operate with the Figures and Images of Heaven, by the
knowledge of their motions, as many Philosophers affirm: But it is enough for
you to know the influence of the Celestial heat, informed by the Figure of the
Heaven and Stars, by reason of which, Virtues are infused into Matter being
aptly appropriated, which receives them by the Natural Industry of an Artist
with resolution, which is done by Art imitating Nature, etc. And in this Point
the Philosophers have been mistaken, in reprehending those Men that knew, that
the Celestial Virtue is too common to every elemented Nature; for by its great
Nobleness it takes determination at any time, because in things mixed it is
influenced as well by Art as by Nature, and this is done by reason of the
Natural Virtues, which are the subject and proper detainer of it in such a
manner, as that it receives such a Virtue, according to the properties of the
Matter, and its Kind, which afterward effects such things by Nature, as are
reputed for a Miracle. In like manner let every Artist take Notice, that Nature
cannot operate but by the succession of the least particles, nor also can it
receive any Virtues but by the succession of its operation, nor can they also
do all at once, nor can the Constellations suffer the Station of any time
punctually in a certain Virtue, which may not be immediately varied: And it
being also granted, that it might, the time of Constellation is so small by
reason of the Circles of revolution, as that it may sooner pass from one Virtue
to another, etc. Lib. Essen. did. 1. Page 18.

An ingenious Artist, says Paracelsus, will by diligent animadversion be able
to prepare Metals, so that being guided by true reason, he may promote the
perfection of transmuting Metals, by his own work or conduct better, than by
Courses of the twelve Celestial Signs, and seven Planets, which therefore to
observe, will be superfluous, as also the Aspects, the ill or good times, day
or hour, the prosperous or unhappy State of this or another Planet, which
cannot help, much less hurt in the Art of Natural Alchymy; if otherwise, you
have a true possible process, operate when you please; but if there be any
defect in you, or your Operations, and Understanding, the Planets and Celestial
Constellations will fail you. Coelum. Phil. Page 125.

If they allege says Geber, that the perfecting of Metals is from a certain
situation of one or more Stars which we know not, we answer, that we regard
not this situation and motion, nor also is it necessarily requisite for us to
know it: because there is not any species of things generable and corruptible,
but Generation and Corruption may be daily and in every instant made from the
individuals of it: And it is therefore manifest, that such a position of the
Stars is every Day good, and able to perfect, and simply to corrupt all the
species whatsoever of Individuals. It is not therefore necessarily expedient
for an Artist to expect the place of the Stars, though it might be useful;
because it is sufficient for him only to dispose and administer the way of
Nature, that She, who is wise, may dispose the situations of those able Bodies
agreeing: For Nature can perfect nothing without the motion and position of the
Planets. Wherefore if you dispose, and duly consider the Artifice of Nature,
whatsoever may be the contingents of this Magistery, it will be perfected under
a due position by Nature agreeable to it, without the consideration of it: For
when we see a Worm produced from a putrified Dog or other Animal, we do not
presently consider the position of the Stars, but the disposition of the
ambient Air, and other causes conducing to putrefaction, besides that position:
And from such a consideration we know sufficiently, that Worms are produced
according to Nature: For Nature finds convenient places for it self, though we
may be ignorant of them. Summa perfect. Lib. 1. part. 2. Cap. 11.

Petrus Bonus of Ferraria has the same Opinion of Influences. As to the ninth
reason, says he, we say it is true, that Forms are introduced into things
below, by the motion and light of Celestial Bodies, and by their particular
Positions and Aspects; but it is not necessary for us to know, nor can we know
them, but in a confused manner, as in some things by the Sun, who is the cause
of the four Seasons of the Year; Sowing, Reaping, and Planting, being done at
certain Seasons; and in some Animals, as Horses, Asses, and Hawks, Conjunctions
are made in order to Coition and Generation at some certain Periods of the Sun;
but in some these things are done at any time indifferently, as in Man,
Pigeons, Hens, etc. Wherefore if we would generate a Worm out of putrefying
Flesh, we do not consider any position of the Stars, but only the disposition
of the ambient Air, and other causes of putrefaction: Likewise, if we put Eggs
in Dung, or such a like place for the production of Chickens, the Form will be
given at any time in the place and time predestined by the Celestial Powers,
without our consideration herein: After the same manner in the Generation of
Lime and Vitriol, and Gold, and Silver, or Sulphur, and Ceruse, and Minium, and
Cinabar, likewise in the Composition of Theriacle, and other Confections,
because these things may be done at any time, and any hour; for the Celestial
Virtue is very common to all things, and is circumscribed by the Virtues and
Dispositions of those things, which are the subject of it in things Elemented
and the Elements themselves, because, as aforesaid, the Celestial Virtues do
operate in the whole Nature of things capable of Generation and Corruption
continually according to the disposition of the Matter, either properly or
commonly: Wherefore said Lilium, The Work is not caused by the motion of the
Powers above, because it may be done at any time. And Rasis in 70. in Libro
Reprehensionis: Time operates not any thing in this; and adds because should
time operate in it, it would be of no esteem amongst the People. If therefore
all contingents in this Magistery concur rightly in their time, their Form will
be introduced under a due Position and Aspect of the Stars, at the time
prefixed in the Matter, without any consideration herein: And therefore said
Plato, According to the merit of the Matter, are the Celestial Virtues infused,
etc. But as to those things, in which an accidental, new, and hidden Form is
infused by the Celestial Powers, as is manifest in Art Imaginum Coelestium, it
is necessary for us to know and observe the determined Positions and Aspects of
the Celestial Bodies, according to the time proposed: Because such a Form is
imprinted by such alone, and at such a time and no other, as appears in the
Books of Astrology concerning the Election of Hours, Images, and Wars,
Buildings, Journey, etc. Wherefore Alchymy being no such Art, therefore is it
not expedient for a Man to know these things. Margar. pretiosa, Page 731: Vol.
5. Th. Chym.

The Twelfth KIND. Compounded Vegetable Menstruums most highly exalted, made of
compounded Vegetable Menstruums graduated.
58. The Etherial and Celestial Limes of Lully, for the making of Alchymical
Tinctures. In Testam. Novissimo.
TAke the Sulphur of Gold, ( the Philosophers Mercury made of Gold, or Sal
Armoniack of Sol) put it in a Glass Vessel, and pour to it as much as it weighs
of the Celestial Vegetable Menstruum (the Coelum Vinosum of Lully described in
Number. 30.) which you know already; put it in digestion of Balneo six Days, then
distill by Balneo; then pour on new Menstruum according to the weight of it, and
digest in Balneo six Days, then set it in Ashes one Day, distilling all that
can be distilled, and put it with the other distilled before: And again pour on
new Menstruum, and digest and distill as before; and continue the repetition of
this Royal Magistery, till all the said Earth or Sulphur is emptied of its Air,
which is done in two and twenty times, if you know how to operate: Then take
all the distillations and put them in Balneo, and distill the whole Menstruum,
and see if all the Air remains in the Form of a Liquor, then will you know that
the Earth is emptied of its Air, but if not, repeat with new Menstruum in
Balneo, digesting and distilling in Ashes as before three times, and then will
all our Sulphur be freed from its Air: Then take the Air which you kept, and
upon it put its whole Menstruum, which is that with which you emptied the Air,
and pour it upon the Earth of the Sulphur of Gold, and put it in digestion in
Balneo eight Days, then distill all the Menstruum in the said Balneo for one
Day, and another in Ashes, draw off all the Air and Fire, as much as you can,
namely, in another Receiver, which you will know, when the Air begins to change
the reddish Color. Keep that Fire apart, and again put the Air with the
Menstruum drawn from it, or with other, and put it to the Earth in Balneo, and
digest six Days, and in the said Balneo distill all the Menstruum for one Day,
and the Fire in Ashes, separating then every one by it self as you did before,
and keep the Fire in Balneo: And again put the Air with the Menstruum upon the
Earth, in which is the Fire, and digest as before, and this Magistery repeat,
till the Earth is well emptied of its Fire, which is done in forty times or
repetitions. Then must you sublime the Earth after this manner; Take that Earth
which remained after the separation of the Air and Fire, and put it in a Glass
Vessel, and pour upon it of the Vegetable Menstruum, according to the quantity
of the Earth, and set it in Balneo for a Natural Day, then another Day distill
in Ashes; and again put of the said Menstruum according to the weight of the
Earth, and digest in Balneo the space of one Day, and distill in Ashes another
Day, and again repeat, digesting in Balneo, and distilling in Ashes, till all
the Earth is converted into an impalpable Powder: Then take that, and put of
the Menstruum upon it according to its weight, and digest in Balneo two Days,
then distill in Ashes one Day, and put the distillation in Balneo: Then take the
Earth, and put again of other Menstruum equal to its weight, digest two Days,
and distill as before; proceed in repeating the inhumations and distillations
till the Earth has passed through the Alembick together with the Menstruum:
That Earth being thus mixed with the Menstruum, is called Argent vive
exuberated according to the intention of the Alcyhmists: put therefore those
distillations wherein is that Earth, to be distilled by Balneo, and draw off
the Menstruum, and the Earth will remain dry and prepared in the bottom of the
Vessel, which keep: Thus Son! have you the Elements of the Sulphur of Gold
divided with the help of God. Then must you have the Sulphur of Silver, ( the
Philosophers Mercury prepared from Silver, or the Sal Armoniack of Luna) and
separate the Elements from it, separating the Air with the Menstrual Water, and
the Fire with the Air and Water, and the Earth subliming with the Menstruum,
and cause it to pass through the Alembick with the same Menstruum. Thus have
you, my Son! the Elements of the white Sulphur, and the Elements of the red
Sulphur separated and divided: Now take the Menstruum or Water with which you
separated the Elements of the Sulphurs of Gold and Silver, and for every Pound
of the Menstruum in which you dissolved the Gold, dissolve one Ounce of Gold;
and in the Menstruum wherein you dissolved the Silver, an Ounce of Silver; and
put either of them by it self in a Vessel of Circulation in Balneo or Dung, the
space of fifteen Days, and there it will be strengthened into its Menstrual
Nature: This Water, Son! we call Elemented Menstruum, or Water washed and drawn
from the Faeces of the Earth. Now take the two Elements, namely, the Air and
Fire of the Sulphur of Gold, put them together into a Glass distilling Vessel,
and distill in Ashes with a most temperate heat, till you have three parts of
five distilled in the Receiver, then let it cool, and that which is distilled
receive by it self, and distill it seven times, and keep it apart, then distill
that which you left; when you have distilled three parts of five, continue
distilling the two which remained, till you see the Fire congealed at the sides
of the Vessel, let it cool till the Fire be congealed: And that Fire which you
drew off till the Fire was congealed, (he means that which ascends as yet moist
before the sublimation of the Matter from these two parts left) is called the
second Air and Tincture, and we call it our Secret, and our Treasure, and the
Vapor of the Elements: This, my Son! you must rectify by seven distillations
or rectifications, and the Earth, which after the distillation of the first and
second Air you drew out of the Vessels, in which you distilled the first and
second Air, put in the Fire to be congealed, and that Earth is called Fire: Now
Son! prepare this Fire after this manner. Put it in a distilling Vessel, and
upon it pour its own Water, which is that wherewith you separated the Elements
of the Sulphur of Gold, when we commanded to reduce it to a fifth Spirit in the
Vessel of Hermes, and said, Take the Water washed from the Faeces of the Earth
( otherwise the Elemented Menstruum of Sol) five parts of its weight, that is,
five Ounces of the said Water ( Elemented Menstruum of Gold) to one Ounce of
the said Fire, and digest in Balneo eight Days, then distill in Ashes most
gently, and again put new Water, namely, five parts, digest and distill as
before, repeating this method seven times, and so you have the Fire and Earth
(of the Sulphur of Gold) calcined by Philosophical calcination; and they are
the two Elements of the red Sulphur prepared for the desert Limes. And take
notice, that you must put the Earth of the white Sulphur, which you calcined
and prepared after the separation of the Elements of the red Sulphur with the
Earth, which you drew from the Air mixed with the Fire, and put both with the
Fire congealed. Now Son! take the Earth of the Sulphur of Silver, which
remained after the separation of the Elements, and prepare it, as you did in
calcining and preparing the Earth of Gold, after the separation of the Elements
sublimed together with the Menstruum, and reduced into an impalpable Powder,
and carried through the Alembick with the same Menstruum. You may also prepare
the Earth of the Sulphur of Silver with the Menstruum, that you used in
separating the Elements of the Sulphur of Silver: Then have you the Earths of
the Sulphur of Gold and Silver prepared by themselves, which you will know by
the sign given you, that is, putting a little of it upon a red hot Plate of
Luna, the greater part will fume away: Then take those Earths in equal weight
and ounces, and put them in a preparing Vessel, then take the Menstruum, with
which you prepared the Elements of Luna, and in one Pound of it, put one Ounce
of the Vegetable Sulphur, which we showed you how to make from the Earth of
Wine ( Vegetable Sal Armoniack made of the Earth of Philosophical Wine) and
distilling, make the whole pass through the Alembick, and then will you have
the Menstruum, with which you extracted the Elements of the Sulphur of Luna,
animated and acuated: Then Son! you must mix and prepare the Earths of the
aforesaid Sulphurs (that is of Gold and Silver) together, allowing of the said
Menstruum, now animated and acuated, a fourth part of their weight, digesting
and drying, as is done in the making of the Sulphur ( of Nature, or Sal
Armoniack) till they have drank up four parts of the said Menstruum, and are
disposed to sublimation, which you must sublime with a Fire of the fourth
degree: And observe that all those preparations and distillations of the Earths
are to be done in Balneo: And thus, Son! have you our Sulphur or Matter, or
Vegetable and Metallic Earth in one Kind united, for the making of the
Glorious, High, and Virtuous Stone, which will transform common Argent vive
into perfect Sol or Luna, without the help of Fire, but as the Eye of a
Basilisk, which kills Animals by sight alone: But it is your interest Son! to
use great diligence, and exquisite Ingenuity in making the Roots of this high
and lofty Tree, which Roots we call desert Limes, in which the whole Virtue of
Heaven and Earth relating to this Magistery will be infused: And the way is
this,

Take of the Vegetable (and Mineral) Earth or Sulphur, which you united in one
Kind, by sublimation, which is that which you called the Earth of Sulphur in
one Kind united, put it in a Glass Vessel, and pour so much as it weighs of the
Menstruum, with which you separated the Elements of the Sulphur of Luna, and
prepared the said kind of Earth, and put it in a Philosophical Balneo three
Natural Days, and in that time it will be all dissolved, which being thus
dissolved, put in a common Balneo, and distill the Menstruum, and the Earth
united to its kind will by sublimation remain as an Oil, which we call the
Philosophers Ointment; and it is one of the Secrets, which we take care to have
concealed: Then,

Take of that Oil or Ointment aforesaid ten Drachms, and of the rectified Air
of the Sulphur of Luna one Dram ( not one Ounce: And of the Air of the
Sulphur of Sol one Dram) and distill in a Fire of Ashes, and that which is
distilled, which is almost all, is called the Terrestrial desert Limes, keep
it. Take of the Element of the (Fire) Sulphur of Gold already prepared and
congealed ten Drachms (not twenty) and of the Element of the Air (Sulphur) of
Luna one Dram, and of the Element of the Air of the Sulphur of Gold another
Dram, and put all in Ashes, and distill; that which is distilled from it,
which is almost all, is called the Etherial desert Limes; keep it for occasion.

Take of the Element of the Fire of the Sulphur of Gold one Dram or two, and
rectify it again thus, pouring upon it fiVe parts of its own Menstruum, which
is that, with which you separated the Elements of the same Sulphur of Gold, and
put it to digest in Balneo for one Natural Day, then distill in Ashes what you
can: And again pour the said Menstruum upon it, digest and distill by Ashes, and
repeat, till it be all passed over by a Fire of Ashes. Then take its weight of
the said Vegetable Earth, united and sublimed together (prepared above) and you
must unite them together (with the distilled Element of Fire) and not distill,
but so lay it aside, and it is called the Terrestrial desert Limes, (of Gold)
not vaporized.

Take of the said Earth (in one kind united) one Dram, and of the Oil of the
Air (of the Sulphur) of Luna one Dram, mix them together, and you will make
the same Magistery, as you did with the precedent Gold, and it is called the
Terrestrial desert Limes lunificated (not) vaporized.

We do now think good to show the way of celificating and preparing those
(Limes) in order to receive the Virtues of Heaven and Earth, and the way is
this: Take Brass or Iron Cages, and let them be like those wherein Parrots
whistle, but the twiggs must be closer, so that no Earth, neither Celestial nor
Terrestrial can enter, but only the vapor of Heaven and Earth, which you will
have by Influence.

Take the Limes (above mentioned, Terrestrial desert) made of ten drachms of
the Earth or Sulphur united, which is that which you united with the Earth of
the Sulphur of Silver, and reduced into an Oil or Ointment; and of one Dram
of the Air (of the Sulphur) of Luna, and one Dram of the Air (of Sol) mixed,
and that Limes put in a Glass Vessel with a long Neck exactly Sealed with the
Seal of Hermes, and put it in the Cage, and set it one Arm or two deep, and let
it stand a Year and half, or at least a Year, covering it well with Earth, and
keeping it from all dangers, and in that time will it be made a powerful Water,
with wonderful fixative Virtues of the Stone, and it has admirable Virtues
acquired from Heaven, which it attracted from the Vapors of the Earth. Son!
depend upon this.

Take the Limes (above declared, Etherial desert,) which you made of ten
Drachms of the Fire of the Sulphur of Gold, and of one Dram of the Air of the
Sulphur of Luna (and one Dram of the Air of the Sulphur of Sol) and put it in
another Glass Vessel with a long Neck Hermetically Sealed, and put it in
another Cage, and hang it in the Air on a Tree, or any private place, free from
all Wind, Dust, and Danger; leave it a Year and half, or a whole Year at least,
as we said of the other, and so will be made a clear Water endowed with the
Virtue of hardening, fixing, congealing, penetrating, and making the Stone
Volatile, and is called the Mercury of Air of most acute penetration.

Take the (Terrestrial desert) Limes of Gold not vaporized, nor celificated
(neither distilled through an Alembick, nor circulated) which is that, that you
made (by merely mixing) of one Dram of the Element of the Fire of the Sulphur
of Sol, and of one Dram of the Earth (united in its Kind) and that (take also
the Terrestrial desert Limes lunificated, not vaporized) which you made out of
one Dram of the Earth of Sulphur united, and one Dram of the Air (of the
Sulphur) of Luna, and put those Limes every one by it self in a Glass Vessel
Sealed, as was said of the other, and put it in the Earth the depth of one Arm
for a whole Year in a Cage, and in that time will be made a Water of wonderful
Virtue in joining Bodies, and content your self with this.

Take the Limes which you made out of ten Drachms of the Fire or Air, and one
of the Earth; and take that which remains of the Air (of the Sulphur) of Luna,
because you took but three Drachms of it, when you made the Limes, and let it
hang in the Air in a Glass Vessel Sealed, and in a Cage, as you did with the
other, and there will it receive the Celestial Virtues, which are the means of
Conjunction between the Limes of the Earth, and the Limes of the Fire, and
other Limes also.

Take the second Air ( the Menstruum Elemented, in which were dissolved the Air
and Fire of the Sulphur of Gold, and gently drawn off, that is, three parts
only from five of it) which is that, which you drew from the Fire congeled,
which we called Philosophical Oil, and Philosophical Treasure (not that, which
is also called the Philosophers Ointment, made of the Earth united in one Kind,
but that which was called the Vapor of the Elements) and put it by it self in
another Glass Vessel well Sealed, and put it in the Air near the other, which
you put for a whole Year.

Take the Menstruum with which you separated the Elements of the Sulphur of
Luna (and that Menstruum, wherewith you separated the Elements of the Sulphur
of Sol) and put in every Vessel, wherein is Menstruum of Luna (and the
Menstruum of Sol) one Dram of Sulphur ( or Vegetable Sal Harmoniack) and set
it in Balneo, then in Ashes, till you have made it all go over with every
Menstruum by it self: Then each Menstruum being thus rectified or animated, put
in a Glass Vessel Sealed by themselves in their Cages, and hang them in the Air
near the other, for a Year.

Take the Oleagineity of Luna (the first, or first Air) which is that, which
you drew from the Earth of Luna, when you prepared it for the making of the
Sulphur of Luna, which we commanded you to keep, and said it should be for the
making (of the Sulphur of Nature) put it in a Glass Vessel Sealed in the Air,
and there it will be made a Fluxible and Virtuous Water of wonderful
penetration: And what we said of the white Oil, we say also of the red
incerative Oil (of Sol.) And now Son! you have the Stone (Menstruum) divided
into eight parts, three in the Earth, and five in the Air.

Annotations.

THe Ten foregoing Kinds of Vegetable as well Simple as compounded Menstruums,
the Adepts made by tempering the unctuous Spirit of Philosophical Wine, with
many sorts of dry Bodies, and by such means produced Menstruums adapted equally
for every use, and permanent and inseparable, they being of the same Nature
with the things that were dissolved. In the Kind immediately antecedent we
showed you, that all the aforesaid Menstruums, whether simple or compound,
exalted with so great Labor to the highest degree by tempering them with dry
things, may be raised yet higher, and augmented in their Virtues: For what Art
cannot do, Nature can; what the Earth cannot do, Heaven can: For Menstruums
perfected by Art, do, by being exposed to the Influences of the Heavens, attain
to very great and incredible Virtues by Nature: In the eleventh precedent Kind,
we had Menstruums for Precious Stones, made of the simple Elements of Metals:
In this twelfth, he takes the Sulphur of Nature, Sal Harmoniack, or Mercury of
the perfect Metals Sol and Luna, instead of crude Gold and Silver, and by
exposing the Elements of them to the Heaven and Earth, separates them much more
Nobly for the best of all Alchymical Tinctures.

From the Receipts we observe:
1. That Limes in their Compositions are indeed clear, but Clouded with a
wearisome multilocution, and disguised by so great a variety of operations,
besides also in respect of time made most tedious on purpose to deter young,
and unadvised Practitioners.

2. That these Limes differ from the former Etherial and Terrestrial Waters in
fineness of preparation; these Elements are of the Sal Harmoniack or
Philosophical Mercury of Sol and Luna; but those Elements of a crude Metal.
For, said Lully, Limes for Alchymical Tinctures ought to be of a purer Nature,
than those which are for Precious Stones.

3. That these Limes are Essences graduated, exposed to the Influences of the
Heaven and Earth, and consequently are Medicines.

4. That the Sulphurs Naturae of imperfect Metals do also by the same method
yield Limes, as strong in their kind, as the Sulphurs Naturae of Gold and
Silver in their kind.

Hitherto have we treated of Vegetable Menstruums, now follow those which are
called Mineral: But before we proceed further, we are to take notice that by
Vegetable Menstruums are meant also Animal Menstruums: For all the Vegetable
Menstruums already alleged, are not called Vegetable in respect of
Ingredients; for besides Vegetables, Animals also, and minerals were made use
of in their preparations; but by reason of the Spirit of Philosophical Wine
produced chiefly from a Vegetable unctuosity; which Spirit, if you knew how to
extract out of some Oily Matter of the animal Kingdom, as the Adepts have more
than often done: You might with this Animal Spirit transmute the aforesaid
Vegetable Menstruums, into Animal Menstruums, which nevertheless you cannot
apply to Mineral Menstruums; for though there are also in this Kingdom thin
Oils, swimming upon watrish Liquors, as Oil of Petre, Pit-Coals, etc. Yet these
are extraordinary Oils of this Kingdom, produced either by exorbitancy, or
defect of Nature. And therefore such Oils as these the Adepts referred to both
the Vegetable and Animal Kingdoms, for they are of one and the same Nature;
whereas the Oils of Minerals and Metals are more dry and masculine, then to
produce our feminine Seed or Menstruum: Now to recite the parts of Animals, and
the way of extracting this Spirit of Philosophical Wine from them, is not
proper to this place, but belongs to a peculiar Book, namely, our fifth
(treating more copiously of these things) to be published in due time, when God
permits; wherefore not mentioning Animal Menstruums, we proceed to the Mineral
or Acid Menstruums.

OF Mineral MENSTRUUMS. The Thirteenth KIND. Simple Mineral Menstruums made of
the Matter of Philosophical Wine only.
59. The Green Lion of Ripley. Libro Accurt. Page 383.
TAke the Green Lion without dissolution in Vinegar (as sometime the Custom is)
put it in a large Earthen Retort, which can endure the Fire, and distill it the
same way as you distill Aqua fortis, putting a Receiver under it, and luting the
Joints well, that it may not respire; then distill first with a gentle Fire,
till you see white fumes appear, then change the Receiver, stopping it well,
and distill with a great Fire so, as Aqua fortis is distilled, thus continuing
twenty four Hours, and if you continue the Fire the space of eight Days, you
will see the Receiver always full of white fumes, and so you will have the
Blood of the Green Lion, which we call Secret Water, and Acetum acerrimum, by
which all Bodies are reduced to their first Matter, and the Body of Man
preserved from all infirmities. This is our Fire, burning continually in one
Form within the Glass Vessel, and not without: Our Dunghill, our Aqua Vitoe,
our Balneo, our Vindemia, our Horse-Belly, which effects wonderful things in
the Works of Nature, and is the Examen of all Bodies dissolved, and not
dissolved; and is a sharp Water, carrying Fire in its Belly, as a Fiery Water,
for otherwise it would not have the power of dissolving Bodies into their first
Matter. Behold! this is our Mercury, our Sol and Luna, which we use in our
Work. Then will you find in the bottom of the Vessel Faeces black as Coals,
which you must for the space of eight Days calcine with a gentle Fire, etc.

Annotations.

HItherto we have mixed or tempered the unctuous Spirit of Philosophical Wine
with things Oily, Dry-oyly, Oyly-dry, and purely Dry, and reduced them to
diverse Kinds of Vegetable Menstruums; in which we have exhibited Menstruums
every way absolute and perfect, in Smell, Taste, and Color incomparable,
dissolving without hissing or effervescence, and permanent with things
dissolved: Now follow in order, those which are called Mineral Menstruums,
which though they be of a stinking Smell, of an acid or corrosive Taste, and
for the most part of a milky and opake Color; and dissolve Bodies with very
great violence and corrosion, yet nevertheless having the same Spirit of
Philosophical Wine, as the Vegetable Menstruums for their Foundation, are
therefore as permanent as they, yea better than they as to the abbreviation of
time; for the acidity of Mineral Salts (for which corrosive or acid Menstruums
are called Minera) lcannot destroy the Nature of the Spirit of Wine, nor the
Nature of the Vegetable Menstruum, but by corroding makes the particles of dry
Bodies more apt to unite themselves with the Oily Spirit of Philosophical Wine;
but if that acidity be taken away, it becomes that which it was before, namely,
either the Spirit of Philosophical Wine, or a Vegetable Menstruum.

The method which we used in the Vegetable Menstruums, we will as near as we
can observe also in these Mineral Menstruums: In the Vegetable we extracted
from the Philosophical Wine an Aqua ardens, from which we did by Circulation
separate an Oil or Essence of Wine, which is our Spirit of Wine, which then by
acuating diverse ways we reduced into the precedent Kinds of Vegetable
Menstruums; but in the Mineral we will begin with Philosophical Grapes, the
Matter it self of Philosophical Wine, which is elsewhere called Green Lion,
Adrop, etc. Though the Discourse of this Matter appertains not to this place,
yet if any thing presents it self to us either in the Receipts themselves, or
elsewhere, which may tend to a more clear manifestation of it, we will not
conceal it; but on the contrary have determined to illustrate and explain
things so, as not only to make you more assured of the use and necessity of
this Spirit promised to you, but moreover also, that you may have some certain
notions beforehand of its Conception, Substance, Nativity, etc.

For the elucidation of this Receipt, we will propound some other Receipts of
the same Matter, that being compared together, they may be made the plainer: In
the first place we will propose a Menstruum made indeed not of the Green Lion
it self, but of the Green Lion dissolved with an acid, and reduced into a
certain Gum.

60. A Menstruum made of the Gum Adrop of Ripley. Libro accurtationum, Page 381.
TAke Adrop, that is, the Green Lion, which we spoke of before, and dissolve it
in distilled Vinegar for the space of seven Days, shaking well the Vessel which
the Matter is in, three times daily, then empty the dissolved Liquor, and
distill through a Filtre three times from its Faeces, till it be clear as
Cristal, and evaporate the Vinegar with a gentle Fire, till it be thick as
Bird-Lime, which you cannot stir by reason of its Viscosity, and being cold,
take it out of the Vessel, and keep it; and again make more of it, and this do,
till you have twelve Pounds of this Green Lion or Adrop reduced to the Form of
a Gum, then have you the Earth extracted from the Earth, and the Brother of the
Earth. Then take a Pound of that Gum, and put it in a Glass Vessel of the
bigness of a Bottle, well luring the Joints of the Alembick with Glue made of
the white of Eggs and Filings well mixed together.

This Receipt in the Treatise of the Philosophical Adrop (which is in the sixth
Volume of Theatrum Chymicum, and inscribed to an anonimous Disciple of the
great Guido de monte, but differs not from the Books of Ripley, namely, the
present de Accurtationibus, and the Clavisaureae portae, the greatest part of
which is ascribed to the Famous Dunstun, Archbishop of Canterbury) is
altogether the same as to the Sense, though these Words run better in the
Translation thus: Now take three Pounds of the aforesaid Gum, put it into a
Distillatory able to hold about two Measures, and putting on an Alembick, lute
the Joints with luting made of Ale, the white of an Egg, and Wheat Flour, Page
552. Volum. 6. Theat. Chym. Which is confirmed with the Process or Receipt of
the Clavis aureae portae, were thus: Put three Pounds of this Milk (thickened or
Gumn'd) into a Glass Page 257. Clavis aureoe portoe: and distill in a Sand
Furnace, and let the Sand be the thickness of two Fingers under the Vessel, and
so round about even to the middle of the Vessel, or till the Matter be covered:
put a Receiver to it, making at first a gentle Fire, but not luting the
Receiver, till the Phlegm be gone over, and this continue, till you see fumes
appear in the Receiver white as Milk; then increasing the Fire change the
Receiver, stopping it well, that it may not evaporate, and so continually
angment the Fire, and you will have an Oil most red as Blood, which is airy
Gold, the Menstruum foetens, the Philosophers Sol, our Tincture Aqua ardens,
the Blood of the Green Lion, our unctious Humor, which is the last consolation
of Man's Body in this Life, the Philosophers Mercury, Aqua solutiva, which
dissolves Gold with the preservation of its Species, and it has a great many
other Names: And when first the white fumes appear, continue your Fire twelve
Hours, in which space if the Fire be strong, will all the Oil be distilled,
which keep well stopped to prevent respiring.

This Menstruum differs from the precedent, for as much as in this, the Green
Lion is dissolved in Vinegar, but in that, it is all distilled alive, but they
are both clearly enough described in themselves; yet the Matter of the
Menstruum remaining more obscure, and less intelligible to the Reader, we have
found out four Reasons in Ripley, why it is called Green Lion.

First, says he, by Green Lion, the Philosophers means the Sun, which by its
attractive Virtue makes things Green, and governs the whole World. Tract. de.
Adrop. Phil. Page 547. Volum. sexti Theat. Chym. and else where: The Green Lion
is that, by which all things became Green, and grow out of the Bowels of the
Earth by its attractive Virtue, elevated out of the Winter Caverns, whose Son
is most acceptable to us, and sufficient for all the Elixirs, which are to be
made of it; for from it may be had the power of the white and red Sulphur not
burning, which is the best thing, says Avicenne, that Alchymists can take,
thereby to make Gold and Silver. But these Words may suffice a Wise Man to know
and obtain the Green Lion. Medulla Phil. Page 139.

Secondly, It is moreover also called Green, because that Matter is as yet
sharp and unripe, that is, not yet fixed or perfected by Nature, as common
Gold. The Philosophers Green Lion therefore is green Gold, Gold vive, which is
not as yet fixed, but left imperfect by Nature, and for this reason has it the
Virtue of reducing all Bodies into their first Matter, and making those Bodies
which are fixed Spiritual and Volatile. Tract. de Adrop. Page 547.

Thirdly, It may also be called Lion, because as all other Animals give place
to a Lion, so all Bodies yield to the power of Gold vive, which is our Mercury.
Tract. Adrop. Page 548.

Fourthly, This Noble Infant is called Green Lion, because when it is
dissolved, it is clothed with a Green Garment. Yet out of the Green Lion of
Fools (Vitriol) is with a violent Fire extracted that which we call Aqua
fortis, in which the said Lion ought to be elixirated. Medulla Philos. Page 139.

These things spoken of the Green Lion, are also to be understood of Adrop,
being a Synonymous term of the same Matter: Take, says Ripley, Adrop, that is,
the Green Lion. Now as to Adrop he declared as follows: Adrop, says he, is
Gold and Silver in power but not in sight, as Rhasis says, and our Gold and
Silver, according to the Philosophers, is not common Gold and Silver, for our
Gold and Silver are airy, which in order to be well fermented, ought to be
joined with the beloved (common Gold,) Forasmuch as the Philosopher says, That
Adrop in its prosundity is airy Gold, and Adrop it self is called Leprous Gold.
And to these Sayings seems to assent Guido, the Greek Philosopher, speaking of
the Mercurial or Menstrual Spirit ( the Spirit or Blood of the Green Lion)
which is extracted out of the Natural Adrop by Art, where he writes: And that
Spirit is Sol extracted out of the Philosophers Solary Water, Arsenick, and
Luna: And in the same place presently adds; The Body is the ferment of the
Spirit, and the Spirit the ferment of the Body, and the Earth, wherein lies the
Fire, dries, imbibes, and fixes the Water; and the Air, wherein lies the
Water, (the Air which lies in the Water, it ought to be read according to the
Doctrine of separating the Elements) washes, tingeth, and perfecteth the Earth
and Fire; and so Guido's Saying, that they tinge and perfect, ought to be
understood, that the Stone ( the Menstruum drawn from Adrop, or the Green Lion)
is sufficient for the completing of it self into an Elixir, and that no
Exotic or Heterogeneous Matter, as he affirms, is or ought to be introduced to
it, but all the parts of it are co-essential and concrete, because the
Philosophers meaning was to complete that work in a short space above the
Earth, which Nature scarce perfecteth in a thousand Years under the Earth:
Unskilfully therefore according to the Opinion of the Philosophers, as Guido
says, do they proceed, that seek to obtain a ferment from common Silver and
Gold for our select Body: For that Matter, in which is Argent vive clean and
pure, not (most, is ill read) thoroughly brought to perfection by Nature, is, as
Guido affirms, after complete purification, a thousand times better than the
Bodies of Sol and Luna vulgarly decocted by the Natural heat of the Sun.
Concord. Lully and Guidon. Page 323. A certain Philosopher says, He goes on
Discoursing of the same Adrop; A fume (white) is drawn from its own Mines,
which if rightly gathered, and again sprinkled upon its own Mines, will there
make a fixation, and so the true Elixir will in a short space of time be
produced from it: And certainly without those Liquors or Spirits, that is, the
Water and Oil of Mercury (Menstruum) this Alchymical Body which is Neutral or
Adrop, is not purged: And that is the Alchymical Body, which is called Leprous
Body, that is, black (at the beginning of the Work) in which, as says
Vincentius in his Speculum Natural, are Gold and Silver in power, and not in
aspect; which in the Bowels of it is also airy Gold, to which no Man can
attain, except the unclean Body be first cleansed, which is without doubt after
its complete dealbation, and then it is a thousand times better than are the
Bodies of common Gold and Silver decocted by Natural heat: The first Matter of
this Leprous Body is a viscous Water inspissated in the Bowels of the Earth: Of
this Body, according to the Judgment of Vincentius, is made the great Elixir
for the red and white, the Name whereof is Adrop, otherwise called the
Philosophers black Lead, out which Raymund commands us to extract an Oil of a
Golden Color, or such like: Raymund adds, But this Oil is not necessary in the
Vegetable Work (namely, for the inceration of the Vegetable Stone) because
solutions and coagulations are there soon made; and if you can separate it from
its Phlegm, and after that ingeniously find out the Secrets of it, you will in
thirty Days be able to perfect the Philosophers Stone: For this Oil makes
Medecines (Tinctures) penetrable, sociable, and amicable to all Bodies, and in
the World there is not a greater Secret. Medul. Phil. Chym. page 131.

Ripley has here recited various Synonima's of this Adrop: We for a time will
follow the Green Lion by the way of Philosophical Lead, as we are directed by
Ripley in these very Words: First, understand, when Avecenn says, that Gold
and Silver are in Lead by Power, and not by sight, and they are left by Nature
crude and half cocted, and therefore that ought to be perfectly supplied by
Art, which is left imperfect by Nature, and by way of a ferment digesting and
cocting that which is left crude: For a ferment therefore take perfect Gold,
for a little (paululum, not paulatim) of their fixed substance (those fixed
Bodies) will draw and convert much of Bodies not fixed to the perfection of
Gold and Silver. And thus will Art help Nature, that in a little space of time
that may be done above the Earth, which is not in a thousand Years done under
the Earth: And by this means you will understand, how Lead contains in it the
greatest Secrets of this Art: For it has in it Argent vive, clean, pure,
odoriferous, not brought by Nature to perfection: And this Argent vive is the
Basis and Groundwork of our precious Medicine, as well for Metallic as Humane
Bodies, so as to be the Elixir of Life, curing all infirmities: Which the
Philosopher meant, saying, There is in Mercury whatsoever Wise Men seek: From
this are the Soul, Body, Spirit, and Tincture drawn: Moreover also in this
Mercury is the Philosophers Fire, always burning equally within the Vessel, and
not without: It has also a great attractive Virtue and Power in dissolving Sol
and Luna, and reducing the same into their first Matter: With this Mercury are
to be dissolved the Calxes of the perfect Bodies in congealing the aforesaid
Mercurial Spirit, etc. Pupilla, Page 295. But have a care that you operate not
with (common) Saturn, because commonly it is said, Eat not of the Son, whose
Mother is corrupted, and believe, that many Men err in Saturn. Hear what
Avicenn says, Saturn will be always Saturn; yea operate not with the Earth of
(Philosoph.) Saturn, which the Spirit of it has despised, and relinquished for
the worst Sulphur: Operate only with the fume of it to congeal Mercury, yet not
as Fools, but as the Philosophers do, and you will have a very good Work. Phil.
Cap. 2. Page 188. The whole composition we call our Lead; the quality of the
splendour proceeds from Sol and Luna, and in short, these are our Menstruums
wherewith we calcine perfect Bodies naturally, but no unclean Body is an
Ingredient, one excepted, which is by the Philosophers commonly called Green
Lion, which is the means of joining the Tinctures between Sol and Luna with
perfection, as Geber himself attesteth, Libro. 42. portar. Page 12. To manifest
this thing to you, you must know, that it is one of those, which are of the
seven Days (Planets) and the meanest of the same, out of whose Body is
artificially extracted Blood, and a vaporous Humor, which is called the Blood
of the Green Lion, from which is produced a Water, called White of an Egg, and
Aqua Vitoe, May-Dew, and by many other Names, which to avoid prolixity, we now
omit. Phil. Cap. 3. Page 190.

The method of extracting the Blood of the Green Lion out of calcined Lead, or
Philosophical Minium is this that follows.

61. A Menstruum made of the red Lead of Ripley. In pupilla Alchym. page 303.
TAke of Lead calcined or rubifyed, or the best Minium, that is, Mineral
Antimony, prepared, what quantity you please, yet with this consideration, that
you must have so many quarts of distilled Vinegar, as you have pounds of the
aforesaid calcined Lead: To this Vinegar pour the aforesaid Lead in a large
Earthen Vessel well glazed, then for the space of three Days stir the Matter
strongly with a Wooden Spatula six or seven times a Day, cover it well from
Dust, and let it not be put to the Fire by any means during all this time,
after which separate all that is clear and cristalline by a Filtre into another
Vessel, then put it into a Brass Skillet to a gentle Fire, that all the
Phlegmatic Water may evaporate, till a very thick Oil is left in the bottom of
the Vessel, which suffer to cool; which being done, the Matter will become like
Gum, so as to be cut with a Knife, hereof put four Pounds into a Glass Cucurbit
with an Alembick, the Joint being well luted with a Paste made of the Scales of
Iron, Flower, and the whites of Eggs well beaten together: put the Vessel in a
Furnace of Sand, and not in Ashes, and let the Vessel be buried in the Sand
even to the middle of it, and let the Sand be two Fingers thick under the
bottom of the Vessel; then put a Receiver to it, but not luted, till you have
drawn out all the Phlegmatic Water with a most gentle Fire, which Water throw
away: When you see a white fume appear, then lute the Receiver, which must be
two foot long; which being drawn out, strengthen the Fire as much as you can,
and continue it till you have distilled all that can be extracted in twelve
Hours, and so will you have the Blood of the Red Lion, most red as Blood, which
is our Mercury, and our Tincture now prepared, to be poured upon its ferment,
that is, upon the Calxes of most pure Gold, etc. But if you would use it for
the white Work, you must distill your Mercury three times with a slow Fire,
always reserving the Faeces apart in every distillation, and then will you have
your Mercury most white as Milk: And this is our Virgins Milk, whitened
Menstruum, and our Argent vive Philosophically exuberated; with which by
Circulation make an Oil out of the Calxes of Luna, and proceed in all things,
as you did with the red Mercury upon the Calxes of Gold, and you will have a
white Elixir, which will convert any Metal into perfect Luna: But the Golden
Oil ought to be perfected and tempered, and well united with artifical Balsom,
by the way of Circulation, till out of them is made a most clear and
resplendent Golden Liquor, which is the true Aurum potabile, and Elixir of Life
more precious for Men's Bodies, then any other Medicine of the World.

The like Menstruum Ripley has in his Medulla Philosophiae Chymicae.

62. The Simple stinking Menstruum of Ripley. Medulla Phil. Chym. page 170.
TAke the sharpest Juice of Grapes, and being distilled, dissolve into a clear
Cristalline Water, the Body being well Calcined to a Redness, which is by the
Philosophers called Sericon; of which make a Gum, which is like Alum in taste,
and is by Raymund called Azoquean Vitriol. Out of this Gum with a slow Fire is
drawn first a weak Water, which has its taste no sharpness, no more than
Spring Water: And when a white Fume begins to appear, then change the Receiver,
and Lute strongly, that it may no way expire; and so you will have your Aqua
ardens, Aqua vitoe, and a resolvitive Menstruum, which before was resolvible:
This is the Potential Vapor, able to dissolve, putrify, and also purify
Bodies, divide the Elements,, and by its attractive Virtue exalt its own Earth
into a wonderful Salt: And they that think there is any other Water, besides
this which we speak of, are mistaken in this Work: this Water has a most sharp
taste, and partly also a stinking smell, and therefore is called stinking
Menstruum; and it being a very Airy Water, it therefore ought to be put upon
its Calxes in less then an Hour after it is distilled or rectified; but when it
is poured upon the aforesaid Calxes, it begins to boil up, and then if the
Vessel be well stopped it will not leave working, though no Fire be administered
to it from without, till it be dried up in the Calx; wherefore you must apply
no greater quantity of it than scarce to cover the Calxes, then proceed to the
full completing of it, as in the work of the compounded Water. And when the
Elixir is reduced to a purple Color, let it be dissolved in the same
Menstruum, being first rectified into a thin Oil, upon which fix the Spirit of
our Water by Circulation, and then has it the Power of converting all Bodies
into most pure Gold, and to heal all Infirmities of man's Body, more than all
the Potions of Hippocrates and Galen, for this is the true Aurum Potabile, and
no other, which is made of Artificial Gold Elemented, turned about by the Wheel
of Philosophy, etc*

The same Menstruum is had in the Vade Mecum of Ripley.

63. The Menstruum of Sericon of Ripley. In Vade Mecum, commonly called the
Bosom-Book.
TAke of Sericon or Antimony thirty Pounds, out of which you will have twenty
Pounds or thereabout of Gum, if the Vinegar be good; dissolve each pound of
that Sericon in two measures (a Gallon) of Vinegar twice distilled, and having
stood a little while in digestion, stir the matter often every day, the oftener
the better, with a clean stick, filtre the Liquor three times, throw away the
Faeces, to be taken away as superfluous, being no Ingredient to the Magistery,
for it is the damned Earth: Then evaporate the filtred Liquors in Balneo Marioe
with a temperate heat, and our Sericon will be coagulated into a Green Gum,
called our Green Lion, dry that Gum well, yet with care, lest you burn the
Flowers, or destroy the Greens of it: Then take the said Gum, put it in a
strong Glass Retort well luted, and with a moderate Fire distill a weak Water to
be cast away: But when first you perceive a white fume ascending, put to it a
Glass Receiver large, and of sufficient capacity, whose Mouth is exactly joined
to the Neck of the Retort, which must be very well luted, lest any of the fume
be lost or evaporate out of the Receiver: Then increase the Fire by degrees,
till a red fume ascends, and continue a stronger Fire, till bloody drops come,
or no more fume appears: Then abate the Fire by degrees, and all being cold,
take away the Receiver, and forthwith stop it, that the Spirits may not exhale,
because this Liquor is called our blessed Liquor, to be kept in a Glass Vessel
very close stopped: Then examine the Neck of the Retort, where you will find a
white and hard Ice, in the form of a congealed Vapor, or Mercury sublimate,
which gather carefully, and keep, because it contains great Secrets, of which
lower: Then take the Faeces out of the Retort, being black as Soot, which are
called our Dragon, whereof calcine one Pound, or more, if you please, in a
Potters, Glass-makers, or Philosophical Furnace, into a white Snowy Calx, which
keep pure by it self, it being called the Basis and Foundation of the Work,
Mars, our white fixed Earth, or Philosophers Iron: Now take the residue of the
Faeces, or black Dragon, and sift it on a Marble, or any other Stone, and at
one of the ends light it with a live Coal, and in the space of half an Hour the
Fire will run over all the Faeces, which it will calcine into a very Glorious
citrine Color; these citrine Faeces dissolve with distilled Vinegar, after the
aforesaid manner, filtre also three times as before, then evaporate the
dissolution into a Gum, and distill the Menstruum, which is now called Sanguis
Draconis, or Dragons Blood, and repeat this Work in all things as before, till
you have reduced all, or the greater part of the Faeces into our Natural or
Blessed Liquor, all which Liquors pour to the first Liquor or Menstruum, called
the Blood of the Green Lion; the Liquor being thus mixed, putrefie it in a
Glass Vessel the space of fourteen Days: Then proceed to the separation of the
Elements, because in this Blessed Liquor you have now all the Fire of the
Stone, hidden before in the Faeces; which Secret has been hitherto kept
wonderfully close by the Philosophers: Now take all the Menstruum being
putrifyed, put it in a Venice Glass of a fit size, put an Alembick to it, and
lute with Linen Rags dipped in the white of Eggs; the Receiver must be very
spacious, to keep in the respiring Spirit, and with a temperate heat separate
the Elements one from another, and the Element of Air, which is the Oil (ardent
Spirit, containing a little white Oil at the top) will first ascend: The first
Element being distilled, rectify it in another Vessel fit for it, that is,
distill seven times, till it burns a Linen Cloth, being dipped in it and
kindled; then is it called our rectified Aqua ardens, which keep very well
stopped, for otherwise the most subtle Spirit of it will vanish away: In the
rectifications of the Aqua ardens the Air will ascend in the form of a white
Oil, swimming upon the Aqua (ardens) and a citrine Oil will remain, which is
distilled with a stronger Fire: Mercury being sublimed, and reduced into Powder
dissolved per deliquium, upon Iron Plates in a cold place, pour a little of the
Aqua ardens to the Liquor being filtred, and it will extract the Mercury in the
form of a Green Oil swimming a-top, which separate and distill by a Retort, and
there will ascend first a Water, and then a thick Oil, which is the Oil of
Mercury: Then distill the Flood or Water of the Stone into another Receiver, the
Liquor will be whitish, which draw off in Balneo with a moderate heat, till
there remains in the bottom of the Cucurbit a thick Oily substance, like melted
Pitch, keep this Water by it self in a Glass well stopped. Take notice, when
first the Liquor rises white, another Receiver must be put to, because that
Element is wholly distilled: Two or three drops of that black liquid Oil being
given in the Spirit of Wine, do Cure any Poison: Now to this black and liquid
Matter pour our Aqua ardens, mix them well together, and let the mixture settle
three Hours, then decant, and filtre the Liquor, pour on new Aqua ardens, and
repeat the operation three times, then distill again in Balneo with a gentle
heat, and this reiterate thrice, and it will come under the denomination of the
rectified Blood of Man, which Operators search for in the Secrets of Nature:
Thus have you exalted the two Elements, Water, and Air, to the Virtue of a
Quintessence; keep this Blood for occasion: Now to the black and liquid Matter
or Earth, pour the Flood or Water of the Stone, mix them well together, and
distill the whole, till the Earth remains very dry and black, which is the Earth
of the Stone; keep the Oil with the Water for occasion: Reduce the black Earth
to a Powder, to which pour the aforesaid Man's Blood, digest three Hours, then
distill in Ashes with a Fire sufficiently strong, repeat this Work three times,
and it will be called the rectified Water of Fire, and so have you exalted the
three Elements, namely, Water, Air, and Fire, into the Virtue of a
Quintessence: Then calcine the Earth being black and dry, in the bottom of the
Reverberatory, into a most white Calx, with which mix the Fiery Water, and
distill with a strong Fire as before; the remaining Earth calcine again, and
distill, and that seven times, or till the whole substance of the Calx be passed
through the Alembick, and then have you the rectified and truly Spiritual Water
of Life, and the four Elements, exalted to the Virtue of a Quintessence; this
Water will dissolve all Bodies, putrefie and purge them: This is our Mercury,
our Lunary, but whosoever thinks of any other Water besides this, is ignorant
and foolish, never attaining to the desired effects.

This Menstruum is made of the same Matter as the precedent Menstruums. For
Green Lion, Adrop, Philosophical Lead, Mineral Antimony, Airy Gold, Mercury,
etc. are Synonima's of one and the same Matter: This Matter being dissolved in
distilled Vinegar, and again inspissated into a Gum, in taste like Alum, is by
Ripley in the Description of the antecedent Menstruum in Numb. 62. called
Lully's Vitriol of Azoth, or Vitriolum Azoqueum: Lully in practica Testamenti,
Cap. 9. Page 159. Vol. 4. Th. Chym. makes a Menstruum of B. C. D. By B. he
meant the said Green Lion, or common Argent vive, which as he says elsewhere,
is more common to Men, than vulgar Argent vive, B. says he, Page 153. of the
said practica, signifies Argent vive, which is a common substance consisting in
every corruptible Body, as appears by the property of it, etc. By C. he
intended common Niter. C. says he, signifies Salt Peter, which has a common
(acid) Nature, and like Argent vive by the property of its strong (acid)
Nature, Page 154.4. Volum. aforesaid. By D. he understood Gum Adrop, made of
the Green Lion. D. says he, signifies Azoquean Vitriol, which corrupts and
confounds all that is of the Nature and Being of common Argent vive. In the
same place, Both C. and D. he calls the purer mediums. Cap. 58. Theor. Test.
page 96. You must know Son! says he, our Bath, you may wash the Nature of
(Phil) Argent vive so, as Nature could never do, that is, to make Argent vive a
complete Elixir. But (Phil.) Argent vive and Metals being both in Nature, and
in your Work, extremes, and extremes not being able to join themselves, without
the Virtue of a middle disposition, which is between the softness of Argent
vive, and the hardness of Metal, because there is by reason of that middle
disposition a Natural compliance, which is the cause of Conjunction between
Body and Spirit, as it is in every thing generated, or in capacity of being
generated: In Nature are many mediums, whereof two are more pure, and more
viscous, the Green Azoquean Vitriols, with the stony Nature, which is the Salt
and Nature of Stones. By the help my Son! of this contemptible Matter is our
Stone, which we have so much sought for, procreated, etc.

With the other of these mediums, C, the stony Nature, Salt Peter, Salt of
Peter, or Niter, we have no business at present; but being solicitous of D. Gum
Adrop, or the Azoquean Vitriol of Lully, it will be worth while to consult
Lully himself: Of which the Philosopher, Cap. 59. Theor. Testamenti, thus: Son!
says he, the Azoquean Lion, which is called (Azoquean) Vitriol, is by Nature
made of the peculiar substance of common Argent vive, which is the Natural
Root, from whence Metal is procreated in its own Mine. By common Argent vive,
he meant not the Vulgar but Philosophical Argent vive, the natural Root as well
of Metals as Minerals. When we say common Mercury, says he, we speak of that,
which the Philosophers understand; and when we name the Vulgar, we speak of
that which is known to the Countrymen, and sold in Shops. Cap. 1. Lib.
Mercuriorum, which the following Synonyma's of this Mercury, namely, Chaos,
Nature, Origo, Green Lion, Argent vive, Unguent, Oil, Pasture and Liquor of
great Value, do also testify in Cap. 45. Theor. Test. page 75. Vol. 4. Th.
Chym.

This common Argent vive, or Green Lion, must be purged from its Superfluities,
before the Aroquean Vitriol of Lully, or the Gum Adrop of Ripley can be made of
it. You must says he, my Son! being a Student of this Science, be steadfast,
and not search after this or that, because this Art is not perfected with many
things, and therefore we tell you, there is but one only Stone, that is Sulphur,
and one only Medicine, namely, the composition of Sulphur, to which nothing is
to be added, only the Terrestrial and Phlegmatic Superfluities taken away,
because they are and ought to be separated from our Argent vive, which is more
common to men, than Vulgar Argent vive, and is of greater Price, Merit, and
stronger Union of Nature, from which and the first forms of it, it is necessary
to separate, by the known degrees of separation, all that belongs not to the
Sal Armoniack of Metals, etc. Cap. 18. Theor. Test. page 33. Volum 4. Th. Chym.
We say there is but one only Philosophical Stone ( volatile not yet fixed, or
matter of a Menstruum) extracted from the things aforesaid by our Magistery.
And therefore when it comes newly into the World, you must not add any other
Powder, or any other Water, nor anything incongruous to it, more than that,
which is born in it, being radical to its own Nature, and the Mother of it,
which feeds and carried it, that is Sulphur, which formed the Stone in a
Celestial Color: But before you extract (distill) it (the Stone) thoroughly,
purge, and cleanse it from all its Phlegmamatick, Terrestrial, and corruptible
Infirmities, which are contrary to its Nature, because they are the death of
it, with which it is surrounded, which do mortify its vivificative Spirit.
Cap. 7. Theor. Test. page 20, of the said Volum. It is to be diligently noted,
that one of the two aforesaid Natural Principles (Sulphur and Argent vive) is
more truly Natural in the whole, and through the whole substance of it, as well
within as without, and that is the pure Sulphur, hot and dry, introducing its
form, that is, according to which the form of a Metal pursues a pure effect:
But the other (Argent vive) is unnatural, that is inwardly natural, and
outwardly against Nature; but the internal natural part is made proper and also
con-natural to it self, because it comes by its own Nature, but the external
part is added to it by accident, and is to be naturally separated from it after
the corruption (Putrefaction) of it; wherefore it is manifest that such Argent
vive is not in the whole substance of it natural, in the first reception of it,
nor is depurated to the full, unless it be depurated by the Ingenuity of Art.
C. 5. p. 10. Codicilli.

As to this Purification of Argent vive, or the Green Lion, Ripley thus:
Wherefore says he, this Mercury (the corrosive Spirit of common Vitriol) is by
Raymond called, Our Fire against Nature: Nevertheless the same thing happens in
some measure to this Mercury (the acidity of Vitriol) as also to the other
(Vegetable Mercury, or Green Lion) which is our natural Fire: For both of them
are hidden in the middle or center of their Bodies, that is, between the
Phlegmatic Water on one side, and Terrestrial Crassitude on the other side,
nor are they obtained without the great Industry of Philosophy, and so those
parts can avail us nothing, except only their middle substance: For says
Raymond, We take neither of the first Principles, because they are too simple,
nor of the last, because they are too gross and feculent, but only of the
middle; wherein is the Tincture, and true Oil, separated from unclean
Terrestreity, and Phlegmatic Water: Therefore says Raymond thus; The unctious
Moisture, is the near Matter of our Physical Argent vive, page 289. Pupilloe
Alchym.

Argent vive, or the Green Lion, is purified by common Vitriol, as thus: When
the Argent vive is put in a dry Vitriolated Vapor (Spirit of Vitriol) which is
a sharp Water, it is presently dissolved by the Incision and Penetration,
caused by the sharpness, being manifestly strong, and in dissolving, is
converted into the Nature of Terrestrial Vitriol, not taking a Metalick, nor a
clear Celestial Form, as appears after the evaporation of the said Water, and
the congelation of it in the form of Yellow Cristals, which Yellowness proceeds
from the sharp Sulphurous Terrestreity, which was beyond measure mixed in the
said Water by Atoms, with an Homogeneous Universality and simplicity, which
simplicity was taken and bound by the said Terrestreity, with the alteration of
the Light, Clarity, and Lucidity into Obscurity, etc. Cap. 89. Theor. Test.
141. Vol. 4. Th. Chym. Son! the thick Vitriolated Vapors from which Vitriol is
produced, is very sharp and pontick, and therefore penetrates the parts of the
Sulphur, and Argent vive being depurated, and penetrating, tingeth that
purified Matter, congealing it into the Form of that Vitriolated and yellow
Terrestrial Vapor, which is mixed with them. Wherefore what we have said is
manifest, that is, This is the great Gate, namely, that the Terrestrial Virtues
must not excel the Celestial, but on the contrary, if you will have the thing
desired, Cap. 85. Theor. Test. page 137. of the same Volume. You may remember
that you would put nothing with the Menstrual (the Matter of the Menstruum) but
that which proceeded from it at the beginning of its mixtion; for if you add an
incongruous thing, it will presently be corrupted by the incongruous Nature,
nor will you ever have that which you would have. Gold and Silver, and Mercury
are dissolved in our Menstrual, because it participates with them in proximity
and vicinity of the first Nature, and from hence will you extract a white Fume,
which is our Sulphur, and the Green Lion, which is your Unguent, and the
stinking Water, which is our Argent vive: But it is requesite for the Green
Lion to be thoroughly dissolved in the Aqua Foetens, or stinking Water, before
you can have the said Fume, which is our Sulphur, which Sulphur is indeed the
same way dissolved from the Body, congealing the Spirit in the form of a dry
Water, which we call Stone, and the highest Medium of all our Work, which is
the connection and aggregation of both Natures, that is, of Body and Spirit.
Son! This Water is called Aqua ignis, or if you had rather Ignisaqua, that
undeclinable Word, because it burns Gold and Silver better than Elementary Fire
can do, and because it contains in it heat of a Terrestrial Nature, which
dissolves without Violence, which common Fire cannot do. Wherefore we enjoin you
to make the Magistery of the hottest things you can get in Nature, and you will
have a hot Water, which dissolveth all things, Cap. 59. Theor. Test. Page 98.
Of the same Volume.

These Sayings Ripley comprehends in short, thus: These Words, says he, may
serve a Wise Man in order to know and acquire the Green Lion: But this Noble
Infant is called Green Lion, because being dissolved it is Clothed in a Green
Garment. Yet out of the Green Lion of Fools (Vitriol) is extracted by a violent
Fire, that Water which we call Aqua fortis (Spirit of Vitriol) in which the
said Lion ought to be Elixirated. For all Alchymical Gold is made of
Corrosives, etc. Page 139. Medulla Phil.

This Argent vive, Green Lion, Philosophers Lead, etc. being purifyed with
Vitriol, must be further matured or calcined into a red Color, Minium, Lead
calcined, Sericon, etc. E. ( that is, Vitriolated Azoth, Page 15. Theor. Test.)
the fourth ( Medium or Principle) is a substance produced from its Mine, and in
it, more near to the Nature of Metals, which is by some called Calcantis, and
Azoth Vitreus (Mercury Vitriolated, or Azoquean Vitriol) which is the Earth and
Mine of Metals, and is by another Name called Vrisius, of shining white and red
within Black and Green openly, having the Color of a Venomous Lizard,
immediately generated out of Argent vive, the Matter aforesaid impregnated with
the said hot and dry sulphurous Vapor (of common Vitriol) in its resolution
congealed into a Lizard, in which (Azoth Vitriolated) is the form and species
of the stinking Spirit in its mixtion, the Mineral heat of which is multiplied,
which is the Life of Metal, and is signified by E. Cap. 3. Theor. Testam. Page
12. Volume. 4. Theat. Chym. And a little after: In the Work of Nature is Argent
vive, but not such as is found upon the Earth, nor will be, till it be first
turned into an apostemated and venomous Blood. In the same place: You must know
Son! that by Art and Nature Argent vive is congealed by an acute Water,
understand therefore Philosophically, because if it were not sharp and acute,
it could not penetrate, which is the first action in dissolution, after which
dissolution it is returned into an apostemated Blood, by the mutation of its
own Nature into another. Son! there are two things, which ought to stick
together by the agreement of contrariety, one pure, the other impure; the
impure recedes, Fire being an Enemy, by reason of its Corruption; the other
remains in Fire, because of its purity, being transmuted into Blood, and this
is our Argent vive, and our whole Secret, clothed with a tripartite Garment,
that is, black, white, and red, and that alone we want for the purpose of our
Magistery, Argent vive containing all that is necessary for a Quintessence.
There is in Mercury whatsoever Wise Men seek; for under the shadow of it lies a
fifth substance; for the substance of it is pure and incombustible; and all of
it is nothing else but Gold and Silver ( not common Metals, but airy, being in
Mercury, or the Green Lion) melted and fused within and without by Virtue of
the Fire (against Nature) and afterward purified and separated from all its
Original Blemish and Pollution; for that Gold which is incombustible, remains
fused and liquid, and imparts its Golden Nature in the said Mercury, etc. Cap.
62. Theor. Test. Page 103. Volume, 4. Th. Chym.

Out of this Philosophical Minium, calcined Lead, or Sericon only, the Adepts
sometimes distilled their Menstruums; for Example, the first of this Kind in
Numb. 59. Sometimes they dissolved this Minium in distilled Vinegar, which
being drawn off, they reduced it into Gum Adrop, or Lully's Azoquean Vitriol,
out of which they then distilled the stinking Menstruum, or Menstruum foetens,
in Numb. 60. Sometimes they dissolved Gum Adrop per deliquium first, and then
distilled it. The thirteenth way of practicing, says Ripley, as it here
appears, is very curious, and that is in Saturn, (Philosophical) rubified in a
Glass Vessel stopped, to prevent respiration, with a strong and continual Fire,
till it becomes red: Take therefore that rubified Saturn, and pour a good
quantity of distilled Vinegar upon it, and shake it very often every Day for a
Month (a Week) then separate the Vinegar by a Filtre, and take only that which
is clear without Faeces, and put it in Balneo to distill, and after the
separation of the Vinegar, you will find at the bottom of the Vessel a white or
Sky-colored Water, which take, and being put in a Bladder five double, to keep
out the Water, dissolve it in Balneo into a cristalline Water; put that Water
in a Distillatory, and if you will, separate the Elements from it, or distill
the dissolved Water, which rectify in a Circulatory, and the Earth which
remained in the bottom (in the distillation) calcine, till it grows like a
Sponge, and then is it very sit to reassume its Mercury separated from it, that
a new Generation may be made, and a Son brought forth, which is called King of
Fire, and which is so great in the Love of all the Philosophers, Cap. 17.
Philos. Page 220. Of this Work Ripley made mention: Cap. 4. of the same Book,
Page 194. Saying, There is moreover another Work in Gum produced by Vinegar
from red Saturn, out of which is the separation of the Elements made, after it
is dissolved in Bladders: The Menstruums of Gum Adrop, which way soever made,
were called stinking Menstruums, because of the stinking smell: This Water,
says Ripley, has a most sharp taste, and partly also a stinking smell, and
therefore is called stinking Menstruum. Assa foetida also is so called from the
smell, which our Mercury has when it is newly extracted out of its polluted
Body, because that smell is like Assa foetida, according to the Philosopher,
who says; That stink is worst before the preparation of this Water, which
after the circulating of it into a Quintessence, and good preparation, it is
pleasant and very delectable, and becomes a Medicine against the Leprosy, and
all other Diseases, without which Gold vive, you can never make the true
potable Gold, which is the Elixir of Life and Metals, Adrop. Phil. Page 548.
Volum. 6. Theat. Chym.

These Menstruums they called White Fume, because of their white and opake
Color. It is also called White Fume, says Ripley, nor without cause, for in
distillation a white fume goes out first, before the red Tincture, which
ascending into the Alembick, makes the Glass white as Milk, from whence it is
also called Lac Virginis, or Virgins Milk. In the same place: Out of the red
Fume or red Tincture, otherwise called the Blood of the Green Lion, the Adepts
did by rectification alone prepare two Mercuries, namely, red and white: Upon
this occasion, says Ripley, I will teach you a general Rule: If you would make
the white Elixir, you must of necessity divide your Tincture ( the Blood of the
Green Lion) into two parts, whereof one must be kept for the red Work, but the
other distilled with a gentle Fire; and you will obtain a white Water, which is
our white Tincture, our Eagle, our Mercury and Virgins Milk: When you have
these two Tinctures, or the white and red Mercury, you will be able to practice
upon their own Earth, or upon the Calx of Metals; for the Philosophers say, we
need not care what substance the Earth is of, etc. Adr. Phil. p. 554. Vol. 6.
Theat. Chy. Roger Bacon made a twofold Mercury thus:

64. The Green Lion of Roger Bacon. A Raymundo Ganfrido in verbo abbreviato de
Leone Viridi. Page 264. Thesauri Chymici Baconis.
THe abbreviated most true and approved Word of hidden things being manifested,
I have in a short Discourse abreviated to you in the Work of Luna and Sol; in
the first place earnestly requiring the Readers not to expose so Noble a Pearl
to be trodden upon by Dogs or Swine; for this is the Secret of all the
Philosophers Secrets, the Garden of Delights, Spices, and all Treasures, into
which he that has once entered, will want no more: Now that Word, not without
cause desired by many Men, was first declared by our eminent Doctor Roger
Bacon; afterward J. Friar Raymund Jeffery, Minister General of the Order of
the Friars Minors, took care to explain the Word, with as much brevity as I
could, to the Sons of Philosophy. In the Name of Christ then, take a great
quantity of the strongest Vinegar diligently distilled through an Alembick, in
which dissolve a good quantity of the Green Lion, being dissolved, distill
through a Filtre, and keep it in Glass Cucurbits well stopped: If any
remarkable part of the Lion remains undissolved, dissolve it with the aforesaid
Vinegar, and distill through a Filtre, and being dissolved, join it with the
other Waters before reserved in the Cucurbits, then take the reserved Waters
(dissolutions) and distill them all in Balneo Marioe, applying Alembicks to them
well luted, that the Cucurbits may not respire, put Fire under, and receive all
the Waters, which will be distilled, but have a care that the dissolved Lion be
not altogether congealed in the Cucurbits, but that it may remain liquid or
soft; then take all the Cucurbits, and put all that is in them into one
Cucurbit, which lute well with its Alembick, and put it in a Furnace of Ashes,
as is fitting, and put a gentle Fire under, because of the temper of the Glass,
and because of the Heterogeneous moisture, which is in the Lion to be rooted
out: And take notice, that must be always done with a gentle Fire, but when the
Heterogeneous moisture is gone over, strengthen the Fire by little and little,
and have an Eye continually to the Beak of the Alembick, if a red Liquor begins
to go over, but if it does not yet go over, continue the aforesaid Fire till it
does; but when you see the red Liquor distill, change the Receiver forthwith,
and lute it well to the Beak of the Alembick, and then strengthen the Fire, and
you will have the Blood of the Lion exceeding red, containing the four
Elements, very odoriferous and fragrant (after due putrefaction) keep it
therefore in a good Phial well stopped: Then take the Blood, and put it in a
Phial close stopped to putrefie and digest, in hot Dung, changing the Dung
every five Days, there to be digested for the space of fifteen or sixteen Days,
and this is done, that the Elementary parts may be dissolved, and be fitter to
be divided into the four Elements, and that by distillation; being putrified
fifteen or sixteen Days, take it out, and put it into a sit Cucurbit, to be
distilled with a gentle Fire in Balneo Marioe; but it is enough for the Water
to boil with the Fire, take the Water (distilled) and the Faeces, which you
find at the bottom of the Cucurbit, keep carefully the Water which you
distilled, distill seven times, always reserving the Faeces which it makes, with
the other Faeces reserved before; and so you will have a splendid Water, clear
and white as Cristal, and very ponderous, which is said to be the Philosophers
Mercury hidden by all the Philosophers, and cleansed and purified from all its
superfluities, most choice, and most precious; keep it therefore warily and
wisely in a Phial well stopped: Then take all the Faeces of the Mercury, as I
have said, before reserved, grind them well on a Marble (with the Phlegm of
distilled Vinegar) dry them in the Sun, and grind again, from time to time
imbibing them with the Water of distilled Vinegar upon the Marble, and drying
in the Sun, and repeat the operations of grinding, imbibing, and drying, till
all the blackness and superfluity is driven out of the Faeces, which you will
know thus: If the Faeces be red, or reddish, or citrine by the aforesaid
imbibitions and ablutions, then it is well done; but if they be yet black,
repeat the contritions, imbibitions, and desiccations, till you have the sign
aforesaid, and then keep them* Then take a Glass Cucurbit, wherein put the
aforesaid Faeces above prepared, with a good quantity of distilled Vinegar, and
set it in a Furnace, that is, in Balneo Marioe, put Fire under, and continue it
in course, till the Faeces aforesaid be thoroughly dissolved by Virtue of the
Vinegar and Fire, and being well dissolved, take the Cucurbit from the Fire,
and distill them through a Filtre as is fitting, all that Water (dissolution of
the Foeces) being thus distilled (filtred) put it in a new Cucurbit, well
stopped; but if any considerable part remains in the Filtre to be dissolved,
take that part, and set it again upon the Fire, as you did the first Faeces, in
Balneo Marioe, till it be dissolved, that you may dissolve those Faeces which
remained with the Vinegar, as you dissolved the first Faeces in Balneo with
Vinegar in a Cucurbit, then distill through a Filtre as before, and put it with
the other Water distilled before, which you reserved; then take that new
Cucurbit, in which you put the aforesaid Faeces dissolved and distilled before,
and lute it well with its Alembick, set it on a Furnace in Balneo, give Fire,
and distill as is fitting; but have a care that the Faeces be not thoroughly
dried, but let them be moist or liquid: Then take down the Cucurbit from the
Furnace, put it upon Ashes sifted and well pressed, and give it a gentle Fire
for the tempering of the Glass, and extracting the Heterogeneous moisture,
which it has from the Vinegar, and see often to the Beak of the Alembick, if a
Golden or Ruddy Liquor distills, if not, continue the Fire till it does; being
distilled, presently change the Glass being very clean, and lute it very well
to the Beak of the Alembick, then strengthen the Fire, receive the Ruddy Oil,
and thus continue the Fire, till all the Liquor be distilled, and save the
Faeces because they are the Fire, but the Oil aforesaid the Philosophers used
to call their occult Sulphur; which you must rectify thus: put it again in a
Cucurbit, put on an Alembick well luted, then set it on a Furnace in Ashes,
administer a gentle Fire, till it distills, receive the Liquor which distills in
a Bottle well stopped with the Beak of the Alembick, and the remaining Faeces
save, because they are the Fire: join that Fire with the other Fire reserved,
and so putrefie by distilling it seven times, and reserving the Faeces, it
makes, as I said before, and so you will have your Air or Sulphur well
depurated, clear, bright, and perfectly purified, and of a Gold Color, etc.

The Blood of the Green Lion being Fifteen Days putrified, Bacon cohobated
Seven times by Balneo, into a clear and ponderous Water, which he called the
Philosophers Mercury; out of the Foeces left in the rectifications of this
Mercury, dissolved in distilled Vinegar, he made a new Gum, out of which he
then distilled a Golden Liquor, or ruddy Oil, which after the Seventh
rectification he would have be the Philosophers Air, or Sulphur well depurated,
clear and bright: But Ripley used two ways in rectifying the stinking
Menstruum, or Green Lion, for either he divided the fresh Blood of the Green
Lion into two parts, distilling only one half; the distilled part he called,
white Mercury, white Tincture, Virginsmilk, etc. The other remaining part he
calls the red Mercury, red Tincture, etc. as it may be seen in his Book called
Adrop Phil. in the place before alleged; or putrified the whole Menstruum,
the Blood together with the white Fume the space of Fourteen Days, which after
that he divided into three Substances, a burning Water, a Water thick and
white, and an Oil, of which at length he made a Vegetable Menstruum, which is
described by Lully in Potestate Divitiarum, and by Ripley ( above in Numb. 35.)
in his Vade Mecum.

Concerning these three Substances of the stinking Menstruum, Ripley has these
following Sayings, in his Book named Terra Terrae Philosoph. page 319. where
thus: When therefore you have extracted all the Mercury out of the Gum, know,
that in this Mercury are contained three Liquors, whereof the first is a
burning Aqua vitae, which is extracted by a most temperate Balneo: This Water
being kindled, flames immediately, as common Aqua vitae, and is called our
attractive Mercury, with which is made a Cristalline Earth, with all Metallic
Calxes also, of which I will say no more, because in this Operation we want it
not: After that there follows another Water thick and white as Milk, in a small
quantity, which is the Sperm of our Stone, sought by many men; for the Sperm is
the Original of men and all living Creatures; whereupon we do not undeservedly
call it our Mercury, because it is found in all things and all places; for
without it no man whatsoever lives: and therefore it is said to be in every
thing. This Liquor, which now you ought to esteem most dear, is that Mercury,
which we call Vegetable, Mineral, and Animal, our Argent vivo, and
Virgins-milk, and our permanent Water: With this Mercurial Water we wash away
the Original Sin, and pollution of our Earth, till it becomes white, as Gum,
soon slowing; but after the distillation of this aforesaid Water, will appear
an Oil by a strong Fire; with this Oil we take a red Gum, which is our
Tincture, and our Sulphur vive, which is otherwise called the Soul of Saturn,
and Living Gold, our precious Tincture, and our most beloved Gold, of which
never man spoke so plainly; God forgive me therefore, if I have any way
offended him, being constrained to gratify your will.

Some great Mystery of Art is here discovered by Ripley, for the revealing of
which he fears the displeasure of not only the Adepts, but of God himself:
Lully, and others have indeed plainly enough declared to their Disciples,
though perhaps it may not appear to us being less instructed in the matter,
what our Green Lion is, what common Mercury more common to us than common
Argent vive, what the Azoquean Vitriol is, and the Menstruum made thereof; but
Ripley affirms that no man ever spoke so plainly of the present Secret. The
Adepts have indeed in their Practicks described the use of (Philosophical) Wine
without any veyl of Philosophy; and amongst them Raymond and Arnold with some
others have attained to the knowledge of the same, but (to use Ripley's
expression in Medulla) how it might be obtained they said not: Wherefore they
being silent, Ripley the first, and indeed the only man of all, declares to us,
that the Key of all the more secret Chymy lies in the Milk and Blood of the
Green Lion, that is, that the stinking Menstruum ( or the parts of it, Mercury
and Sulphur, Virgins Milk, and the Lions Blood, white and red Mercury) being
fourteen Days digested gently, is the white and red Wine of Lully, and other
Adepts: Nor was he satisfied in declaring this freely to us, but adds Strength
and Light to his Words, in making a Vegetable Menstruum the Rectified Aqua
vitae ( described by Lully in Potestate Divitiarum, and by us in Numb. 31.) of
the said stinking and corrosive Menstruum, by which one only example he was
pleased to teach us, that all Vegetable Menstruums may be made of the said
stinking Menstruum: Lully's rectified Aqua vitae is made by diverse Cohobations
upon its own Caput Mortuum: We may if we please proceed by another way or
method: Distill the Menstruum Foetens, being fourteen Days digested, and first
will ascend the Aqua ardens, then the Phlegm, and in the bottom will remain a
Matter thick as melted Pitch, which are the Constitutive Principles of all
Vegetable Menstruums.

Let us therefore desist from further pursuit of the said Green Lion, which we
have pursued through the Meads and Forest of Diana, through the way of
(Philosophical) Saturn, even to the Vineyards of Philosophy. This most pleasant
place is allowed the Disciples of this Art, to recreate themselves here, after
so much Pains and Sweat, dangers of Fortune and Life, excercising the work of
Women, and the sports of Children, being content with the most red Blood of the
Lion, and eating the white or red Grapes of Diana, the Wine of which being
purified, is the most secret Secret, of all the more secret Chymy; as being the
white or red Wine of Lully, the Nectar of the Ancients, and their only desire,
the peculiar refreshment of the Adopted Sons; but the Heartbreaking, and
Stumbling Block of the Scornful and Ignorant.

But before we depart hence, I will present you (Paracelsians) with another
Dish, and that not unsavory, which is, that the Virgins-milk, or white Mercury
( otherwise the white Wine of Lully) extracted out of the Green Lion is by
Paracelsus that Glue of the Eagle, or Green Lion, so carefully sought for: For
Eagle and Green Lion are to the Adepts Synonyma's of the same thing: For thus
Ripley before: You will obtain the white Water, which is our white Tincture,
our Eagle, our Mercury and Virgins-milk. Consequently therefore, red Mercury (
or the red Wine of Lully) is the Blood of the Red or Green Lion: For the same
Lion is called sometimes Green (in his Youthful Estate) sometimes red (in his
more grown Estate) and therefore the Blood is sometimes said to be of the Green
Lion, sometimes of the Red: So Ripley ( in the Menstruum described in Numb.
61.) says; Take the Blood of the Red Lion being most Red, as Blood, which is
our Mercury, and our Tincture now prepared to be poured upon its Ferment, that
is upon the Calxes of the purest Gold: also elsewhere; The Blood of the Lion of
a Rosey Color. But let us hear Paracelsus himself.

65. The Green Lion of Paracelsus. Aurei Velleris Germ. p. 41.
TAke distilled Vinegar, wherein dissolve the Green Lion, putrefie, filtre the
Solution, draw off the Liquor in Balneo to an Oyliness; this Oil or Residue put
in a Retort, distill away the moisture in Sand with a gentle Fire: Then increase
the Fire, and the Green Lion, being compelled by the strength of the Fire will
yield his Glue, or Air; To the Caput mortuum, pour its Phlegm (the moisture
drawn off) putrefie in Dung (or Balneo) and distill, as before, and again will
ascend the Spirits; force it strongly, and there will come a tenacious Oil of a
Citrine Color: Upon the Caput mortuum pour again the first distilled Water,
putrefie, filtre, and distill, as before: Lastly with a most strong open Fire,
and there will come over a Bloody Oil, which is otherwise called Fire: The
remaining Earth reverberate into whiteness, etc.

Hitherto we have had the stinking Menstruums made of Azoquean Vitriol only,
yet sometimes the Adepts have added common Vitriol to it, thus.

66. The stinking Menstruum made of the Gum Adrop, and Common Vitriol of
Ripley. Page 357. Viatici.
TAke and Grind the Gum made of Sericon with distilled Vinegar, and as much of
Vitriol evaporated, and first distill the Water with a gentle Fire, then with a
strong; receive the Oil (blood of the Lion) which separate from the Water,
till you have the pure Oil by it self.

Sometimes instead of common Vitriol, they added common Nitre to the Azoquean
Vitriol; thus Lully in Practica Testamenti made his stinking Menstruum.

67. The stinking Menstruum made of Azoquean Vitriol, and Nitre of Lully. Cap.
9. Pract. Testam. p. 159. Vol. 4. The. Chym.
TAke one part of D, (D, signifies Azoquean Vitriol, which destroys and
confounds all that is of the Nature and Being of common Argent vive, page 154.)
and half a part of C, (C, signifies Salt Peter or Nitre, page 154.) of the same
Volume) which being very well ground, fifted, and mixed together, put in a
Glass Cucurbit in a Furnace, and putting on an Alembick, in which the Spirits
are by resolution distilled and condensed; lute the joints of the Vessels with
linen Cloth, impasted and steeped in luting, made of VVheat-flower, and the
whites of Eggs, that the united properties of the three Mercuries, namely,
Saltish, Vitriolick, and Watery, being joined and united together, may be
preserved: And observe, that the said Powders put into the Cucurbit exceed not
the weight of eight Ounces; and to abbreviate the time, put of the like Powder
into two other Cucurbits, according to the weight of eight Ounces in every
Cucurbit, and place them upon little long Furnaces, so as I shall declare in
the Chapter of Furnaces; put not above three Cucurbits upon one Furnace, for
the Fire cannot administer equal heat to more, as the mixtion of Nature
requires; and let the said Cucurbits be placed the distance of five or six
Fingers one from another, and let the bottoms of the Cucurbits be luted with
Potters Clay mixed well with hair; put fine Ashes well sifted and pressed the
thickness of five Fingers under them, and to the Beak of every Alembick put a
Glass Phial with a long Neck at the end, because the Receiver of those Phials
must not feel the heat of the Furnace, nor the Water of the Phials flow back,
nor the Spirits recede or fly away: Then must you provide a good quantity of
Saw-dust, whereof take two parts, and half a part of the husks of Grapes, or
the powder of dry Fire, and mix it with the said Saw-dust, and with this
Composition fill your Furnace, then light your Fire at both ends, and let it
burn; for you must make no other Fire, till you see six, or ten, or fifteen; or
twenty drops of Water distill, and when twenty have distilled, make your Fire
with small Wood dry, and so by little and little make the Fire flame directly
to the Matter; and see when it distills, that the Water be clear, and when it is
at fifteen Points, and the Water clear, and the fumes subtle, continue that
Fire equally: And if you see it returned from fifteen to twelve Points, or
less, strengthen the Fire, and continue it according to the Point of its
distillation, and then thirdly, strengthen your Fire one Point further, and
continue it till nothing more distills, and then let the Fire go out, stop your
Furnace, and let the Matter cool; and if the Water be clear, without any
disturbed Color, or without muddiness, take and keep it, and stop the Phial
with warm Wax, that nothing may respire, nor the Air enter, because the Spirits
which are subtle, would presently be corrupted by the Air. Remember, when you
begin to make the Fire of dry Wood, that your Vessels must be covered with the
aforesaid Paste, and wrapped about with Linen Clothes, and the Phials well
luted to the Beaks of the Alembicks with the same luting, putting a Quill
between the Beak of the Alembick and the Phial; for whilst the Fire operates,
the Air will for the most part go out and respire, when it has not a Receiver
to retain it, for it is hot, and the subject which retains it, is not able to
endure an exceeding heat, and therefore it requires some place wherein it may
respire; when therefore you hear it blow, open the Quill-hole for it. O Father!
how have you made the practice thus tedious! Son! That you may be acquainted
with all things both small and great, and that you may have both a general and
particular knowledge of Fires, and other operations, as also of all sorts of
luting; because it is not our intention to speak any more of them, there being
nothing difficult to the wise, circumspect, and intelligent, and that you may
hereafter say, that the stinking Menstruum is at your command, which is a mean
thing, by which all Bodies are in a short time converted into their first
Nature, and it is the pure and proper Original of a wonderful and most
commodious thing, but you must know how to apprehend it with a clear
understanding, etc.

The like Menstruum has Lully in his Magia Naturalis, which is called

68. The Water calcining all Bodies of Lully Magioe Naturalis. Page 359.
TAke of the Earth, that is, D. (of Azoquean Vitriol) five Ounces and a half,
and of the Water, that is C. (of Salt Peter and Niter) two Ounces and a half,
the Sum of which is the weight of eight Ounces, and being all mixed, grind the
Matter fine upon a Marble, then put it in a glass Vessel with an Alembick upon
it, and distill the whole substance, first making a gentle Fire of Saw-Dust,
taking two parts of it, and one part and a half of Coals small or ground, and a
little dry Bran, and light the Fire, and let it kindle of it self, till it
begins to distill from one Point to twelve (twenty) Points, and then you must
begin to strengthen the Fire with small Wood, making the Fire of the Flame
right under the Matter, and so continue the Fire till it be returned to twelve
or fifteen Points, or also to fewer, and then continue the whole Fire according
to the Points of its distillation, and after that strengthen the Fire one Point
further, and continue it till the Alembick loses its Color, or no more
distills; then cease, and let it cool, gather the Water, keep it in a hot and
moist place, and have a care that it respires not: And remember to have a Quill
in the luting of the Beak of the Alembick, and the Neck of the Receiver, that
you may sometimes draw it out, that the Receiver may have vent, for the heat is
there so quick, that the Vessel containing the Matter cannot endure it,
wherefore it is requisite sometimes to be opened and sometimes shut: Take
notice, that this Water, though made of a contemptible thing, has the power of
converting Bodies into their first Matter, which being joined to the Vegetable
Virtue is of much perfection, and must be put into practice presently after it
is distilled, that the Spirit which is subtle and of a strange Nature, may not
be lost by the Air.

The same Menstruum is described in Lully's Clavicula under this Title,

69. The Stinking Menstruum for the dissolution of the Calx of Gold and Silver,
in order to the reducing them into Argent vive. Cap. 15. Clav. Page 299. Vol.
3. Th. Chym.
TAke of Vitriol two Pounds, of Salt Peter one Pound, of Cinabar three Ounces (
I do not understand by what Error Cinabar has crept in among the other
Ingredients of this Menstruum, for it is a constitutive not of this, but of the
following Menstruum for the dissolving of the Philosophers Stone; especially
Lully himself, in Cap. 20. Claviculae, speaking of the extracting of Mercury
from a perfect Body, having made no mention of Cinabar, whereas notwithstanding
in the same place he gave a Description of this Menstruum in these few Words,
saying: Put of our stinking Menstrual, made of two parts of red Vitriol, and
one of Salt Peter, and let the aforesaid Menstruum be first distilled seven
times, and well rectified) let the Vitriol be rubified and pulverized, then put
in the Salt Peter and Cinabar, and grind all together, then put the Matter in
fit Vessels well luted to be distilled; let it be distilled first with a gentle
Fire as the Work requires, and as they know how that have done it: Let this
Water be distilled very often, casting away the Faeces which remain at the
bottom of the Cucurbit, and so it will be your best distilled Menstruum.

Sometimes they added common Vitriol to the Azoquean Vitriol and Nitre: It is
thus done.

70. The Stinking Menstruum made of Azoquean Vitriol, common Vitriol, and Niter
of Ripley. Cap. 1. Page 143. Medul. Phil. Chym.
TAke Vitriol made of the sowrest Juice of Grapes, with the Fire of Nature and
Sericon (Azoquean Vitriol) joined together in one mass with Natural (common)
Vitriol a little dried, together with the Sol Niter, and out of these distill a
Water, which will first be weak and phlegmatic, not coloring the Vessel,
which throw away: Then will ascend a white Fume, which will make the Vessel
look like Milk, which must be gathered, till it cease, and the Vessel is
returned to its former color: For that Water is the Stinking Menstruum,
wherein is our Quintessence, that is, the white Fume, which is called the Fire
against Nature, without which our Natural Fire could not subsist, whereof we
will say more in its proper place: And these, namely, the Mineral and Vegetable
Water, being mixed together, and made one Water, do operate contraries, which
is a thing to be admired; for this one dissolves and congeals, moisteneth and
dries, putrefies and purifies, dissipates and joins, separates and compounds,
mortifies and vivifies, destroys and restores, attenuates and inspissates,
makes black and white, burns and cools, begins and ends. These are the two
Dragons fighting in the Gulf of Sathalia, this is the white and red Fume,
whereof one will devour the other: And here the dissolving Vessels are not to
be luted, but only stopped slightly with a Linen Cloth and Mastick, or common
Wax: For this Water is a Fire and a Bath within the Vessel, and not without,
which, if it feels any other strong Fire, will be presently elevated to the top
of the Vessel, and if it finds no rest there, the Vessel will be broken, and so
the composition will be left frustrated. So much as this compounded Water
dissolves, so much it congeals and elevates (is congealed and elevated) into a
glorious Earth: And so it is the secret dissolution of our Stone, which is
always done with the congelation of its own Water: And because this Fire of
Nature is added to the Water against Nature, so much therefore as it lost of
its Form by the Fire against Nature, so much it recovers by the Water of
Nature, that our work by the Fire against Nature, may not be destroyed or
annihilated.

From the Receipts we observe.
1. That the Menstruums of this kind, being made of the very matter of
Philosophical Wine, or Philosophical Grapes, are the first of all other
Menstruums, either Mineral or Vegetable.

2. That the milky Liquor or Spirit, Virgins Milk, white Mercury, the White
Wine of Lully, and the Glue of the Green Lion, called by Paracelsus the Glue of
the Eagle, are terms synonymous; and that the Red Liquor, Blood of the Green
Lion, Red Mercury, the Philosophers Sulphur, and the Red Wine of Lully,
otherwise by Paracelsus, the Blood of the Red Lion, are likewise Synonyma's.

3. That the acid Mineral Menstruums, are by digestion or further elaboration,
transmuted either into a simple Vegetable Menstruum, or into the Heaven or
Spirit of Philosophical Wine.

4. That these acid Menstruums are to be distilled with very great caution, by
reason of the excessive effervescence of the Azoquean Vitriol, or rather Spirit
of Philosophical Wine, which is in this Vitriol caused by the Acids.

5. That Mineral Menstruums are the Heaven, or Essence of Philosophical Wine
dissolved in an Acid, so that having acquired this Spirit, you may make them ex
tempore by simple dissolution.

6. That the Menstruums even now prepared, are presently to be used, lest they
perish.

7. That Menstruums are by dissolving Bodies coagulated.

8. That Metallic Bodies are by these Menstruums reduced into running Mercury.

9. That these are called Stinking Menstruums, because of their stinking smell.
By the smell alone we easily distinguish these from those fragrant Menstruums
called Vegetable. Thus the unsavory smell of the Menstruum it self proves that
Morienus used the Stinking Menstruum. What is the smell of it, says King
Calid, by way of Question, before and after the making of it? Morienus
answers, Before it is made, the sent of it is strong and unsavory; but after
the preparation of it, it has a good sent, according to that which the wise man
says: This Water resembles the unpleasant smell of a Body dead, and void of
life; for the smell of it is ill, and not unlike to the smell of Graves: He
that can whiten the Soul, and cause it to ascend again, and keep the Body well,
and take away all obscurity from it, and extract the ill savor out of it, will
be able to infuse it into the Body, and in the hour of conjunction exceeding
Miracles will appear, Morien. de Trans. Metal. p. 33. Geber also acknowledges
himself to have operated with a mineral Menstruum, Cap. 25. Summoe perfect. The
first natural Principles, says he, out of which Metals are procreated, are the
Stinking Spirit, that is, Sulphur, and Water Vive, which also we allow to be
called dry Water. And in another Place at the end of his Book de Investigat. he
goes on; We do by plain and open proof conclude our Stone to be nothing else
but a Stinking Spirit, and living Water, which we also call dry Water, being
cleansed by natural decoction and true proportion with such an Union, that
nothing can be added or taken from it, to which a third thing ought to be added
for the abbreviation of the Work, that is, a perfect Body attenuated.

10. That Adrop, the Name of the Matter of these Menstruums, signifies the
Philosophers Saturn, or Lead. The first Matter of this leprous Body, says
Ripley, is a viscous Water inspissated in the Bowels of the Earth. The great
Elixir for the Red and for the White, says Vincentius, is made of this Body,
whose Name is Adrop, otherwise called Philosophical Lead, page 132. Medul.
Phil. Chym.

Our Stone, says Arnold, in Speculo Alchym. is called Adrop, which is in
Latin Saturnus, in English Lead, and according to the Trojans Dragon or Topum,
that is, Poison, Septima Dispos. Speculi, page 596. Vol. 4. Theatr. Chym. I
have showed that the Philosophers gave it diverse Names, because of the
diversity of Colors; but as to their Intention, they had one peculiar Name,
that is, Roman Gold, or Adrop, or Stone above all the Stones of this world,
Quarta dispositio Speculi, page 594. of the same Volume. Laton and Azoth are
together, and never asunder, but remain always joined together, but because of
the diversity of Colors, the Philosophers called them by many Names; and as
the Colors are varied and changed, they imposed so many Names; because Azoth
among the Indians is Gold; among the Hermians Silver; among the Alexandrians
and Macedonians Iron; with the Greeks Mercury; with the Hebrews Tin; with the
Tartars Brass; with the Arabians Saturn; and among the Latins, and especially
among the Romans Ognividon, ( by an Anagram Dono G vini, G signifying
Philosophical Mercury, or Sulphur aqueum;) But that none may err, I say it has
one proper Name, and is commonly called by men; and every one knows the Stone,
Tertia dispos. Specul. p. 593. of the same Volume.

Some of the Adepts write not Adrop, but Atrop; by which Name they have been
pleased to signify the Matter of these Menstruums to be as it were the Gate of
all the most secret Chymy: for Atrop, by the inversion of the Letters is read
Porta, a Gate: Thus Robertus Valensis in Gloria Mundi, page 305. That you may
attain (says he) to the true foundation, I will once again repeat it to you,
and call it the first Hyle, that is, the beginning of all things; it is also
called the only Holy; apprehend what Elements are in it by those which are
repugnant; the Stone of the Philosophers, of the Sun, of Metals, the fugitive
Servant, the airy Stone, the Thernian Stone, Magnesia, or the corporal Stone,
Marcasite, the Stone of Sal Gemmoe, the Stone of Children, the golden Stone,
the Original of worldly things, Xelis, also by inversion Silex, a Flint, Xidar,
by the same inversion Radix, Atrop, by inversion, Porta, a Gate; and it has
also as many other Names, yet is but one only thing.

To Robertus Lully seems to incline, who has been pleased to call every
alteration of the Azoquean Vitriol, or Matter of the Menstruums of this Kind,
the first Porta or Gate of the Work; thus he called the dissolution of the
Matter the first Gate. In our whole Magistery, says he, there are three
principal Spirits necessary, which cannot without the consummation of their
resolution be manifested, and they are otherwise called, three Argent vives.
And because Resolution is so often used for the First Gate of our Magistery
which we will declare; the said Resolution is divided into three principal
parts: The first is Corporal, and is called in the Latin Tongue Recfage (that
is, Anagrammatically sacere G; but by G, he means Sulphur aqueum, Cap. 5. The.
Test. page 115. Vol. 4. Theat. Chym. or our Mercury, Cap. 20. Pract. Test. page
170. of the same Volume.) The second is spiritual, and called Agazoph. The
third is spiritual and corporal, and called Vbridrugat. etc.

When the Matter in the Resolution of it appears black, this Blackness (for
which some have called it Lead) he would have to be a sign of the first Gate.
In the first Resolution, says he, lies all the danger, and therefore I give
you notice, that you must have the Sulphurs of simple Argent vives destroyed by
heat, in such manner and form, as that their active property may not be
expelled by extraneous heat, and that it may not be separated from its moist
Subject, which appears wholly black, full of a noble Spirit: That Blackness
demonstrates the sign of the first Gate leading into our Magistery, and without
it can nothing be done, because it is the Fire of Nature, which is to create
the Stone, and which cannot be manifested without the corruption of its Body,
Cap. 28. Theor. Test. page 51. Vol. 4. Th. Chym.

Lastly, He calls the Destillation of this Matter the first Gate also. The way
of preparing the Stony, and fermentable Spirit is, to take the Juice of Lunary,
and extract the sweat of it with a small and gentle fire, and you will have in
your power one of our Argent vives in Liquor, in the form of a white water,
which is the ablution and purgation of our Stone, and its whole Nature: And
that is one of the most principal Secrets, and is the first Gate, as you may
understand by the Reasons aforesaid, etc. Cap. 9. Theor. Test. page 21. of the
same Volume,

Being persuaded by these and the like Quotations, I may affirm, that Atrop is
to be written rather than Adrop, because besides the Blackness or Philosophical
Lead, Atrop signifies the beginning or first Gate of the Work.

11. That in the Adeptical Chymy are many Green Lions, to be necessarily
distinguished one from another.

By the first the Adepts meant the Celestial Sun, governing the whole World.

The second is Argent vive, more common to us than common Argent vive.

The third is called Argent vive dissolved into a Green Color.

The fourth is Adrop, Azoquean Vitriol, Philosophers Lead, etc.

A fifth is the Stinking Menstruum, otherwise called the Blood of the Green
Lion.

A sixth is the Green Lion of Fools, Roman Vitriol, Verdigreece, etc.

The seventh is extraordinary, namely, common Mercury sublimed.

12. That there are also many Saturns.

The first is common Lead, the impurest of Metals, and consequently the most
remote of all in our Art; which to prove by the Sentiments of the Adepts is a
thing superfluous, finding almost every where amongst the Adepts a solemn
caution for us to beware of this devourer of Metals and Minerals, Saturn. Have
a care, says Ripley, (to bring one Witness for all) of operating with Saturn,
because it is commonly said, Eat not of the Son, whose Mother is defiled, and
believe me, many Men err in Saturn. Hear what Avicenne says, Saturn will be
always Saturn, yea operate not with the Earth of (Philosophical) Saturn, which
the Spirit of it has despised, and left for the worst Sulphur, etc. Cap. 2.
Philorcii. page 188.

The second is Adrop, or Azoquean Vitriol, whereof before.

A third is the first Color or blackness of the first Work; of which lower.

The fourth is Copper, the first of Metals; of which Arnold in Speculo Alchym.
disp. 8. Page 605. Volum. 4. Theat. Chym. thus: There were, says he,
Philosophers that placed our Science in the seven Planets; and our first Planet
is called Venus, the second Saturn, the third Mercury, the fourth Mars, the
fifth Jupiter, the sixth Luna, the seventh Sol: The Generation of Copper has
the first place after (the universal) Mercury, says Basilius, Libro de rebus
not. and supernat. Cap. 4. Of all those things, says Paracelsus, which proceed
from Salts, there is none more nearly allied to the Mineral Virtue, than
Vitriol; the reason is, because Salts are Minerals, and all Minerals lie in one
Mass and Ares. Now Vitriol in the separation of Minerals, is the last thing, to
which is immediately subsequent the generation of Metals, whereof Venus is the
first, Lib. 4. Philos. de Element Aquoe, page 279. And a little after he says,
The Marcasites and Cachymys being thus separated from the first Matter of
Metals, then follows the first Generation, which is of Venus, etc. Besides, by
the separation, whereby the nature of the Marcasites and Cachymys are expelled,
the generations of Copper do immediately concur, imprint themselves, and are
coagulated together, because it is the first Metal after the separation of the
Marcasites and Cachymys. in the same Book, page 281.

The Vitriol of Venus being the first of all things added or joined to the
Vegetable Mercury in the making of Adrop, is called by Lully the first Male.
This Fire, says he, is that Property of the Mercury, which you must endeavor
to preserve from burning, being the Tincture of Vitriol, with which (the
Vegetable) Mercury ought to be sublimed, because it is the first Male of it,
and is the augmentation of our Tincture, which is a great addition in virtue
and power, when it is joined with the Tincture of Sol; for if you know how to
extract the Property of Mercury from Vitriol and Salt, and make them friendly
by conjunction, which is done by gentle sublimations, you will know one of the
greatest Secrets of Nature, and the true principal perfection. Codicil. cap.
92. page 202. So in many places of his Theoriae Testamenti majoris, he means
Vitriol by his Male; in these especially: The Fire of our Male, page 50. The
Virtue of the Male, page 94. The Virtue of the Sperm of the Male, page 108. The
Heat of the Male, page 72. The Female (Venus) is in this case the Male, and is
not so hot as the true (second) Male, Gold, Page 73. Vol. 4. Theat. Chym. This
Male also Espanietus mentions in the making of his Menstruum. Take, says he,
the winged Virgin completely washed and cleansed, impregnated with the
spiritual Seed of the first Male, etc. Sect. 58. Arcani Hermet. Phil.

Paracelsus, the better to express the Masculine Nature of Venus, calls it
Metallus, a Noun of the Masculine Gender, as Metallus primus. Take, says he,
the Coralline Liquor, I mean that which is very diaphanous, to which add a
fifth part of the Vitriol of Venus, digest them in Balneo for a month; for by
this means the Wine of the first Metal separates it self aloft, but the
feculent part of (this) Wine, the Vitriol of Venus retains ( he means the
residue left in the extraction of Vitriol) and so that first Metal (Metallus
primus) is made a perspicuous, diaphanous, and truly red Wine, etc. Cap. 12.
Lib. 3. De Vita longa, Page 65. As the Adepts called Venus the first Metal
(Metallus primus) in the Masculine Gender, so also they changed Saturnus
(Saturn) a Noun of the Masculine Gender, into Saturna, a Noun of the Feminine
Gender, to signify not common Lead, but Venus, being a Feminine Noun, of
Copper. I have, says Ripley, a dear and beloved Daughter, named Saturna, from
which Daughter are both the white and red Elixirs assuredly procreated; if
therefore you desire this Science, you must extract a clear water from her, etc.

Sometimes to describe by Saturn, not only Venus, but also the Philosophical
preparation of Copper ( that is, to be performed by a Vegetable Menstruum) they
made it a Vegetable or Herb, that so they might distinguish that which was,
from that which was not prepared; Thus Flamel in his Summary: Some unskilful
men, and unlearnest Chemists take common Gold, Silver, and Mercury, and handle
them so ill, till they vanish away by fume, and thereby endeavor to make the
Philosophers Mercury; but they do not attain to that, which is the first Matter
and true Mine of the Stone: But if they would attain to that, and reap any
good, they must betake themselves to the seventh Mountain, where there is no
Plain, and from the top downward behold the other six, which they will see at
great distance. At the top of this Mountain you will find a triumphant Royal
Herb, which some Philosophers call a Mineral, some a Vegetable, and if pure and
clean Broth be made thereof, the better part of the work will be hereby
accomplished, and this right and subtle Philosophical Mercury must you take.
This Place is thus read in Chortalassaeus, page 313. Vol. 6. Theat. Chym.
Ascend therefore the Mountain, that you may see the Vegetable, Saturnine,
Plumbeous and Royal, likewise also Mineral Root, or Herb, take only the Juice
of it, and throw away the Husks.

The Fourteenth KIND. Simple Mineral Menstruums made of the acid or saline
Essences of Salts.
71. The Water or Oil of Salt of Paracelsus. Cap. 3. Lib. 10. Arch. Page 38.
THough there be many ways of extracting the primum Ens of Salt, yet this (
method of making Salt circulated, the Circulatum minus of Salt, the dissolving
Water, the Water or Spirit of Salt circulated, described above in Numb. 27.) is
most commodious, and expeditious, and after this is that other way, which we
mentioned speaking of the Elixir of Salt, namely, that new Salt being mixed
well with the dissolving Water, which is the distilled Spirit of Salt
(circulated) must be putrefied, and so long distilled, till the whole substance
of the Salt is dissolved, and reduced into a perpetual oleosity, the Body of
Phlegm being drawn neatly from it. This way is also taught the preparation of
the Arcanum or Magistery of Vitriol and Tartar, as of all other Salts.

Annotations.

WE take notice that the Menstruums of the antecedent Kind are made of the
unctuous Matter of Philosophical Wine, purged, dissolved, and volatilized with
an acid; in the present we shall observe the contrary, namely, that the acid or
saline Essences of Salts made with the unctuous Spirit of Philosophical Wine,
are Menstruums of this fourteenth Kind. Paracelsus in the prescribed Receipt
reduced Salts by cohobation alone, with the Water of Salt circulated into a
liquid substance or Oil, but the Oil made of common Salt, by the method
aforesaid, he commends before the rest to his Disciples, for the extractions of
Metallic Bodies. Certainly, says he, there cannot be a more Noble and better
way, than by the Water or Oil of Salt, prepared as we have clearly described in
Alchymia (and in Libris Chyrurgicis.) For this Water fundamentally and
radically extracts out of all Metallic Bodies their Natural Liquor or Sulphur,
and a most excellent Crocus as well for Medicinal as Chemical Operations: It
resolves and breaks any Metal whatsoever, converting it out of its own
Metallic Nature into another, according to the various intention and industry
of the Operator. Manuale de Lap. Phil. page 139.

It will therefore be worth while to explain the way of making this Oil of Salt
more clearly to you: First for the illustration of the Receipt we will propose
the Description of the Oil of Salt alleged by the Author himself, in the
eighth Book of his Archidoxes, which in the Elixir of Salt, Page 31. we read
thus: Take Salt accurately prepared most white, and most pure; put it into a
Pelican with such a quantity of the dissolving Water, as to exceed the weight
of it six times: Digest them in Horse-Dung together the space of a Month, then
separate the dissolving Water by distillation, pour it again to it, and
separate as before, and that so often, till the Salt is converted into Oil.

By comparing the Receipts it appears, that Sea Salt newly made is not to be
understood by new Salt, but the same exquisitely purifyed: Then it is clear,
that the weight of the Water of the circulated Salt omitted in the Receipt of
the tenth Book, ought to be so determined, as to be six times more than the
weight of the Salt: Moreover, the time and place of putrefaction omitted in the
former process are described in the other, that is, to be digested a Month in
Horse-Dung: Besides it is from the Receipts observed, that all the Salt is not
converted into Oil, the Body of the Salt being drawn as a Phlegm from the
Essence. Lastly, that the Oils of Vitriol and Tartar may be also made by the
same method.

The Receipts being thus compared, are not only without all obscurity, but do
by the exuberance of their Light give Light also to other Processes, being
otherwise less intelligible. So this Oil of Salt, as the Essence or primum Ens
of Salt explains that more obscure Description of the Essence of Salts, given
in Libro 4. Archid. Page 14. Take Salts, and calcine them thoroughly; if they be
Volatile, burn (sublime) them, after that resolve them into a tenuity (per
deliquium) and distill them into a Water (through a Filter.) This Water putrefy
(not by it self, but as the Disciples of the Art ought to understand and know,
with the Water of Salt circulated) for a Month, and distill by Balneo, and a
sweet Water will ascend (the Body of the Salt by the way of a Phlegm) which
cast away: That which will not ascend, digest again (with new dissolving Water)
another Month, and distill as before, and that so often, till no more sweetness is
perceived. By this way you have now the Quintessence of Salt in the bottom,
(like an Oil) scarce two Ounces out of a Pound of the burned or calcined Salt.
One Ounce of this Salt thus extracted, if common, seasoneth Meat more than half
a Pound of another; for the Quintessence of it remains only, and the Body is
drawn from it by liquid solution. This way is the Quintessence of all Salts
separated.

This Process being thus enlightened by the rays of the antecedent, reflects no
small Light upon the said Receipts, namely, that scarce two Ounces are acquired
from one Pound of the Salts.

In Clavi Archidoxorum, Lib. 10. Page 37. Paracelsus has described the Essences
of Salts in these Words: The way of extracting the Quintessence of Salts, as
Vitriol, Salt, Nitre, Tartar, etc. is this: Cohobate with its own Liquor or
Water very often, putrify with the Phlegm, and then draw off the Body in the
form of Phlegm even to the fixed Spirit: This Spirit dissolve in its own Water,
and by a strong heat separate the pure from the impure with the Spirit of Wine.
This Description is most obscure, but made clearer by those aforesaid. The
meaning of Paracelsus is this: He putrefies the Salts, and cohobates them so
often with their own Liquors or Waters, that is, with their own Circulatums;
common Salt with common Salt circulated; Nitre with Nitre circulated; Vitriol
with the Water of Vitriol circulated; Alume with the Water of Alume circulated,
the dissolving Water of Alume, the Circulatum minus of Alume, etc. till they
remain at the bottom in the form of an Oil, which Oil being either acid or
saline, easily makes an effervescence with the unctuous Spirit of Philosophical
Wine or its own Circulatum, and in this heat lets fall some of its impurities,
and so becomes purer, which thing is confirmed by the Description it self of
the Water of Salt circulated, where he putrefies Salt, being melted and
resolved per deliquium, with the Spirit of Philosophical Wine, cohobates, and
draws it to an Oleity: Join it, says he, with the Spirit of (Philosophical)
Wine, and the impure will fall to the bottom, which separate, but let the pure
be Cristallized in a cold place, pour the distillation to it again, and
cohobate so often, till a fixed Oil remains at the bottom, and nothing sweet will
more distill.

Moreover, this Oil of Salt as a Menstruum, makes his Process in Chyrurgia
intelligible, which otherwise could not be understood.

72. The Water of Salt by another Description of Paracelsus. Cap. 2. Tract. 3.
part. 2. Chyr. major. Page 66.
TAke Salt without any addition of Art being most white by Nature it self (Sal
Gemmoe) which must be diverse times melted, then being reduced into a most fine
Powder mixed with the Juice of Raphanus, stir them together; after resolution
distill, distill the distillation with an equal quantity of the Juice of
Sanguinea five times more: In this Water are Plates of Sol, being purged by
Antimony, easily resolved into Powder; this Powder being thus prepared must be
washed with sweet Water distilled, till it has no taste of Salt, for the Salt
not entering into the substance of it, is easily washed away.

In this Process Sal Gemmae being fused by the method of the Water of Salt
circulated, is dissolved in the Juice of Raphanus, evaporated and resolved per
deliquium, then six times distilled with an equal proportion of the Juice of
Sanguinea. In the antecedent Description of this Oil of Salt, this fusion of
the Salt, dissolution in the Juice of Raphanus, and resolution per deliquium is
not necessary, because the Water of Salt Circulated is sufficient of it self to
separate the Essence of Salt from its Phlegm: But where we use the Spirit of
Philosophical Wine in making the Water of Salt circulated, without the said
previous preparation of the Salt, we should have the Work too tedious: In the
mean time both Processes agree in weight of Menstruum, for it is all one,
whether the Salt be cohobated into an Oil with six times as much of the
dissolving Water, or distilled six times with the Juice of Sanguinea in equal
weight. One thing that mades the latter Process inexplicable, is the unknown
Juice of Sanguinea, but however it is evident by what has been said, that
either the Spirit of Philosophical Wine, or the Water of Salt circulated
supplies its place. Basilius indeed resolved common Salt with the Spirit of
Philosophical Wine not into an Oil; but reduced into it a Green Stone thus:

Viride Salis of Basilius. In supplemento Libri de conclusion. TAke common
Salt, calcine it well, yet without fusion, reduce it to a Powder, resolve per
deliquium in a Cellar, or in Raphanus made hollow, then distill in Sand with a
quick Fire, and a Water will ascend, the residue in the bottom pulverize, and
dissolve it in its distilled Water, and distill again; this repeat till all the
Salt has ascended, which will be in the fourth or fifth time: Draw off the
Phlegm from the distilled Water in Balneo, the remainder put into a Cellar in
cold Water, and you will have Cristals, which take out, and dissolve in the
Phlegm; then draw off one half, and you will find new Cristals, repeat the
Operation four times or more, for the oftener, the more fusible will be the
Cristals, which being dried and pulverized on a Marble, pour to them the
rectified Spirit of (Philosophical) Wine, which cohobate from the Salt so often,
till you perceive the Oil of Salt coagulated into a Green transparent Stone,
which reserve.

Paracelsus in his Receipts appointed the calcination of Salt to be done by the
fusion of it; but in this Process Basilius prohibits this liquefaction of Salt,
wherefore we conclude it to be little essential in the said depuration of Salt,
nor do we think it so necessary, for the Salt being resolved per deliquium to
be distilled, thereby to be made a fusible Salt; Paracelsus having taught how
to make the same Oil out of fused Salt, which Oil Paracelsus himself, besides
Basilius, in many places affirms to be of a Green Color. Thus we read of the
Green Oil of Salt: Libro de male curatis, Page 170. Chyr. Majoris. Of the
Greens of Salt, Libro. 4. de Gradibus, Page 154.

From the Receipts we observe,
1. That these Menstruums are the Essences of Salts not tinging.

2. That the Oils or Essences of tinging Salts, as Vitriol, etc. may also be
made by the same method, and do appertain not to this, but to another Kind.

3. That these Menstruums are by further digestion or cohobation made sweet,
and transmuted into volatile Arcanums, less Circulatums, or Simple Vegetable
Menstruums of the Fifth Kind.

4. That these Menstruums do dissolve Metals into Powder for the extraction of
the Crocus or Sulphur of Metals and Minerals: The way we will borrow from
Ripley in the Use of Stinking Menstruums.

Let us, says he, proceed, Page 145. Medul. Phil. Chym. to practice upon the
Calx of a (Metallic) Body duly calcined: The Body therefore being prepared,
pour upon it so much of this compounded water (in Numb. 70.) as to cover it
half an inch, and it will presently boil upon the Calxes of the Body without
any external heat, dissolving the Body, and elevating it in the form of Ice,
together with the exficcation of it self, which must be taken away by the hand
of the Operator: And the remaining Calxes being well dried again by Fire, put
so much water to them as before, and proceed in all things as before,
continuing the same way of operating, till all the Calxes be well dissolved:
which substance being well dissolved, neatly separated, and pulverized, must be
put into a good quantity of the rectified water of the Fire of Nature (Spirit
of Philosophical Wine) that in that Vessel well stopped it may by the
administration of external heat, together with the excitation of internal heat,
be dissolved into an Oil, which will soon be done, etc. When the Menstruum (of
Sericon, in Numb. 63.) is poured upon the aforesaid Calxes (of Metals) it
begins to boil up; and if the Vessel be well stopped, it will not leave
working, though no external Fire be administered to it, till it be dried into
the Calx; wherefore you must not put a greater quantity of it than just to
cover the Calxes. In the same place, page 171. For in this Operation the less
of the Spirit, and the more of the Body is put, the better and sooner will be
the dissolution, which is made by the congelation of the Water. You must have a
care therefore, as it is said in the Rosary, that the Belly be not too moist,
because then the Matter would not receive dryness: And this way must be
observed, till all the water be dried up. The same Place, page 161.

5. That all the sharpness of this Metallic Powder may be washed away with
sweet water. That the Menstruums of the Adepts are permanent, is manifest by
the ways of making them; but more clearly by the Use of them in the Receipts of
the following Books: However Paracelsus seeming to have appointed the contrary
by the present ablution of the Menstruum, lest therefore you should fall into
the greatest and most dangerous Error of all the Adeptical Chymy, we thought
good to communicate to you an Observation or two about the permanence of
Menstruums.

First, That Aqua ardens, the Philosophical that is, is by digestion or
circulation divided into Phlegm and Oil swimming upon it, as you observed in
making the Essence or Spirit of Philosophical Wine. You have taken also notice
that the same Aqua ardens, or same Oil made of it, is further concentrated, and
rejects the remaining Phlegm, but that it self as a mere Oleosum, remains with
the inanimated Earths so called, in the Preparations as well of Vegetable, as
Mineral Sal-Harmoniacks: For it is impossible for the said Phlegm being the
vehicle of the unctuous Spirit to abide with things dissolved, much less be
fixed with them, they being so contrary to it: wherefore the permanence of
Menstruums, but rather of the Spirit of Philosophical Wine is easy to be
understood, namely, as these Menstruums are unctuous mixed with dry things, not
in the least diluted in their aquosities, which do all separate themselves as
useless in fixation. Examples you will have in Lib. 2. De Astris and Arcanis,
and often in Lib. 3. of Philosophical Tinctures.

Secondly, These Menstruums do not presently, or at the first time abide with
their dissolutions: For sometimes, nay more than often, we are forced to pour
on and cohabate before any part of it will continue with the dissolved Body,
whereas in the mean time the rest ascends unaltered.

Thirdly, Nor do the Menstruums persist with all things promiscuously, but are
united only to things homogeneous to them, which in reason they should remain
with. Thus the Simple Vegetable Menstruums do continue with Essences, but not
with their relinquished white Bodies; whereas the Compounded Vegetable
Menstruums being suitable to these Bodies, do dissolve them wholly in the making
of Magisteries.

Fourthly, Yea though every Menstruum is either an Essence, or a Magistery, and
one Essence prepares another, easily entering and mixing themselves radically
one with another, yet so long as they are of different kinds or degrees, are
they both separable again, nor do they continue; till one being newly
extracted, is raised to the same degree as the other, then do they flow
together at length into a mixture not to be separated by Art or Nature.

Fifthly, As to these Mineral Menstruums, you have observed, that the Acidity
of them admits of the same reason with the Phlegm or Aquofity of the Vegetable
Menstruums, so far as it is moist, and therefore to be separated in the
fixations of things: But as it consists of the dry Particles of Mineral Salts,
(but Salts they are dry things dissolved in Acids) it will fall under two
several Considerations.

In the first, the Acidity of the Menstruum being perhaps in greater plenty
than is necessary, or sticking about the superficies of the thing dissolved, is
easily washed away with common Water.

But in the second, the same Acidity being more artificially mixed, and absorbed
by the Aridity of the thing dissolved, is made the cause of venenosity, and now
cannot be altered but by Vegetable Menstruums transmuting it. Paracelsus
commands the washing not of the Oil of Salt, but the sharpness of the Salt,
which penetrates not into the substance of the Metal, and is easily washed
away, but the Vnctuosity of the Salt being thoroughly mixed with the unctuous
Spirit of Philosophical Wine; and now united to the Vnctuosity of the Metal,
common Water cannot touch nor separate. But an Acid received into the bowels of
an Arid, he corrects again with the Spirit of Philosophical Wine, that it may
not become the cause of venenosity: Yet there is a place in Paracelsus, where
he seems to have established a particular Decree against the permanence of
Menstruums. Many several ways, says he, Lib. 4. Archid. de Essentia, page 12.
are found, whereby the Quintessence may be extracted, viz. by Sublimation,
Calcination, by Aqua fortisses, by Corrosives, by Sweet, by Sour, etc. It may
be done which way you please: Where this is withal to be observed, that every
thing added by way of mixture, to the Quintessence, for the necessity of
extraction, must be again taken away, and so the Quintessence remain alone, not
mixed, or polluted with any other Matters: For the Quintessence cannot be
extracted from Metals, especially Gold, which cannot be subdued by it self
alone; but some fit Corrosive must be made Use of, which may afterward be
separated from it again; so Salt (dissolved) in water, is drawn again from the
water left void of Salt: Whereas notwithstanding it must be considered, that
every Corrosive is not fit for this purpose, because they cannot all be
separated: For if Vitriol or Alume be mixed with water, neither can be
separated from it again without detriment or corruption, but will leave some
sharpness behind them, because they are both watery; and two likes concur
together, which ought not to be in this place: Wherefore it is to be advised,
not to put watery to watery, or oyley to oyley, nor resiny to resiny, but a thing
contrary must separate the Quintessence, and extract it, as waters extract the
Quintessences of things oleaginous, and the oleaginous the Quintessences of
watery things, as we may learn by the Quintessences of Herbs: The Corrosives
therefore are to be separated again after the separation and extraction of the
Quintessence, which may easily be done; for oil and water are separated with
ease; but oil cannot be drawn from oil, nor water likewise from water without
mixing, which being lest, would indeed infer very great detriment to the
Quintessence: For a Quintessence ought to be clear and pure without any
mixture, so as to have an uniform substance, by virtue whereof to penetrate the
whole Body.

Lest the Essence should be defiled by things added for the necessity of
extraction, he commands no Watery Matter to be extracted by a watery Menstruum,
an oyley by an oyley, a resiny by a resiny, but by some contrary. This Rule, if
understood according to the Letter, is erroneous, for it takes away all the
permanence of Menstruums established upon the Maxim so often repeated by the
Adepts; The Dissolution of the Body is the Coagulation of the Spirit or
Menstruum; and on the contrary: It takes away, I say, all the natural
homogeneity of the dissolvent and the dissolved; yea is repugnant to the
Experience of Paracelsus himself, who had no Menstruum but what remained in a
radical mixtion with the things dissolved in it, as by the Use of them we shall
prove hereafter. Now an Essence is diverse ways coinquinated by things added in
the extraction of it.

First, When a Natural or Seminal Essence is extracted by the like Natural
Essence of another species; For example, the Essence of Saffron is inquinated
and confounded with the virtues of Cinamom, in extracting it with the specific
Essence of Cinamom, and therefore the Essences of Vegetables are not to be
extracted with a Natural, or rather Artificial Essence, or with the Spirit of
Philosophical Wine, not yet specificated.

Secondly, An Essence is inquinated, when a Menstruum or Essence is in greater
than convenient quantity used in the extraction of another Essence, by which
quantity the quality of the said Essence is washed, wasted, and as it were
inquinated; wherefore the superfluity of the Menstruum must always be taken
away, that the Essence may remain by it self alone without any mixture.

Thirdly, An Essence is inquinated by extracting it with Air or mineral
Menstruums according to some Processes of the Ancients. For an Acid, though it
cannot be radically mixed with any Essence, being no Essence it self, yet is
easily absorbed or hidden by the aridity of mineral Essences, and so joined
with the said Essences by accident, and from a thing otherwise innocent,
creates a very strong Poison: This therefore to remove, the Ancients first
washed off that which stuck to the outside of the Body, then transmuted that
which was more deeply admitted, by the digestion of Vegetable Menstruums: But
in the making of Essences with acid or mineral Menstruums according to the
reformed Process, otherwise called by Paracelsus, the Process of two Colors,
the said inquination of an Essence has no place. In the beginning of this
Process the acid being absorbed by the arid, becomes indeed the cause of
venenosity, as in the Process of the Ancients; but when this Process of
Paracelsus is by industry and ingenuity raised to such perfection, that no more
Aridity can remain to hide any Acidity in it, but on the contrary, the whole
Body is converted into two Oils or Fats, from which all Acidity may easily be
washed away with common Water, then is there no inquination to be feared from
Acids. The Saying of Paracelsus, we suppose is to be referred to this Method,
he having there treated of it on purpose, especially having said that the
oleaginous Essences of Metals are to be extracted by Watery, that is, acid or
corrosive Menstruums, but that the watery Essences of Herbs, that is, less oyley
in respect of Metals, must be made by Oleaginous, that is Vegetable Menstruums,
which things being not in common terms, but obscurely enough delivered, we do
therefore leave them to be better explained by his Disciples; but if they were
to be understood according to the Letter, it would certainly be an Error, not
indeed to be connived at in the Prince of Adepts: But according to the Proverb,
We are Men, etc. For sometimes good Homer himself has nodded, and the Pen of
Paracelsus has wanted mending.

The Fifteenth KIND. Simple Mineral Menstruums made of the Spirit of
Philosophical Wine, and Acid Spirits, as Aqua fortis, Spirit of Nitre, Spirit
of Sulphur, Salt, etc. distilled Vinegar, etc.
73. Aqua fortis mixed with the Spirit of Wine of Paracelsus. In Tinct.
Paracelsica, Page 37. Aurei Vel. Germ.
TAke the best Wine ( the red or white of Lully) rectify till a Linen Cloth
burns, being dipped therein and kindled: This Spirit is called the Essence of
Wine. Take of Vitriol two Pounds, of Nitre one Pound, from which distill Aqua
fortis into the aforesaid Essence of Wine, then digest ten Days, that they may
be well united.

Annotations.

THat the Adepts acuated the Spirit of Philosophical Wine diverse ways as well
with Oily as Dry things, we have given plenty enough of Examples in the
antecedent Kinds of Vegetable Menstruums; it shall now be declared in the
following Menstruums, which ways this Spirit is to be acuated by Acids. In this
Fifteenth Kind we will join the unctuous Spirit of Philosophical Wine with some
Acid Spirits, that by the help of their acidity it may dissolve and perfect
Arids sooner and easier than before without. Paracelsus in our Receipt
intending to assuage the excessive effervescence in dissolving the Spirit of
Philosophical Wine in Aqua fortis, distilled the Aqua fortis into the Spirit of
Wine, that they might both by degrees be mixed together, which being thus mixed
one with the other, he digested moreover the space of ten Days. The same
Menstruum is described by Trithemius.

74. Aqua fortis mixed with the Spirit of Wine of Trithemius. Page 46. Aurei
velleris Germ.
TAke of the Spirit of Wine three Pounds, of Vitriol and Nitre one Pound,
distill the Spirits of the Aqua fortis into the aforesaid Aqua vitoe, digest
eight Days.

This quantity of Aqua fortis is insufficient to dissolve three Pounds of the
Spirit of Wine, Ounces perhaps are to be understood for so many Pounds. No Art
is here required, provided the Acid and Oily be mixed together. In former times
the Adepts used distilled Vinegar, instead of Aqua fortis, for this Menstruum,
thus:

75. Vinegar mixed with the Spirit of Wine of Basilius. Cap. de Wein Essig. in
Repet. Lapidis.
DEr Wein Essig. (Vinegarwine, a single undeclinable Word) is not the
Philosophers Vinegar, which is another Liquor, viz. the Matter it self of the
Stone, because the Philosophers Stone is made of the Philosophers Azot; but
Vinegarwine, is made of common Azot distilled (common Vinegar) and Spirit of
Wine (that is, Philosophical.) And elsewhere, Libro de particularibus de
particul. Veneris. I spoke even now, says he, Parabolically of this
preparation, in Libro Clavium (in Repetitione) Capite de Wein Essig. where I
said that common Azot (Vinegar) is not the Matter of the Stone, but our Azot or
first Matter extracted out of common Azot and Wine, which composition is called
the expressed Juice of unripe Grapes, with which the Body of Venus is to be
dissolved, and reduced into Vitriol ( then into our Azot, the first Matter of
the Stone, Philosophers Mercury, Spirit of Mercury made of Vitriol, etc.) which
you must very well observe, that you may be free from many troubles and
dangers. The Philosophers Mercury, says he, Libro de Conclusionibus, Sect. 2.
de Vitriolo Philosophorum, or first Matter of the Stone must be made by Art,
for our Azot is not common Vinegar, but extracted by Virtue of common Azot.

Though therefore a Philosophical Menstruum may be made of common Azot or
distilled Vinegar, and the Spirit of Philosophical Wine, as also sufficient and
qualified for the dissolutions of some Bodies, yet being less sharp, especially
in the Alchymical use of Metals and Minerals, instead therefore of Vinegar the
Adepts took Aqua fortis, the sooner to finish their Operations. You must know,
says Isaacus Hollandus, that our Ancestors labored in the Art diverse ways,
and yet came to one and the same end, but their Stone made not projection
always alike, one making a deep, another a strong projection, as the Works
(Menstruums) were sharp, or of a deep Color: some sweat a long time with
pains, before they produced the Stone: others shortened the time by sharpness of
Wit, as it is now done every day with sweat and pains. Some of our Ancestors
wrought three Years, some four, before they acquired the Stone, for in those
days Aqua fortis was unknown, and they used nothing but distilled Vinegar; but
now their Successors have found out Aqua fortis, which has much abbreviated
the Work. Cap. 6. Lib. 2. Oper. min. page 423. Volum. 3. Theat. Chym. Even at
that time Bodies were to be opened slowly, namely, by calcination,
reverberation, solution in our sharp Vinegar ( Vinegar mixed with the Spirit of
Philosophical Wine) which their posterity observing and considering, quickened
their Wits, and found out Aqua fortis, which did much abbreviate the way to
them. Cap. 77. Lib. 1. Oper. min. page, 358. of the same Volume.

To make the present Kind of Menstruums, the Adepts dissolved this Spirit of
Philosophical Wine, not in Vinegar and Aqua fortis only, but in any acid Spirit
not tinging, as of Salt, Sulphur, etc. It is thus prepared;

76. The Spirit of Salt of Basilius. Lib. partic. in particul. Solis.
TAke of the Spirit of Salt accurately dephlegmed one part, of the best Spirit
of (Philosophical) Wine without any Phlegm, or of the Sulphur of Wine half a
part, the Vessels being luted, distill with a strong Fire, so as that nothing
remains.

If you add new Spirit of Wine to the distillation, and digest for some time,
it becomes sweet: It is therefore requisite to dissolve the Spirit of Wine in
the Spirit of Salt without digestion, lest the acidity or brackishness of this
Spirit be lost. Guido sometimes took his Circulatum either minus or majus,
instead of the Spirit of Philosophical Wine, into which he distilled the Spirit
of Salt.

77. The Spirit of Salt of Guido. Page 7. Thesauri Chym.
TAke of the less Vegetable Menstruum (in Numb. 36.) or the great (in Numb.
38.) one Pound, put it in a large Receiver. Then take of common Salt, or Sal
Gemmoe, of the Stone of Tripoly, of each four Pounds, distill in an Earthen
Retort with an open Fire, first gentle, till all the Phlegm is drawn off, then
put the Receiver with the Circulatum to it, and distill the Spirits, till not a
drop of the Oil of Salt ascends, and you will have an acuated Menstruum.

To make these Menstruums stronger, they sometimes separated or drew off the
Acid from the Oleosum, that the Spirit of Philosophical Wine might remain in
the form of Oil or Ice, thus:

78. Aqua fortis mixed with the Spirit of Wine of Lully. In Elucidat. Testam.
page 147. Artis aurifer.
TAke of Vitriol one part, of Nitre one part, of Alume a fourth part, mix them
all well together, and distill with a gentle Fire, till the Liquor is gone over,
then give a stronger, and lastly most strong, till the Alembick grows white,
for then is the Aqua fortis prepared. Then take of the aforesaid Water one
pound, put it in a large Cucurbit, and pour it upon four ounces of Aqua Vitoe
(Aqua ardens) four times distilled, and put an Alembick on with its Receiver,
then will it make great noises, boiling exceeding violently without Fire; and
therefore the Waters ought to be mixed by little and little. Then put it into
a less Cucurbit, and put on an Alembick with its Receiver, and distill the Water
in Balneo, that a Matter may remain alone at the bottom of the Vessel in the
form of Ice; pour back the water, and distill again, and this repeat nine times,
then will an Oil or Matter like Ice remain in the bottom.

This Menstruum of Lully is clear, and therefore requires not our Explanation.
But it is described by an Anonymous in Rhenanus, thus;

79. Aqua fortis mixed with the Spirit of Wine of an Anonymous Author. Libro de
Principiis Naturae, and Art Alchym. page 28. Syntagm. Harm. Joh. Rhenani.
TAke an equal Quantity of Niter and Alume, distill the Phlegm, till the strong
and dissolving Spirits ascend, and set before them new and clean distilled
water, and force the Spirits into it with a most strong Fire. Then take the
Spirits of Wine being well purged, and artificially distilled in Balneo, take
four ounces of them to one pound of Aqua fortis, put them into a large
Cucurbit, apply an Alembick to it, stop, and put it into cold water, and let
them boil till they will boil no more: Then put it in Balneo, and distill the
water, so that the Spirits may remain yet moist, then pour the water first
drawn off, to them again, and do as before, and that seven times, continually
distilling with a gentle Fire, till nothing more will distill, but the Matter
remains like an Oil in the bottom.

From the Receipts we observe these remarkable Things:
1. That the Spirit of Philosophical Wine dissolved in an acid Spirit, is a
mineral Menstruum. Our Aqua fortis, our Vinegar, distilled Vinegar, Vinegar
mixed with the Spirit of Wine, our Spirit of Salt, Sulphur, etc.

2. That the Spirit of the same Wine, is with very great ebullition dissolved
in an Acid, and therefore you ought to be exceeding careful lest you pour too
much of the Spirit of Philosophical Wine upon the Aqua fortis, and vice versa:
For it would be more safe to distill the Aqua fortis upon the Spirit of
Philosophical Wine, as Paracelsus advises.

3. That Aqua fortis mixed with the Spirit of Wine, may be taken instead of
Vinegar mixed with the Spirit of Wine, or Spirit of Salt mixed with the Spirit
of Wine. etc. in Chemical Works especially.

4. That the more these Menstruums are abstracted from the Acid debilitated in
dissolution, the stronger they are made.

5. That the Adepts used also corrosive Menstruums or Aqua fortis. There are
some, not only common ignorant Operators, but Adepts also, who not knowing the
Preparation and Use of these Menstruums, have written against these corrosive
Menstruums. Fools, says Bernhard, do out of the less Minerals make and extract
corrosive waters, into which they cast the Species of Metals, and corrode them;
for they think them to be dissolved by a natural solution; which solution does
indeed require permanence together, that is, of the dissolvent and the
dissolved; that from both, as the Masculine and Feminine Seed a new Species may
result. Verily I tell you no water dissolves a Metallic Species by a natural
reduction, but that which continues in matter and form, and which the Metals
themselves, being dissolved, are able to re-congeal. Which Quality is not in
Aqua fortisses, but is rather injurious to the Composition, that is, of the
Body dissolved, etc. Yet thus they think they dissolve, mistaking Nature; but
they dissolve not, because the Aqua fortisses being abstracted, the Body melts,
as before; nor will that water be permanent to it, nor is it to that Body as
radical Moisture: The Bodies are indeed corroded, but not dissolved, and so
much the more alienated from a Metallic Species. Wherefore such solutions as
these are not the foundation of the transmutative Art, but rather Impostures of
Sophistical Alchymists, who think this sacred Art lies in these things, etc.
Epist. ad Thom. de Bononia, page 60. Artis Aurifer. So in the Regeneration of
Metals, says Sendivogius, Vulgar Chemists proceed amiss, they dissolve
Metallic Bodies, either Mercury, or Gold, or Saturn, or Luna, and corrode them
with Aqua fortisses, and other heterogeneous things not requisite to true Art,
then they join and force them together, not knowing that man is not generated
from the Body of a man dissected, etc. Tract. 6. page 488. Vol. 4. Th. Chym.

Some do by Art corroding Waters make,
In which Metalline Species they calcine;
But then the Liquor does the Earth forsake,
Nor by man's Skill together they will combine:
This way to Fools we leave, for nothing fit,
But for to wast ones Thrist, beware of it.
Page 41. of the second Part of the Marrow of Alchymy.

These and the like Expressions they reflect against our Mineral or Acid
Menstruums, whereas they were written by the Philosophers against Common not
Philosophical Aqua fortisses. In that Point, says Lully, they ignorantly err,
imagining the Bodies of Metals to be dissolved, and as I said before, reduced
to their first Matter or Nature with Common Aqua fortisses; but if they had
read our Books, they would certainly know that these Liquors are repugnant to
the intention of the Philosophers, etc. Comp. Anim. Transm. page 19^. Vol. 4.
Th. Chym. Parisinus, a faithful Disciple of Lully, explains his Meaning thus:
Those things that are objected by us against Aqua fortisses, namely, that they
are of no efficacy in the Art, and nevertheless are taught by Lully, are to be
otherwise understood: For he this way puts a difference between the Vulgar and
Philosophical Aqua fortisses, etc. And therefore Raymund rejecting sharp
Waters, means the Aqua fortisses of separation, but not those of the
Philosophers, Cap. 6. Lib. ^. Elucid. page 206. Vol. 6. Th. Chym. But it would
be merely superfluous for us, either by Authorities or Arguments to illustrate
that which the Menstruums themselves will demonstrate.

The Sixteenth KIND. Simple Mineral Menstruums made of Philosophical Vinegar,
and Volatile Salts, as Common Sal Armoniack, Urine, etc.
80. The Oil of Sal Armoniack of Guido. Page 11. Thesaur. Chymiatr.
TAke of the Oil of Salt (the Menstruum described in Numb. 71.) half a pound,
of (Common) Sal Armoniack four ounces. Dissolve the Salt in the Oil, cohobate
the Dissolution three times through an Alembick.

Annotations.

IN the attecedent Kind, the Spirit of Philosophical Wine was dissolved in
Acids: Now to make these Oyley-acid Menstruums stronger, the Adepts added to
them Salts, that is, Arids dissolved in Acids, and Cristallized. In this
present Kind they took Volatile Salts, as being of easier preparation, in the
following: fixed Salts, because of stronger virtue. In the Receipt of Guido,
there is nothing either difficult or dark, unless you will object against the
Ingredients, which cannot be both common, because Guido sublimes Gold
Philosophically with this Menstruum. Whatsoever also you read in the Books of
Practical Chymy, understand always according to the Letter (we need not
admonish you to except the Terms of Art) if so, that which is promised in the
Preparation and use may be performed; if not, seek an Analogical sense not in
the method and use of preparation, but in the ingredients; according to which
Rule either the Oil of Salt, or Sal Armoniack, or both ought to be
Philosophical, because Gold cannot be Philosophically sublimed with Common
Menstruums. The Oil of Salt of Paracelsus, as also the Spirit or Oil of Salt of
Basilius, wherewith he extracts the Sulphur of Sol, do prove the Oil of Salt to
be a Philosophical Menstruum, Cap. 6. de Rebus not. and supernat.

Probable it is that Guido meant the same Oil, for otherwise the Name of Oil
had been improperly attributed by a Philosopher to the thin and common Spirit
of Salt. But if you think rather that Guido meant the common Spirit of Salt by
the Oil of Salt, you must by Sal Armoniack understand not the common, but
Vegetable Sal Harmoniack (the Spirit of Philosophical Wine dried with some
Salt, and then sublimed) for so you might also make a Menstruum of the same if
not of stronger Virtue, a species of the following Eighteenth Kind: But if both
the Oil of Salt and Sal Armoniack be Philosophical, a Menstruum will be from
thence produced yet stronger than both the precedent: Here you may deviate from
the true and genuine sense of the Receipt, but never from Chemical Truth, so
long as you are guided by the Spirit of Philosophical Wine, but here you must
have a great care that you do not transmute (as sometimes through inadvertence
you may) the false Receipts of deceitful Distillers into true ones; an
impossible into a possible; a lie into truth; and a wicked Man into a
Philosopher.

Sometimes they impregnated common Sal Armoniack with a Tincture, to make a
Menstruum higher, thus:

81. The Water of Sal Armoniack of Isaacus. Cap. 47.2. Oper min. page 460. Vol.
3. Theat. Chym.
TAke Sal Armoniack, sublime it with Roman Vitriol, one Pound of Sal Armoniack,
to two Pounds of Vitriol, then grind upon a Stone the Faeces, and sublime
again, then throw away the Faeces, and sublime again with two Pounds of new
Vitriol, do as before, repeating nine times: pulverize the Sal Armoniack, and
put the Powder into a Glass, pour upon it distilled Vinegar (Philosophical, or
some Menstruum of the Fifteenth Kind) so as only to be dissolved, and no more,
than that the Sal Armoniack may be turned only into Water as yellow as Sol,
because the Sal Armoniack was sublimed by Vitriol, and that produced the
Tincture: And this is that Water of Sal Armoniack, which I promised before to
teach you how to make.

From the Receipts we observe:
1. That the Oil or Essence of Salt becomes a stronger Menstruum by the
addition of Volatile Salts.

2. That this ought to be understood also of the Menstruums of the fifteenth
precedent Kind.

3. That these Menstruums are the same with the Vegetable Menstruums of the
fourth Kind, excepting only that they have an Acid added over and above.

4. That these Menstruums are of most easy preparation, being made by three
cohobations only.

5. That it is very difficult for a Man to err, being experienced in the more
secret Chymy, for he that understands the practice of this Art, will easily
explain the Receipt of every Adept, be it never so obscure, either by the use,
or title, or way of preparing; for it is in a manner impossible, not to draw
some Light from one or other of the said three, or direction enough to find the
same Receipt more clear in the Writings either of the same or some other Adept:
And indeed though we sometimes meet with Receipts, which in title, way of
preparation, and use, seem to be like the Receipts of vulgar Chemistry, yet a
Desciple of our Art will easily determine either for the approbation or
reprobation of these Receipts: For there are infallible Signs to distinguish a
true from a false Menstruum; this one following shall here suffice: The quality
of a good Menstruum is to dissolve Bodies either gently or violently, and make
them not only Volatile, but fat also, yea reduce them into a true Oil either
swimming upon, or sinking under watery Liquors. This Attribute of a Menstruum
is inconsistent to any common dissolvent, but proper to the Philosophical, and
to them alone, being made of the unctuous Spirit of Philosophical Wine, which
Spirit alone does by its permanence make the dry Sulphur of a Metal both
thinner and fatter: That Menstruum therefore in the use of which are promised
such things, as cannot be performed by common Menstruums, may be truly called
Philosophical, with a caution or two to be observed.

1. That the Receipt must be of some known and not suspected Author, not of
every smoak-seller, promising great and many things without a Foundation,
wherefore every Receipt wanting its Authority, though it may seem like a true
one, yet we think ought to be rejected as suspicious.

2. That the Receipt must not be alone, described not in one but diverse places
by the same Author, or at least most clear in its ingredients: For the same
Names have one signification with one, but another with another Adept; so long
therefore as it is not known by collateral places, what an Author means by his
Matters, such a Man's Receipts we declare uncertain.

3. That the Receipt must import a competent Rule in operating, that is,
declare whether Matters are to be volatilized in part or in the whole, but
whatsoever are more obscure and concise we lay aside as imperfect.

The Seventeenth KIND. Simple Mineral Menstruums made of Philosophical Vinegar,
and fixed Salts not tinging, as well Vegetable as Mineral.
82. The Aqua Comedens of Paracelsus. Lib. 10. Arch. page 37.
BY Aqua Comedens (Eating or Corroding Water) we mean Vinegar mixed with the
Spirit of (Philosophical) Wine, which must be drawn from common Salt so often,
till it is dissolved, and comes over by distillation in the Vinegar.

Annotations.

THe Philosophical Vinegar, or Vinegar mixed with the Spirit of Philosophical
Wine, which you acuated with Volatile Salts in the precedent Kind, is made
stronger by the mixing of fixed Salts so called. We have described several
Vegetable Menstruums made with Alcali Salts in their fifth Kind, which if
prepared with Philosophical Vinegar instead of the Spirit of Philosophical
Wine, will produce Mineral Menstruums of this Kind, though prepared another
way, with this only difference, that they are made more slowly with the Spirit
of Philosophical Wine, but with Philosophical Vinegar much sooner, yea
immediately, if either Common or Philosophical Vinegar be joined to the
Vegetable Menstruums. Aqua comendens, or Eating Water, is the third Menstruum
that we have observed to be made of common Salt. The first is in the fifth Kind
of Vegetable Menstruums, where common Salt being fused and resolved per
deliquium, is by Virtue of the Spirit of Philosophical Wine reduced into the
Oil or Essence of Salt, which by being sometimes cohobated with the same
Spirit, becomes sweet, and is transmuted into the Arcanum of Salt, or
Circulatum minus made of common Salt. The second is in the fourteenth Kind,
where the aforesaid Oil of Salt is left in its acid (rather saline) Essence.
The third, which is taught in the present Kind, agrees with the first, except
only that it is prepared not with the Spirit of Philosophical Wine, but
Philosophical Vinegar, and so, sooner than that, and in use is stronger, as a
Mineral Menstruum. Dissolve the Arcanum of Salt, or Salt circulated in any Acid
not tinging; for example, common Vinegar distilled, Spirit of Niter, Sulphur,
Salt, etc. and it will produce the Eating Water by simple mixtion; on the
contrary, if you weaken, or take away the Acid of the Eating Water, either by
precipitating it with common Spirit of Wine, common Water, etc. or digesting it
by it self, you will have the Arcanum of Salt, or Water of Salt circulated.
That which has been said of common Salt, is also to be understood of Niter,
Alume, and all other Salts not tinging. The Receipt of the Eating Water is
clear of it self, except that in the Latin Translation, a Salis Nitri Spiritu
is read amiss, the German Authors own Writing having it a Sale communi, Von
gemeinen Saltz: The Error it is requisite you should correct.

Menstruums of this Kind are made not only of Mineral Salts not tinging, but
also of Vegetable Alcalies, thus:

83. The fixative Water of Trithemius. Page 37. Aurei Veller. Germ.
TAke Aqua fortis mixed with the Spirit of Wine, (described above in Numb. 74.)
whereto add of the Oil of Tartar per deliquium half a Pound, distill the Spirit,
throw away the Phlegm, and dissolve the remaining Earth or Salt in the Spirit.

Keep the solution for the fixing of things; but for volatilization the Salt of
Tartar must be cohobated so often, till it ascends as the common Salt in the
Eating Water.

Hereto is referred the Menstruum, called

84. The Aqua Mirabilis of Isaacus. Cap. 29. 2 Oper. Min. and page 91. Manus
Phil.
TAke old Urine, distill with a weak Fire, then a stronger, that whatsoever can,
may ascend; rectify the destillation, taking away all the Fatness or Oil, till
it leaves no Faeces behind it. The Caput Mortuum left in the bottom, calcine
the space of two hours, but without fusion of the Salt, draw all the saltness
from the calcined Matter, with common Water; evaporate the Liquor to a thin
skin, that the Salt may be Cristalized, repeat sometimes, that the Salt may be
made most pure, which dissolve in the distilled Urine. Then take of this
regenerated Urine six pounds, of distilled Vinegar, and Spirit of
(Philosophical) Wine, of each three measures, of Common Salt two pounds, of Sal
Armoniack and calcined Tartar, of each half a pound, dissolve them all together
into an Aqua Mirabilis.

The like Water almost has Basilius, but that he distills his through an
Alembick; the Description of which follows.

85. The Resuscitative Water of Basilius. Page 81. Currus Triumphalis Antim.
TAke of the Salt of Man's Urine clarified and sublimed, of Sal Armoniack, and
Salt of Tartar, of each one part, mix the Salts, pour strong (Philosophical)
Vinegar to them, lute with lutum sapientioe, digest the Salts for a Month in a
continual heat, then distill the Vinegar by Ashes, till the Salts remain dry,
then mix them with three parts of Venetian Earth, force them with a strong Fire
through the Retort, and you will have a wonderful Spirit for the making of
Running Mercury out of Antimony. The same Water we find also, page 39. of his
Manual Operations.

The Adepts have sometimes used some crude Oyley Matter instead of the Spirit
of Philosophical Wine in making these Menstruums; thus Paracelsus volatilized
four Salts into a Menstruum of this Kind with Wax dissolved in Aqua fortis.

86. The Water of Sallabrum of Paracels. Libro de reductione Metallorum in
Argentum vivum, sive Tractatu. 4. Rosarii novi Olympici Bened. Figuli, page 24.
TAke notice there is no shorter Method of reducing Metals into Mercury, known
to us, than that which we used in our Book de putrefactione quatuor Salium,
which we there called Sallabrum, as thus; each of those (Salts, as lower) must
be converted into a pure Water or Oil (per deliquium) which being mixed in
equal weight, are called Lac Veterum, or Milk of the Ancients: Which
Philosophical Milk put into a strong Receiver, and distill the Spirits of
calcined Vitriol, calcined Alume, and the best Niter, ana, five times upon it,
and the mixture will be called Flying Eagle, carrying Metals in its Talons
aloft; such a Metal, being sublimed, grind to powder, from which draw the
Spirit of strong Wine being poured to it the height of a Finger, three or four
times gently in Balneo, and you will have a quick or running Metal as common
Mercury. Now the Eagle is made volatile thus: To the Philosophers Milk acuated
with the said Spirits, or Eagle, pour Wax, being very well liquefied and
purged, about the thickness of a Finger, distill the Phlegms together with the
Spirits by a Cucurbit in Balneo, which Matter must be cohobated so often, till
they are all coagulated or well mixed; and you will have the Philosophers
Borax, which we wrote of in our Book de virtute Vitrioli, wherein the Volatile
Eagle absconded it self with its Feathers, namely, Spirits. Now take the Calx
of what Metal you please, made of Aqua fortis, one part, of the Flying Eagle
half a part, mix, putrefie nine days, the longer the better, then sublime the
Matter upon Sand in a Cucurbit well luted, and all the Metal you took will
ascend, wherewith proceed as before. Sallabrum described in the Book mentioned,
(de putrefactione quatuor Salium) Take Sal Niter, Sal Gemmoe, common Salt,
Potashes, an equal quantity of each, dissolve every one by it self, and purge
it from all Terrestreity; out of all being mixed together, make a clear and
transparent Water, which again coagulate in a clean Vessel, and you will find
the Salt of another color, namely, yellow, penetrating, and sweetning,
dissolving and fixing: Love and esteem this Salt, because there are many
Secrets in it; for it fixes the Volatile, and vivifieth the Spirit being dead;
and mollifieth the hard and friable, and freeth from any Leprosy and Poison,
sixeth Arsenick, and moreover is the promoter of many famous works to a happy
and desired End.

In the first place, let us admonish you to beware of this and such like
Menstruums; for a Mystery lies in these Receipts, which to observe is
necessary, lest you begin to doubt the Truth of them after many most dangerous
Experiments tried in vain: for you Beginners let this suffice; that it is
impossible for Wax, or any other oyley Matter to supply the place of the Spirit
of Philosophical Wine. There would be no need of this Spirit in the whole Art,
if crude oyley things could perform the same as this most pure and most
unctuous Liquor. No man but he that is expert in the Method of preparing the
Spirit of Philosophical Wine, can make these Menstruums, whereas all the rest
may be made by any Idiot, if he has but the Spirit of this Wine given him. The
Adepts do in these Receipts both prepare and acuate this Spirit of Wine; no
wonder therefore that they either wholly omitted the Mystery, or not
sufficiently expressed it in their Compositions; for which reason also these
Menstruums do appertain to the preparation of the Spirit of Philosophical Wine,
rather than as all the rest to the Use of this Spirit, or compositions of these
Menstruums; nor should I have remembered them here, had they not been
detrimental to many men; and that to my own knowledge. The Name Sallabrum is
given quasi Salis labrum, or Salt-Cellar, not that Salt is to be contained in
this Vessel, as Candelabrum, or Candlestick is so called, because Candles are
set in it, but rather because the Essence or Fire of some Metals, or some
Chymcial Light is either to be reserved, or made in this Sallabrum, as Alume is
by Isaacus in Man. Philosophor. page 28. called Lucerna, signifying a Lanthorn.

Concerning this Sallabrum, Thomas Aquinas in Lilio Benedicto, page 1085. Vol.
4. Th. Chym. Thus; Add labrum Salis quanta sit sexta duorum
Conjunge poneque simul --


In the same place he calls this Sallabrum the Medium of joining Tinctures, the
middle between two Extremes, between hard and soft, between Luna and the
Spirit, between the Body and Spirit: As the Menstrual Blood is the Medium
between the Sperm of the Male and Female, so this our Salt, page 1085.
Sallabrum he calls thundering Salt, illuminating Stone, and fatness of the
Eagle, page 1087. Sal Alembrot, the Stone Bore (Borax) and fatness of the
Eagle, page 1097. Tincar, Borax.

This Sallabrum or Saline Labrum is by Paracelsus made of these Salts, Niter,
Sal gemme, common Salt, and Alcali.

Guido used these four following in his reduction of Metals into Mercury:
Common Salt, Alcali, Sal ammoniac, and Salt of Tartar, page 23. These. Chym.

Thomas Aquinas took the same Salts as Guido, for his Labrum Salis. The
Affinity which I observe between the Salts of Paracelsus, Gemme and Common, I
perceive also between the Salt of Tartar, and Alcali of Guido; but the
foundation of the Receipt is not grounded upon these four Salts. Paracelsus was
sometimes satisfied with Niter and common Salt fused and resolved together per
deliquium. Nor does the Mystery of the Receipt lie in the Wax, in the room of
which if you chose any oyley thing else, you will not err. Instead of the same,
he sometimes used Linseed-Oyl in the Water of the sixth gradation; but of this
hereafter.

From the Receipts we observe,
1. That these Menstruums are simple Vegetable Menstruums of the Fifth Kind
dissolved in Acids. Dissolve any of them in common Aqua fortis, and you will
have a Menstruum of this Kind; but take away the Acid, and it will be a
Vegetable Menstruum again, as it was before.

2. That these Menstruums are by reason of the Acidity both sooner made, and do
more powerfully operate than the said Menstruums of the Fifth Kind.

3. That they are not always made of the Spirit of Philosophical Wine, but also
with any common Oyley Matter, provided it be undertaken by an Artist expert in
the Method of making the Spirit of Philosophical Wine.

4. That these Menstruums do by their own strength without any addition of
Common Argent vive, reduce Metals and Minerals into running Mercury.

5. That Metals dissolved in these Menstruums, and sublimed, are properly
enough called Philosophical Mercuryes, because as Common Mercury sublimate, so
these are most easily resuscitated into running Argent vive.

The Eighteenth Kind. Simple Mineral Menstruums made of Vegetable Sal
Harmoniack, and Acids not tinging.
87. The Aqua fortis of Isaacus Hollandus. Cap. 122. Oper. Min. page 397. Vol.
3. Th. Chym.
MAke an Aqua fortis with an equal quantity of Sal Harmoniack, and Sal Niter,
dry the Sal Niter to a dry Powder, then mix the Sal Harmoniack discreetly among
the Powder of the Sal Niter, so as to be well mixed together, and incorporated
one with the other; then distill; not luting the Receiver close to the Beak,
before it begins to distill; for if you lute the Receiver at first to the Beak
of the Alembick, there are windy wild Spirits in the Matter, which would break
the Receiver; but having distilled a little while, lute the Beak without fear,
and distill the Water according to Art.

Annotations.

BEsides the Philosophers Vinegar, there is a Sal Harmoniack, under the Name of
which is comprehended the Spirit of Philosophical Wine, the root of all
Menstrums, being concentrated, dried in an Arid, and sublimed into an admirable
Salt. This present Kind treats of this Salt, not common Sal Armoniack,
dissolved in common Acids, not tinging. We have also made indeed Philosophical
Menstruums before of common Sal Armoniack, by the help of Philosophical
Vinegar, or an Acid mixed with the Spirit of Philosophical Wine, but the
Menstruums of this Kind are stronger than they, the Spirit of Philosophical
Wine being sublimed into a Vegetable Sulphur or Mercury, is made better, as
being acuated either with an Alcali, or some fixed Arid, and for this reason
being dissolved in an Acid, it yields also a more noble Menstruum. Isaac in our
Receipt mixeth Vegetable Sal Harmoniack with so much of Sal Niter, for the
Vegetable Salt to be by subsequent distillation dissolved in the Mineral Acid
of Sal Niter; but because this way of dissolving, is by reason of the sudden
ebullition of the oyley and acid, too dangerous, he durst not therefore lute
the Receiver close to the Beak, but the like effervescence appearing in the
distillation, of common Sal Armoniack, and Sal Niter, we must prove, that by
Sal Harmoniack Isaacus meant not the Common, but Philosophical; which we prove
first by the Use of the Menstruum: Of which says Isaac thus; Dissolve your
Sol in the Water made, and put it in Balneo, with a glass Alembick upon it;
kindle the Balneo no more than that you may endure your hand in it, and lute
the Receiver very firmly to the Beak, and a little hole being made above in the
Alembick, put a glass Funnel therein, whereby other Aqua fortis may upon
occasion be poured in, and keep the Balneo in that heat aforesaid a day and a
night, and when you see your Aqua fortis brought to a small quantity (by
distilling) as it was when you dissolved the Sol in it, pour to it new Aqua
fortis' and let it gradually distill a day and a night in Balneo, and' when it
is thick again, pour Aqua fortis again to the Matter, doing in all respects as
before; repeat it three times, always pouring to it new Aqua fortis, but the
third time distill it dry (to siccity) then let the Body cool, and take the
Receiver from the Beak, and stop it firmly with wax, remove the Alembick from
the Pot, and then take a Dram or Scruple of the Matter out of the Pot, and
put it in a glass Phial, pour common distilled water to it, and set it on a
Furnace in Ashes, and let the water boil half an hour: Then let it cool of its
own accord, and stand a day and a night, and a Powder will settle in the bottom
of the Vessel; pour off the top of the water gently, and the rest evaporate
with a lukewarm heat, to dry your Powder: Being dry, take it out, and heating a
silver Plate, put a little of your Powder upon it, and look earnestly whether
the Powder fumes not; if you perceive it fume, have a care of your self, for
the fume may kill you, etc. page 397. of the same Volume. Then he goes on, Cap.
24. saying, Then put your Matter or Powder in it (the subliming Vessel) with a
large and clean Alembick upon it very well luted, so as to be certain that no
Spirits can pierce the luting; for they are subtle beyond description, and
should they penetrate, and you receive the fume, you would die. Lute also a
large Receiver to the Beak of the Alembick, and let the luting be in every
place thoroughly dry: Then put Fire under the Furnace, first a very small Fire,
and sometimes increase it by degrees, till your Matter begins to sublime, which
it will do with a little heat; and when you see the Matter ascend, diligently
observe to keep the Fire in the same degree, that it may sublime very gently,
which will be easily done; for the Matter is sublimed, and ascends with a very
little Fire, page 402. of the same Volume.

Gold dissolved in this Aqua fortis of Isaac, and once or twice cohobated,
then washed with common Water, becomes so volatile, as to ascend with a very
small heat into a most poisonous Sublimate; if any man does the same by as
easy a Method with common Aqua Regis made of Sal Armoniack and Niter, we
declare he needs not Menstruums of this Kind; but that common Sal Armoniack is
insufficient for such a purpose, even the Novices of vulgar Chemistry have long
since experienced.

Besides the Use of this Menstruum, the Encomiums of Sal Harmoniack, which
agree not in the least with the Common of the same Name, do prove the
excellency of this Menstruum. Now, says he, we have a mind to teach you how
and which way to join Soul, Body and Spirit together, so as to enter one into
the other; for a Congregation of Contraries cannot be so, as to remain together
without a Medium ( which before in cap. 146. he called Sal Harmoniack or dry
Water) Take an example from the Dyers that dye Clothes, etc. Thus it is with
our Stone. Though we have rightly prepared the Body, Soul and Spirit, if they
enter not into one another, they will neither now, nor at any time ever remain
together without the Medium of our dry Water. Now Beloved, where now shall we
find this Water? For Geber says, Our water is not Rainwater. Aristotle says,
Our water is a dry water. Hermes says, Our water is gathered out of a filthy
and stinking Menstrual Matter. Danthynus says, Our water is found in old
Stables, Houses of Office, and stinking Sinks. And Morienus, Our water springs
in Mountains and Valleys, and Fools understand not these words, but think it
Mercury; it is not Mercury, it is a dry water, which causes all Mineral
Spirits, Soul and Body to enter and mix together, and when it has joined them
together, it departs from them, and lets them remain fixed. And this water is
found in all things of the world. For if this water was not, in vain should we
endeavor to make the Stone: For how should we make one of our prepared Matter
enter into another? As the Apothecaries gather their Herbs together, so ought
we to do either in the Vegetable, Animal, or Mineral Kingdom, to make a perfect
work or Quintessence, we ought to have a dry water out of every distinct thing.
A dry water therefore is in all things, to make themselves perfect. Therefore,
says Galen, All things have their own Medicine to make the Stone either in the
Mineral, Animal, or Vegetable Kingdom, without the addition of any exotic
things. Wherefore when we would make the Stone, or any Fixation, we ought to
make that conjunction with our dry water, as was said of the Dyer and
Apothecary. Therefore is it, my Beloved! that so many fall into Errors, because
they do not understand nor follow Nature: Therefore did I mention the Dyer and
Apothecary, for you to understand Nature, by that rude way, that you may in
your own mind perceive that no conjunction can be made without a Medium..
Wherefore all the works above cited are good, but those two things are not
there named, the Spirit, that is, and Dry Water, weights and way of joining,
wherein consists our whole Art: wherefore I conjure you never to reveal this
Secret; for all the Art that is in the world is comprehended in it, to make the
perfect work in a short time and little pains, Cap. 147, 148, 149. 2. Oper.
Min. page 524, 525. Vol. 3. Theat. Chym.

Ripley has described the same Water thus;

88. The Aqua Regis of Ripley. Page 349. Viatici.
MAke a corrosive Water of Salt Peter and Harmoniack, and put not above four
Ounces in the Destillatory, and draw a water with a slow Fire, wherein dissolve
and make the Oil of Sol, etc.

This Water Basil Valentine calls the Kings Bath, of which thus, in the
elucidation of the second Key: Take notice, Friend! and seriously consider,
because here lies the principal Secret; Make a Bath, have a care that no
strange thing enter into it, lest the Noble Seed of Gold be radically destroyed
after the dissolution of it: Exactly therefore, and with care examine the
things which the second Key informs you of, that is, what Minerals are to be
taken for the Kings Bath, wherein the King ought to be dissolved, and his
external form subverted, that his Soul may appear without blemish: To this
purpose will the Dragon and Eagle, that is Niter and Sal-Armoniack serve, out
of which being united, is made an Aqua fortis, as you will be informed in my
Manuals, where I shall treat of the Particular of Sol.

89. The Kings Bath of Basilius. Lib. Partic. in Particul. Solis.
TAke of Salt Peter one part, of Sal Harmoniack, one part, of Flints pulverized
half a part, mix, and distill. Take notice, that this Water must be carefully
and exactly distilled; for it cannot be distilled by the common method: He that
is expert in the operations of (the more secret) Chymy, will know what is to be
done. Observe, you must have a strong earthen Retort well luted, in the upper
part of which must be a Pipe half a span long, and two fingers broad; put a
great Receiver to it, lute well, and increase the Fire by degrees till the
Retort grows red hot: Then put in a spoonful of this Matter through the Pipe,
and suddenly stop the Pipe with a wet Cloth, and the Spirits will pass
impetuously into the Receiver; the Spirits being assuaged, put in another
spoonful of the said Matter, thus proceeding, till no Matter remains, and you
will have Aqua Gehennea, or Hell-water, dissolving the Calx of Gold in an
instant into a thick solution, which we mentioned in the third Part, as also in
the second Key, not only dissolving Gold, but reducing the same into
volatibility, etc.

This Kings Bath is described also by Basilius in Revelatione Manualium
Operationum, thus;

90. A Philosophical Water for the Solution of Gold of Basilius. Labor primo
Revelation. Man. Operat.
TAke of Salt Peter, and Sal Armoniack, of each two parts of Stones washed one
part, grind them together, and by a Retort (with a Pipe) distill the Water into
a large Receiver putting in two or three ounces through the Pipe; the Receiver,
must be a big one, and lie in a Vessel full of cold Water, and covered with wet
Linen Clothes, that the Spirits may cool; for it will be very hot, stop the
Joints of the Retort very close, kindle a Fire, and the Retort being hot, cast
in three ounces of Matter, the Pipe being suddenly stopped, the Spirits will
pass through, and the Receiver will grow white, and drops fall: When the
Spirits are settled, put in three ounces more, stopping the Pipe immediately,
proceed as before, changing very often with wet Linen: Continue this Operation
till you have water enough, which stop very well, that it may not evaporate; it
is the true Water and Mineral Bath for the King.

That Basilius as well as Isaacus used the Sal Harmoniac not common Sal
Ammoniac, for his Bath, the Use of the same does also prove.

Take of this Water three parts, of the Calx of Gold one part, mix them in a
Cucurbit, put it with an Alembick upon hot Ashes to be dissolved; if it be not
wholly dissolved, pour out the Water, and pour on new, and that till all the
Calx is dissolved in the water, being cold, white Faeces settle in the bottom,
which separate; put all the water together, and digest for a day and a night in
Balneo, then removing the Faeces, digest the space of nine Days continually,
distill the Water, that the Water may remain in the bottom like Oil, etc. distill
so often, till all the Gold has passed through the Alembick. In the same place:
This unctious Bath reduces Gold and all other Metals into Oils, because it is
made of the Oily Spirit of Philosophical Wine, concentrated, and dried in some
Vegetable Alcali; and Spirit of Nitre, whereas on the contrary Sal Armoniack,
or common Aqua Regis, cannot transmute Metals beyond its saline Nature, for
that Oleity which it has not, it cannot give. Isaacus for want of a Retort
with a Pipe, perhaps not being at that time known, sustained no small loss of
Spirits in distilling this Menstruum, which Basilius did by help of the said
Retort endeavor to repair, though that also not without some difficulty.

The later Adepts, Crinot, Trismosinus, and Paracelsus observing the difficulty
of distilling, and the loss of Spirits made it better, who by a plain but
better method dissolved the Vegetable Sal Harmoniack in Spirit of Nitre or Aqua
fortis, without any loss, danger, or delay.

91. The most strong Aqua fortis of Paracelsus. Lib. 3. Arch. de separ. Elem.
page 7.
TAke Sal Nitre, Vitriol, and Alume, in equal parts, which distill into Aqua
fortis, this again pour to its Faeces, and repeat, distill in a Glass, which
Aqua fortis clarify with Silver, and dissolve Sal Armoniack in it.

That Paracelsus neither by Sal Armoniack meant the common, is also
demonstrated by the use of the Menstruum, which he thus describes: These things
being done, take a Metal reduced into Plates, and there resolve it into Water,
in the same Water, then separate by Balneo and pour on again, this repeating,
till you find an Oil in the bottom, of Sol or Gold a purple, of Luna a
lazurine; of Mars red and very dark; of Mercury white; of Saturn livid and lead
Colored; of Venus altogether green; of Jupiter yellow; in the same place.
Whoever dissolved Metals promiscuously with common Aqua regis, both Silver and
Gold into an Oil, either purple or lazurine? Not to say any thing of the
reduction of all Metals into two Fats red and white, the Essence thereof, and
the Dead Body. It is therefore clear from the effect that Paracelsus dissolved
Sal Harmoniack in Aqua fortis for his most strong Aqua fortis.

In making this Menstruum Guido adds the weight of the Sal Harmoniack which
Paracelsus omits.

92. The Aqua Regis of Guido. Page 22. Thesauri Chym.
TAke Vitriol, common Salt, and Nitre, distill into Aqua fortis, take one Pound
of this, four Ounces of (Philosophical) Sal Harmoniack, and distill yet once.

Solomon Trismosinus sometimes dissolved Metals in comm^^ Aqua fortis, and to
the solution added Sal Harmoniack. Thus he volatalized Silver, being dissolved
in Aqua fortis, with the aforesaid Salt. Lib. 8. Tinct. quinta. page 81. Aurei
velleris German. Take of pure Luna four Ounces, dissolve it in common Aqua
fortis, draw off the Phlegm, to the remainder add six Drachms of Sal
Harmoniack, and pour on new Aqua fortis, draw off again in Ashes to an oleity,
this repeat four times with new Aqua fortis, then urge it strongly, and the
Luna will ascend together with the Aqua fortis.

Sometimes he volatilized Gold and Silver together with this Menstruum. In
Tinctura Regis Julaton. page 16. Aurei veller. Take of the filings of Gold of
Sal Harmoniack, each two Ounces, to which put four Ounces of the best Silver
dissolved in eight Ounces of Aqua fortis, draw off to an Oleity, pour on new
Aqua fortis, and repeat three times with new Aqua fortis, and the Gold will
ascend with the Silver through the Alembick.

Lully made his Aqua Regis by dissolving Vegetable Sal Harmoniack in the acid
Water of Mercury sublimate.

93. The Aqua Regis of Lully. In Exp. 17.
TAke Mercury being twice sublimed with Vitriol, and common Salt prepared, each
time with new materials, grind, and if there be one Pound of sublimate, take
the whites of nine new laid Eggs, which whites beat so long, that it seems to
be Water; then mix the white with that sublimate, and put it in a Retort with a
long Neck, join a Receiver to it very close, giving it a Fire of Ashes at the
beginning most gentle, till it distills by that degree: The distillation
ceasing, increase the Fire, and at last give a most violent Fire, and by this
means part of the Mercury will turn into Water, and part into running Mercury,
which running Mercury being gone over sublime again, then grind and join it
with the distilled Water, and distill again as before, repeating the Magistery,
till all the sublimate is gone over, and converted into Water: Wherefore you
may the same way multiply it as often as you please, always putting new
sublimate to the Water, and distilling till it be converted into Water. Now
take this Water, put it in a small Urinal (Cucurbit) joining a Head to it with
a Receiver, then distill by Balneo, till the white seems to be gone over mixed
with it, which you will thus know; take an Iron or Copper Plate, upon which let
one drop of the distillation fall, if it boyls and seems to dissolve, take away
the Receiver, joining another very well luted, and distill by Ashes, and again
by Ashes repeat this Magistery seven times: And thus you will have a Mercurial
Water, which will serve you in many operations: Take now one Ounce of the Salt
of the second Experiment ( Volatile Salt of Tartar, declared in Numb. 17.) and
four Ounces of this Water (the acid Water now distilled from Mercury sublimate)
mix them together, and the mixture will presently be dissolved; being
dissolved, distill by Ashes with a gentle Fire luting the Joints well, in the
last place increase the Fire, that all the Salt may with the Water pass through
the Alembick, then again put one other Ounce of the Salt into the same Water,
and by distillation pass it all over as before, and thus repeat this Work of
distillation four times, in every distillation adding an Ounce of the said Salt
to that Water: Then will you have at length a Mineral Water vegetated and
acuated, with the augmentation of Virtue and Power proceeding from the said
most precious Vegetable Salt, without which is nothing done.

Our Annotations upon the Receipts are:

1. That the Menstruums of this Kind are simple Vegetable Menstruums of the
sixth Kind, dissolved in Acids. Take away the Acidity, and it will be a
Menstruum again of the sixth Kind.

2. That these Menstruums are better made of Aqua fortis, it being an Acid
stronger than the rest: yet that they may be also made of any other Acid less
strong, as distilled Vinegar, Spirit of Salt, Sulphur, etc.

3. That these are the best of all the simple Mineral Menstruums, both in the
facility of making, and excellency of Virtue.

4. That it is much at one, whether the Metal be first dissolved in common Aqua
fortis, and then the Vegetable Sal Harmoniack added, or the said Salt first,
and then the Metal.

5. That these Aqua regisses differ from the common, in that they dissolve all
Metals promiscuously, Silver as well as Gold, and reduce the same not into a
Calx, but Oil, which cannot be said of common Aqua regis.

6. That Metals dissolved in these Menstruums and sublimed, become the greatest
Poisons belonging to this Art.

The Nineteenth KIND. Mineral Menstruums compounded of the Philosophers Spirit
of Wine, and Acid Spirits tinging, Spirit of Vitriol, Butter of Antimony, etc.
94. Spirit of Vitriol mixed with the Spirit of Wine of Lully. Epist.
accurtatoria, page 327.
THE Spirit of Vitriol is more dry and thick, than the Spirit of the
Quintessence of Aqua ardens, and great affinity there is between the Spirit of
Vitriol, and the Nature of Gold, because they are both derived from the same
Principles with Minerals: The Spirit therefore of Vitriol being joined with the
Spirit of Aqua ardens, inspissates it, and makes it suddenly adhere to Gold, so
as to be fixed with it; and believe me, this is a very excellent way of
Abbreviation.

Annotations.

THis Difference you may observe between the Simple and Compounded Mineral
Menstruums; The Simple dissolve only, but the Compounded do both dissolve and
tinge things dissolved; for they are in a wonderful manner exalted by things
tinging, and made many degrees better, so as to have enough to serve
themselves, and others also, and therefore may deservedly be called graduated,
as well as graduatory Waters. Hitherto we have treated of the Simple; In (...)
Nineteenth Kind, we are to consider them as Compounded, of two Spirits, Oyley
and Acid tinging, as in the prescribed Receipt of the Spirits of Philosophical
Wine and Vitriol mixed together, and intimately joined by two or three
distillations. The Preparation is most easy, in which notwithstanding it will
not be impertinent to take notice of this one thing; that both Spirits must be
without Phlegm, and exquisitely rectified according to the Advice of the
following Anonymus. A burning Oleity is made out of Wine, therefore it
participates with Sulphur, and herein is indeed the greatest virtue of the
Metallic Nature, which it drew and conceived from the Earth; and as this
Oleity, the Spirits that is, are much more agil than the Spirits of other
things; therefore their Virtues are much more agil than the Virtues of other
things: but yet you must know that those Spirits (as says the Text of Alchymy,
and as indeed the truth is) which come out of Vegetables and Animals, conduce
not to Alchymy as they are in a Vegetable Nature, but it is requisite for them
to attain to a Metallic Nature by many depurations and distillations, and then
they are serviceable to it: Therefore is there one only stone, and one
foundation necessary to the Art, namely, the Metallic virtue, though sometimes
Vegetable and Animal things are taken, yet they do not remain in a Vegetable or
Animal Nature, but are transmuted into a Metallic and Sulphurous Nature,
which contains a Metallic Virtue. Whereupon, said Ferrariensis, cap. 20.
suarum Quoestionum: It is impossible to coagulate Argent vive, without Sulphur,
or something that has a sulphurous Nature, because Sulphur is the coagulum of
Argent vive, and if there be sulphureities in Wine, having a burning faculty,
it argues there is a Metallic Nature in it: wherefore some do operate in Wine
and Gold or Silver, to extract out of the Wine its most subtle Spirit,
strengthening the virtue of Gold with it, that so the Spirits may be fixed with
it, by which consequently the Tincture of the Gold is dilated and multiplied,
and of a certain there is a very great coherence or participation between the
Spirits of Wine and the Spirits of Gold, they being both of a hot Nature, and
therefore the Spirits of Wine are inseparably fixed with Gold; yet it is to be
noted, that the Spirits of middle Metals, as Vitriol, etc. are of larger
fixation, and more nearly allied to Gold, both springing as it were out of one
Fountain, namely, out of the Mines of Metals, than the Spirits of Wine, which
proceed from a Vegetable Nature; though the Spirits of Wine are more agil and
subtle. Some therefore do compound the Spirits of them, so as to join the
Spirits of Vitriol with the Spirits of Wine, to inspissate one with the other,
and to make them more easily united to Gold: But he that intends to operate
with these things, must take the strongest Spirits, and the purest Matters, so
that the Spirits must be exactly purified before they are fixed with Gold or
Silver. Anonym. de Principiis Nature. and Art Alchym. page 30. Syntagm. Hermon.
Rhenani,

Not only the rectified Spirit of Vitriol, but every Acid Spirit is here
effectual, provided it be tinging, and mixed with the Spirit of Philosophical
Wine, thereby to be made a Menstruum of the same Kind. It Is thus made:

95. The Butter of Antimony mixed with the Spirit of Wine of Basilius. Page 88.
Currus Triumphalis Antim.
TAke of Common Mercury most purely sublimed, of Antimony, equal parts, grind,
mix and distill by a Retort, which retains the Spirits, three times; rectify
this Oil with the Spirit of (Philosophical) Wine, and it is prepared, and of a
Blood-colour; in the beginning it was white, and thickens as Ice or melted
Butter. This Oil has done many wonderful things; yet the Virtue, Faculty, and
Operation of it has always appeared, making an ill thing good.

This Composition, though given by Basilius, as a Medicine, not as a Menstruum,
yet is by Paracelsus in Libro de Gradationibus, described as such.

96. The Water of the fourth Gradation of Paracelsus. Libro de Gradationibus,
page 131.
TAke of Antimony one pound, of Mercury Sublimate, half pound, distill both
together with a violent Fire through an Alembick, and a redness willl ascend
like Blood, thick, which tingeth and graduates any Luna into Sol, and brings
this pale Color to the highest degree, of a permanent Color.

Though Paracelsus thought it not always necessary to admonish his Disciples of
the Spirit of Philosophical Wine as an addition in his Compositions, yet
nevertheless ought I to declare to you the necessary addition of this Spirit in
this Menstruum, that you may not err; for without it, it would be of no
consequence, but rather a damage to you in the more secret Chymy:

The Adepts made sometimes Menstruums of this Kind, not with the Spirit of
Philosophical Wine, but the Matter of it, namely, some Vegetable Oleosum, Thus;

97. The Water of the sixth Gradation of Paracelsus. Libro de Gradationibus,
page 132.
TAke of Sulphur vive, two pounds, of Linseed Oil, four pounds, boil them to a
Composition ( commonly called the Liver of Sulphur) which must be distilled
into an Oil ( by a peculiar and Philosophical manual Operation, appertaining to
the making of the Spirit of Philosophical Wine:) To this must be added again
the same quantity of Sulphur vive, and boiled as before to a Composition, and
digested in Horse-dung for a Month, or if longer, better: Then must be added of
Sal Niter, Vitriol, Alume (Ingredients of Aqua fortis) Flos Aeris, Crocus of
Mars, Cinabar, (to increase the Tincture of the Sulphur) of each half a Verto
(einem halben vierling, that is, a fourth part of half a pound, or two ounces)
distill whatsoever will ascend, and take away the Liquors, the Oils only being
kept (not Oil, but Oils, because they are two, White and Red) which must be put
into a glass Cucurbit, the Species being added, as before, and the Caput
mortuum pulverized; distill them again together as before; then pour the
distillation back to the Faeces, and let it be putrified again for a Month, and
distilled again: Then the Colors being evacuated or separated (the Red from
the White) keep the Red, and rectify it as is requisite, in which let Plates
of Luna be digested a due time, and then reduced by cupellation.

Paracelsus sometimes made this Oil or Fire of Sulphur by it self, without
other tinging things for the graduating of precious Stones as well as Metals.
It is come to that, says he, page 200. Lib. de Sulph. that the Spirit of
Transmutation has given his Receipt of making a Liver or Lung out of Linseed
Oil and Sulphur: The distillation of this Lung or Liver is done many ways; but
it is sound by operating, that this Liver yields a Milk nothing differing from
common Milk, being thick and fat; it yielded also a red Oil like Blood: This
Milk and that Blood confounded not their Color and Essence by distillation,
but remained distinct and separate one from the other, the White settling to the
bottom, and the Red ascending to the top: Now Art has been solicitous in making
Silver out of the White or Milk, and out of the Red, Gold; but to me it is
plain that never any thing could be either by the Ancient or Modern
Philosophers done with the White or Milk (of Sulphur) I do therefore affirm
that Milk to be dead, and nothing contained in it: But as to the Red Oil which
yields the Liver, observe, every Cristal or Beril being first well polished or
purified, etc. (See the fourth Book concerning the Use of this Oil in the
Gradutions of Precious Stones) exalts Gems even to the highest degree, yea
higher than they can be exalted by Nature: Here also note, that all Silver put
into it a due time, at length grows black, and leaves a golden Calx, yet not
fixed before its exact time, but a volatile and immature thing; but if it has
its time, it performs all things feasible, whereof no more must be here
declared. Thus therefore observe of Sulphur, if it be taken into degrees, the
more subtle, clearer, higher, and of quicker operation it is, the higher and
better it is: This way are Metals and Stones made. He that is about to attempt
it, must not think, but know himself able; for it is, as to Operation, the most
dangerous Labor in all Alchymy, and therefore requires notable Experience, and
repeated Practice, nor must he proceed by Hearsay, but by much Experience, etc.

Yet not being satisfied with the strength of this Oil in this twelfth
gradation, he was willing to exalt it yet higher with other tinging things, as
Flores Aeris, and Crocus of Mars, by which Paracelsus meant not Common but
Philosophical Medicines. We perceive, says he, Lib. 4. Archid. de Essentiis,
page 16. Verdegrease is accounted the Quintessence of Venus, whereas it is not;
but the Crocus of Venus is a Quintessence so to be understood. Flos Aeris is a
(common) transmutation with a thick and subtle substance together, extracted
out of the whole Complexion of Copper, wherefore it can be no Quintessence; but
the Crocus of Venus, as we have taught, is a true Quintessence, it being a
potable thing, without corrosion, and in mixtion divided from the Body, very
subtle, yea more than I am minded here to write, to avoid prolixity. So also
the Crocus of Mars and the rust of it has hitherto been esteemed a
Quintessence, it not being so; but the (true) Crocus of Mars is the Oil of
Mars, (which is sometimes in a dry form under the Name of an Essence, and
called the Philosophical Crocus of Mars in the second Book of Medicines.

From the Receipts we observe.
1. That common Spirit of Vitriol, Butter of Antimony, Arsenick, Tin, etc.
mixed with the Spirit of Philosophical Wine, are Philosophical Spirit of
Vitriol, Philosophical Butter of Antimony, etc.

2. That the Menstruums of this Kind, are the same with the Menstruums of the
Fifteenth Kind; but with this difference, namely, in that, Philosophical
Vinegar not tinging is prepared, but in this, Philosophical Vinegar tinging;
because these are made of the Acid Spirits of things tinging, that is Metals
and Minerals; but those of the Acid Spirits of things not tinging, that is
Vegetable Salts, and some Minerals, whose dry part was neither Metal, nor any
colored Body.

3. That these Menstruums are not only dissolving Waters, but also gradatory,
because prepared with things tinging.

4. That these Menstruums are the Essences of things tinging, or Magisteries
dissolved in an Acid, and consequently Medicines.

5. That these Menstruums, may be also made of crude Oils; provided a Man knows
the way of preparing the Spirit of Philosophical Wine.

6. That the same two Oils of Sulphur (whereof the Red is an Essence, after the
way of Paracelsus, that is, the best) which Paracelsus elsewhere prepares with
the most strong Aqua fortis, described before in Numb. 91. are here made by the
same Author, of a crude oily matter.

7. That Vegetables and Animals as such, and crude, are not Ingredients in
Philosophical Works, but as they are made incombustible, and reduced into a
Metallic Nature. The said separation, says the Author of Via Veritatis, page
253. You must well observe, for from hence the Ancient Sophi took occasion to
inquire into the Three Natures (Three Kingdoms) namely, the Vegetable, Animal,
and Mineral; and they so much learned from it, that the separation of Natures
is nothing else but a defect of coction in Nature: Then they considered them
somewhat further, how (for instance) those Essences, which were most weakly
cocted by Nature, might be succored in a Natural way, with common Fire, that
the Essences which are now combustible, may by their Liquors (which the
Ancients through envy called Mercury, and are black, separated from the
Essence) be made perfect by Art, so as that the Essences may remain with the
Liquor safe and secure from burning, and the Liquor not be able to separate it
self from the Essence: This the Ancients called our Sulphur; for according to
this preparation, the Essence is no more Vegetable, nor Animal, but now by
coction made a Mineral Essence, and therefore called Sulphur. And afterward,
page 264. he thus proceeds, One Nature is more cocted by its moisture with its
Elementary Fire, than another, whereof the Vegetable Nature is in coction the
least, because the Essence of it is easily burned, and the Liquor also is most
easily separated from the Elementary Fire, by the help of common Fire. The
Animal Nature) is in coction not much unlike the former (Vegetable Nature) the
Essence of it being likewise easily burned, and therefore the Mineral Nature is
in coction the highest, because the Metalick Liquor will be more and better
united by coction with the Elementary Fire, than the other two aforesaid
Natures: Wherefore also, Metals do resist common Fire, better than the other
things comprehended under a Vegetable and Animal Nature, as you may see by
Metals put into Fire, which do not Flame as Wood; for the Essence of it is not
so cocted with Liquor, as the Metalick moisture with its Essence; and the
conjunction of the Liquor with the Essence is not Metalick, but simply
Vegetable, which is consumed in a black Fume. But when the Essence has
attained to coction by Nature, then it remains not a Vegetable, but is now made
a Metalick, and is now consumed in a white Fume by common Fire, no otherwise
than as you see in perfect Metals, when they are melted in Fire, disperse a
white Fume from them. Now consider, says Chortalasseus, or the Author of Arca
arcani Artificiosissimi, in his Cabula Chymica, page 369. Vol. 6. Th. Chym. by
way of advice; how the aforesaid Speeches of Vegetables and Animals are to be
taken, neither of them must be rejected; for they differ one from the other no
otherwise, than that the Vapor is purer, and of greater quantity in one than
the other; but you may make the more impure, like to the pure Vapor, for they
may by subtle management be so reduced, that those two, that is, the Animal and
Vegetable, in a Watery Body may be taken together with the Mineral Spirit or
Vapor, and then the Mineral Spirit separated from the rest with great
discretion, which though it shows it self in a small quantity, is
notwithstanding of the greatest Virtue, and clearer than the Light at Noon: In
this state will that Spirit if you please bring the Animal and Vegetable
Spirit, so as to be like it self. This is the Foundation of the whole Art, that
is, for the Vegetable or Animal Spirit to leave its combustibility, and become
Incorruptible, and Immortal: This is the Key to open all Gates; here you have
the true first matter of Gems, and Metals: Yet if I consider this thing
rightly, it is not the first Matter, but a threefold extraction out of the
first matter of Gems; and therefore you ought to praise God Eternally, and give
him thanks in making you worthy of this matter, and vouchsafing you so much
understanding, whereby to obtain to your use that which is the deepest in the
Earth. I proceed in this first matter; which if you make Liquid, and open by
the incombustible Vegetable Spirit (not common) you will be able to dissolve
Gold, Silver, all Minerals, and Gems in it, and make it melt like Ice in warm
Water, destroy, mortify, and renew it again; by this means I say, visibly
obtain, see, touch, and perceive an Astral Spirit (as a Lanthorn, wherein the
Eternal Fire, and Virtue of the highest Star of Eternal Wisdom dwells) you
will I say, with your Eyes behold an inconsumptible Fire, shining Night and
Day; Sun, Moon, Stars, Carbuncles, and a Splendour exceeding all manner of Fire;
and observe the perfection of the whole Firmament in it. O man, my Creature!
how great a Divine Gift, as that which is above all the Heavens, most
excellently clear, and is most deep in the Earth, may you in a few Hours time
obtain, whereas she has been a vast time employed in it, and in subtilty is
far inferior to you, etc. The same Author of this first matter in his Rusticus.
page 308. of the said Volume, thus: This Doctrine certainly is very worthy of
Observation; for many Notable Men, do herein err, thinking they have the first
matter, when they have obtained the Philosophers Mercury, or Salt of Metals:
For the first matter is made when the Man and Woman are joined together,
witness Count Bernhard, saying: Then is the Conjunction called the first
Matter, and not before; that is, of the Stone, and all Metals; concerning which
see Turba: For before this is done, we do according to the foundation of
Nature, and with good reasons deservedly reject Animals and Vegetables, as
things extraneous, and contrary and ineffectual to our Work, and our Stone we
place rightly among Minerals.

8. That both Spirits ought to be warily mixed, because of the danger of
overmuch effervescence.

9. That these Menstruums are by digestion made sweet, and called the sweet
Spirit of Vitriol, sweet Butter of Antimony.

10. That the Spirit of Philosophical Wine is sometimes not expressed in the
Receipts of Menstruums; but it appears by collateral places, and necessity
requires it to be understood.

The Twentieth KIND. Mineral Menstruums Compounded of the Spirit of
Philosophical Wine, and other tinging things; Vitriol, Cinabar, Antimony, Lapis
Haematites, etc.
98. Oil of Vitriol of Basilius. Cap. 6. Sect. 2. Libri de Conclusionibus.
TAke Hungarian Vitriol, dissolve it in distilled Water, coagulate,
cristallize, repeat five times, and so purge it from the Salts, Alume, and
Niter: This Vitriol thus purged, distill with the Spirit of (Philosophical) Wine
to a red Oil, which ferment with Spiritual Gold; add to it, its part of the
Mercury of Stibium, and you have a Tincture for Man, and reducing Luna into
Sol. Visitando Inferiora Terroe, Rectificandoque Invenies Occultum Lapidem,
Veram Medicinam.

Annotations

THE Antecedent Kind contained Mineral Menstruums, compounded of Acid Spirits
containing a Metalick Tincture in them; in thus present we use the Bodies of
these Spirits, to make the Menstruums a degree better. For a Tincture, for
Example extracted out of the dry part or body of Vitriol distilled, with the
Spirit of Philosophical Wine is an Essence, which being in the same
distillation dissolved in its own Acid Part, produced a Menstruum of this Kind;
whereas in the Precedent Kind, that small quantity of Copper, dissolved or
contained in common Spirit of Vitriol, and elevated with a violent Fire, is by
the Spirit of Philosophical Wine reduced not into the Essence, but Magistery,
little effectual as well through the smalness of its quantity as Tincture: This
present Oil of Vitriol is not the least esteemed among the Secrets of Basilius,
and therefore we will a little more exactly consider his most clear
description, that by his more abundant Light, we may Illustrate darker places.
First, Basilius bids us purify Roman Vitriol by diverse solutions, and
coagulations; which purification is necessary to separate the Vitriol from
strange Dust, Dross, and other impertinent Offals; yet this we think
Superfluous, when the Vitriol is purely cristallized, for the Terestreity
settling in the dissolution of Vitriol, is not Foeces, but Copper, less
dissolved than the rest, and left by the Acid, being too much diluted with
common Water: The Vitriol being purified, he enjoins to be distilled with the
Spirit of Wine into a red Oil.

He reduced not only Natural Vitriol, but also Artificial Vitriols made of
Metals into such Oils. The Sugar or Vitriol of Saturn he distills together with
the Spirit of Wine into a red Oil, curing Melancholy, the French Disease, etc.
Coagulating and fixing Mercury, but, if fixed with the Mercury of Mars, tinging
thirty parts of Mercury into Gold. Libro de Conclu. Tract. 2. Sect. 1, Cap. 1,
de Sulphur Saturni. The same way, says he, is a red sweet Oil tinging Saturn
into Gold, to be distilled out of Sugar or Vitriol of Jupiter, in the following
Chapter, which he repeats in Sect. 2. Cap. 2. de Vitriolis Saturni and Jovis.
Argent vive he dissolves in Aqua fortis, and being reduced into Cristal or
Vitriol, distills with the Spirit of Wine rectified before with the Salt of
Tartar (the Menstruum described in Numb. 18.) into a sweet Oil, curing the
French Pox, Old Ulcers, Palsy, etc. to be joined to Martial Tinctures in the
Transmutation of Metals. Sect. 2. Cap. 5. de Vitriolo Mercurii: The more fixed
Metals, Gold and Silver he distills in Balneo Regis (in Numb. 89.) through an
Alembick, which, the Menstruum being drawn off, he reduces into Volatile
Vitriols, to be distilled with the Spirit of Wine into Oils. Sect. 2. Cap. 1.
De Vitriolo Solis et Luna. The more dry Metals, Iron and Copper, he prescribes
to be distilled into the same Oils, but omits the way of distilling. Sect. 1.
Cap. 3. De Sulphuribus Martis and Veneris, Sect. 2. Cap. 3. De Vitriolo Martis.
Cap. 4. De Vitriolo Veneris; but the following Kind of Menstruum will prove
that they are to be distilled with Philosophical Vinegar: By these places
compared together, we are better assured of diverse things: First that the Oil
of Vitriol is not any common Acid of Vitriol, though drawn out of Vitriol most
exquisitely purified, for the same Oils may be made with the Vitriols of all
Metals by the same Spirit of Wine. Secondly, that common Spirit of Wine is
altogether useless to this Work; but that the Philosophical, or Menstruum
rather described in Numb. 18. is meant by Basilius by the Spirit of Wine.
Moreover, that the Vitriols of Saturn and Jupiter do yield sweet Oils, because
made of some weak Acid, namely, common Vinegar, which is easily altered or
transmuted by this Philosophical Menstruum. But that the Oils of the other
Metals, being made with stronger Acids, either Philosophical Vinegar, or
Mineral Menstruums do remain Acid, especiaily the present Oil of Vitriol, in
the distillation of which, the Spirit of Philosophical Wine, or Vegetable
Menstruum is dissolved by the Natural Acid, or common Oil of Vitriol, and with
such a prevalent Acidity, ascends in the form of a red Oil. Lastly, that this
Oil of Vitriol is commended to us by Basilius as a Menstruum to be fermented
with Gold; which we would have you take special notice of; for Basilius has
here and there in his Books discovered many notable things concerning the
Menstruum of Vitriol, but most rarely advised the distillation of it with the
Spirit of Philosophical Wine; yet without which all Processes and Labors, all
Endeavors and experiments are vain, and of no importance in the more Secret
Chymy.

For the making this Oil of Vitriol the Adepts sometimes dissolved it in the
Spirit of Philosophical Wine; which afterward being cristallized, they called
Vitriol corrected or graduated. Of this correction or graduation of Vitriol
Paracelsus, thus: The Description of Vitriol, says he, is to be directed to
Medicine and Alchymy: In Medicine it is an excellent Remedy: In Alchymy it is
good for many other things; but the Art of Medicine and Alchymy, consists in
the preparation of Vitriol: For the Crude is not such, but like Wood, out of
which any thing may be carved. Lib. de Vitriolo, page 200. At first, he
proceeds, the Spirit of Vitriol being obtained, the custom was to graduate it
to the highest, wherewith being exalted, they cured the Epilepsie, whether new
or old, in Men and Women, of what condition soever, etc. But let us return to
the beginning, how the Spirit of Vitriol was found; First they distilled the
moist Spirit of Vitriol by it self from the Colcothar, then they extended its
degree by distilling and circulating it alone to the highest, as the process
teaches: Thus the Water began to be used for several Diseases, as well
Internal as External, as also for the Falling Sickness; so a wonderful Cure was
performed: But those that came after were much more diligent in the extraction;
for they took the Spirit of Vitriol, corrected as before, and distilled it with
the Colcothar eight or ten times with a most strong Fire; so the dry Spirits
were mixed with the moist: They urged the work so long, continually and without
intermission extracting, till the dry Spirits were over; then they graduated
both Spirits, the moist as well as the dry, in a Phial together their own time:
This Medicine they found to be of much greater operation against Diseases, that
they confounded all the Humorists in general: Yet is there some correction by
Artists added by Spirit of Wine, for better penetration sake, but of no higher
degree: But I will communicate to you my process, which I commend to all
Physicians, especially for the Epilepsie, which has the only cure in Vitriol;
wherefore even the Charity of our Neighbor, requires us to appoint the more
diligent care in that Disease: Now my Process is for the Spirit of
(Philosophical) Wine to be imbibed by the Vitriol, and then distilled, as I
said, from the dry and moist Spirits, etc. But you must further know, that the
aforesaid Receipts of making the moist Spirit of Vitriol cannot be more clearly
described; for an Artist is required to understand it; those sordid Boylers do
not in the least understand a thing of so great moment. You must expect
sufficient information of all things, from Artists (of the more secret Chymy)
Alchymists and Operators, so also to be more instructed by the same in the way
of correcting the Spirit of Wine.

Basilius in his Elucidat. 12. Clavium. Where he made the following Menstruum
spoke of such a graduated Vitriol, not common.

99. A Menstruum of Basilius made of Hungarian Vitriol. In Elucid. 12. Clavium.
IF you have obtained such a highly graduated and well prepared Mineral, called
Vitriol, most humbly beseech God to give Understanding and Wisdom for the
success of your Intention, and when you have calcined it, put it into a Retort
well luted: Distill it at first with a slow Fire, then increase it, and the
White Spirit of Vitriol will appear in the form of a horrid Fume or Wind, and
passes into the Receiver so long as any of the same Matter is in it: And take
Notice, that in this Wind are hidden all the Three Principles, proceeding from
one and the same Habitation; it is not necessary therefore to be always diving
in precious Things, because by this Means a nearer way to the Mysteries of
Nature lies open, and is obvious to all Men apt to learn Art and Wisdom. Now if
you can well and purely separate and free this Expelled Spirit by the way of
Distillation, from its terrene Moisture, then will you find in the bottom of
the Glass Treasure, and the Fundamentals of all the Philosophers, hitherto
known to few, which is a Red Oil ponderous as Lead or any Gold whatsoever, as
thick as Blood, of a burning and fiery quality, which is the true Fluid Gold of
the Philosophers, which Nature compacted of the Three Principles, in which are
found Spirit, Soul, and Body, and it is Philosophical Gold, that (Spirit of
Philosophical Wine) excepted, with which the Dissolution of it is performed,
etc.

Cinabar the Adepts sometimes added to the Vitriol thus.

100. The Mineral Menstruum of Isaacus. Page 59. Manus Philos.
TAke of the Roman Vitriol calcined to Redness, and Cinaber an equal quantity,
mix and pulverize, then pour Aqua Vitae to them, distill and cohobate upon the
Caput Mortuum three or four times.

The same Menstruum has Lully in Magia Naturali, but instead of the Caput
mortuum, he takes new Species in every Rectification.

101. The Stinking Menstruum of Lully made of Vitriol and Cinabar. Page 371.
Magiae Naturalis.
AFter the Fourth Distillation of the Water aforesaid (Aqua Vitae or Ardens
made of Philosophical Wine) Distill seven times with an equal weight of good
Cinabar and Vitriol, putting in new things every time constantly, and drying
the Matter of the Stone ( Vitriol and Cinabar) well in every Distillation,
before you pour in the Aqua (Vitae) etc.

102. The same Stinking Menstruum of Lully. Epist. Accurtatoria Page 327.
THe Vegetable Stone being Distilled ( the Vegetable Menstruum or rather Aqua
ardens, or the Spirit of Philosophical Wine) till the Water is free from
Phlegm, and that commonly is in the fifth time, take an equal Weight of
Vitriol very clear, and of the best Cinabar, mix and grind them well together,
dry the Matter in the Sun, till all the moisture is exhaled; then cast in your
Water, and Distill first with a gentle Fire, and strong in the end, as the
custom is in preparing the Philosophers Acute Water; and then the Spirits or
Quintessence of Vitriol and Cinabar, which do principally make the Mineral
Stone (Mineral Menstruum) do mix and join together with the Spirit of the
Quintessence of Aqua Ardens, which Spirit is the Vegetable Stone; and this
continue ten Times, beginning after the fifth (five times after the fifth
Rectification of the Spirit of Philosophical Wine) and so continue the
Distillations five times with those Bodies ( Vitriol and Cinabar:) And you must
remember to make the things thorough dry, before you put them into the Water,
so that all the Water (all the Phlegm) must be dried up (evaporated) and the
Spirits remain, which must be joined together, because of the strength of the
Aqua Ardens; and every Distillation you must put in new things.

To Vitriol and Cinabar he sometimes added Niter; thus he made this, called

103. The Stinking Menstruum of Lully made of common Vitriol, Cinabar, and
Niter. In Clavicula. Page 299. Vol. 3. Th. Chym.
TAke of Roman Vitriol calcined to Redness three Pounds, of Salt Peter one
Pound, of Cinabar three Ounces, grind all together upon a Marble, then put the
Matter in a thick and strong Body (Cucurbit) and pour Aqua Vitae seven times
Rectified upon it, and put it in Horse Dung fifteen days, the Vessel being well
Sealed: Then Distill with a soft Fire, till you have all the Water in the
Receiver, then increase the Fire till the Head (Alembick) be red, then
strengthen the Fire till the Head (Alembick) be white, then let the Vessel
cool, take away the Receiver, Seal it very well with Wax, and keep it for
occasion: Take Notice that the Menstruum ought to be seven times rectified by
Distillation, every time casting away the Feces, before it be made use of.

Besides the Ingredients of Aqua Fortis and Cinabar, he sometimes adds also
Tartar calcined thus,

104. The Stinking Menstruum of Lully made of Vitriol, Niter, Alume, Tartar,
and Cinabar. In Experimento 26.
TAke Aqua Vitae so hot as to burn a Linen Cloth, then take Vitriol free from
all Phlegm, so as to Boil upon Fire without Liquefaction (Vitriol calcined the
common way) the best Sal Niter, Roch Alume dephlegmed and dried, one Pound of
all the aforesaid, of white Tartar calcined, and Cinabar of each half a Pound,
grind and sift every one severally through a Sieve; then mix, and put the
Matter into a Retort, pouring the aforesaid Aqua Vitae upon it, put a Receiver
to it, the Joints being very close, and the Luting first thoroughly dried: The
Receiver must be large, as those, wherein Aqua Fortises are commonly distilled:
Now the Luting being dried, make a gentle Fire at first, till the Retort grows
warm, then continue the Distillation in this degree, that you may pronounce ten
words between each drop of the Distilling Water, and when it will Distill no
more with that Degree of Fire, increase the Fire so as to return the
Distillation again to the same ten Words as at first; and this degree continue,
till the Distillation increases again, and lastly, increase the Fire with
Wood, covering the Retort round about with Tiles above, that it may have a Fire
of Reverberation; but this observe, the Retort must first be strengthened on
all sides with strong Luting, before this Distillation is begun, and when the
Distillation is begun, and when the Distillation is, it ought to be placed in a
convenient Furnace, with an open Neck; but it would be best and most commodious
in this Work, if the Receiver of this Distilling Water could be handsomely set
in a Basin full of cold Water, but if that cannot be, you must at least lay
Linen Cloths dipped in Water upon the Receiver again and again oftentimes; thus
the Receiver may not be broken by the violence of the Spirits, all which
particulars mark well. The Distillation being ended, let the Vessels cool, and
keep the Receiver with the Water very close stopped. Then take the same Mineral
dried, and prepared as before, in the same order and measure, which grind
together, and put into a Retort, as before, and pour the Water a little before
Distilled upon it, fit a Receiver to it, the Joints being very well Luted, as
before, and having dried the Luting, put Fire under, the Distillation being
completed, take again New Materials of the same Weight, and put them again
into a Retort with their own Water, and Distill, as before, with the same
Degrees of Fire; which being done, and the Vessel cold, take away the Receiver,
and keep it carefully with its Distilled Water firmly stopped: For you will
have a Physical Mineral Water, or Stinking Menstruum with its Form: This Water
has the power of Calcining, and at the same time dissolving all Metals with
the preservation of their Vegetative Form: Many Experiments we have herewith
both seen and done.

Isaacus Hollandus to augment the strength of these Menstruums, did rather add
some tinging Minerals to the Vitriol, than the Acidity of Niter and Alume. Thus
he prepared a Menstruum called,

105. The Dissolving Water for the Red, of the first Description of Isaacus.
Cap. 103. Oper. Min.
TAke of Roman Vitriol six parts, of Lapis Haematites, Crocus Martis, Cinabar,
Aes ustum, Mineral Antimony, of each one part, being well dried, mix, and
putting them into a Retort, pour four Pounds of Rectified Aqua Vitae to them,
Distill and Cohobate three times upon the Caput Mortuum pulverized.

The following Menstruum being like this, proves it to be of a sanguine color.

106. The Dissolving Water for the Red of the second Description of Isaacus.
Cap. 45.3. Oper. Miner.
TAke of Mineral Antimony, Aes ustum, Crocus Martis, Cinabar, of each two
parts, of Vitriol the weight of all, being all dried and mixed together, pour
to them of Aqua Vitae most purely rectified, the height of two hands; the
Vessel being close luted, digest in Balneo the space of ten days, stirring the
Matter three or four times every day, that it may be the better incorporated
with the Aqua Vitae; these ten days being ended, and an Alembick put on,
Distill with a gentle Fire, but at last with a most strong Fire twelve hours
together, that all the tinged Spirits may ascend with the Aqua Vitae: This
process repeat, always Distilling the Water with new Matters, till it becomes
Red as Blood.

To these two we will add also a third Menstruum of this sort.

107. A Dissolving Water for the Red of the third Description of Isaacus. Cap.
61.3. Oper. Min.
TAke of Roman Vitriol, Cinabar, of each one part, of Crocus Martis, Lapis
Haematites, Aes ustum, Verdegreece, of each half a part; calcine the Vitriol
first. If you have a mind, you may extract the Tincture out of Mineral Antimony
with (Philosophical Vinegar) and being separated from the Vinegar, add it to
the former Species, as also as much Aqua Vitae twelve times rectified as
suffices; the Vessel being well luted, digest in Balneo seven or eight times,
then having put on an Alembick, and luted the Joints well, Distill with a
gentle Fire two days, then a stronger two days more, then the space of three
days, that the Glass may be hot; the Glasses being cold, take out the Caput
Mortuum, which being well pulverized, digest with the Distilled Water for the
space of eight days, then Distill the first day gently, the second more
strongly, the third most strongly for the space of twenty four hours, that the
Glass may be red hot; then let it cool, the Distilled Water digest with new
Matters, and Distill, as before, and that to be three times repeated.

And as these Menstruums were for Red Tinctures, so also he made some for White
Tinctures, thus,

108. A Dissolving Water of Isaacus for the White. Cap. 76.3. Oper. Min.
TAke of Roch Alume, Lapis Calaminaris, of the Calx of Eggs, an equal quantity,
pour to them as much Aqua vitae rectified from all Phlegm as suffices, and
distill, as the Dissolving Water for the Red.

109 Another Dissolving Water of Isaacus for the White. Cap. 48.3. Oper. Min.
TAke of Roach Alume, Lapis Calaminaris, Calx of Eggs, common Arsenick, an
equal quantity, being all pulverized, mix, and to the Powder pour as much Aqua
Vitae well rectified, as to be the space of three hands above the Matter,
distill with a gentle Fire, then a stronger, lastly, for twenty four hours so as
to be red hot; cohobate the distillation yet four times upon the Caput Mortuum
reduced into Powder.

Many such Menstruums as these we meet with in several places of Isaacus, in
the Descriptions of which, tho the Addition of Philosophical Aqua Vitae or
Spirit of Wine be not always expressed, yet that it is to be understood in all
of them, is evident by the former Receipts of Dissolving Waters: The Menstruums
following may be Examples, in the first place that which is called

110. A Red Water Shining Day and Night of the First Description of Isaacus.
Cap. 153. Lib. 2. Oper. Min. Page 528. Vol. 3. Th. Chym.
TAke the Crocus of Mars, Antimony as it is dugge out of the Mines, Red
Arsenick, of each one Pound, of Auripigment one Pound, of Roman Vitriol three
Pounds, of Sal Niter as much as the weight of all the rest: Grind all together
into an impalpable Powder; mix one Bound of Sal Armoniack with them, and being
well mixed, put the Matter in an Earthen Vessel, not glazed within, such as can
well endure the Fire, and having put on an Alembick, with a Receiver strongly
luted, distill Aqua Fortis, as it should be, first with a small Fire, then
increasing the Fire by degrees, and a White Water will distill, which being
distilled, the Alembick will begin to be Red or Yellow; then presently take
away the Receiver, and add another, soundly luted, and increase your ^ire till
a White Spirit goes over; it is the Sal Armoniack which goes over last of all,
and strengthen the Fire so long, till the Alembick be altogether clear: When
now the Red Spirit goes over, nothing (of Sal Armoniack) goes with it, and so
soon as it is gone over (the White Water) the Spirit and (dry) Water (or Sal
Armoniack) go over together, then the Alembick becomes White within, as if it
was full of Snow, and then increase the Fire till the Spirit and Water are
driven through the Beak by Exhalation, as a Man casts forth his Breath by
force; so the Spirit and dry Water do breath through the Pipe of the Alembick
into the Receiver, and increase the Fire, and the Spirit and dry Water being
gone over, the Alembick becomes clean, clear, white, and transparent; then let
it cool, and take it from the Fire, put the Water into a Glass, and stop it
close. Take the Caput Mortuum, grind it to a fine Powder, put it in pure clear
Water for two hours, let it settle, pour off the clear, and pour it upon pure
clear Water again, as before, and let it boil an hour, as before; then let it
settle again, add it again to the former, cast away the Feces, and that which
you poured out (the Solution) evaporate, and a yellow Powder will remain, weigh
it, add as much Sal Niter, and mix them together, put them into a Glass, pour
your Distilled Water (or Menstruum) upon it, put on an Alembick strongly luted
all over, adding a Receiver, and leave it three days upon thee Furnace (to
Digest) before you put Fire under, then kindle your Fire, and Distill first
with a small Fire, then sometimes a greater, till the White Spirit is gone
over, then cease, and you have a Red Water shining Day and Night, which
dissolves fixed Luna, as Luna is commonly dissolved, and it will take a
Tincture as the purest Sol that ever was seen, yea, it tingeth all White Metals
of the color of Sol.

111. A Red Water showing Light by Night of the Second Description of Isaacus.
Cap. 44. Oper. Min. Page 458. Vol. 3. Th. Chym.
TAke of Roman Vitriol three Pounds, of Cinabar, Verdegrese, Cerusse, of each
half a Pound, of Crocus Martis, Lapis haematites of each four Ounces, of Sal
Niter as much, as the whole Mass (five Pounds) pulverize and mix them well
together; divide the Mass into three parts, and of one part make an Aqua
fortis, which pour upon the powder of another part; distill Aqua fortis again,
and pour it upon the third powder, and distill Aqua fortis again; which being
done, pulverize all the three Caput Mortuums. Take the Water of Sal armoniack,
which I shall teach you below to make ( but we have already declared it in
Numb. 81.) wherewith grind the aforesaid powder so fine, as that a Painter may
paint with it, then dry it in your Dry Stove in glass Dishes being dried, grind
it dry upon a Stone, and put it into an earthen Pot, and pour the Aqua fortis
(before distilled) upon it; distill first with a gentle fire the space of
twenty four hours, then increase (the Fire) as yet 24 hours more, then increase
till it begins to shine, then keep it in the same fiery brightness six hours
more, then let it cool, take it away from the Fire, and stop the Receiver well:
Then grind and pulverize the Caput Mortuum upon a Stone with Vinegar distilled,
and extract the Salt or Element of Earth out of the Feces; put the Salt into a
Glass, pour yout Aqua fortis upon it, the Alembick and Receiver being very
close, put the Glass in Sand in a Kettle with Water (in Balneo) distill all
that will distill, when no more distilleth, let the Balneo boil a day and a
night whether it drops or no: Then let it cool, remove it from the Fire, put it
in Ashes, use first a weak Fire for 12 hours, then increase the Fire yet 12
hours more; then let it be moderately hot, and let it be so for six hours; then
let it cool, take it from the Fire, and cover it well, and having taken away
the Feces or Salt, grind them very small with Distilled Vinegar, put it into a
Stone Jugge, and a good part of the Distillation being poured to it, put it in
Balneo, doing as was taught before; see if it has yet any Feces, and make the
Salt clear; put it again in a Glass, pour on the Aqua fortis again, do every
way as before, three or four times, and all your Matter or Earth will distill
with the Aqua fortis, then take it from the Fire, stop close, and keep it well:
For you have a precious Water, above all the Waters that ever I heard of; and
believe me in good faith I have seen and done also my self wonderful things
with this Water: This Water I have reduced to a Red Christalline Stone, which
would give light by night, so as that my Friends might see to eat and drink by
it. Keep it well for use, and esteem it as the most secret Water of all you
have.

The Method of making such Shining Menstruums is better perceived by the
following Water.

112. A Red and Shining Aqua fortis of the Third Description of Isaacus. Cap.
72. 1. Oper. Min. Page 354. Vol. 3. Th. Chym.
TAke of Vitriol clarified and purified from its Feces, of Sal Niter, an equal
quantity, distill an Aqua fortis out of them according to Art, then take the
Caput Mortuum out of the Glass, and reduce it to a fine Powder; then grind it
upon a Stone, then put it in common Distilled Water, and draw out all the Salt,
then filter it, that you may have it clean from Feces; congeal again, and being
congealed, make it an impalpable Powder, and put the Powder into a Glass, and
then pour that Aqua fortis again upon the Powder which you distilled from
thence, and distill again all that will distill: Then take out the Caput
Mortuum again, grind it to Powder as before, and do in all things as before;
this Operation repeat, till you have distilled all the Salt within the Aqua
fortis: Then have you an excellent Red Water shining by night like a clear
Fire; then rectify that Water in Balneo, oftentimes distilling, and pouring on
again, so as at last to have all the Distillation in Balneo: Then is your
precious Water prepared, by which you may multiply and open your
(Philosophical) Stone. These Menstruums are little different, yea almost the
same with the former of Isaacus, as to the Ingredients as well as Method of
preparation, but the addition of the Spirit of Philosophical Wine which Isaacus
prescribed in those Dissolving Waters, must of necessity be understood in these
his Aqua fortises; for without this Spirit all these Waters would be common, of
no Virtue and Use.

From the Receipts we observe:
1. That all Tinging Bodies whatsoever being either naturally or artificially
dissolved in an Acid, and reduced into Salt or Vitriol by the help of the
Spirit of Philosophical Wine, do yield the present Menstruums, by these two
Methods; either by repeated Cohobation, or Simple Distillation; but in this
latter way it is necessary for the Salts or Vitriols of the said Bodies to be
first graduated, that is, by various Dissolutions and Coagulations joined with
the Spirit of Philosophical Wine, and then distilled, where Caution must be
had, lest in this gradation of the Vitriol, the Acid, be by Operations less
necessary than convenient debilitated; for so you will easily prepare
Menstruums unexpectedly of the Eighth instead of this Kind.

2. That these Menstruums differ from Menstruums of the Eighth Kind, these
being Acid, but those Sweet. Dissolve a Compounded Vegetable Menstruum of the
Eighth Kind in Distilled Vinegar, Spirit of Sulphur, Common Aqua Fortis, etc.
and you will immediately have a Menstruum of this Kind; on the contrary,
debilitate the Acidity of these Menstruums, and they will be transmuted into
Menstruums of the Eighth Kind.

3. That these Menstruums are the Essences of Things tinging dissolved in an
Acid.

4. That Hungarian Vitriol (Copper naturally dissolved in an Acid) tho
artificially purged from Heterogeneous Salts and Feces, does nevertheless as
well as other things tinging, require the Spirit of Philosophical Wine, in
order to be reduced into an Oil so excellent in Medicine as well as Alchimy.

5. That it is even much at one by what Acid Copper or any other tinging Body
is reduced into Vitriol, provided it be afterward graduated, that is, mixed
with the Spirit of Philosophical Wine: Wherefore you must once for always take
notice, that not only in the Writings of Basilius and Paracelsus, but of other
Adepts also, as in Via Veritatis, etc. in several places of which you will meet
with these Phrases, Things graduated, corrected, exalted, etc. you must
understand not Common Menstruums, but prepared with the Spirit of Philosophical
Wine, and so made fit for the Works of the more Secret Chymy.

6. That Roman Vitriol is reduced into so Noble an Oil, not by the Spirit of
Common but Philosophical Wine.

7. That these Menstruums do by continued Cohobations become most red, shining
by Night so, that Men at Supper want no other Light; permanent and multiplying
the Philosophers Stone; but of these in their proper places, namely, the Third
and Fourth Books.

The One and Twentieth KIND. Compounded Mineral Menstruums of Simple Mineral
Menstruums and Mercury, the rest of the Metals, and other Tinging Things.
113. The Spirit of Venus or Spirit of Verdegreece of Basilius. Libr. Partic.
de Particul. Veneris.
TAke of Copper as much as you will, of which make Vitriol the common way, or
instead of it take Common Verdegreece sold in Shops, which will do the same
thing; to which being pulverized, pour (Common) Distilled Vinegar, put it in a
heat, decant the Vinegar, being transparent and green, to the remainder pour
new Vinegar, and repeat the Work, till the Vinegar be tinged, and the Matter
remain in the bottom of the Vessel black; draw off the Vinegar being tinged and
gathered together either to dryness, or to a thin Skin, that the Vitriol may be
cristallized, and you will have the Verdegreece purified (after the common way)
to which being pulverized, pour the Juice of Unripe Grapes ( Philosophical
Vinegar in Numb. 74.) put it in a gentle heat, and digesting you will have a
transparent Smagragdine Tincture, with which is extracted the Red Tincture of
Venus, an excellent Color for Painters. This Tincture being extracted, mix all
the Extractions together, and draw off the Phlegm gently, that the Vitriol
being very clear (graduated) may be cristallized in a Cold place, whereof if
you have a sufficient quantity, you have also enough Matter for the making of
the Philosophical Stone; if perhaps you should doubt to perform such a Mystery
with every (Natural) Vitriol whatsoever: Concerning this Preparation we lately
spoke parabolically in Libro Clavium, Capite de Wein Essig. where we said: That
common Azoth is not the Matter of our Stone, but our Azoth or first Matter
extracted by common Azoth and Wine, which are the expressed Juice of unripe
Grapes, whereby the Body of Venus is to be dissolved and reduced into Vitriol:
This is to be well observed, for thus you will free your selves from many
Difficulties. Now out of this Vitriol thus prepared, distill a Spirit and Red
Oil, etc.

Annotations.

IN the Eighth Kind common Mercury and Metals were either by the Spirit of
Philosophical Wine, or by some simple Vegetable Menstruums converted into
compounded Vegetable Menstruums. In the Twentieth antecedent Kind, tinging
Arids dissolved in Acids are more easily distilled together with the Spirit of
Philosophical Wine into compounded Mineral Menstruums: But the present Kind
volatilizeth the said Bodies, not by the Spirit of Philosophical Wine; but
Mineral Menstruums, that the Menstruums may be thereby made sooner, easier, and
of a higher Kind. In the last Kind we distilled natural Vitriol, being
macerated in the Spirit of Philosophical Wine, or, which is much more
conducible, dissolved in the same Spirit, and reduced into graduated Vitriol,
into a Mineral Menstruum: For the natural acidity of Roman Vitriol for the
corrosion of Copper, was in the composition of it able and strong enough to
dissolve the Spirit of Philosophical Wine in the making of the said Menstruum;
but here in Artificial Vitriols the matter is otherwise; for the dry Bodies of
Metals cooperating in their Dissolutions do debilitate the acid, and therefore
Vitriols, containing this debilitated acidity, are scarce fit either for the
dissolution of the Spirit of Philosophical Wine, or the constitution of the
present Menstruum: Wherefore the Vitriols of Saturn and Jupiter being made with
a common acid, do by virtue of the Spirit of Philosophical Wine, yield sweet
Oils, or Vegetable Menstruums, not at all acid or mineral; for that weak acid
remaining in the Vitriolification of those soft Metals, is wholly transmuted in
the dissolution of the Spirit of Philosophical Wine, as also in the very
Distillation of it self, so that Vitriol being artificially made of Copper and
Iron by acids, is distilled not by the Spirit of Philosophical Wine, but
Mineral Menstruums, into a Menstruum of the present Kind; but Gold and Silver
need not only these Mineral or Stronger Menstruums, but to be likewise
volatilized by the same, and reduced into Volatile Vitriols.

Thus Basilius in Conclusionibus suis. Sect. 2. de Vitriolis. Cap. 1. de
Vitriolo Solis and Lunae: reduced Gold and Silver into Volatile Vitriol. It is
requisite, says he, first to have our Water made of the cold Salt of the Earth
(Niter) and the Eagle (Vegetable Sal harmoniack) wherewith Gold and Silver are
made spiritual, and coagulated into Cristal, or Metallic Vitriol, by which,
etc. In Labor primo Libri Revelationis, ut and in Elucidatione 12 Clavium,
this Vitriol of Sol is more exactly thus described: Take, says he, of this
Water (the Kings Bath or Menstruum described above in Numb. 89.) three parts,
of the Calx of Gold one part, mix, put it in a Cucurbit with an Alembick upon
hot Ashes, to be dissolved, if it be not all dissolved, pour off the Water and
pour on new, and that, till all the Calx is dissolved in the Water, when it is
cold, white Feces settle in the bottom, which separate, join all the Water
together, and digest in Balneo a day and a night; then having taken away the
Feces, digest the space of nine days continually, distill away the Water, that
the Matter may remain in the bottom like Oil, the Water distilled from it pour
on again being heated, distill, as before, pour on again, distill, and this
repeat some certain times, thus will (the Menstruum) be debilitated, then pour
new Water to the Matter like Oil, digest a day and a night, distill in Sand to
an Oil, pour on Water again being hot; distill, and that so often till all the
Gold is come over, but this Distillation ought to be done in a low Cucurbit,
with a flat bottom, put the Golden Water which came over in a cold place, to
cristallize, separate the Water from them. Guido made the Volatile Vitriol of
Gold out of Gold sublimed: The Gold he sublimed thus: Take of Gold calcined
twelve times with three parts of Cinabar, or of Leaf Gold four Ounces, of the
Oil of Salt ( the Menstruum described in Numb. 76.) twelve Ounces, dissolve in
ashes. Draw off the Oil of Salt from it several times, putrify for a Month,
then distill, and all the Gold will be sublimed, of a Red Color in the tenth
or twelfth Sublimation; but if it will not be sublimed, join all together, and
draw off the Phlegm in Balneo, to the remainder add of the Oil of Tartar per
deliquium four Ounces gradually, and force it with a stronger Fire, and the
Gold will ascend Red with the Menstruum, and be precipitated in the bottom of
it; decant the Water from the Gold, upon which kindle Rectified Spirit of
(Common) Wine eight or nine times, to take away all the Acidity of the Oil of
Salt. Page 11. Thesaur. Chym. With Gold thus sublimed he prepared the graduated
Vitriol of Sol by the following Method. Take of Gold sublimed four Ounces and a
half, pour to it Radical Vinegar (mixed with the Spirit of Wine) the height of
three Fingers, digest three days in Balneo, decant the Vinegar, and pour on
new, till all be dissolved, which draw off in Balneo, but beware of too much;
put it in a cold Cellar, and the Vitriol of Gold will be cristallized of a Ruby
or Granat Color, more or less beautiful, according to the Method of Operating;
from which decant the Liquor again to be drawn off to a thin Skin, till you
have five Ounces of the Vitriol. Page 19. Thesaur. Chym. The same way also he
prepared the Graduated Vitriol of Luna, Page 31. as also of Mars, Page 36. But
Jupiter, Page 42. Venus, Page 45. and Saturn, Page 49. he calcined only, and
reduced them with the aforesaid Vinegar into Graduated Vitriols, out of all
which Vitriols may Menstruums of this Kind be distilled, as Basilius his Spirit
of Venus.

Isaacus distilled the Spirit of Saturn out of the Graduated Vitriol of Lead,
thus,

114. The Water of Paradise of Isaacus. In Opere Saturni.
TAke of Saturn ten or fifteen Pounds, which no other Metal is mixed with, beat
it into thin Plates, and have a Bottle half full of Vinegar, lute, put it in a
warm Balneo, and every three or four days scrape the Saturn that is calcined
from the Plates, gather about five or six Pounds of it, grind this calcined
Saturn (Ceruse) with distilled (Philosophical) Vinegar, upon a Marble, so as
with a Pencil to serve for a Picture, then take a Stone Jugg, and therein pour
Distilled Vinegar to the calcined Saturn, leaving a third part of the Jugg
empty, mix very well, stop it with a Glass or Stone Stopple, set it in Balneo,
stir it five or six times a day with a Wooden Slice or Spoon, stop it again,
nor heat the Balneo more than that you may endure your hand in it; let it thus
stand 14 days and nights, then pour off the clear, and pour new Vinegar to the
Calx not yet dissolved; mix, proceed, as before, repeating, till all the Calx
of Saturn is dissolved; put the Saturn being thus dissolved in Balneo,
evaporate the Vinegar with a slow Fire, the Saturn will be reduced into a Mass,
which move to and fro till it be dry; it will be of a Honey Color, rub it on a
Marble with Distilled Vinegar, like Soap, put it again in the Stone Jugge,
being very well mixed, in a warm Balneo the space of five or six days; stir it
every day with a Wooden Slice, stop the Glass, let it cool, pour off what is
dissolved into another large Stone Jugge, pour other Vinegar to it, mix very
well, put it again in Balneo, pour off, and thus proceed, till nothing more
will be dissolved, which you may try by your tongue, for if the Vinegar be
sweet, it is not enough dissolved; or put a little in a Glass Cucurbit, and let
it evaporate, if any thing remains, all that will be Gold is not dissolved, and
that which remains in the Jugge, or Feces, if they be sweet upon the tongue,
and you find yet something in the Cucurbit that is not enough dissolved, you
may dissolve it by pouring new Vinegar to it. These Solutions coagulate, as
before, dissolve in Distilled Vinegar, as before; these Coagulations and
Solutions continue, till no more Feces remain in the bottom, but are all things
dissolved into a clear and limpid Water; then is Saturn free from all its
Leprosy, Melancholy, Feces, Blackness, and Superfluities, and is pure, as
(now, being exempted from all filth) fusible as Wax, and sweet as Sugar, etc.
Take half of the Purged Saturn, put it in a Stone Jugge, and pour to it four
Pounds of Distilled Vinegar, put on an Alembick, and distill the Vinegar in
Balneo, but the Alembick must have a hole in the top, through which pour new
Vinegar, distill, as before, pour on new and draw off, and that till the
Vinegar be drawn off as strong as it is poured on, then is it enough, because
the Matter has imbibed as much of the Spirits of the Vinegar, as it needs, and
as much as it can retain: Take the Jugge from the Fire, and the Alembick being
taken off, put the Matter into a Glass that can endure the Fire, put an
Alembick to it, put it in a Copel with Ashes in a Furnace; make first a gentle
Fire, increase it by degrees, till your Matter goes over of the Color of
Blood, and thickness of Oil, sweetness of Sugar, and of a heavenly smell; if
the heat diminishes, keep it while the Matter distills, increase the Fire,
till the Glass begins to be Fire hot, keep it in this heat, till nothing more
distills; let it cool by it self, take away the Receiver, and stop it very well
with Wax, beat the Matter (Caput mortuum) in an Iron Mortar, with a Steel
Pestle, and then grind it upon a Marble with Distilled Vinegar (Vinegar mixed
with the Spirit of Philosophical Wine) put it in a Stone Jugge two parts full,
distill by Balneo, pour on new Vinegar, distill as before, repeat, till the
Vinegar distills with the same strength as it was poured on, let them cool,
distill the Matter in a strong Glass upon Ashes as before, first with a gentle
Fire, then alstronger, as you did before, a Red Oil will go over, as before,
etc. beat the Matter, and proceed again, till the Matter will retain no more of
the Spirit of Vinegar in the Distillation in Balneo, then take the Matter,
distill what will distill in a glass Cucurbit upon Ashes, till you have distilled
the Matter into a Red Oil, which is the noble Water of Paradise, by which all
Fixed Stones may be resolved, and the Stone made perfect. This Water of
Paradise the Ancients called their sharp, clear, Vinegar, etc.

Metals sometimes are not reduced into graduated Vitriols, but by repeated
Cohobation made Menstruums of this Kind Thus

115. The Mercurial Vinegar of Trismosinus. Libro Moratosan sive Octo
Tincturarum in Secunda Tinctura, Page 79. Aur. Vell. Germ.
TAke Argent Vive purged the common way, put it in an Alembick, whereto pour
very sharp Vinegar ( Vinegar mixed with the Spirit of Philosophical Wine
described before in Numb. 72.) three Ounces of Vinegar to one Ounce of Mercury;
draw off six times in Balneo, then force it to ascend into the Receiver, being
distilled, rectify it, and it will be prepared.

Sometimes instead of Philosophical Vinegar he used the strongest Aqua Fortis
described in Numb. 73.

116. The Mercurial Water of Trismosinus. Libr. Octo Tincturar. in Tinct.
quarta. Page 80. Aurei Vell. Germ.
TAke of Roman Vitriol, Sal Niter, of each one Pound and a half, of (Vegetable)
Sal armoniack four Ounces, of Tiles pulverized one Pound, out of which distill
Aqua fortis by the Rule of Art. Take of Venetian Mercury sublimed (you must
have a care of its Venomous Fume) four Ounces, put it in a Cucurbit, pour the
said Aqua fortis to it, draw off strongly, that the Mercury may be well mixed
with the Aqua fortis, and it will be prepared.

Albertus Magnus prepared the same Mercurial Water thus,

117. The Mercurial Water of Albertus Magnus. Libro Compositum de Compositis.
Cap. 5. Page 937. Vol. 4. Th. Chym.
TAke of Roman Vitriol two Pounds, of Sal Niter two Pounds, of Alume calcined
one Pound; being well ground and mixed together put the Matter in a fit Glass
Phial, and having luted the Joints very close, that the Spirits may not
evaporate, distill Aqua fortis after the common way, first with a weak Fire,
secondly a stronger, thirdly with Wood, that all the Spirits may go over, and
the Alembick turn white; then put out the Fire, let the Furnace cool, and keep
the Water carefully, because it is the Dissolvitive of Luna, keep it therefore
for the finishing of the Work, because that Water dissolves Luna, separates
Gold from Silver, calcines Mercury and the Crocus of Mars, etc. This is the
first Philosophical Water (Common Aqua fortis) and has one Degree of
Perfection in it. Take of the first Water one pound, dissolve in it two Ounces
of (Vegetable) Sal armoniack pure and clear, which being dissolved, the Water
is presently otherwise qualified, and otherwise colored, because the first was
of a Green Color, and the Dissolvitive of Luna, and not of Sol, and presently
after the putting in of the Sal armoniack the Color of it is turned to a
Citrine, and dissolveth Gold, Mercury, and Sulphur sublimed, and tingeth a Man's
Skin of a most Citrine Color, keep that Water (Philosophical Aqua Regis)
apart. Take of the second Water one Pound, and of Mercury sublimed with Roman
Vitriol, and common Salt five Ounces and a half, put it to the second Water by
little and little gradually, seal the Mouth of the Glass well, that the Virtue
of the Mercury put in may not suddenly exhale; put the Glass in Ashes
temperately hot, and the Water will presently begin to work upon the Mercury,
dissolving it and incorporating; and let the Glass stand thus in hot Ashes, and
in the dissolution of the Water, till the Water appears no more, but has wholly
dissolved the Sublimed Mercury: Now the Water acts always upon Mercury by the
way of imbibition, till it dissolves it totally: But take notice, if the Water
cannot wholly dissolve the Mercury put in, then lay aside the Mercury that is
dissolved by that Water, and that which is not dissolved at the bottom dry with
a gentle Fire, grind, and dissolve it with new Water as before, and thus repeat
this Order, till all the Sublimed Mercury is dissolved into Water: And then
join all the solutions of that third Water, into one, in a clean Glass, and
stop the Mouth of it well with Wax, and keep it carefully: This is the third
Philosophical thick qualified Water in the third degree of Perfection, and is
the Mother of Aqua Vitae, which dissolves all Bodies into their first Matter.
Take the third clarifi'd Mercurial Water, qualified in the third Degree of
Perfection, putrefie it in the Belly of a Horse, to be well digested in a clear
Glass with a long Neck, well sealed the space of 14 days, make it putrefie, and
the Feces settle at the bottom, then will this Water be transmuted from a
Citrine to a Yellow Color, which done, take out the Glass, put it in Ashes
with a most gentle heat, put on an Alembick with its Receiver, and begin to
distill by little and little a most clear, clean, ponderous Aqua Vitae, Virgins
Milk, most sharp Vinegar, drop by drop, continuing constantly a slow Fire, till
you have distilled all the Aqua Vitae gently, then put out the Fire, let the
Furnace cool, and keep it diligently apart. Behold this is Aqua Vitae, the
Philosophers Vinegar, Virgins Milk, by which Bodies are resolved into their
first Matter, which is called by infinite Names. The Signs of this Water are
these, if a Drop be cast upon a Copper Plate red hot, it will presently
penetrate, and leave a White Impression, it smoaks upon Fire, is coagulated in
the Air after the manner of Ice: and when this Water is distilled, the Drops of
it do not enter continually as other Drops, but one is distilled one way,
another another way; this Water acts not upon Metallic Bodies, as another
strong Corrosive Water, which dissolves Bodies into Water, but if Bodies be put
into this Water, it reduces and resolves them all into Mercury, as you shall
hear hereafter.

Paracelsus made this Water by the following Method.

118. The Mecurial Water of Paracelsus. In Appendice Manualis de Lap. Phil.
Page 139.
TAke of Mercury seven times sublimed with Vitriol, Sal Niter, and Alume, three
pounds of (Vegetable) Sal armoniack sublimed three times with Salt, clear and
white, one Pound and a half, being ground together and alcolized, sublime them
in a Sublimatory nine hours in Sand: Being cold, draw off the Sublimate with a
Feather, and with the rest sublime, as before: This Operation repeat four
times, till no more sublimes, and a Black Mass remains in the bottom flowing
like Wax; being cold take it out, and being ground again, imbibe it often in
the Water of Sal armoniack prepared according to Art ( the Menstruum described
in Numb. 91.) in a Glass Dish, and being coagulated of it self, imbibe it
again, and dry nine or ten times over, till it will scarce any more be
coagulated: Being ground finely upon a Marble, dissolve it in a moist place to
a clear Oil, which you must rectify by Distillation in Ashes from all Feces
and Sediment. This Water keep diligently as the best of all.

Lully made his Mercurial Water of Mercury and the Stinking Menstruum thus,

119. The Stinking Mercvrial Menstruum of Lully. Page 63. Testam. Novissimi.
TAke of the Stinking Menstruum four Pounds, and put in one pound of Mercury
Vive, put the Matter in Balneo or Horse Dung six days, and it will be all
converted into Water, distill by Balneo, and you will have a Mercurial Water,
truly Mineral.

Ripley followed his Master in the way of making the Mercurial Water, as
follows.

120. The Mercurial Green Lion of Ripley. Page 310. Pupillae Alchymicae.
TAke Mercury sublimed with Vitriol and common Salt, to the quantity of 20 or
40 Pounds (in my opinion two or four ought to be read) that you may have
enough. Grind it well into Powder, and put it in a Glass Vessel very large and
strong, pour to it so many Pounds of the most strong Water ( the Stinking
Menstruum is the strongest Water in the World, Page 138. Medullae) as there are
Pounds of Mercury: Shake them soundly together, and the Vessel will become so
hot, that you can scarce touch it; stop it well, and let it stand nine days in
a cold place, shaking it strongly three or four times each day: Which done, put
the Vessel in a Furnace of Ashes, and with a most gentle heat distill away all
the Aqua Vitae (Menstruum) which keep safe by it self, then immediately add
another Receiver well luted, kindle a most strong Fire, and continue it till
all the Golden Liquor is wholly distilled.

The same ways as the Mercurial Waters are made, may also be made Menstruums of
this Kind out of the other Metals, thus.

121. The Stinking Lunar Menstruum of Lully. In Experimento 29.
TAke of the aforesaid Mineral Water ( described in Numb. 104.) as you have it
in the former Experiment ( Numb. 26.) six or eight Ounces, dissolve in it one
Ounce of Luna, which dissolution put into a small Retort to be distilled by
Ashes; which Distillation ceasing, increase the Fire as much as possible, and
when no more moisture will with this degree of Fire distill, cool the Vessel,
receive the Distilled Water, wherein is the Soul of Luna, and secure it from
respiring.

Thus also Lully prepares the Water of Sol.

122. The Stinking Solar Menstruum of Lully. In Experim. 31.
TAke the Aqua Fortis or Mineral Water (described in Numb. 104.) as above, and
in every Pound thereof dissolve three Ounces of the Animal Salt prepared and
fixed, as you have it in its (Sixth) Experiment: Which being dissolved,
dissolve therein two Ounces of Gold cemented, as you know, after that putrefie
eight days, then distill by Balneo: Now that which remains at the bottom, will
be like melted Honey, upon which Matter pour again some of its own Water
distilled by Balneo, so as to swim two fingers above it; putrefie for a natural
day, then taking away the Antenotorium, put on an Alembick with a Receiver, so
close, as not to respire: Distill by Ashes, till no more will distill, then
increase the Fire a little, that part of the Air may pass into the Water; and
lastly increase the Fire, that also the Element of Fire may pass through the
Alembick; and when nothing will distill with this last degree of Fire, cool the
Vessel, take away the Receiver with its Distilled Water, and keep it well
stopped.

Isaacus Hollandus made a Mercurial Water sometimes with the Mercury of Luna,
thus.

123. Philosophers Vinegar made of the Mercury of Silver of Isaacus. Cap. 99.
2. Oper. Min. Page 492. Vol. 3. Th. Cym.
TAke of the Calx of Luna one Pound, of Sal armoniack, which must be clear and
transparent as Cristal, without moisture, a fourth part, being ground, put them
in a Stone Jugge, then take (Philosophical) Vinegar distilled five or six times
from its Phlegm, so as to leave no Feces; empty the Vinegar into another Stone
Jugge, and having put on an Alembick, place it in Balneo: The Jugge which the
ground Calx is in, lute well to the beak of the Alembick, and let the Luting be
thoroughly dried: Then make Fire under the Balneo, and distill the Vinegar
leasurely upon the Calx of Luna; and so many Pounds as you have of the Calx of
Luna, so many four Pounds of Vinegar distill upon it, and when all the Vinegar
is distilled, let it cool gently the space of three days, before you remove the
Jugge, for if you remove it sooner, the Vinegar, Luna, and Sal armoniack will
run over, and you will retain nothing, so vehement is that Matter, for Cold and
Hot do come together; and when you would remove it, have a Glass Stopple ready
fitted to the mouth of the Jugge, or Receiver, which you must presently lute to
it, that the Virtue may not evaporate: Then set the Jugge in Balneo, let the
Fire be no hotter than your hand can well endure in the Water up to the
Knuckles, or then may be drunk without burning, and thus keep it the space of
six weeks: Then let it be cold, break it, and presently lute an Alembick to the
Jugge very firmly, and put a Receiver to the Beak, distill in a temperate
Balneo, whatsoever will distill, and when now no more distills, take it out, and
put it in Ashes, lute the Receiver again to the Beak, and first apply a gentle
heat, then sometimes a stronger, till your Mercury begins to sublime with the
Sal armoniack, as white as Snow, and hanging to the White Matter with clear
Fibers, then keep it thus (till you see it sublimes not) in the same heat, to
extract the Mercury purely out of the Earth: Then let it cool, take away the
Alembick, take out the Mercury being sublimed with the Sal armoniack, which are
sublimed into a Mass together, which weigh, that you may know how much Mercury
you sublimed out of the Calxes of Luna, for you knew how much Sal armoniack you
put into the Jugge: Then put the Sublimate again into a Glass, and again
sublime, that you may see whether any Feces remain, for you must repeat the
Sublimation till no Feces remain. Keep this Mercury till I teach you what to do
with it: You must know that in that Vessel, wherein you sublimed the Mercury
with the Sal armoniack, is the Body (commonly called Caput Mortuum) or Element
of Earth with its Oil or Fire, this take out and weigh, that so you may the
better know, how much Mercury you sublimed also out of it, for you knew how
much of the Calx of Luna you had in the Jugge, so you may certainly know how
much you have out of it: Then put your Salt or Earth into a Glass, and pour
Distilled Vinegar upon it, and dissolve it into a pure Water, if it yields any
Feces, pour off the top gradually, and congeal again, till it leaves no more
Feces, then congeal again: Then have you your Salt prepared with your Earth
clear as Cristal. Now take your Sublimed Mercury and Sal armoniack, and your
clear Salt, and grind them together upon a Marble dry, being ground, put all
the Matter into a Glass Plate, set it on a Tripos or our Calcining Furnace, and
there let it stand six Weeks, and apply such a heat, as if you would keep Lead
melted without congealing: Those six Weeks being expired, let it cool, then put
it in a cold Cellar, and cover it with a Linen Cloth, that no dust may fall
in, and in the space of six or eight days it will be wholly dissolved into a
clear Water. Now you must know, this is the Philosopers clear Vinegar, for when
they write our Vinegar, they mean this Water, and when they say Philosophers
Mercury, they mean this Water, and it is their Vinegar which they write or so
wonderfully speak of.

From the Receipts we observe:
1. That Metals and Minerals volatilized with Simple Mineral Menstruums are
Menstruums of this Kind.

2. That these Menstruums are the same with the Menstruums of the Eighth Kind
dissolved in Simple Mineral Menstruums, but differ from the antecedent Kind, in
being made not with the Spirit of Philosophical Wine, but Philosophical Vinegar.

3. That these Menstruums are the Essences or Magisteries of Things tinging
dissolved in Simple Mineral Menstruums.

4. That those Menstruums being Mineral or Acid, are in Alchymical Processes
better than the Vegetable Menstruums of the Eighth Kind, because stronger.

5. That the dissolutions of Metals performed by these Mercurial Menstruums,
have been by the Adepts sometimes called Amalgamations. You must know, says
Isaacus, That this is the best Solution, that ever was found in the World, for
herein is no error of Proportion and Weight. For Nature errs not. For when
Mercury is dissolved, it dissolves other Metals also, as is rightly taught in
other places. Nor will it dissolve more than it is able, nor will it receive
more of a Body into it, than its Nature can bear. For whatsoever has no need of
it, it cannot dissolve. And it is the best Amalgamation that can be found. 2.
Oper. Min. Cap. 103. Page 494. Vol. 3. Th. Chym. That Bernhard in Epistola ad
Thomam treated not of a dry but of this moist Amalgamation, I shall prove
elsewhere.

6. That the Menstruum of Venus, Sol, Luna, etc. is of the same Virtue, as to
the faculty of Dissolving, with the Menstruum of common Argent Vive; this
Mercurial Menstruum has been indeed more in use than the other by some Adepts,
because of the more easy way of operating upon the Open Body of Mercury, tho
it be less powerful than the rest in Point of Tinging.

7. That there are diverse Kinds of Stinking Menstruums: The Thirteenth Kind
taught us how to distill the most Stinking Menstruum of all, out of Atrop: For
there the Oily Matter of the Spirit of (Philosophical) Wine being dissolved in
Vitriol, is in its Distillation purged from all its Putrid Feculencies; but the
Twentieth Kind treats of Menstruums less stinking, being made of the Spirit of
Philosophical Wine now purified and sweet: The present Kind produces from the
same Matter Menstruums of the same Name indeed, but not of the same Stinking
Savor, Color, etc. For Philosophical Vinegar is, by reason of the perfect
dissolution of the Spirit of Philosophical Wine, Diaphanous, not of a Milky
Color, but in the Distillation of a Menstruum it is made Milky, because the
Acidity of the said Vinegar being debilitated by the Aridity of a Body
dissolved, cannot retain the Unctious Spirit of Philosophical Wine so well as
before, but in the precipitation of which the Distilled Liquor becomes Milky;
for this reason the Adepts sometimes added common Vitriol and Niter to the
Azoquean Vitriol, that the said Spirit might the better be dissolved. In a
word: The greater quantity of Philosophical Vinegar, or any other Mineral
Menstruum stronger than this, is made use of in the making of these Menstruums,
the less Milky, and less Stinking will the Menstruums be, because made not of
the embrionated Stinking Matter of the Spirit of Philosophical Wine, but of the
same purified by Circulation and Distillation.

8. That these, as all other Menstruums, are by Digestion made sweet and
transmuted into Dissolvents of the Eighth Kind.

The Two and Twentieth KIND. Mineral Menstruums compounded of the Philsophers
Vinegar, and other Simple Mineral Menstruums and Things tinging being first
fixed.
124. The Menstruum of Venus of Isaacus Hollandus. Cap. 82. 3. Oper. Miner.
I Will now Son teach you how to make the Stone, which God gives us freely. You
must know it is made diverse Ways, but I will teach you the Way which I learnt
from my Father. Take of the Stone which God gives us freely (the Vitriol of
Venus) as much as suffices, which dissolve in (Philosophical) distilled
Vinegar, let the Feces settle, decant the Dissolution from the Feces warily,
and filter; draw off the Vinegar with a gentle Fire, that the Matter may remain
dry; being dried dissolve it again in Distilled Vinegar, decant, filter, and
draw off, and that to be four times repeated, till no more Feces settle in the
Solution: Then distill away the Vinegar with a gentle Fire, till the Matter
becomes so dry, as to fly away in the beating of it into Powder, yet retains
its Spirits: Now it is prepared for Calcination. You must know Son, that this
Matter is in its Nature Stiptick and Astringent, partly volatile, partly fixed,
and so dissolved in Distilled Vinegar, that it may retain the subtle Spirit of
the Vinegar, and be calcined together with the said Spirit, made more subtle,
be better opened and dissolved, for the Spirit of Vinegar dissolves well before
all things. The Vitriol being thus prepared, Put it in a Glass Bottle or Egg,
lute hermetically, but the Vessels must be filled, that there may be no space
for the Spirits to elevate themselves, set it on a Tripos, and there let it
remain in a temperate heat, to subtiliate it self: Then take out the Matter,
and pulverize it, put it in a Cucurbit, put on an Alembick with a Receiver to
it, and so distill in Balneo whatsoever will distill, it will be distilled in
about 20 or 25 days: Then lay aside the Distillation, take out the Feces lying
at the bottom of the Cucurbit, grind them very fine upon a Stone, put them in a
Dissolving Vessel, pour all the Distilled Water to them, seal hermetically, and
it will be all dissolved in Balneo without Feces; distill the Solution in a
Cucurbit through an Alembick in Balneo with a moderate heat, that all the Water
may separate it self, which keep very choicely; continue the Distillation in
Ashes, that you may receive the Element of Air in the form of a very noble
Citrine Oil; and this must be done with a strong Fire, lay aside the Air by it
self very well stopped near the Water: The Feces being as red as Blood, take
out of the Cucurbit, grind them to an Impalpable Powder upon a Stone, put them
in a Glass Bottle or Egg, seal, and set it 30 days and nights on a Tripos to
be subtiliated with a temperate heat, then take out the Matter, grind it to
Powder, put it in a Dissolving Vessel, pour to it the Element of Water (above
distilled) seal, and put it in Balneo, to be dissolved, as before; distill the
Solution through an Alembick in Ashes (the Receiver must be put into cold
Water) increase the Fire by degrees, till at length it be hot; so let it
continue five or six days, and in the mean time will ascend the Element of Fire
in the form of a Red Oil, suffer it to be cooling three or four days, then take
away the Receiver, keep it very well stopped, etc.

Annotations.

WE have had diverse graduated Vitriols in the former Receipts, which have
yielded us diverse Menstruums. The Vitriol in this Kind is made better than all
of them; for it is made of Vitriol graduated in a close Vessel, fixed according
to Art, and again dissolved in Philosophical Vinegar, that by Distillation it
may be made a better Menstruum than those before. In the Ninth Kind of
Vegetable Menstruums the graduated Vitriol of Mercury, made of Mercury sublimed
and Salt circulated, is in a close Vessel reverberated into a Fixed Powder,
which Crocus of Mercury then volatilized with the Spirit of Philosophical Wine,
makes a Vegetable Menstruum. If the same graduated Vitriol of Mercury be in a
close Vessel reverberated into a Fixed Precipitate, and then dissolved, not in
the Spirit of Philosophical Wine, but Philosophical Vinegar, or some other
Mineral Menstruum, it will be thereby made a Menstruum of this Kind. That which
is spoken of the Vitriol of Mercury, must be also understood of the present
Vitriol of Venus in our Receipt; where Isaacus dissolves the said Vitriol in
Phiosophical Vinegar, depurates and graduates, which then he calcines, that is,
fixes upon a Tripos^ being fixed it must be dissolved in new Philosophical
Vinegar, and volatilized, before the Distillation of it, as appears by the
Description of the same Menstruum elsewhere given.

125. A Menstruum of Vitriol of Isaacus Hollandus. Cap. 62. 2. Oper. Min.
TAke a great quantity of Roman Vitriol, 10 or 12 Pounds, rather more than
less, as much as you will, and dissolve the Vitriol in common Water; let the
Feces settle, put the clear Dissolution in a Stone Vessel to be congealed, till
a thin skin comes over it, then let it cool and stand three days a, nd you will
have notable Stones of a green color clear as Cristal; take out those Stones,
and put them in small Glass Vessels in a clean Balneo to dry, the Balneo must
have such a heat as is of the Sun in the middle of Summer, and your Stones will
be turned into a white Powder, which Powder dissolve in common Distilled Water,
and let the Feces settle, decant the clear into a clean Vessel, as before, and
let it be congealed, as before; this repeat, till you can see no Feces left;
when you have thus washed and made your Powder white, you may be assured your
Vitriol is rightly prepared. Now take the white powder of Vitriol, put it in a
Glass Vessel with a Neck pretty long, and seal the Neck with the Seal of Hermes
so, that no Air can either pass out or in; and then put it in a Plate with
sifted Ashes upon a Furnace, put fire under, and put a Burning Lamp under the
Furnace, adding such a heat as the Sun yields in the middle of March, and thus
keep it, till you see your Matter grow yellow, and continue it in the same
heat, till it be perfectly ruddy, then increase the Fire a little, that is, put
under one Lamp more, and thus continue it eight or ten days, and then see
whether your Matter begins not to be red, if it begins to be red, increase your
Fire, and so continue it eight or ten days: But if you gain nothing in redness,
increase your Fire with yet one Lamp, and so proceed gradually always one Lamp
being kindled, till your Matter be as deep a red, as a Rose or Ruby; it being
now so deeply red, suffer it even thus the space of eight or ten days in the
same heat; when you see your Matter remains in the same state, take it out of
the Plate with Ashes, and empty it into another strong Glass, pour a good
quantity of (Philosophical) distilled Vinegar upon it, and put it in Balneo,
let it boil, and stir it with a Wooden Spatula three or four times every day,
and thus continue it four days and nights, then let it cool, and pour off the
clear; and again pour on Distilled Vinegar, and that repeat three times; then
throw away the Feces, and draw off the Vinegar through an Alembick in Balneo,
till your Matter become altogether dry; pour on new Vinegar, and do as before,
and that so long, till no more Feces remain in the Dissolution: Then congeal it
into a dry Powder, which put into a good thick Glass, and putting on an
Alembick with a large Head, distill in order to obtain first Saffron Colored
Spirits, then a Red Oil, lastly, white Spirits, then let it cool, take away the
Receiver, and keep that truly blessed Oil which is in it. Take away the
Alembick, and in the Pot you will find a Matter white as Snow, and clear as
Cristal, etc.

The way of making of this Menstruum, we will consider in its several Branches.

The first is concerning the choice of Vitriol, which Reason requires as well
as the antecedent Receipt to be graduated, that is, dissolved either in the
Spirit of Philosophical Wine, or Philosophical Vinegar, and Cristallized, for
the Calcination of common Vitriol, dissolved in common Water, and purified, in
a close Vessel to a most red color, is altogether Impossible, and of no
Efficacy neither; for nothing but the common Acid or common Spirit of Vitriol
is extracted out of common Vitriol, be it never so well purified and calcined:
Vitriol therefore well Purged in common Water, is to be chosen according to the
present Receipt, but after that, according to the antecedent well dissolved in
Philosophical Vinegar, that it may be thereby made graduated Vitriol, and the
fit Matter of this Menstruum.

The second Branch treats of the calcination or fixation of this graduated
Vitriol into redness: Corncerning which, the former process was too obscure,
but the present or later clear enough: This Calcination is the true and
Philosophical way of fixing this Vitriol, and that chiefly, because citrinity
and redness follow blackness and whiteness, the true signs of volatilization as
well as fixation, of which Tho. Isaacus said nothing in both the Receipts, yet
other Adepts have mentioned these Colors in the fixing of Vitriol. Take that
Stone, says Ripley, Cap. 7. Phil. Cupri Stillicidium (the Green Lion of Fools,
or common Vitriol graduated) and put it, being ground into a Philosophers Egg,
and proceed upon it by the way of Putrefaction, as was declared in the Process
of Rebis, and continue the Stone upon the Fire, till after blackness and
whiteness, it is turned into a red Powder, which many call Vitriol Rubificated.

But here rises some doubt, in that the Red Color of this Calcined Vitriol,
seems to be by Isaacus himself called Volatile, not in the least fixed. This
Matter, says he, will remain red for ever, and not fixed, for if it should be
fixed, it would be altogether corrupted, for it must be Dissolved into Water,
and distilled through an Alembick, Cap. 65. To disperse this Cloud, you must
know, the meaning of Isaacus is, that Vitriol calcined, or by what way soever
reduced into redness, remains red, but not also fixed ^^ause it must be
dissolved in Philosophical Vinegar, and Distilled through an Alembick. For we
find the like, if not the same Phrase, concerning the redness and fixity of the
Philosophers Stone, which will easily remove the aforesaid doubt: When the
Stone is perfect, says he, it ought to remain in that State now and for
evermore. After Perfection, it cannot be changed for better nor for worse, but
will remain a King for ever. Wherefore, if any Man has prepared the true
Philosophers Stone, no Multiplication follows after; wheresoever Multiplication
follows after Perfection, there is not the Philosophers Stone, nor is there a
true Stone. It may be a Medicine, or other Stone, of which sort are many
wherewith Projection is made, but it is not the Philosophers Stone, which we
here Discourse of. When the aforesaid Stone is perfect and prepared, it ought
to remain in that State for ever, Cap. 127. 1. Oper. Miner. Page 407. Vol. 3.
Th. Chym.

As to the Permanence of the red color in the Philosophers Stone, he declares
the following Notions: In Multiplication, says he, no blackness intervenes,
nor do any Colors of the World show themselves, nor any Whiteness, nor in
Sublimation does any thing show it self besides redness, nor in fixation does
any Color show its self except its own, that is, an egregious redness: For the
Stone has no other Color but redness, for it is one only substance, one
single matter, and as the Heaven invincible: You must also know, tho it were
sublimed, it would not be deprived of all its fixity, for when the Stone is
made and prepared in the utmost virtue of it, then can it not be changed out of
its own Essence into another, for if the Stone could be changed or drawn out of
its own Essence into another Essence or Nature, it would not be the
Philosophers Stone, nor one single Matter, nor a glorified Body; no, no,
understand my Discourse rightly, etc. Cap. 72. 1. Oper. Min. Page 355. of the
same Volume.

Isaacus being perhaps persuaded of an unalterable constancy of redness
observed in the Multiplication of the Stone of higher Degree or Kind, concludes
the Philosophers Stone to be altogether and absolutely immutable: which Opinion
to defend in every part, he has sooner ventured to deny the volatilization it
self of the Stone, than give way to the a^ing of fixity in Multiplication: You
must know, says he, if the Stone were sublimed, yet would it not be deprived
of its fixity. Yea, he has chosen rather to prevert his own Senses (for he
himself has in the same place taught how to volatilize the Philosophers Stone,
with some shining Menstruum) and the Sense of the Word Fix (tho upon this Term
depends one half of all the Operations in the more secret Chymy) than
relinquish this fallacy derived from a Paralogism. The Stone, says he, may be
so often opened as aforesaid, and after that sublimed, and again condensed so
as to unite its parts, which we call Fixation; we term it indeed Fixation, but
it is not Fixation, but only Condensation, so, as that all the subtle parts of
it are again forced into an Union jointly together, as they were at first, and
the Stone will again expect Fire, and we may again make Projection with it, as
we did before. Cap. 76. read 73, 74, 75. Chapters of the same Book.

What we have against this Opinion, we will reserve for the Third Book; in the
mean time it will be requisite for you to observe this one thing: That the
Matter of Calcined Vitriol, as also of the Philosophers Stone, multiplied,
remains for everred, but not fixed, because either of them may be volatilized
with Philosophical Menstruums. But let them be how they will, the Vitriol of
Saturn fixed the same way by the same Author, will prove that the graduated
Vitriol of Venus, calcined to redness in a close Vessel is fixed. Take, says
he, a Glass Viol, put in it one half of Purged Saturn (Sugar of Saturn made not
with common Distilled Vinegar, but Philosophical) reserve the other part by it
self till you have occasion, put a fit Glass to the mouth of the Viol, and put
the Glass in sifted Ashes in a Furnace, of Tripos Arcanorum, or on a Furnace
wherein you calcine Spirits; give it a Fire as hot as the Sun is at Mid-summer,
no more, except by chance a little hotter or colder, provided it be not so
great as to melt the Lead, for so your Matter would be liquid as Oil, and
should it stand so the space of 12 days, all the Sulphur would fly away, and
the Matter be corrupted, for the Sulphur of it is not yet fixed, and on the
outside only, and therefore the Matter is most easily melted, and though it be
pure, yet is it not fixed; wherefore the Fire must be so gentle as not to melt
the Matter; let it stand so the space of Six Weeks, after which take a little,
project it upon a hot Iron, if it presently melts and fumes, it is not yet
fixed, but if it remains, the Sulphur of it is fixed: Then increase the Fire
notably, till your Matter becomes citrine, and so continually till it grows
red, still increasing the Fire till it attains to the color of Rubies;
increase till it is red hot, and then is it fixed, and prepared for Infusion,
with the Noble Water of Paradise (the Menstruum described in Numb. 114.)

Besides this, there is indeed another way also of calcining Philosophical
Vitriol, which is done in an open Vessel; thus graduated Verdigrese is calcined
to redness before the Distillation of it, in the preparation of the Spirit of
Venus of Basilius, as we have observed in the precedent Kind, but this belongs
not to this place, for the Calx remains volatile, not fixed, which way of
Calcining was invented merely for the separation of the Phlegm.

The third Branch consists in a new dissolution of this fixed Vitriol in
Philosophical Vinegar, for which Reason this Vitriol is volatilized again, and
made fit for Distillation, in the former Receipt, this Solution is wholly
omitted, but more exactly described in the latter Process.

The fourth Branch is the single, and frequent Distillation in the several ways
of making all these Stinking Menstruums, yet this excepted, that out of this
graduated, fixed, and again volatilized Vitriol, the Spirit ascends not White,
but of a Saffron Color (because more Mature) before the Red Oil; and lastly,
the White Spirit appears also, being extracted out of the Salt or White Body.

Lastly, These words following do prove, that the same Menstruums may be also
made of any other Metals. But if you would extract an Oil out of Metals, as has
been taught of Vitriol; you must dissolve your Metal in Aqua fortis, and make
it precipitate, and wash away the Saltness of it with common Water, and being
dried, put into a Glass with a long Neck, and congealed, and put upon a Furnace
with Sifted Ashes, make a Fire under it as for Vitriol, till the Metal be
alogether red, and till the inside of it is turned outward: Then dissolve it in
Distilled Vinegar, as the Vitriol, and Congeal, till no more Feces remain: Then
distill, and the Metal will wholly distill into a Red Oil, and it is the perfect
Oil of the Philosophers, but the Projection of it is not so high, as of the Oil
which was first Salt: And the Oil of every Metal you must Multiply with the Oil
of Vitriol, as aforesaid: And the Oil is very easily made after the same manner
out of Saturn, and the Projection of it is very high: Give thanks to God, Work,
and remember the Poor, dispense the gifts of God to your own Salvation, Cap.
80. 2. Oper. Min. Page 478. of the same Volume.

All Metals, says he, Cap. 67. of the same Work, even Jupiter and Luna, will
become red as blood, for the inside of all Metals is red, one more red than
another: When therefore they are brought to redness, they must then be
dissolved (in Philosophical Vinegar) and again congealed, till they be free
from any Feces, and yet contain their Elements together perfectly; for when
they are brought to that pitch, nothing remains, save only Feces; for the Earth
(the Caput Mortuum) being made subtle and liquid, is likewise dissolved, when
you have made it subtle by Dissolving and Coagulating so, as that no more Feces
remain. Thus you may Distill it through an Alembick into a Red Oil. As you was
here taught concerning Vitriol, so must you also do with all Metals, as also
Mercury, when it is dissolved in Aqua Fortis, and precipitated, the Saltness
washed away and dried, put it in a Glass, as was said of Vitriol, and done
moreover so, as was taught before concerning Vitriol. And that which is here
declared of Metal, you may also do with Antimony (and all other Minerals.) Open
your Ears, and hearken, and open your Mind, it was never heard that such a Work
should be done with so little Pains.

Here I would advise you to take Notice of the difference between the Oils of
Vitriol and other bodies; the like Oil is produced from all Metals as from
Vitriol, yet with this difference, that Vitriol in the Distillation of its Oil,
leaves an Earth or Salt behind it, wherewith the Spirit and Oil of it are fixed
into the Philosophers Stone; but Metals and the rest of the Minerals not so,
they totally ascending into Spirit and Oil, no Earth, Salt or Caput mortuum
remaining, whereby to be fixed into the Stone: Vitriol therefore is that alone,
which has all things in it, relating to the Perfection of it self, whereas the
Oils and Spirits of the rest are forced to borrow fixed bodies elsewhere for
their fixations. You must know, says he, when you would reduce the Salt of
Metals to an Oil, the same as has been said of Vitriol, the Elementary Earth
of Metals will distill together, with the Oil red as blood, but that the Earth
of Vitriol does not, the Oil seperates it self from the Earth: God has
vouchsafed such a blessing, that the Philosophers Stone may be made of it alone
without Addition, translating all Metals into true Sol, but the Oil of it must
be fixed with the Earth (its own Earth or Salt) but that is not so with Metals,
the Earth distills together through the Alembick, and the whole Body is
converted into Oil, translating all Metals into true Sol: Herein do all the
Philosophers agree. An Oil, he goes on, is also made of Mercury, and of
Antimony, but their Earth goes over together, and their whole Body turns into
Oil, and remains an Oil for ever, and with this Oil you may do wonderful
things, which here to recite would be too long. You know also what is written
of Antimony and the Oil of it. Yet must my Son know, That the Oil of Mercury is
much better in all works, wherein the Oil of Antimony is used. This is a
Secret. Cap. 69. and 70. of the same Work.

An Example, That Metals wholly ascend into Oil, he brings in the following
Chapter, namely the 70th, which we will name.

126. The Circulatum Majus of Isaacus. Cap. 70. 2. Oper. Min. Page 474. Vol. 3.
Th. Chym
TAke this Mercury (the Metals sublimed in the Philosophical Menstruums
aforegoing) Dissolve it in Aqua Fortis, with an equal quantity of Vitriol and
Niter, being Dissolved, put the Solution in a Glass Vessel, put on an Alembick,
set it in Sifted Ashes, give first a gentle Fire, Distill the Aqua Fortis from
it, then the Mercury will sublime upwards into the Alembick, when it will
sublime no more, take it away; take the Mercury out of the Alembick, put it in
a Glass with a long neck, as you did with the Vitriol, put it in a Vessel with
Sifted Ashes, light your Lamp under it, so leave it, till it be perfectly red,
as has been taught of Vitriol; Dissolve, Congeal, being clean, Distill it into
a red Oil, as has been said of Vitriol, but all the Mercury distills into Oil,
so as to leave no Earth.

The Menstruum immediately antecedent in Numb. 125, is in all things clear,
except the first Branch of it, wherein is omitted the necessary Dissolution of
Vitriol in Philosophical Vinegar, before the Calcination of it into redness or
fixation. The first Menstruum of this Kind is imperfect, not indeed in this,
but in another Branch, insomuch as it is not therein declared, that Vitriol
must after the Calcination of it, be again Dissolved in Philosophical Vinegar.
In this present third, Tho it be said, that it ought to be made according to
the rule of the precedent Menstruums, there is no mention at all made of
Philosophical Vinegar, yet without it, Vitriol can neither be fixed into
redness, nor when fixed, be again Volatalized or Distilled. The Receipts
therefore must be compared as often as the Adepts have either through too much
fear or envy left us them imperfect: It is enough, if by comparing them
together, we can pick out their meaning or intention, being not fully enough
expressed in every circumstance, the terms being either too obscure, or
altogether omitted. Bodies in this Kind are to be fixed, and then volatilized
by Mineral Menstruums, as Mercury and Antimony, in the Ninth Kind, are first
fixed, and then distilled in the greater Circulatums by vegetable Menstruums:
This light borrowed from the said Ninth Kind, will dispel all the Obscurities
and Doubts of this Kind. Vitriol therefore purged with common Water by
Solutions and Coagulations, must first be graduated, that is several times
dissolved in Philosophical Vinegar and coagulated according to the Receipt in
Numb. 125, as Mercury is dissolved in the Water of Salt, circulated in the
Circulatum majus of Mercury. This Vitriol being graduated in a close Vessel,
must be fixed into a most red Powder, and being fixed, then dissolved and
coagulated in Philosophical Vinegar, that it may again become volatile, as
Mercury being fixed in its own Circulatum, is again made volatile by virtue of
the Spirit of Philosophical Wine. At last the Vitriol is to be Distilled into
its Spirits. Now by knowing the method, it is manifest that the mystery of the
Receipts consists in the Vinegar, but to remove all scruple from these most
excellent Menstruums, we will prove by the very words of Isaacus himself, that
he meant not a common but Philosophical Menstruum. Have not I taught you, says
he, how to draw all Metals through the Alembick, so as to Distill wholly into
Oil, leaving nothing; but that alone does the strong Spirit of Vinegar, and
makes them (Metals) to be perfectly separated and rectified from their Feces,
within and without, as I taught you, and that the inside should be outward, and
the outside inward, and then they are so resolved and subtle, that the Elements
cannot be separated one from another; if you sought all the means in the world,
you would not be able to separate these Elements, by reason of their subtility,
cleanness and resolution; and when they have the subtle penetrating Vinegar
with them, they pass all together through the Alembick with the Vinegar; but if
you should put them to fire, and any Spirit of Vinegar (in sufficient quantity)
was present, they (the Metal and Vinegar) would be forthwith fixed together;
and because the Vinegar is copiously in their clean, open, subtle Body, they
distill into Oil, and the Spirits of the Vinegar are fixed with the Body: Now
you must know thdt the Spirit of Vinegar is more Subtle than all things in the
World, yea, a thousand times more subtle than the Quintessence of Aqua Vitae,
it cannot be contained in any Vessels, but it is easily half fixed, and
therefore it easily fixes the thing to which it is applied, as it is
demonstrated in the Vegetable (Work) where the Discourse is of Wine, and the
Nature of it, where you will be sufficiently instructed what Vinegar is, and
the Spirit of it, how all things are dissolved and ascend. Cap. 77. 78. 2.
Oper. Miner. Page 477. Vol. 3. Theat. Chym. You must know, says he elsewhere,
this is the greatest Secret in this Art, for the middle parts of Vinegar are of
so great Virtue as to be incredible, by reason of their great Subtility, for
every thing they are mixed with, becomes exceeding subtle and penetrable,
wherefore they make the (Philosophers) Stone a thousand times more subtle than
it was before, and more penetrable, and the subtle parts mix themselves with
the Stone, for they are of one Nature, and are both clean and subtle, and are
mixed together, as Water with Water, and it is a Medicine of that Nature, as to
make every thing fixed which it is mixed with, and of its own Nature wherein it
is; and thus are the subtle parts (of Philosophical Vinegar) fixed in the
(Philosophical) Stone, and are made of one Nature with the Stone, and they make
the Stone as fusible, as an Artist can wish, as he oftentimes dissolves the
Stone in Vinegar, and congeals it, for as many or few Spirits remain in the
Stone, the more fusible is the Medicine: Wherefore I have taught my Son how to
make his Stone so fusible, as thereby to bring Mercury to Sol and Luna; and it
is a great Secret, known to few, peruse this Lecture diligently, what virtue
there is in Vinegar, and what with the middle matter of Vinegar may be made.
Cap. 51. 1. Oper. Min. Page 337. Vol. 3. Th. Chym.

That Vinegar, which is a thousand times more subtle than the Quintessence of
Aqua Vitae, or Spirit of Philosophical Wine: The Spirits of which makes the
Philosophers Stone a thousand times more Subtle: That is of one Nature with it;
and fixes every thing it is mixed with; you your selves will say is no common
Menstruum, but another of more excellent quality. Isaacus moreover dissolves
and coagulates the Stone in this Vinegar, so often, till it is converted into
Oil, which will be no more congealed. Cap. 51, 59, 107. of the same Book. With
the same Vinegar also he made Metals fat, and transmuted them into Oils, thus
he dissolved and coagulated Gold so often continually in New Vinegar, till an
Oil was made thereof as red as blood, as Cap. 54. of the same Book. Sometimes
also he did with the same Vinegar reduce Gold to the consistence of an
excellent White Oil, out of which he then distilled a White Spirit, and a Red
Oil apart, and not immixible together, so subtle, as that he advised the Artist
to have a care, lest these Oils should condense again by too much
Rectification, for then being forced with too strong a Fire, the greatest part
of them would by reason of their great Subtility penetrate the Glass, and so be
lost. Cap. 126, 128, 1. Oper. Min. Page 406. Vol. 3. Th. Chym. Who can expect
such and so great things from Common Vinegar? The same Vinegar, that dissolved
the fixed Metal Gold, and divided it into Spirit and Oil, the Constitutives of
the Stone out of Sol alone; the same also is required to dissolve fixed
Vitriol, and distill it into Spirit and Oil, the constitutives of the Stone out
of Vitriol alone, of the making of which in the Third Book of Alchymical
Tinctures.

That this Oil of Vitriol, shows light by night, affirms Trismosinus, who has
described the said Oil thus.

127. The Oil of Vitriol shining by Night, of Trismosinus. Libro Gangeniveron,
sive novem Tincturarum in Tinctura prima.
TAke of the best Hungarian Vitriol twelve pounds, grind and dissolve it in
pure clean Water, or Rain Water distilled, let the Feces settle, decant the
Solution into a Glass Dish, placed in a Brass Basin full of Sand, put the said
Basin in Balneo, and draw off the Water to a thin skin; let it cool, and stand
three days in a cold place, and in the mean time you will find green Stones,
which take out, the remainder draw off again to a thin skin, and let it
Cristallize, and this seven times repeat, put the Stones in a Stove of the same
heat as the Sun in Dog Days, and in such a heat they will turn into a White
Powder. The Vitriol being thus prepared, put it in a Cucurbit, with a long
neck, well Sealed, in Ashes, under which put a Lamp, so as that the heat exceed
not the Sun in March, thus leave it, till the Vitriol begins, to be yellow,
being yellow, the Fire of the Lamp increase one Degree, and thus leave it ten
days and nights, or till it begins to be red, then again increase the Fire in
the Lamp another Degree, and thus continue, till the Matter be altogether red
as a Ruby, then increase the Fire yet ten days, and the hidden part of the
Vitriol is now manifest, and prepared in its redness, as a volatile Matter: The
redness thus remaining, take the Glass out of the Ashes, and the Matter out of
the Glass, and put it in a stronger Glass, to which pour the best Vinegar well
rectified, stop it well, set it in Balneo, so let it stand four days, yet
stirring the Matter with a Spatula made of Haslewood, three or four times a
day, let it cool, decant the Vinegar into another Glass, pour new upon the
Matter, digest in Balneo, as before, this repeat with new Vinegar three times,
the decanted Vinegar gently draw off, till the Matter remains in the form of a
Salt at the bottom, to which, pour new sharp Vinegar, put it four days in
Balneo, as before, to dissolve, and let that be repeated, till it be free from
any sediment: Then coagulate the Matter into a dry Powder, and put it in a
Glass Cucurbit, with a wide mouth, and a large Alembick, day the Receiver in a
Vessel full of Water, lute the Joints firm, and distill with an open Fire, but
very gently, the space of four hours, after that strongly, and the Spirits will
ascend yellow, which are called Air; continue the Fire in the same degree, till
the Alembick begins to be red; then slow the Fire, that the Alembick may be of
a blood color, then increase the Fire still, that the Glass may be burning hot
as a red hot Iron, which keep in that heat, till the Alembick be made of a Snow
Color, then strengthen the Fire yet more, that the Alembick may again be clear
and transparent, then let it cool, remove the Receiver, and pour the Oil into a
pure Glass, which stop well, and you will have the true Oil of Vitriol shining
night and day in dark places, which keep well for your occasion. But you must
know there is a White and Beautiful Oil found in the bottom, which to its red
Oil, etc.

This Receipt of Trismosinus agrees almost in all things with Isaacus his
Description of the Menstruum made of Vitriol, so that it seems to me to be
borrowed of Isaacus, especially because the same phrase of Isaacus of the
volatile redness of Calcined Vitriol is retained: Those things therefore, which
were observed before upon the Menstruum of Isaacus, do also hereto relate; but
we added this, because Trismosinus does more assure us, that this Oil shines in
darkness, concerning which quality of his Menstruum, Isaacus was silent.

Ripley made Menstruums of this Kind this way.

128. The Circulatum Majus of Ripley. Page 395. Accurtationum.
THe time of true Putrefaction and Alteration is completed in the space of Six
Weeks, but it may be done in a shorter time by half, and that by the acuition
of our Mercurial Waters, that is, the white and red Water ( the milk and blood
of the Green-Lyon in Numb. 59.) with common Mercury sublimate, which thus do:
Fix and Calcine the Mercury sublimate, and dissolve it in our white or red
Mercury (of the said Menstruum) so as to be all one true Water, which Water,
being thus acuated, has the Power of putrefying and altering any Calx of
Metals, in the space of three Weeks, and that because the two Fires, namely, of
Nature and against, Nature, are then joined together in that Water.

Common Mercury being dissolved in Philosophical Vinegar, or any Mineral
Menstruum, and fixed either by Sublimation as the Circulatum majus of
Paracelsus, or Calcination as the Vitriol of Isaacus calcined to redness, is
then dissolved in a stinking Menstruum, and distilled through an Alembick. He
reduced all other Metals and Minerals, the same way as he did Mercury, into the
greater Circulatums, thus.

129. The Metallic Acetum acerrimum of Ripley. Page 266. Clavis aureae Portae.
HAving therefore these two Mercuries, the white and red (of the Stinking
Menstruum) practice with them either upon their own Earth (or Caput Mortuum of
the said Menstruum) or upon the Calx of Metals prepared, for you need not
trouble your self about the Earth, provided the substance of it be fixed: Take
therefore any of them, being white, and ferment it thus: For the White Work,
take the Calx of Luna, and the altered Earth ( a Philosophical Calx, made of
the Mineral Menstruum of Luna) in equal quantity, grind them together, and
temper them with the White Mercury, which we call Lac Virginis (in the
Description of the Green Lion) and sublime them very well, keep and gather that
which is not fixed, that is, so much as ascends white, and sticking to the
parts of the Glass as Mercury sublimate, for this is that our Mercury made by
sublimation out of the white altered Earth; then grind it upon its own Calxes,
tempering, distilling, and subliming it with Lac Virginis, till it be wholly
fixed, so as to be immovable by Fire: This is the sublimed and fixed Mercury,
for which fools take that common Mercury sublimed with common Vitriol and Salt,
wherein they very much err: put it into a Circulatory, and pour Lac Virginis
upon it, till it be covered, then let it be circulated and distilled through an
Alembick.

An Example of making the altered Earth of Metals, and the way of fixing the
said Earth he has given in Vitriol. Take Vitriol calcined to Ashes (common
Colcothar) grind it to a most fine Powder, put it in an Vrinal, pour Lac
Virginis (the White fume of the Stinking Menstruum) to it, till it be covered
with it, stop the Vrinal with a Linen Cloth, and let it stand eight days, then
add the same quantity of the former Milk, repeating it from eight days to
eight, but when it will drink up no more, let it stand in the cold well
stopped, till a Cristalline Earth appears in the superficies of it, like Eyes
of Fish. Separate this Earth from the thicker parts resided in the bottom, and
put it ( this graduated Vitriol made not indeed of the Spirit of Philosophical
Wine, nor Philosophical Vinegar, but the Stinking Menstruum) in a Philosophical
Egg, to digest (calcine) discreetly, till it be perfectly fixed, then increase
the Fire, till it be perfectly citrinated, and still increase it, that it may
be Rubified in the form and color of Sanguis Draconis.

Lastly, For a conclusion, we will add the Circulatum Majus of Isaacus, made of
Sulphurs, which being most clear in the graduation, fixation, and
volatilization of it, will help to illustrate those things which have perhaps
remained more obscure in the antecedent, and make the Receipts in this Kind
more clear.

130. The Circulatum majus of Isaacus, made of Sulphur. Cap. 88.3. Oper. Min.
TAke Hungarian or Spanish Sulphur ten or twelve pounds, prepare it upon a
Stone, with (Philosophical) Vinegar distilled, as Painters do their Colors,
pour a good quantity of the (aforesaid) Vinegar upon it, put it in Balneo, stir
it well with a Wooden Spatula, decoct it in a close Vessel in Balneo the space
of six or eight days, stirring it three or four times a day, then let it cool
and settle, filter the tinged Vinegar, pour on new, repeat this Work, till no
more Vinegar will be tinged: Draw off all the tinged Vinegar in Balneo, that a
Powder of a golden Color may remain at the bottom. This Powder prepare and
extract with Vinegar, as before; filter the solution, and draw it off, till at
length it leaves no Feces behind it, then draw off the Vinegar, that the rest
of the Matter may remain in the form of a Powder. Take of this Powder one part,
of Salt prepared one part, of Roman Vitriol dried, six parts, mix them all
well, and sublime by degrees, first, with a weak Fire, secondly, stronger,
lastly, most strong for the space of two days; sublime the sublimation mixed
with its Feces three times, then casting away the Feces, sublime with new
Species, and repeat the Work three times, then dissolve the Sublimation in the
Dissolving Water for the red (of what Description soever in the Twentieth Kind)
the Water being drawn off, sublime, pour on New Water and sublime, and that do
three times: Then take seven parts of this Sublimation, one part of the Calx of
Sol, and sublime: This Sublimation being put into a Philosophical Egg, made of
Gold (for one of glasswould be of little use for this purpose, because it would
become soft as wax) stop it well, and set it upon a Tripos the space of
eighteen Weeks to be fixed, but the first six Weeks with a gentle Fire, the
next six a stronger, the last most strong: These Eighteen Weeks being ended,
take out the Matter (being fixed) reduce it to Powder, to which being put in a
dissolving Vessel, pour an equal quantity of our red burning Water (of the
aforesaid Dissolving Water for the red) seal or stop the Vessel very well, let
it dissolve and settle, then take it out, and distill it through an Alembick in
Balneo with a very small Fire: It is necessary for the Receiver, to be well
luted, and the Alembick must have a pipe in the upper part, for it must be six
times distilled, always with new Red Water, and your Matter will at length
become thick as Honey, which distill in Sifted Ashes by degrees, and an Air will
ascend like Water, then changing the Reciver, an Oil of a Golden Color will
distill gilding the Alembick, as also the Receiver; let it continue in the same
heat till the Alembick be of a Blood Color, then take away the Receiver; stop
it suddenly, put another to, and increase the Fire for the space of twenty four
hours, till the Vessel grows red hot, in which heat, let it continue twelve
hours, and the Matter will ascend red as blood, and at last also a red fume:
These Spirits no more appearing, let the Vessels cool, keep the Distillation,
but the Feces reverberate, etc.

Out of the Receipts these things we observe.
1. THat these Menstruums, made of the graduated Vitriols of Metals, fixed in a
close Vessel, have the like place amongst Mineral Menstruums, as the greater
Circulatums of Paracelsus, have amongst the vegetable Menstruums. Dissolve the
aforesaid Circulatums in any Acid Spirit, and you will presently make
Menstruums of this Kind.

2. That these Menstruums are Medicines, called Volatile Arcanums, dissolved in
an Acid.

3. That the graduated Vitriol of Venus, has some certain peculiar Privileges
above the rest.

1. Because in the Distillations of these Menstruums, it has a Fixed Body,
besides a Soul and Spirit, whereby the two aforesaid must be fixed into the
Stone; but all the other Metals and Minerals being reduced into graduated
Vitriols, have no Fixed Bodies, and are divided into two parts only, Spirit and
Soul; but because the Adepts found it necessary to borrow some Fixed Body
elsewhere for the fixing of these, they therefore more than often affirmed the
possibility of making the Stone out of Vitriol alone, without any Addition,
thus have we heard Isaacus in the antecedent Receipts saying: God has
vouchsafed such a blessing to Vitriol, that the Philosophers Stone may be made
of it alone, without Addition, it translating all Metals into true Sol, but the
Oil of it must be fixed with (its) Earth (or Body) but that is not so with
Metals, for their Earth distills together through the Alembick.

But who observes not here these Words, Without any Addition, to be meant of
any Foreign Matter, and are so to be understood with some certain restriction?
For this most red Oil of Vitriol, shining by night, and which must be fixed
with its Salt into the Philosophers Stone, cannot in the least be produced from
Vitriol alone, and that crude, being not graduated with Philosophical
Menstruums.

Moreover as the like Oil being distilled from Gold, and fixin the purified,
but not volatalized part of it, is called by Isaacus the Stone of Sol alone;
whereas notwithstanding, he used his Philosophical Vinegar to the making of it;
so the Stone may be said to be made out of Vitriol alone, without Addition,
though the same Vinegar was used in the preparation of it.

Lastly, It is manifest by the Kinds of almost all Menstruums, that no Acid
(that is, dry and incombustible Matter) can be reduced into Oil, without an
Oily Menstruum, because it must receive this unctiosity from the Unctions
Spirit of Philosophical Wine.

2. Because it is of mean value, and so by the Adepts called the Stone, which
God has given us freely. This Work, says Isaacus, you cannot enter upon with
a little Matter, you must have at least four or five Pounds of Matter (Gold or
Silver) if otherwise, the Work will be insufficient. For it is not the Work of
poor men, except the Stone given us by God freely, might happily be obtained;
then other Charge is not necessary, more than Vessels, Coals, and Food, till we
have prepared the Stone. And the two Stones, which God has given us freely,
for the White and Red Work, require but half the time, as the Matter which is
to be taken for preparation sake, for before we come to Sublimation, the Stone
given us freely, is already almost brought to fixation. Cap. 17.1. Oper.
Mineral. Page 313. Vol. 3. Th. Chym. The same thing is affirmed by Basilius:
saying, There is no moisture in Gold, unless it be reduced into (graduated)
Vitriol, which would be a Work indeed of no Profit, but much Charge, because of
the great quantity of Vitriol required to the making of the Philosophers Stone;
and though there is in Vitriol the desired Spirit of Gold, of a white quality,
and a Soul and Salt of a glorious Essence, but how many Countries, Estates and
Riches, have been thus consumed, I will not reckon; but this Admonition I give
my Disciples, to follow the shorter way of Nature, that they may not also fall
into extreme and inextricable Poverty. If you intend therefore, he goes on, to
make the Philosophers Stone out of the Vitriol of Sol, as many men indeed
endeavor, consult with your Purses, and prepare Ten or Twelve pounds of this
Vitriol, and then you will finish your Work, whereas Hungarian or other Vitriol
would suffice.

3. Because it is our Gold full of the Tincture of common Gold. Green Vitriol,
says Ripley, being Stillicidium Veneris (or common Vitriol) is by many
Philosophers called Roman Gold, because of the abundance of its Noble Tincture,
which ought to be fermented with common Gold, Page 140. Medulla Philos. For
Vitriol, he goes on, is nothing else but Stillicidium Cupri (or droppings of
Copper) in the Mines, wherein Copper is generated, as Bartholomaeus (an English
Monk and Philosopher) says; and though it has an admirable Tincture of
redness, yet is that Tincture polluted with an unclean terrestreity, which is
called its original blemish, which hinders Gold and Silver from being made of
it. Therefore says Raymund, let not the Terrestrial Virtues over power the
Celestial Virtues (of the Sun and the rest of the Stars) and you will have a
good thing in Vitriol. Page 303. Pupillae.

Arnold to show the Golden Nature in common Vitriol to his Disciple, resolved
to prove it by an Experiment, in Speculo Alchymiae, Page 605. Vol. 4. Theat.
Chym. where thus by the way of Dialogue. Disciple, I wonder, good Master, that
you commended Brass so much, I know not whether there be so great a secret in
it, I thought it to be a leprous Body, because of that greenness which it has
in it: Wherefore I still admire what you said, that we ought to extract Argent
vive (Menstruum) out of this Body. Master, Son! You must know, that the
Philosophers Brass is their Gold, and therefore says Aristotle in his Book,
Our Gold is not common Gold, because that greenness which is in that Body, is
the whole Perfection of it, because that greenness is by our Magistry suddenly
turned into most true Gold, as we know by experience; and if you have a mind to
try, we will give you a Rule. Take Aes ustum well and perfectly rubified
(common to be Sold in Shops) and let it drink seven times of the Oil Duenech
(Spirit of Philosophical Wine) as much as it can drink, always assating and
reducing (cohobating and calcining) then cause it to descend (melting this
Vitriol being impregnated with the aforesaid Oil into a Regulus) for pure Gold
settles as grains (of Kermes) red and pure; and you must know that so great a
redness descends with it, as to tinge some quantity of Silver of a most true
Color, etc.

To allege all, that the Philosophers have said of the Golden Nature of
Vitriol, would be too much, peruse Basilius alone, especially the fourth and
fifth Chapter, De Rebus Naturalibus and Supernaturalibus, as also in the
Elucidation of the 12. Keys, and you will find Vitriol more esteemed by him
than any Gold, for his Doctrine is that the Tincture of the Vitriol of Venus
and Mars, is far better than the Sulphur of Gold, not indeed in its Kind, for
it is one and the same in all, but that this Tincture is in the Natural as well
as Artificial Vitriol of Venus and Mars higher, and more noble in Color, more
abundant in Quantity, of easier Separation from its Body, in Preparation, and
of less Charge in the use, than the Tincture that is in Gold.

4. Because it is Gold opened, not yet fused, and so of easier preparation. You
have labored, says Isaacus, a long time, before this Matter is made subtle
and spiritual enough to be sublimed: But if you could procure the Stone, which
God has given us freely, there would be no need to prepare it so: But you
might presently take it, reduce it to an impalpable Powder, and wash away the
uncleanness of it with a common Water, till the Matter came clear from it, then
dry it again, and it would be ready for Sublimation, in which respect the Work
of it is shorter. Cap. 22. Page 317. Vol. 3. Theat. Chym. To speak more
plainly, says Ripley, I affirm, that the more subtle a Body is, of the easier
Dissolution it is. And moreover you must know, that Dissolution ought to be
performed by our Vegetable Menstruum, or some other Vegetable. And this
Vegetable Mercury (Vegetable Menstruum) cannot penetrate a Body, so as to
complete the dissolution of it, except the Body be first made spongy; but no
Lead is so spongy, nor so subtle, as Red Lead or Minium (Vitriol calcined) and
therefore if we would not be frustrated of our expectation, it is necessary for
us to take Red Lead, that is, Antimony prepared, which is more spongy and
subtle, than any other Lead. For the (Vegetable) Water will suddenly penetrate
into it, and dissolve the most subtle parts of it. But now to declare further,
concerning the second Body, which is Roman Vitriol, you must know, that it is
an easier thing to make the separation of the Elements in a thing complexioned,
which was never before forced into a hard and compact Substance by the violence
of Fire, than to perform the same in a Substance forced into a hard Mass, or in
a Metallic and Stony Substance, wherein the Congalative Virtue is
extinguished, and therefore in respect to the other is made Intractable, not
being soft nor unctious, and consequently less obedient to Solution and
Separation; for Vitriol is nothing else but, etc. Page 301. Pupillae.

4. That the Adepts in the more secret Chymy meant four things chiefly by the
Stone.

1. The Matter of the Menstruum or Spirit of Philosophical Wine, of which God
willing, in the Fifth Book.

2. All Menstruums whatsoever, made with the Spirit of Philosophical Wine.
Examples enough you will find in the Receipts of Menstruums produced to you.

3. Every Matter of the Philosophers Stone; so Gold and Silver are in many
places called Stones, but by the Stones which God has given us freely. Isaacus
meant Vitriol for the Red, and Alume for the White. Cap. 39. 3. Oper. Miner.
Page 67. He has besides these two other Stones also made of Arseniek and
Auripigment both graduated, of which see the Six former Chapters, 1. Oper. and
Cap. 112. and 113. 2. Oper. Miner. But of these in their proper places.

4. Every Alchymical Tincture, tho not in the form of a Stone, but Oil.

5. That Menstruums made of Vitriol or Venus are indeed better than the rest in
point of Tinging but not Dissolving.

The Three and Twentieth KIND. Mineral Menstruums made of Mineral Menstruums
compounded, and Metallic Bodies and other Tinging Things.
131. The Oil of Mars and Venus of Basilius. Libro de Conclusion. Sect. 1. Cap.
3.
TAke of Verdegrese some Pounds, and with (Philosophical) Vinegar distilled
make an Extraction, which is cristallized into a Noble Vitriol; out of which by
a Retort is distilled a Red Oil, which dissolves Mars into Vitriol, out of
which is the Red Oil extracted again in a long time, and with a strong Fire;
and thus have you the Sulphur of Mars and Venus together: with this Oil is Luna
graduated, and a good part of the Kings Crown obtained, a part dissolved with a
part of Sol and Luna together, and putrified in this Oil eight days and nights,
is changed into good Gold. Praised be God.

Annotations.

THo every Mineral Menstruum is able enough to dissolve any Body whatsoever,
yet the Adepts thought good to acuate them yet more, by the addition of
Metallic Bodies, that they might the better dissolve and tinge their
Dissolutions. In the present Receipt Basilius dissolves Mars in the Spirit of
Venus, described before in Numb. 113. reduces it into Vitriol, and at last
distills it into a Compounded Oil. Sect. 2. Cap. 4. This Menstruum he calls Oil
of the Salt of Mars: Now, says he, I have taught you how to extract a clear
Vitriol out of Venus, and to distill its Red Oil; this Oil dissolves Mars into
Vitriol, and being yet once distilled strongly by a Retort, you will have a
Noble Tinging Oil, or Salt of Mars, which is a Subject that pays Tribute to the
King, and enricheth him. This Oil dissolves the Purple Spiritual Gold, and
brings it over the Helm, etc. The Process of this Oil of the Salt of Mars, etc.
being by its brevity too obscure, will be not a little illustrated by the
following Spirit of Mercury.

132. The Spirit of Universal Mercury made of Vitriol of Basilius. Labor 2.
Libri Revelat.
TAke Common Copper, make Verdegrese of it after the common way, grind it, pour
to it a good quantity of Distilled Vinegar (Philosophical, or Vinegar mixed
with the Spirit of Philosophical Wine) stir it well, and the Verdegrease will
be dissolved, let the Feces settle, and the Solution will be very pure, clear
and green: Draw off the Vinegar in a Cucurbit to thickness, and in a cold place
a weighty Vitriol graduated to the highest degree will be cristallized, which
again dissolve in hot Water, evaporate the Water till it be thick; put it again
in a cold place, and the Vitriol will be again coagulated: which solution and
coagulation must be three times repeated, and the purification of the Vitriol
will be perfect: Let the Phlegm evaporate from this Vitriol in a Calcining Pot,
and calcine it till it begins to be red, that is enough. Then take pure Flints,
calcine, and being red hot, quench them in Distilled Vinegar, repeat some
certain times, till they be well calcined: Then again calcine, and when they
are a little cool, pour to them (Philosophical) Vinegar made hot, and let them
be gradually dried. Of these little Stones thus prepared, take one part, of the
Vitriol now calcined two parts, grind and mix, put the Matter in an Earthen
Retort, that will not suck up the Spirits, or in a Glass Retort well luted, put
a large Receiver to it, and the Vessel being well luted, kindle a Fire by
degrees the space of 24 hours, then give a stronger Fire 24 hours more, and the
Green Spirits will come over White, and the Fire being thus continued Red Drops
at last: Keep this violent Fire, till all the Spirits and Drops are gone over,
then put the Distillation in a Cucurbit, and the Vessel being very close,
rectify it in Balneo with a most gentle Fire, and the Phlegm will ascend, but
in the bottom of the Cucurbit will remain the Oil of Vitriol red and ponderous.
This Work being finished, Take pure Filings of Iron, put them in a Cucurbit,
pour to them the said Oil of Vitriol, so as to swim above them, add so much
distilled Rain Water, till you see that the Oil dissolves the Iron; then draw
of the Phlegm by Dis^illation, and let the remainder cristallize in a cold
place into pure Vitriol, and thus are Mars and Venus joined together: This
Vitriol calcine it under a Tyle, and stir it with an Iron Hook into a fine
reddish Powder: This Powder put into a Glass Retort, well luted, and the
Vessels being very close, distill by degrees of Fire, as you distilled the Oil
aforesaid, and first you will have a White Spirit, which is the Philosophers
Mercury, then a Red Spirit, which is the Philosophers Sulphur, an incombustible
Oil compounded of both the Tinctures of Venus and Mars never to be separated,
and this is the Blood of the Green and Red Lion, with which the King their
Father ought to be nourished, draw of the Plegms from this Oil in Balneo, and
it is prepared for Gold to be tinged with it. Take the Caput Mortuum, which is
of a Beautiful Crimson Color, grind it to a most fine Powder, put it in a
Glass, pour (Philosophical) Vinegar distilled to it, digest three days in a
gentle heat, to extract the Salt, wherein lie the Treasures of the whole World;
without which Salt, all labor would be in vain; draw off the Vinegar in Ashes,
and the Salt will remain in the Glass, to which, pour the aforesaid Oil (of
Venus and Mars) in a Glass Retort, and the Salt will be presently dissolved,
and then distill with the same violence, as before, and the Oil will carry its
own Spirit of Salt over with it, which rectify once in Balneo, and it will be
ten times stronger than before, and you have the incombustible Oil of Mercury,
Sulphur and Salt, issuing out of one root prepared; this Oil is the true first
Matter of Metals, and the true root from which Gold is generated.

This Spirit of Mercury, ye searchers of Nature! has been to my knowledge,
detrimental to many unwary men, seeking after it either too inconsiderately, or
arrogantly, which to prevent for the future, I will somewhat more clearly
manifest the Nature, Qualities, and Original of it. Common Verdegrese reduced
into Vitriol by Vinegar, then three times dissolved in common Water, and
coagulated, must be calcined to redness in an open Vessel, that the superfluous
Phlegm may be drawn away, and made fitter for the ensuing Distillation. But
whoever calcined Verdegrese purified, in Apothecaries Shops, called the flowers
of Verdegrese, to redness, without the diminution of its Virtues? Who I say has
distilled a most Red Oil out of this calcined Powder? Verdegrese therefore must
be dissolved not in common, but Philosophical Vinegar, in order to be not only
purified, but reduced also into Vitriol, graduated to the highest. In the 20th
Kind, Basilius distills the same Red Oil of Venus, ponderous as Lead or Gold,
thick as Blood, and of a fiery quality; that is, of extreme acidity, out of
Roman Vitriol being highly graduated, that is, either macerated, or thoroughly
dissolved in the Spirit of Philosophical Wine. In the 21th Kind, We took
Notice, that the same Vitriol of Copper or Verdegrese being purified with
common Vinegar, was reduced into a graduated Vitriol, not indeed by the Spirit
of Philosophical Wine alone, but with the juice of Sour Grapes, that is, mixed
with common Vinegar, or some other stronger Acid, and then distilled into the
Oil of Venus. If Metals, Minerals, and all other Acids dissolved in acids, and
reduced into Vitriols, be so graduated with the Spirit of Philosophical Wine or
Philosophical Vinegar, that the desired Oils may be drawn from them, the reason
why Vitriols alone made of Copper, should be deprived of the said Privilege,
cannot easily be apprehended: It matters not whether Vitriol be graduated
according to the method given in Numb. 113. or according to the prescription of
the present Receipt, for the same Spirit and Oil is produced either way.

Now this Oil of Venus being made, and diluted in common Water, Iron is reduced
into graduated Vitriol, which must like the Vitriol of Venus be also calcined
into a Red Color, and then distilled tnto a White Spirit and Red Oil. The
Method of this Process is, in Libro particul. in particulari Martis, thus: Take
off the Red Oil of Vitriol one part, of Spring Water two parts, mix, wherein
dissolve the Filings of Steel, filter the Solution warm, then evaporate it
gently to the comsumption of a third part, and in a cold place you shall find
Cristals sweet as Sugar, the true (that is graduated) Vitriol of Mars, from
which decant the Solution, then draw it off a little, and in a cold place you
will have New Cristals, which gently calcine under a Tyle, stirring them
continually with an Iron Spatula, into a Powder of a Purple Color, to which
pour (Philosophical) distilled Vinegar; extract the Soul (Tincture or Essence)
of Mars, draw off the Vinegar, and edulcorate the Soul: This is that Soul of
Mars, which being dissolved in the Spirit of Mercury, and united with the Soul
of Sol, tingeth Luna into Sol.

But of these below, The Vitriol of Mars being graduated and calcined into a
Purple Powder in our Receipt, is without the extraction of its Soul distilled
into the Philosophers Mercury, and Philosophical Sulphur, the true Oil of Mars
and Venus, the Menstruum next foregoing in Numb. 131. Out of which, to make
the present Spirit of Mercury, the Salt must be extracted out of the Caput
mortuum, with Philosophical Vinegar, which Salt being mixed with the Oil of
Mars and Venus, and distilled together through an Alembick, is called the first
Matter of Metals.

Basilius sometimes used the Salt and Sulphur of Sol, instead of the said Salt
extracted out of the Caput mortuum. Thus,

133 The Oil of Mars and Venus, acuated with the Sulphur and Salt of Sol of
Basilius. In Supplemento.
TAke of the Purple Colored Gold ( the Crocus of Sol, des Konings Purpur
Mantel) half an ounce, of the Philosophers Oil of Mercury (the Oil of Mars and
Venus) one ounce and half, dissolve, to which add of the Salt of Sol two
drachms; all being resolved into an Oil, rectify it by a Retort, that it may
be clear and pellucid.

For the Spirit of Universal Mercury, Basilius took Copper dissolved in
Philosophical Vinegar, and cristallized into graduated Vitriol, and with gentle
calcination, reduced it into the true Crocus, or Red Powder of Venus: But the
Iron he dissolved in the Oil of Venus ( distilled out of the said Crocus of
Venus) cristallized and calcined into the Crocus of Mars. For the present
Menstruum he requires Gold dissolved in Balneo Regis ( described in Numb. 89.)
and reduced into a volatile graduated Vitriol, which then being dissolved in
Distilled Water, he precipitates with three times as much of Argent Vive, out of
the Menstruum but the amalgame from thence produced, he gently calcines under a
Tyle, into a Purple Powder or Crocus; as to the making of which here only by
the by, but in the following second and third Books, we shall treat more fully
of it. The way of making the Salt of Sol, he has thus in Libro particul. in
particulari Solis, described: Take the White Body of Sol left in the extracting
of its Soul, ( the Essence extracted out of the Crocus of Sol, with the sweet
Spirit of Salt described in Numb. 28.) reverberate it gently for half an hour,
that it may be made corporal, then pour to it the Corrosive Water of Honey well
rectified, which in a gentle heat will extract the Salt in the space of ten
days: All the Salt being extracted, draw off the Menstruum from it in Balneo,
edulcorate the Salt, by repeating Cohobations in common Distilled Water; and
lastly, Clarify it with the Spirit of (Philosophical) Wine, and you will have
the Salt of Gold.

Concerning this Water of Honey, Basilius in Curra triumphali Antimonii, Page
77. thus: Out of sweet Honey may be made the strongest Corrosive and Poison,
which is to most men a thing incredible. The same affirms Paracelsus, saying:
The like is to be understood in Honey, which by its elevations is made much
sharper than any Aqua Fortis and Corrosive, and more penetrative than any
Sublimate; such a property of sharpness it has not Naturally, but by
elevation, which changes this Honey into a Corrosive. Libro 5. Archid. Page
18. and elsewhere, Cap. 14. de Morbis Tartar. Page 319. Honey of it self is
innocent, but in the third elevation becomes mortal.

The way of making this Water, is not indeed in the Writings, which we have
either of Basilius or Paracelsus; yet easily will a diligent Disciple learn the
same, by the Principles of his Art, for either the Coelum Mellifluum of
Parisinus must be dissolved in distilled Vinegar, or some stronger acid, or
crude Honey cohobated in Philosophical Vinegar, that is, common, mixed with the
Spirit of Philosophical Wine, and the Process will be shorter and better. But
this Salt of Gold may be also made without the said Water of Honey, provided
the Menstruum be so corrosive as to dissolve the remaining Body of the Gold,
thus in Labor tertio Revelat. he reverberates the Caput mortuum of Gold, the
space of three days, then calcines it with an equal weight of the Salt of
Tartar, which he washes off with Distilled Water, and extracts the Salt out of
the dried Powder with Vinegar, which drawing off the Vinegar, he clarifies with
the Spirit of Wine, that is, he dissolves, filters, draws off, and
cristallizeth it into the true Salt of Sol. In another place, he extracts the
Salt of Gold by the Spirit of Universal Mercury, as in Elucidatione 12.
Clavium, where he affirms, that the Philosophers Stone cannot be coagulated or
fixed without this Salt; and that he has taught the way of making it in the
fourth Key. By the Philosophers Oil of Mercury, he means the Oil of Mars and
Venus, not yet reduced into the Spirit of Universal Mercury, or acuated with
its own Salt, and the more fixed part indeed of this Menstruum, which he calls
the Philosophers Sulphur, not the more volatile part, which is called the
Philosophers Mercury: With this Sulphur he dissolves the Soul or Crocus of Sol,
and converts it into potable Gold. Libro de supernaturali Medicina. Yet
sometimes he would have us take the same Oil of Mercury for the Oil of Roman
Vitriol, the Menstruum described in Numb. 98. So in Libro de particular. in
particulari Solis, he reduces the white Body of the King (Gold, left in the
extraction of the Soul or Crocus of Sol) with Philosophical Sulphur, which is
the second Principle in order; and the Spirit of Mercury ( a little before
called the White Spirit of Vitriol) into pure and malleable Gold, as it was
before, not in the least defective in color and virtue.

Sometimes he acuates the Spirit of Universal Mercury, with the Sulphur and
Salt of other Metals: Thus,

134. The Spirit of Universal Mercury acuated with the Sulphur and Salt of Luna
of Basilius. Libr. partic. in particul. Lunae.
THe Sulphur of Luna being extracted and edulcorated, dry the remainder of the
Calx of Luna, to which pour the same Corrosive Water of Honey, that you used
for the Salt of Sol, digest gently the space of four or five days, that the
Salt of the Luna may be extracted, which you will know by the Whiteness of the
Menstruum. All the Salt being extracted, draw off the Water of Honey,
edulcorate the Salt, distilling and clarifying it with the Spirit of
(Philosophical) Wine. The remainder left in extracting the Salt of the Luna
edulcorate, and dry, then pour the Spirit of Tartar to it, digest fifteen days,
and proceed as with the Gold, and you will have the Mercury of Luna (of which
in the Second Book, for here we use it not.) The said Salt of Luna has
excellent Virtues for the Body of Man, of which I shall treat in a place more
convenient. In the mean time the efficacy of the Salt and Sulphur of Luna you
will learn by the Process following. Take the Lazurine Sulphur of Luna,
dissolved in the Spirit of (Philosophical) Wine (rectified) and coagulated; put
it in a Cucurbit, pour to it double the quantity of the Spirit of Mercury made
of the White Spirit of Vitriol: In like manner take the Salt of Luna extracted
and clarified, which mix with three times the quantity of the Spirit of
Mercury, lute both the Glasses, and digest gently in Balneo the space of eight
days and nights; have a care that none of the Sulphur and Salt be lost, but let
them be in the same quantity as they were separated from the Silver.
Putrefaction being ended, mix both Dissolutions and distill, etc.

He sometimes acuated this Spirit without Metallic Salt, and Sulphurs only
thus:

135. The Spirit of Universal Mercury acuated with the Sulphur of Sol and Luna
of Basilius. Libro particul. in particul. Lunae.
TAke of the Sulphur of Luna one part, of the Sulphur of Sol half a part, of
the Spirit of Mercury six parts, join them together, lute well, digest in a
gentle heat, and a Liquor will come over of a Red Color, distill through an
Alembick, so as nothing to remain.

This Spirit of Mercury he fermented not only with the Sulphurs of the perfect
Bodies, but sometimes added to them withal the Sulphur of some imperfect Metal,
as Mars, thus:

136. The Spirit of Universal Mercury acuated with the Sulphur of Sol and Mars
of Basilius. Libro partic. in partic. Solis.
TAke of the Sulphur of Sol and of the Sulphur of Mars, equal parts of each, of
the Spirit of Mercury the height of two Fingers above them, that the Matter
may be well dissolved into a C^n Water of a Ruby Color, being mixed, distill
through an Alembick; that they may become one; as they were (...) first from
one Stem, keep it well, that nothing may evaporate.

Besides the Sulphur of Mars he sometimes added also the Sulphur of Antimony,
thus:

137. The Spirit of Universal Mercury acuated with the Sulphurs of Sol, Mars,
and Antimony of Basilius. Libro partic. in particul. Antimonii.
TAke of the Sulphur of Antimony two parts, of the Sulphur of Sol one part,
mix. Take of the Sulphur of Mars three parts, of the Spirit of Mercury six
parts, being well luted di^ that the Sulphur of Mars may be wholly dissolved;
ther^ cast in a fourth part of the Sulphur of Antimony and Sol, ^ure again, and
digest till they be all dissolved, then add another fourth part of Antimony and
Sol, repeating the Work, as before, till all be perfectly mixed, and the Matter
made like a thick Red Oil, distill the whole through an Alembick.

Sometimes he fermented this Spirit after an unusual way, namely, without the
Sulphur of any perfect Metal, but mere imperfect only, thus:

138. The Spirit of Universal Mercury acuated with the Sulphur of Mars,
Jupiter, and Saturn of Basilius. Libro partic. in partic. Mercurii Vivi.
TAke of the Soul of Mars two Ounces, of the Soul of Saturn one Ounce, of the
Soul of Jupiter one Ounce, dissolve them in six Ounces of the Spirit of
Mercury, being well dissolved, distill them through an Alembick without any
Sediment into a Golden Water like to the transparent Dissolution of Gold.

Tho these Menstruums of Basilius may well deserve the first place among the
Dissolvents of the Adepts, yet some of the Adepts made Menstruums not much
inferior to them. Isaacus Hollandus not only the better to dissolve Bodies,
but tinge them also deeper, made his Menstruums of Tinging Menstruums, and
common Mercury, but being satiated with the Tinctures (Souls, Sulphurs, etc.)
of Tinging Things. Thus made he the Menstruum called,

139. A Compounded Mercurial Water for the Red Work of Isaacus. Cap. 43.3.
Oper. Miner.
TAke Argent Vive purged with Salt and Vinegar, which sublime with an equal
quantity of Aes ustum, Crocus of Mars, Crocus of Venus, and Lapis Haematites;
of Roman Vitriol the weight of all, and a little Salt, and repeat the
Sublimation seven times, every time with new Species, and the Mercury will be
sublimed for the Red. Take of Aes ustum, Cinabar, Crocus of Mars, Venus, Lapis
Haematites, Antimony, equal parts of each; of Roman Vitriol the weight of all,
mix, and reduce to a fine Powder, to which pour of Aqua Vitae completely
rectified (Spirit of Philosophical Wine) the height of two hands breadth,
digest in Balneo three days, stirring the Matter daily, then draw off the Aqua
Vitae with a gentle Fire, then increase the Fire gradually; lastly, force with
a most strong Fire for the space of Twelve hours, that all the Spirits may
ascend: This Work must be three times repeated with new Matters continually.
Take of this Water one Pound, of Argent Vive sublimed for the red as much as
suffices, or you can dissolve, distill, and reserve.

Besides Mercury he sometimes added also Sulphur and Sal Armoniack sublimed for
the red, thus:

140. The Philosophers Water made of Three Spirits of Isaacus. Cap 10.3. Oper.
Min.
TAke of Roman Vitriol six parts, of Lapis Haematites, Crocus of Mars, of
Venus, Cinabar, Aes ustum, Mineral Antimony, of each one part, dry well and
mix, put the Matter in a Retort, and pour to it of Aqua Vitae rectified (Spirit
of Philosophical Wine) four Pounds, distill, and cohobate three times, with the
Caput Mortuum pulverized: Divide the Water into two parts, whereof save one, in
the other dissolve one Ounce of Salarmoniack, sublimed to redness, in Balneo,
which being dissolved, dissolve one Ounce of Sulphur prepared; lastly, also put
in an Ounce of Mercury sublimed for the Red Work: These three being dissolved
in the Dissolving Water made of Aqua Vitae, you have a Water, which is
deservedly called the Philosophers Water, by reason of its admirable and secret
Virtues, the Miracles of which must not be described, because not convenient
for certain Reasons, etc.

The Preparation of Sulphur, Take of Sulphur Vivum 12 Pounds, to which being
pulverized, pour distilled (Philosophical) Vinegar, let them boil gently in
Balneo, the Vessel being very close the space of three days; decant the Vinegar
being now tinged warily; to the residue, pour New Vinegar, digest, and decant,
and so often repeat, till no more Vinegar will be tinged: The tinged Matter
distill gently in Balneo, to the remainder of a fourth part; from the residue,
you will in the space of three or four days in a cold Celler receive Cristals (
the graduated Vitriol of Sulphur) like Niter, clear as Amber, and of the color
of Gold: The remaining Vinegar evaporate into a Golden Powder, then dissolve
the Cristals and Powder in the aforesaid Vinegar, and Cristallize, and that so
often, till the Sulphur leaves no Feces behind it. This is a great Alchymical
Secret for the Purging of Sulphur. The Preparation of Mercury, Take of Roman
Vitriol (by which the Adepts do more than often mean that which is graduated)
six or eight Pounds, of common Salt two Pounds, mix them together with three
Pounds of Mercury, purged with Salt and Vinegar, sublime the Mercury, and that
repeat three times always with new Species, keep the Mercury.

The Preparation of Salarmoniack, Take of Salarmoniack three Pounds, sublime it
thrice with Roman Vitriol, and Lapis haematites, with New Matters every time.

Tho these Menstruums of Isaacus are not so much esteemed, as those before of
Basilius, as to the Excellency of Preparation, yet are they of no less but the
same Virtue with those, as to the quality of tinging, for they are made of the
same Sulphurs, Crocusses, and Essences of Mars, Venus, Sulphur, etc. as the
compounded Mineral Menstruums of Basilius were made of. Lully acuates the same
Menstruums with Metallic Essences, not indeed already made, but to be made in
the preparation of the Menstruum, thus with the Stinking Menstruum, acuated
with Vegetable Salharmoniack, he makes the Essence of Luna, which being mixed
with the said Menstruum, becomes a Menstruum of this Kind, and is called.

141. The Compounded Water of Silver of Lully. Cap. 10. Practicae Testamenti
majoris. Page 161. Vol. 4. Th. Chym.
IN the Power of A (God,) take one Ounce of F ( clear Luna, Page 171.) well
purged and refined: And that Silver being well beaten (extended with a Hammer)
into Leaves, cut them into small pieces, short and slender, then divide them
into two equal parts, and take two dissolving Glasses, the Form and Measure of
which, you will see in the Chapter of Vessels; and in one of these two, put one
Ounce and a half of F. ( Menstrual Page 171. alleged by us before, in Numb.
67.) I mean the eighth part of the whole Menstrual, then put in presently one
part of F, and be careful immediately to stop the Mouth of the Vessel with its
Cover, and lute the joint well, with the luting aforesaid ( in the Preparation
of the said Menstrual) or with clear and pure Wax; which done, put it in Balneo
Mariae hot for three days, that God may give you a happy day. Then take F (the
Dissolution of the Silver) and strain (decant) the Water into another clean
Glass Vessel, and incline the Vessel well and warily, that the Earth of F may
not be strained with the Water, nor the Water troubled, and stop the said Phial
wherein you put the Water of F, and keep it apart. Then upon the Dissolving
Vessel of that F, which ought to be dissolved (the other part of Silver to be
distilled into a Menstruum) put its Alembick, which must be close and
discreetly joined with the luting aforesaid; then place it upon Sifted Ashes,
and setting it on a Furnace, kindle your Fire and distill, put the Liquor in a
Glass Phial, and make a Fire of Saw-dust, and when the Liquor is in a manner
all distilled, strengthen the Fire a little with Coals, according to that which
is used for the exact calcining of an Earth, but keep it from too much heat,
for we have seen it done by the heat of the Sun; understand this well, unless
you would be made a fool, give this heat continually for eleven hours, then
stop the Furnace, and go to sleep, and in the Morning take your Calcinatory
(which is so called because of the property of its operation) and put in the
Menstrual often mentioned, wherein G ( our Mercurial Page 171. or Vegetable Sal
armoniack) was dissolved ( see the Menstruum below in Numb. 147.) and you will
see it operate, and the fume ascend, and the Metal calcined with Liquefaction,
but stop it better than before with its own stopple, which goes in (to the said
Calcinatory) and have a care of putting it into any other heat, till it has
operated by its own Virtue, and when it has wrought and is quiet, lute the
joint well with common Wax and being so luted, put it in a hot Balneo Mariae
three Natural days, as you did elsewhere, because it is so expedient. Then
distill the Water, and calcine the Earth (remaining in the bottom) as aforesaid,
and repeat so often till all the Earth is dissolved by this Method in the Form of
a Liquor, and the Dissolved Limus, or Oil by Art dissolved, which is the
Substance of a Body depurated by Water, and carried by the Water of the Wind,
always keep apart, and when it is all dissolved (and distilled) join them
together, then putrify six weeks (to be circulated) in a temperate heat, where
the Vessel must be very well luted with its Cover, and so ought the Figure of I
to be done ( the composition, or compounded Water of Luna, Page 171. of the
same Volume.)

The same way sometimes he prepares the Essence of Gold with the Stinking Lunar
Menstruum, by addition of which, he makes the same Menstruum more acute, that
is more noble.

142. The Stinking Lunar Menstruum acuated with the Essence of Sol of Lully. In
Experimento 30.
TAke the aforesaid Water, wherein you have the Soul of Luna (described in
Numb. 121.) and dissolve in it two Ounces or one and a half of the fixed Salt
of Urine, as you have it in its Experiment ( the sixth, but produced by us in
Numb. 30.) which being dissolved, dissolve one Ounce of Gold in that Water,
putrefie eight days, then separate the Water by Balneo, and the Body will
remain in the Vessel like melted honey, upon which Matter pour back so much of
the Distilled Water, as to swim two fingers above it, cover the Vessel with its
Antenotorium, and putrefie in Balneo the space of 24 hours, then put on an
Alembick with a Receiver, lute the joints well, distill in Ashes; lastly,
increase the fire extremely, and that which comes over, keep very close, for it
is the animated Spirit, or Soul of the Gold.

From the Receipts we observe.
1. THat the Menstruums of this Kind are more noble than those of the 20th and
21th Kinds; there the Essences or Magisteries of Metals were dissolved in
Simple Mineral Menstruums, but here in the same compounded.

2. That these Menstruums differ not from the Menstruums of the Tenth Kind, but
in the addition of Acidity; dissolve a Menstruum of the said Kind in what Acid
you will, and it will be forthwith transformed into a Menstruum of this Kind.

3. That these Menstruums are by Digestion made sweet again, and Vegetable as
before.

4. That these Menstruums are not satiated, but by their Dissolutions
augmented, as well in quantity as quality in infinitum.

5. That the Spirit of Universal Mercury, or first Matter of Metals of
Basilius, is by him also called Mercury duplicated, wherein the Kings Mantle is
to be dissolved. Sect. 1. Cap. de Sulphur Mercurii, Sect. 2. de Vitriolo Phil.
and Sect. 2. Cap. 4. de Vitriolo Veneris. In another place, the Sulphur of Mars
and Venus duplicated. Sect. 1. Cap. 3. de dulph. Martis and Veneris. In another
place the Soul of Mars and Venus, as in Particul. Veneris.

6. That this duplicated Mercury is made much better by adding the Kings
Mantle, the Crocus of Sol, Luna, and other Metals. That the Menstruums of
almost all Kinds are promiscuously called Philosophers Mercuries, but of these
more copiously and more exactly in the Third Book.

7. That the Spirit of Universal Mercury of Basilius, is the same with the
Magisteries of Mars and Venus, made after the Mineral way; dissolve the
Magisteries of Mars and Venus in the common Spirit of Vitriol, and by this
simple Dissolution, you will make the same Spirit of Universal Mercury.

8. That as Mars and Venus, so also Jupiter and Saturn, and the rest of the
Metals, may be made into the said first Matters, that is, of the same Virtues
with the first Matter of Mars and Venus, as to the faculty of dissolving: But
Mars and Venus are preferred for the excellency and exuberance of their
Tinctures.

The Four and Twentieth KIND. Mineral Menstruums compounded of Vegetable and
Mineral Menstruums mixed together.
143. The Vegetable Fire dissolved in the Calcinative Water of Lully. Page 363.
Magiae Naturalis.
TAke of the Vegetable Water acuated ( the Metallic Soul of Lully, described
in Numb. 5.) one Ounce, put it in a Phial with a long Neck, into which you
poured three Ounces of the Calcinative Water ( the Mineral Menstruum described
in Numb. 68.) and suddenly cover the Phial with its Cover, luted close with
Wax, then place it well in a Balneo, the space of two Natural days, and in that
time, the whole Vegetable will be converted into Clear Water.

Animadversions.

THe Adepts acuated the Spirit of Philosophical Wine diverse ways, and reduced
it into several as well Vegetable as Mineral Menstruums in the antecedent
Kinds. Now in this 24th and last Kind of Menstruums, they mix not either common
Oily or Arid, or Acid Matters, with the Unctious Spirit of Philosophical Wine,
as they did in the aforesaid Compositions of Menstruums, but join Vegetable and
Mineral Menstruums, already perfected together, in order to make Menstruums of
this Kind. The like Menstruum almost is made by Luly, and called

144. The Vegetable Heaven dissolved in a Mineral Menstruum of Lully. Page 59.
Testam. Novissimi.
TAke of the Stinking Menstruum (described in Numb. 99.) one Pound, add one
Pound, or half a Pound, which will be enough, of Aqua Vitae most perfectly
rectified ( Philosophical, described in Numb. 30.) and acuated with the
sublimed Salt of Tartar (in Numb. 17.) or Wine: Hold the Vessel in your hands,
and do not put it on the ground or any other place, till the fury (of the
ebullition) is over, and it is a mixture of a Vegetable with a Mineral; seal it
with Wax, and let it stand a day, then put it two days in Balneo, and distill in
Ashes, and you will have a limpid, clarified and ponderous Water; then put it
in a Circulating Vessel very well sealed, the space of sixteen days in Balneo
conveniently, till you return, and see the Water well united, and at the bottom
of the Vessel, in the form of a Cristalline Salt, keep it.

The same Menstruum but of different weight he made elsewhere, he added half a
part of the Vegetable Menstruum to one part of the Stinking Menstruum in the
antecedent, but in the following Menstruum he takes more of the Vegetable than
Mineral Menstruum.

145. Ice compounded of Vegetable and Mineral Menstruums of Lully. Page 68.
Testam. Noviss.
TAke of the Mineral G, or Stinking Menstruum, three Ounces, and of Aqua Vitae
rectified and acuated with the Salt of Tartar four Ounces, put them together in
a Glass, and distill nine times in Balneo, and in that time it will be all
converted into one, as Ice.

Ripley mixed vegetable and mineral Menstruums thus.

146. The Aqua Mirabilis of Ripley. Page 212. Philorcii.
TAke the Tartar calcined white as Snow, grind it upon a Marble, and incerate
it with Aqua Vitae fortified with its Species, as is premised ( with the
Menstruum described in Numb. 8.) till it be as thin paste; then put it in a
Circulating Vessel, and circulate the Water, till it is wholly dried up in the
Tartar; repeat the same Work, and so continue, till it has drank off the Water
double its part and quantity in weight, which done, grind the Tartar, and lay
it upon a Stone, or hang it in a Linen Bag, and put a Glass under to receive
the droppings of it, and this must be done in a place under ground, till all
the Tartar is distilled into clear Water; out of which, after Distillation and
Coagulation, is made a wonderful Salt of Nature, which the Philosophers call
Saltpeter, and incombustible Sulphur (properly the volatile Salt of Tartar)
which fixes any Argent Vive: But to have perfect Aqua Vitae (requisite for
this Work) put (Philosophical) Wine in a Circulatory for a hundred days, to be
circulated with its Species, and then extract Aqua Vitae out of it ( the
Menstruum in Numb. 23.) because if you put to it as much Salharmoniack sublimed
as Tartar, one drop of it, after it is perfected, suddenly kills a Cancer in
the Flesh of Man, and if it be dropped upon ones hand, penetrates it, and
dissolves every Body. Without this Water we profit little in this Art, and he
that has this Water, will not in the least doubt of completing the Art: But
this Water is made twice as strong, if an equal quantity of the Mineral Spirit,
which is the Philosophers acute Water ( the Green Lion of Ripley in Numb. 59.)
be added to it, and then circulated upon the Tartar, and upon the Sal
harmoniack to spissity, and then dissolved into Water; which if done, this
Water will be of greater value than any Gold, and one of the wonderful things
of this World.

Sometimes they mixed Vegetable Salharmoniack, instead of Vegetable Menstruum,
with Mineral Menstruums. Thus,

147. The Stinking Menstruum acuated with the Salharmoniack of Lully.
TAke of the vegetable G. ( Vegetable Mercury or Salharmoniack) one Ounce, put
it in the Phial with a long neck, wherein you put three Ounces of E before (
the Stinking Menstrumm in Numb. 67.) and presently stop it with its stopple,
sealed with common Wax, that nothing may respire, then distill in a hot Balneo,
the space of three Natural days, into a clear dissolved Water.

As they added Salharmoniack to simple Mineral Menstruums, so also to the same
compounded.

148. The Stinking Lunar Menstruum, acuated with Vegetable Salharmoniack of
Lully. Cap. 14. Practicae Test. Major. Page 163. Vol. 4. Th. Chym.
IN the power of A (God) take one Ounce of the Compounded Water of Silver (
described in Numb. 141.) distilled through an Alembick, and put to it one Ounce
of the vegetable G. ( Mercury or Salharmoniack) dissolve, etc.

Basilius mixed these Menstruums thus.

149. The Spirit of Mercury mixed with Vitriol and the Fiery Spirit of Wine of
Basilius. Labor 3. Libri Revelat.
TAke off this Oil ( the first Matter of Metals made out of Venus and Mars, or
Spirit of Universal Mercury described in Numb. 132.) eight Ounces, of the
Spirit of Wine rectified to the highest ( the Menstruum described in Numb. 19.)
five Ounces, distill by a Glass Retort, and that three times, always with New
Spirit, so as that fifteen Ounces of the fiery Spirit of Wine may be joined to
the eight Ounces of Oil.

Paracelsus made the following mixed Menstruum for the Arcanum Lapidis or
Antimony.

150. The mixed Menstruum of Paracelsus. Cap. 6. Lib. 10. Archidon. Page 39.
WHoever desires to graduate his Metallic Heaven (Antimony) to the highest,
and reduce it to an Action, must first extract the liquid primum Ens Celestial
Fire, Quintessence of Mercury, (not of Sol; as it is ill read in the Latin)
and the Metallic Acetum acerrimum (the Circulatum majus of Paracelsus
described in Numb. 51.) out of its life, that is, common Mercury, by dissolving
it with its Mother, that is, the Arcanum of Salt ( Salt circulated in Numb.
27.) and mix it with the Stomach of Anthion, that is, the Spirit of Vi^riol
(the Menstruum described in Numb. 98.) and in it ( the mixed Menstuum)
dissolve, digest, etc. the coagulated Mercury of Antimony (the Regulus of
Antimony.)

From the Receipts we observe.
1. THat these Menstruums are the mixtures of diverse Menstruums.

2. And that they may be made of all Vegetable and Mineral Menstruums, being
mixed together at the Artists pleasure.

3. Yet that they are made the better, the more tinging the Menstruums were.

4. That these Menstruums do by Digestion become sweet and pure Vegetable
Menstruums.

EPILOGUE.
THese are the things, My Friends! which I promised you; the Menstruums of
Diana, hitherto by none but the Adepts described, declared, and rightly applied
to Use, and are now by me so manifestly explained, and distributed into their
Kinds, that they may be distinctly apprehended even by the meanest Chemists.
There are indeed many more Menstruums remaining ( for Diana has superfluity of
Menstruums) which I have not showed you; but I thought these sufficient, as
Examples to you: You, if you please, may collect more, and appropriate them to
their Kinds: But if it be our duty to respect the common Good, I could wish you
would communicate to me some of the more rare Manuscripts or Impressions of the
Adepts, if you have any in your Studies or Libraries, that they may be of
service not only to you, but to all Mankind, or at least signify their Names
to me, that I may either buy, or by entreaty borrow them of you or others;
especially you being already well assured, that in Practical Books all Secrets
depend upon the Spirit of Philosophical Wine, but that in the Theoretick, they
are all most obscure, being figurative, and not in the least to be understood
according to the Letter; which, if you keep longer in your Libraries, will be
daily exposed to a thousand dangers, and at length, as nothing worth, being
moldy and rotten, become the Aliment of Time, the Consumer of all things.

In the mean time, despise not these Receipts of Menstruums offered to you, but
rather read and peruse them, and every where endeavor to find out the Chemical
Truth, but those which you do not either understand, or not esteem, cast away
as trivial; for if one only Kind, or any one Receipt of a Kind out of four and
twenty, please you, it is sufficient; for we will easily prove that by that
one, all the Secrets of the more Secret Chymy may be prepared.

If also you are pleased to object against the Authority, yea Honesty and
Sincerity of this or that Adept, as, Paracel^us, Lully, etc. you may leave him,
and reject his Receipts, making choice of any other, in whom you may have
greater confidence, and we will prove all the rest by his Receipt: Learn
therefore the ways of making these Menstruums, observe their Orders, Degrees,
Matters, Methods of Making, the Virtues of Dissolving, Tinging, Multiplying
themselves, etc. and you will acknowledge them to be the best Instruments of
all the more Secret Chymy, as Keys, without which nothing, and with which all
the Secrets of this Art are opened and unlocked.

To make these Things, which we have declared in the former Discourse, of the
Excellencies of the Menstruums, more easy to you, I will here contract into a
Breviary, and reduce them into twelve subsequent and infallible Conclusions.

I. That the Descriptions of these Menstruums are understood according to the
Sound of the Letter.
THat the Receipts of this Book contain nothing occult, but the Spirit of
Philosophical Wine (the Use only of which we promised to define) you will
easily vouchsafe us your Assent. Nor yet is it too obscure, but that it may be
properly called an unctuous Spirit, proceeding from the White and Red Wine of
Lully, the Constitutives of the Menstruum foetens: The rest, which seem more
obscure, are Terms of Art, for the most part explained in the very Descriptions
of the Receipts of things made and produced from this Spirit: But the
obscurity, which a shorter or longer description of a Receipt causes, is by
accident, to be easily overcome and removed by any diligent Disciple of this
Art.

II. That no one of the aforesaid Menstruums is prepared without the Spirit of
Philosophical Wine.
AMong all these Menstruums of the Adepts imparted to you, there is not one,
which has not the Spirit of Philosophical Wine for its Basis. There are indeed
Menstruums, in the Receipts of which, we meet not with the Name of this Spirit,
yet there it is lurking under the name of this or that Menstruum. Other
Receipts of Menstruums there are, which do not take the Spirit of Philosophical
Wine free, but as it were settered, that is, any Common Oil; but when in the
making of these Menstruums the Spirit is unsettered, as also acuated, such
Menstruums cannot in the least be said to be made without it. There are lastly
also Menstruums, in the Receipts of which, neither the Spirit of Philosophical
Wine, nor any Oyley Matter is expressly mentioned (but these are more rare, on
purpose alleged to show us either the Envy or Morosity of the Adepts) whereas
notwithstanding it is by the Use of the Menstruum, manifest that this Spirit is
added through necessity; for that which is promised, could not otherwise be
effected.

Finally, There are some, which you will affirm may be made with Common Spirit,
Common Vinegar, and Aqua fortis, or Common Sal Armoniack without the Spirit of
Philosophical Wine: Suppose it so; but when you proceed to Practice, and try an
Experiment with such a Menstruum, you will soon find it not only too weak, but
also altogether ineffectual, and destructive in the more Secret Chymy: For it
is impossible to do that with a common Menstruum, which the Adepts have
prescribed by a Philosophical Menstruum. The Secrets of the more Secret Chymy
have this Privilege, that they cannot be made by any man but him that is
possessed of Philosophical Wine.

III. That these Menstruums are prepared from any sort of Matter.
We have demonstrated that the Menstruums aforesaid are made of diverse
Oleosities, Aridities and Acidities of the three Kingdoms. You have observed
the simple Vegetable Menstruums to be made of things neither Tinging nor Acid;
Compounded Vegetable Menstruums of things Tinging, not Acid; Simple Mineral
Menstruums made of things Acid, and not tinging; the Compounded, of things both
Acid and Tinging. Wherefore being now better assured of your Menstrual Matter
hitherto so anxiously sought for, you may take crude Mercury, or Vitriol,
Niter, common Salt, Salt of Tartar, or Urine, Rainwater, May-Dew, the Spirit
of the World also, by whatsoever Art obtained, or any other Matter also which
you have made choice of before the rest, for the true and universal Matter of a
Menstruum, in which choice you will not err; for it is much at one, whether you
make it of Gold or Mercury; whether of Pearls or Arsenick; Vegetable or Mineral
Salt, provided you proceed according to this or that Kind of Menstruums, with
consideration also of what Use you would have the Menstruum, lest you prepare
an Essence instead of a Magistery, or a Poison for an Antidote: On the
contrary, take pure Honey so applauded by Parisinus, or the Salt of Tartar,
commended by Ripley; or common Salt, esteemed by Paracelsus, as the Matrix of
Metals; or Vitriol abounding with the Tincture of Gold, extolled by Basilius,
or Argent vive magnified by most of the Adepts, as the open Metal: Take, I say,
which of them you please, but you must know it cannot in the least answer your
expectation, except it be joined, that is, corrected, exalted and graduated
with the Spirit of Philosophical Wine.

IV. That these Menstruums are also prepared by any Method.
YOU have here had several Methods of Preparation, which if not satisfactory,
you may please to invent new ones. Herein is contained nothing secret, if your
Matter, and the Spirit of Philosophical Wine be, without any possibility of
being separated, mixed together, and distilled either in part or whole, through
an Alembick: For every Matter, by what method soever volatilized and distilled
with the Spirit of Philosophical Wine, is a Menstruum.

V. That these Menstruums are sufficient also for every Use.
YOU have now in this Book observed the Use of the Spirit of Philosophical
Wine, as also of most Menstruums in these ways of making Menstruums: hereafter,
in the following Books you will perceive them to be sufficient for every
purpose. By these means you will make all the Medicines of the Adepts, reduce
all Metals into running Mercury, or if you had rather, into the Philosophers
Mercury, or first Matter of Metals. By these will you make as well universal as
particular Transmutatives of Metals, the best of all in respect of deeper
Tincture, shortness of Time, and conciseness of Work. Hereby lastly, will you
prepare whatsoever curiosity has been left us by the Adepts, and prescribed in
their Books, so that if they have any Preparations without the Spirit of
Philosophical Wine, you may decline them without any damage: For these
Menstruums do volatilize all fixed Bodies, and fix the volatile and
volatilized, dissolve the coagulated, and coagulate the dissolved: Under which
few Notions are comprehended all the Operations of the more Secret Chymy.

VI. That these Menstruums are many.
YOU have observed diverse Kinds of Menstruums, designed for several distinct
Uses. Simple Vegetable Menstruums do extract, rather than dissolve Bodies; the
Compounded dissolve only, but not extract: That which Vegetable Menstruums do,
the Mineral cannot; and so on the contrary: Of Vegetable Menstruums are made
Medicines only, not Poisons; but of Mineral Menstruums, Poisons only, and not
Antidotes without the singular dexterity of an Artist. An Use different and
contrary to its self admits no universal Menstruum: The Spirit of Philosophical
Wine is indeed the universal Matter of them all, but there is not one of all
the Menstruums sufficient for every Use; wherefore, unless you will for the
same reason call every one universal, because they all proceed from the Spirit
of Light, the universal Basis of all things, we cannot but deny an universal
Menstruum.

VII. That some Menstruums are corrosive.
THat Mineral Menstruums are corrosive, and therefore dissolve Bodies with
ebullition, is clearly manifest by the Receipts aforesaid. I would not have
you, being perhaps not sufficiently instructed in the Sayings of the Adepts,
every where declaring against Aqua fortisses, and all Corrosives, either
despise, or think ill of them: These are those Menstruums by which the ancient
Adepts abbreviated their Time and Labor in preparing their Tinctures: And
Paracelsus justly entitled himself to the Monarchy of Arcanums, he having been
the principal Instrument in completing not only the Abbreviations of Alchymy,
but moreover introducing these Mineral Menstruums to Medicinal Use, and that
with so much dexterity, that there seems to be now no hope left to his
Disciples of mending any imperfection of this Art, as will be demonstrated in
the following Books: Besides, these Menstruums differ from the Vegetable
Menstruums no otherwise, than that an Acidum is superadded to them, or to the
Spirit of Philosophical Wine, corroding the Aridum, and dividing it into Atoms,
making way for the Oleosum, to be sooner and better incorporated and mixed
together, which notwithstanding do by taking away the Acidum, return into the
same Vegetable Menstruums they were before.

VIII. That these Menstruums are permanent, yea fixed with Things dissolved in
them.
IT is by the former descriptions of Menstruums, manifest, that as well the
Spirit of Philosophical Wine, as Menstruums made of it, do stick to the things
dissolved in them. There is indeed no better Argument to confirm the excellency
of Menstruums, than that they are homogeneous and permanent with things
dissolved, and consequently Dissolvents transmutable with the dissolved into a
third substance different from both: These Menstruums therefore are so far from
being immutable, that, according to the Edict of the whole Crowd of
Philosophers, to wit, The dissolution of the Body is the coagulation of the
Spirit, and so on the contrary, nothing in the more Secret Chymy, can be more
infallible. Now this permanence of Menstruums you have observed not only in the
volatilizations of Menstruums, but also in the fixations of some, thus you had
the fixation of the Spirit of Philosophical Wine in the greater Circulatums of
the Ninth, and Two and Twentieth Kinds; but you will find more in the
Preparations of Medicines, as well as Tinctures. They were by an Analogy of the
Ancients ill called Menstruums, unless also they could be transformed into the
substance of an Embryo, and yield proper Nutriment and augmentation to the
Infant: The Spirit of our Wine is indeed an absolute Oleosum, that is,
combustible, but here being thoroughly mixed with Aridums, it becomes
incombustible, and despises the violence of Fire: It is also moist, and so
incapable of fixation; but the moister and thinner parts, which it contains,
are separated in the work of fixation from the more Oyley Particles being now
concentrated. So you observed, that, in the Preparations of the Sal
Harmoniacks, or Sulphurs of Nature, the Spirit of Philosophical Wine, as also
the Vegetable, as well as Mineral Menstruums are partly reduced into insipid
Water, and partly sticking to the Matters left in the bottom, and fixed: But
better Examples you will have both in the Second and Third Books.

IX. That Menstruums are not satiated with dissolving, but become rather more
avidous, and so are by Dissolutions augmented as well in quantity as quality.
THough the Spirit of our Wine is the Basis, Root, and Center of all
Menstruums, Medicines, Alchymical Tinctures, and Precious Stones, yet
nevertheless does it dissolve slowly, yea only such Bodies as are homogeneous
to it, that is, purely Oyley, as it self is a pure Oleosum, and associate the
same to it, transmuting into its own Nature, and so multiplies its self by this
means. Now so soon as this Spirit is transmuted into an Arido-Oleosum, it does
under the name of a Simple Vegetable Menstruum, dissolve Arido-Oleosums, that
is, the Sulphurs or Tinctures of the Mineral Kingdom, the pure Aridum being
untouched, and left in the form of a white Powder, with which Essences the said
Menstruums or Essences may indeed melt together, but not in the least be
satiated, because there is an Addition and Multiplication of like Parts: But
the same Vegetable Menstruums being now compounded of the Simple, do no more
extract the Tinctures and Essences of Minerals, but dissolve and transmute the
whole Mass or Substance of these Bodies into an Oil swimming above, which is
called a Magistery: Now this being digested together with its Menstruum, at
length falls in, is united, and so multiplies the Compounded Vegetable
Menstruum. For an Example to young Beginners; The Spirit of Philosophical Wine
being a Menstruum of the first Kind, and acuated with the Oil of Nutmegs, is
hereby made a Menstruum of the second Kind; or acuated with Honey, if you would
have a Menstruum of the third Kind: distill either of those Menstruums with
Common Sal Harmoniack, and you will have a Menstruum of the fourth; but if you
desire one of the fifth Kind, cohobate either of them with the Salt of Tartar,
and you will have the Acetum acerrimum of Ripley; or with common Salt, and you
will make the Sal circulatum of Paracelsus; Cohobate Mercury, or any other
Mercury, or any other Metal through an Alembick with this Vinegar or Salt, and
you will transmute the Simple Vegetable Menstruums into the Compounded
Vegetable Menstruums of the eighth Kind; from which you will further prepare
Menstruums of the tenth Kind, by dissolving and volatilizing any other Metal in
them. The same Rule you have as to our Mineral Menstruums: But the Common
Menstruums cannot receive beyond their Capacity.

X. That these Menstruums are also Secrets of the Second Book.
YOu have in this Book observed that among the Vegetable Menstruums there is
none but what is either an Essence, or a Magistery, and it will be more
copiously demonstrated in the Book of the Preparations of Medicines: You have
also taken notice by the aforesaid Receipts of them, especially being compared
with the following Descriptions of Medicines, that Mineral Menstruums are the
same Medicines, but mixed and dissolved with Acids.

XI. That these Menstruums are likewise Secrets of the Third Book.
IT is now partly clear by the Receipts of them, but will be more clear by the
Secrets of the Third Book, that the Simple Menstruums are the Philosophers
Stones not yet fermented; but the Compounded are Menstruums mixed with the
Masculine Seed, and therefore Volatile and Fermented Stones.

XII. That these Menstruums are in like manner Secrets of the Fourth Book.
THat these Menstruums do gove Light by Night, and consequently, are perpetual
Lights, yield also Matters for Pearls, Precious Stones, etc. the Receipts
themselves do show; which will be confirmed by the Fourth Book.

RIPLEY, Cap. 13. Philorcii. Without these Waters we do little Good in this
Art; but he that has these Waters, will without all doubt complete the Art.

The End of the First Book.
ERRATA.
EPist. Ded. page 5. l. 3. read these for that. Ep. to the Reader, p. 10. l.
10. r. have a mind to. Preface. p. 3. l. 20. for Vegetative, r. Vegetable. p.
8. l. 28. for Minerals, r. Mineral, p. ibid. r. fixed Vegetable. p. ib. l. 8.
after that, r. it scarce deserves. p. 12. l. 6. for mixed, r. mix. p. 14. l.
26. for is it, r. it is. p. 24. l. 12. dele of. p. 31. l. 3. after oil, r. or
middle salts, for salts or. p. 39. l. 5. for their, r. the. p. 42. l. 33. for
with, r. which. p. 45. l. 4. for the, r. a. l. 16. for that only are they able
to do, r. that only is able to do this. p. 48. l. 16. for as, r. us. p. 54. l.
11. for fly, r. flow. p. 56. l. 14. for drive, r. dive. p. 69. l. 24. for
distill, r. distilled. p. 78. l. 19. for stored, r. restored. p. 81. l. 1. omit
the first four lines wholly. p. 95. l. 1. for the latter is, r. it. p. 119. l.
ult. dele to. p. 127. l. 12. for Metallic of, r. Metals. p. 128. l. 31. for
extract, r. extracting. p. 130. l. 32. for prefers, r. preserves. p. 138. l.
21. for wherefore, r. whereof. p. 146. l. ult. r. for an Aurum potabile, he
prepares a Menstruum out of Gold and Silver thus. p. 152. for away, r. all the.
p. 177. l. pen. for out, r. out of. p. 181. l. 8. for its, r. in. p. 182. l.
14. for greens, r. greeness. p. 199. l. 33. for fire, r. Firr. p. 215. l. 5.
for into it, r. it into. l. ult. for greens, r. greenness. p. 246. l. 22. for
Water, r. Matter. p. 261. l. 3. after Wine, r. and Salts. p. 296. l. 27. dele
and when the Destillation is. p. 301. l. 14. for showing, r. shining. p. 306.
l. 2. after Menstruums, r. made. p. 326. l. 27. for Tho, r. tho. p. 349. l. 30.
for Acids, r. Arids, d 351. l. 33. for repeating, r. repeated.

Books Printed for, and Sold by Tho Howkins in George-Yard near Lombard Street.
CLavis Horologiae, or, The Art of Dyalling; with an Explication of the
Pyramidical Dyal set up in His Majesty's Garden at Whitehal, Anno 1669.
Illustrated with 40 Copper Cuts. in Quarto. By John Holwell.

A Cabalistical Dialogue in Answer to the Opinion of a Learned Doctor in
Philosophy and Theology, That the World was made of nothing. By F. M.
Van-Helmont. in Quarto.

Trigonometry made easy, fitted to the meanest Capacity; it being the
Foundation of Astronomy, Surveying, Navigation, etc. in Octavo. By John Holwell.

Mellificium Mensionis, or the Marrow of Measuring, wherein a new and ready way
is showed how to measure Glazing, Painting, Plaistering, Masonry, Joyners,
Carpenters, and Brick-layers Work, in six Books; and Illustrated with Copper
Cuts: the like not heretofore Published. The Second Edition, Corrected, in
Octavo, By Venterus Mandey.

The Royal Catholic English School. Containing a Catalogue of all Words in the
Bible, beginning with one Syllable, and proceeding by degrees to eight, divided
and not divided, etc. in Octavo. By Tobias Ellis.

Dr. Everard's Works in Octavo.

The Paradoxal Discourses of F. M. Van-Helmont, concerning the Macrocosm and
Microcosm, etc. in Octavo.

The Narrow Path of Divine Truth, described, from living Practice and
Experience of its three great steps, viz. Purgation, Illumination and Union,
according to the Testimony of the Holy Scriptures, etc. By F. M. Van Helmont,
in Twelves.

The Artless Midnight Thoughts of a Gentleman at Court. The Second Edition,
with Additions, in Twelves.

The Young Man's Companion; or a very Useful Manual for Youth, etc. The Second
Edition with Additions. By William Mather, in Twelves.


