IMPRIMATUR Tho. Tomkyns R. Rmo. in Christo Patri ac Domino Dno. Gilberto
divina Providentia Archi-Epis. Cant. a sac. dom.

Ex Aed. Lambeth. June 2.
The Profitableness of Piety, Opened in an ASSIZE SERMON Preached at
DORCHESTER, March 24. 1670/1.

Before the Right Honorable Sir RICHARD RAINSFORD Knight, One of the Judges of
the KINGS BENCH.

At the Request of The Right Worshipful ROBERT SEYMER Esquire; His Majesty's
High Sheriff of the County of DORSET.

By Richard West, D. D. and Rector of Shillingston in the same County.

Discite Justitiam, moniti, and non temnere Divos. Virg. Aen. 6. -- Vbi non est
Pudor,
Nec Cura Juris, Sanctitas, Pietas, Fides,
Instabile Regnumest. --
Seneca in Thyest. Act. 2. LONDON, Printed for R. Royston, Bookseller to the
Kings Most Excellent Majesty, MDCLXXI.

1 Timothy Chap. 4. the latter part of the 7th and the 8th Verses. -- Exercise thy
Self rather unto Godliness. For Bodily Exercise profits little, but Godliness
is Profitable unto all things, having Promise of the Life that now is, and of
that which is to come.
WHEN the Prophet David instructs the Judges of the Earth, the lesson he would
have them learn is, Psalm. 2. 10.
Serve the Lord with Fear. And if you look into the character of Jethro's
Justices of Peace, you will find their main qualification to be, Exodus, 18. 21.
Men fearing God. And great reason.

For first, They have their Commission and Authority from God. By him Princes
rule and Nobles, even all the Judges of the Earth, Prove. 8. 16.

2. They Judge not for men, but for the Lord, who is with them in Judgment, 2
Chro. 19. 6. Again, Their Judgment is God's, Deuteronomy. 1. 17. and once more, God
himself has said they are Gods, Psalm. 82. 6. And now it would be a monstrous
Solecism and Contradiction, if they should be Ungodly Gods. I am not of their
opinion who hold Dominion is founded in Grace, and make Saintship a Plea for
Sovereignty: but yet, considering that Dominion is oftentimes confounded for
want of Grace in them that Govern; and since S. Paul tells us, that the Saints
shall Judge the World, 1 Cor. 6. 2.
yea the Angels hereafter in Heaven: and again, Since none can be glorious
Saints there, who are not Gracious Saints here; it is therefore very meet and
necessary that Judges should Exercise themselves unto Godliness, on Earth; for
alas, it would be but a poor Privilege, and a miserable Dignity, to Condemn
Prisoners in this World, and to be themselves Condemned in the next, now, to
have the Power of Gods, and then to have the Portion of Devils. Though then the
Apostle prescribes this Counsel in my Text, to a Man of God; 1 Timothy 6 11.
yet it is very fit and proper to be given in Charge to you that are Gods of
Men. To Exercise your selves unto Godliness; it is not only your main Duty, but
your greatest Interest and Concern, far above all the Income of the Heads
Projects, or the Hands Performances; for Bodily Exercise profits little, but
Godliness (which is seated in the Heart and shines in the Life of a Christian)
that is Profitable for All things, having Promise of the Life that now is, and
that which is to come.

Exercise Secondly, A Powerful Argument to encourage and enforce it, drawn ab
Vtili, from the Great Diana of Profit; Godliness is profitable unto all things,
having Promise of the Life that now is, and of that which is to come.

In the Exhortation, we have First, The Object, Godliness; Secondly, The Act,
Exercise.

I shall begin with the Object, Godliness, and show, first, what that is. In
the Greek the word is (...), which signifies a Right Worship, or Awful
Adoration of God. And here now the Great Question will be, What this Right
Worship, or Religious Adoration of God is. The Truth and Life of it is in a
manner lost in the Quarrels and Disputes about it. It faring with Religion, as
it did with the Woman in Plutarch, who having many Suitors, when every one
could not have her to himself, they pulled her in pieces that so none might
have her. And thus among those several Sects and Subsects (which have been as
numerous and busy almost as Insects) every one beats down the price of another
man's Religion, to enhance the Value of their own; yea, Et malunt nullam, quam
non suam, some of them had rather there should be none, than that their own
should not take place. But as the Patriarks sheaves made obeisance to Joseph's,
Genesis 37 7.
so must all other Religions bow down to Christianity; all other Books they
must do homage to the Bible, and every Christian must subscribe to what the
Gospel says is Godliness.

And now from thence the Schoolmen and other Divines, define Godliness to be a
Likeness or Conformity to God; which Conformity is twofold.

1. A Conformity to the Nature of God, (as far as may consist with our
capacity) and therefore Believers are said to be partakers of the Divine
Nature, 2 Pet. 1. 4. The meaning of which is, not that we participate of his
Substance, which is incommunicable, but that we are made like unto him, First,
in his Attributes, and Secondly, in his Affections.

Adam was at first created, and by these God becomes, (as it were) Visible in
man.



2. True Godliness consists also in our Conformity to the Will of God, that is,
to whatsoever he wills us to do, or not to do, in his Word. The Will of God, is
(as one says) the Rule of Holiness, Mr. C. upon Job.
as his Nature is the Pattern of it. So that, as it is the root of all Sin, yea
and a heavy Judgment too, when men make their own Will, Wit, Reason, Fancy,
Humor, (things which some call Conscience) to be the Spring and Warrant of all
their Actions; Thus it is the Power, and Perfection of Godliness (and
consequently the way to true Happiness) when we do every thing in Obedience to
Gods Commands, regulating all our works by his Word, and directing all to his
Glory. This was the frame of Adams Heart in the state of Innocence, this was
the disposition of Christ's soul, when he humbled himself in our Humanity, and
this is that, in which every Saint of God should be conformable to the Son of
God, 1 Pet. 1. 16.
that so he may be Holy as he is Holy. Thus you see what Godliness is. But
where now shall we find this godliness? Is it to be found amongst all those who
call themselves the Godly party? I wish with all my soul, that they were all
such Conformists, to wit, that they were Conformable to the Image of the Son of
God, as it is Romans 8. 29. Summa Religionis est imitari quem colis, it is the
sum and substance of Religion, to Imitate Him whom we worship. Those that are
truly Godly, must be Godlike. What the Devil in height of Pride once said
concerning Knowledge, and Power, the same should every Christian in all Humility
say concerning Holiness and Righteousness, Esaias 14. 14.
Ero similis Altissimo, I will be like the most High. This, S. John calls a
walking as Christ walked, 1 John 2. 6. And observe I pray, how that was, in
some few acts of his ordinary Obedience.

1. Look on him in his Devotions, and he is Hearing, Reading, Luke 4. 16.
Kneeling on his Knees and Praying again, and again, Luke 22. 41.
in the same Form of words; and that in the Temple, Matthew* 26. 44.
and Synagogues, Luke 6. 6.
the public places of Gods worship; where he carefully observed the Rites and
Ordinances of the Church, Joh. 10. 22. compared with 1 Macc. 4. 59.
though some of them were of bare Humane Institution, and held Communion with
it, Matthew. 23. 3.
though the Priests were corrupt in their Office, Matthew, 26. 14.
and a Judas was amongst the Apostles.

2. Take him in the Kingdom, or Commonwealth, and he is subject to Authority;
He pays Tribute, and Renders unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's, Mat. 17
25, 27.
yea, Mar. 12. 17.
though Caesar gave not to God the things that are Gods.

3. Once more, look upon him in his Carriage and Converse with men of inferior
rank and order, and you shall find him Meek, Matthew. 11. 29.
and Lowly, Peaceable, and Patient, Acts 10. 38.
always going about to do good, even to them who made it their business to do
him evil. And now, thou that call thy self Saint, (though thou will not
vouchsafe the Evangelists and Apostles that Name) how walk thou in these
respects?



resistest the lawful Powers, thou despisest Dominion, Jude 8. v.
and speak evil of Dignities, and art not afraid to offend Him, who is the
Defender of Thee, and the Faith, and art thou conformable to thy Savior?



On the other side; amongst Those who think themselves Conformable in the
aforesaid particulars, yet many of them, O what Antipodes are they to Christ in
other matters?

Swear not at all, Matthew. 5. 37.
but let your Communication be, yea, yea, nay, nay, for whatsoever is more than
these, comes of evil. But yet their mouths are full of Cursing and
Blaspheming, running over the Passion in a most horrid Litany, and using Gods
Name more in their Oaths than Prayers, making thus their Sins most show their
Christianity: in so much, that if according to the custom of the Jews, we
should rent our Clothes, 2 Kin. 19. 1.
as often as we hear Gods holy Name profaned, we should scarce have a Rag left
upon our backs.

Again, Christ kept Holy the Sabbath, and only Luke 6. 7.
and did good Works upon it; But O, how is that Day made the most sinful Day of
the Week, the time of leisure for Iniquity, or of Rest to men's Sloth. Many
labor six days in their lawful Callings, who shamefully Play, and Sin away
the Seventh, which may justly occasion the revival of what Alstedius once said
of the Germans, If the day should be called according to some men's observation
of it, Daemoniacus potius quam Dominicus, it should not be called the Lords
day, but the Devils.

Once more, briefly, What a miracle of Temperance Holiness to the Lord. Zach.
14. 20.
When he sat down to feed himself, Matt. 14. 21.
he multiplied Loaves and fed Thousands, so that all his Meals were
consecrated, as it were, into a Communion, and as strict and sober as our
Sacramental Suppers. But alas! how is the old English Hospitality turned into a
Dutch Debauchery; Variety of Liquors is now the chiefest Entertainment, while
in our Feasts, more is spent in Sauce than in Meat, in Smoke than in Fire, in
Wines than in Loaves, as if we meant to abrogate the old Petition in the Lord's
Prayer, and say no more, Give us this day our daily Bread, but Give us this day
our daily Drink. Jude 12. ^.
These doubtless are spots in our Feasts, I cannot say of Charity, but of
Wantonness and Riot, when more care is taken to fill the Brain, than the Belly,
the Rich, than the Poor; as if we would Correct the Magnificat, and invert also
the words of the Blessed Virgin Mother, Filling the Full with good things, Luke
1. 53.
and sending the Hungry empty away. There is no better remedy to retrive
Christian Charity and Temperance, than, instead of making men Blind and Lame,
Luke 14. 13.
to call in such as are so; and to be as liberal at the Door, as in the Dining
room, causing the Basket to go about more, and the Bottles less. This, this
would be to be conformable to Christ; But now, if true Godliness be thus a
likeness to God, where, O where, is it to be found? Betwixt the Atheists in
Heart, dissembling Hypocrites on the one hand, and Atheists in Practice, the
profane Hectors on the other; betwixt Scribes and Pharisees here, and
Publicans and Sinners there, How is sincere Piety decayed and lost, so that we
may justly take up the Psalmists complaint, and say, Psalm. 12. 1.
Help Lord, for the Godly man ceases, the Faithful fail from amongst the
Children of Men. Once Orbis ingemuit factum se videns Arrium, The whole world
groaned to see her self made Arrian; but now she groans much worse Factum se
videns Atheum, to see her self turned Atheist. In some there is but a Form of
Godliness, 2 Timothy 3. 5.
in others, not so much as a Form; In few is found the Power and Exercise
thereof, which is the Act here mentioned, and the next thing to be insisted on,
Exercise thy self unto Godliness.

The word in the Original is (...), 2. Part.
which signifies a making bare, or stripping our selves of all encumbrances in
the Christian course of Piety, as Racers, Wrestlers, and Combatants do in their
preparations for victory. Grotius tells us it alludes to Gymnasium, a School;
and imports our being as diligent in Religion, as we would have our children
that go to School be in Learning. And indeed, there is nothing that we ought to
make our Business so much as Godliness. Luke 2. 49.
Pietas est pro pietate sumptus, says Tertullian. This is Godliness to be at
cost for God. 2 Samuel 24. 24.
Holy David would not serve God of that which Cost him nothing. And if any man
be otherwise minded, and thinks much to take pains, and bid high for Heaven;
all the comfort I can give him is this, that he may be Damned with ease, and go
to Hell if he please, good cheap. The Jews have a rule, That whatever a man
does in the solemn Worship of God, he should do it with all his might. Eccl. 9.
10.
S. Paul therefore joins Fervency of Spirit, Romans 12. 11.
and Serving the Lord together: and says our Savior Ever since the days of
John the Baptist, the Kingdom of Heaven suffers Violence, Mat. 11. 12.
and the Violent take it by Force. But alas, we have a generation of men, who
are all for a poor pittance of Piety, a little upon a Knifes point will serve
their turn, They are afraid to Fear God too much; and think it enough, if
(Agrippa like) they be but almost Christians. Acts 26. 28.
Again, there are others, who purposely study Irreligion, and affect
Profaneness; that so they may be sure to avoid the suspicion of being
Hypocrites or Phanaticks. Yea, and further, Zeal in their Fellow Christians
turns their weak stomachs, and, as if there were Infection in Faith, they are
sick to see a Soul (like the Spouse in the Canticles) sick of Love. Cant. 2. 5.
Seneca tells us of a Sybarite that was grown so extremely nice and lazy, that
he would wax weary with the sight of others Labors, and therefore when at any
time he saw a poor man digging and sweating, he began to pant and faint, and
requires him to be removed. And thus these dainty Christians, they loath to see
men zealously devout, and would (I fear) be content to have their Room rather
than their Company, 1 Timothy 5. 17.
who labor in the Word and Doctrine, and Jacob-like, Genesis 32. 24.
wrestle with God in Prayer, Stirring up themselves to take hold of Him, as
it is Esaias 64. 7. But, O, that such would consider, that Religion is not a
matter of such a French indifferency as they make it, nor are God, and his
Service, things to be played and trifled with. He that is but almost a
Christian, shall be but almost saved; and he has nothing of true Godliness,
who thinks he has enough, or may have too much. Immensitas est mensura. Amb.
In other Churches, there is no man so much magnified, as he that is Strictest
and most Devout; That Papist that is most diligent at his Beads, most Canonical
in his Hours, and most frequently prostrate before his Crucifix, He of all
others is most admired, and Canonized for the greatest Saint. Dr. Reynolds Bp.
of Nor.
And now as an excellent Bishop in his Treatise on the 110. Psalm, says, why
should not a Holy Strictness, be as much Loved, and Honored as a
Superstitious? Why should not Exactness, Purity, and a Contending to
Perfection, be as much pursued in a True, as in a False Religion? I cannot
(indeed) but acknowledge, that Praeciseness (with some) has been made a Cloak
(and that a long one) for Rebellion: and many wicked things have been done
under the color of Zeal and Reformation. But what? because others have been
Hypocrites, shall we be Profane? Because their Zeal has set the world on
fire, shall we be Keycold in Piety, and serve God, as if we served him not?
yea, and further, shall we shamefully Act the Black Devils, because others have
Acted the White? Remember (I beseech you) the words of the Royal Martyr, in his
most Excellent MEDITATIONS. (I Will give you his own Expression, (...), c. 27. To
the Prince of Wales.
that it may make the deeper impression in you;) Let not (says he) Counterfeit
and disorderly Zeal abate your value and esteem of true Piety; both of them are
to be known by their Fruits; The sweetness of the Vine and Fig Tree is not to
be despised, though the Brambles and Thorns should pretend to bear Figs and
Grapes, thereby to Rule over the Trees. Let us then make it our Business to be
Unlike those men in a more Excellent way. Did Sectaries pretend to be Saints?
Let us really and sincerely strive to Be so; Had they the Name? Let us have the
Thing; and again, Had they the Show and Vizard of Religion? Let us have the
Face and Substance of it, that so the Beauties of Holiness, the Fruits of
Conversion, and the Exercise and Power of Godliness, may be as much Seen in our
Practice and Conversation, as they were proclaimed in their Language and
Profession. If the Lives of the Sons of the Church of England, were as Holy as
its Doctrine, as Divine as its Discipline, and as much Reformed as its
Liturgy, This, This, would bring our Way of Worship into Credit, This would
put to silence the Evil-speakings of Foolish men, 2 Pet. 2. 15.
yea and This would make Converts fly to our Churches, as Doves to their
Windows; Esaias 60. 8.
whilst by our Holy Fervency in Prayer, our close Attention in Hearing, and our
Grave and Orderly deportment through the whole Service of God, not only
Children and Looser Christians may be struck with Awe and Admiration of the
Ordinances, but also that a Heathen or Phanatick, if they should come into our
Assemblies, and see us thus Zealously Affected in Good things, Gal. 4. 18.
They may Confess and say, Surely, Great is this God, whom this People Worship,
and Right is this Worship, which is done so Solemnly, so Seriously, and so
Devoutly.

I have done with the Act, Exercise, and hasten to the Argument, or Reason,
with which the Apostle presses and enforces it, and that is drawn ab Vtili,
from its Profitableness. For Bodily Exercise profits little, but Godliness is
Profitable unto all things, having Promise of the Life that now is, and of that
which is to come.

Here, Third Part.
if any shall ask with those in Job, what Profit is there in Serving the
Almighty? Job 21. 15.
I answer (as S. Paul does in another case) much every way. Romans 3. 2.


1. It profits more than all Bodily Trades and Labors. Take Bodily Exercise in
that sense, and the Profitableness of the one, compared with the other, is (as
my Text says) (...), Little, or for a Little time; 1 Timothy 6. 6.
whereas Godliness (says the Apostle) is Great Gain; and that Good part which
shall never be taken away, Luke 10. 42.

2. Understand by Bodily Exercise, the External Duties of Religion; and
Godliness, which consists in Newness of Heart, and Life, that is more Profitable
than those also, yea and it is to be preferred before the severest Exercises of
Devotion, such as Watching, Fasting, and Abstinence from Meats, and Marriage:
(as is hinted Verse 3.)

To Keep our Heart with all diligence; Prove. 4. 23.
and stand daily upon our Guard, watching against Sin and Satan, so that
neither of them take us Napping; this is better than to turn the Night into
Day, and by an Unnatural Burglary force open the Windows of our Eyes, when
sleep would shut them fast.

Again, To Serve God in Singleness of Heart, Ephesians. 6. 5.
that is more considerable, than to Vow a Single Life, than which, Marriage as
it is more Honorable, Heb. 13. 4.
so it is now Profitable and Useful, by how much Fruitfulness is more
Commodious than Barrenness, Posterity more Immortal than Want of Issue, and in
brief, by how much Two are better than One, Eccl. 4. 9, 11. 1 Cor. 7. 9.
and to be Warm, better than to Burn.

In the next place, Fasting from Meat and Drink, that is Good in its place and
season, when it is done in Order to the Exercises of Godliness; but, who will
not say, that to that end, An every-days Temperance may be as good, Luke 18. 12.
as the Pharisee's Fasting twice a-week. These are those Bodily Exercises,
which the Apostle does not here altogether Condemn, but extenuates in respect
of Benefit, if compared with Godliness; and therefore he says in my Text,
Exercise thy self rather unto Godliness, for that is Profitable for All things
both in this Life, and that which is to come.

For the Things of this Life, I shall instance only Prove. 3. 16, 17. where it is
said of Godly Wisdom, Length of days are in her Right hand, and in her Left
hand Riches, and Honor. Her ways are ways of Pleasantness, and all her Paths
are Peace.

I shall begin with Wealth, and first show, That the way to be truly Rich, is
to be Religious. Though Great Gain, without Contentment is some men's Godliness,
yet the Apostle assures us, 1 Timothy 6. 5, 6.
that Godliness with Contentment is Great Gain. And needs must it be so;

1. Because it is accompanied with Contentment; for who so Rich, as he that
has Enough, and is Content with what he has. That is Wealth indeed, that
frees a man from Want, and that Contentment does, even in Want it self.

2. This Exercising our selves unto Godliness, it is Ars quaestuosissima, as
Tertullian calls it, The most Gainful Trade, because of Gods Blessing that
attends it; and now, the Blessing of the Lord, that makes Rich, says Solomon,
Prove. 10. 22.

3. It is said of the Godly man, That whatsoever he does shall prosper; Psalm.
1. 3.
and then sure he must needs be in a very Thriving way. If any of you had the
Philosophers Stone, that could turn Iron into Gold, you would think your selves
Abundantly wealthy, as if you had both the India's; and much more may you do
so, Matthew. 13. 46.
when you have this precious Pearl, or White stone of the Gospel, Rev. 2. 17.
which has the Virtue to turn Losses into Gain, and that an hundred fold,
Matthew. 19. 20. yea, and make All things work together for your Good, Romans 8.
28. The Godly man's Expenses may be reckoned as part of his Income, and Revenue,
in that, what he spends in Charity to the Poor, and in Liberality to Pious
Uses, is counted a Lending to the Lord, Prove. 19. 17.
who will pay him again, (in Kind, or in Kindness, in money, or in money-worth)
for which he has the Bond of God's Promise, which is the best Security in the
world. Riches thus scattered, Non periunt sed parturiunt, by an Honest Usury,
and happy Brocage, they are Improved and Insured; and like good Seed sown, they
are not cast away, but Multiplied and Increased. Away then with the old Wives
Proverb, which says, Plain, (or Pious) dealing is a Jewel, but he that uses it
shall die a Beggar. I acknowledge the first part of it to be Orthodox, it is a
Jewel of Inestimable value, but I cannot see how the latter part can be true,
when I consider how many Beggars there are in the world, and how few Plain and
Pious dealers. Examine things aright, and you will find, that there is no such
Vnthriftiness and Ill-husbandry as Sin. Many complain of Wars, and Taxes, and
these (they say) have wasted and impoverished their Estates. But alas, their
Sins are far more Chargeable and Consumptive. Think but with your selves at
what a High rate Contention and Revenge are maintained, when the Toll is more
than the Grist, and the Fees far greater than the Satisfaction. Think what vast
sums of money Pride and Idleness exact, when a whole Lordship shall be hung at
the Tip of the Ear, and men spend their Patrimony merely to spend their Time,
making it their every-days work, only to Play all day.

Again, Think but how the Drunkard swallows both Life and Livelihood down his
Throat, Romans 3. 13.
and so makes it an open Sepulcher to bury all he has.

Think also what a Master that sly sin of Adultery is, when at once it Empties
both Back and Bags, leaving a man as Poor and Naked as the Highway Robbers,
Prove. 23. 27.
and throwing him into a deep Ditch (as Solomon calls the Whore) which like a
more devouring Sea, confounds the Revenue of all the Land that it encloses.

And again once more, Think but how many Elements are dispeopled for Variety of
Dainties, to defray the wantonness of Lust, and satisfy the Curiosity of a
Critical Ingenious Palate which studies the the Art of Eating. Think (I say)
seriously of these things, and you may live cheaper under the Power of any
Needy and Disordered Armies, than thus pay Taxes to Sin, and give Free Quarter
to the Devil. Unless then you had rather be poor and wretched Sinners, than
Rich and Happy Saints, Exercise your selves unto Godliness.

Health, as Wealth. Psalm. 34. 12, 13, 14.
What man is he (says David) that desires Life, and loves many days, that he
may see Good? Keep thy Tongue from Evil, and thy Lips from speaking Guile;
Depart from Evil, and do Good. Many men's Tongues are such sharp Swords and
Razors, that they cut their own Throats; Others dig their Graves with their
Teeth; and others by Wantonness and Lust (like the worst of Cannibals) Eat away
their own flesh, killing themselves by piecemeal, whilst alive, and doing that
which the Devils desired to shun, Matthew. 8. 29.
viz. Tormenting themselves before their time. The Physician being asked the
Causes of Diseases, answers, and that truly, Mali Humores, The Ill Humors of
the Body. But the Divine resolves it more fully, and says, Mali mores, The Ill
Manners of the Life. Art thou fettered with the Gout? Rackt and Tortured with
the Stone? Or are thy Loins Ulcer'd with the Pox? or thy Breast spotted with
the Plague? O consider, That there were shackles on thy Conscience, before
those of thy Feet. There was a hardness in thy heart before that in the
bladder; and the more filthy spots of thy life, they make the sores run, and
cause those spots in the Liver. In brief, thy drunkenness drowns thy little
World with a Dropsy; thy Apostasy brings the Epilepsie or Falling Sickness;
thy Envy pines thee into a Consumption; and thy hot boiling Lusts cast thee
first into a Fever, and thence into Hell fire. Psalm. 32 11.
Great Plagues (says the Psalmist) remain for the Ungodly. But Godliness,
that is the Grand Antidote against Pestilential diseases; as you may see, Psalm.
91. 3, 6, 10. ver. If then you would escape such sad and loathsome Sicknesses,
labor to live free from more foul and nasty sins. Try it when you will, you will
find it to be true, That as Honesty is the best Policy, and Patience the best
Law, so Temperance and Chastity they are the best Physic.

And Thirdly, This Exercising your selves unto it makes also for public Peace
and Safety, (which is the Magistrates great Concern.) Men (as one says) are the
Walls and Ribs for Strength; Women the Nurseries for Increase; Children the
Pledges for Perpetuity, Money as the Vital breath, Peace as the Natural heat,
Plenty as the Radical moisture, Justice as the Life-bloud; but Religion; that is
the Form and Soul of a Body Politic, without which it is but as a noisome
Carcass, exposed to be devoured by Birds and Beasts of prey. Diis, Te minorem
quod geris, imperas. Horat.
Poets and Historians tell us, That the Old Romans owed their Prosperity to
their Piety; and were made Commanders of the World for their Obedience to their
Gods. And New Rome too, flourishes (at least Outwardly) in her Superstition,
more than some Protestant Churches do in their carelessness and coldness of
Worship, (not to say Profaneness.) And to come nearer home, we have seen also
by Experience, how Pretended Godliness and Zeal has made Usurpation
Formidable, and brought Reputation and Assistance to an Ill Cause and Title.
Machiavel therefore was not out in his Politics, when he Instructs his Prince
to put on a Show of Religion. The very Athiests themselves acknowledge it a
principal Engine of State, and an excellent Instrument of Government. And now,
if the Shadow, Form and Counterfeit of a Feigned Religion be thus Considerable
and Effectual to Establish a False Power, and draw Disciples and Adherents to
Unjust Governors; O how Forceable and Advantageous would the Real and Sincere
Exercise of True Godliness be, to the Settling and Securing of a Right and
Lawful Authority. If the bare pretense and profession of Piety has done such
wonders, as amazed the world, and struck an Awe into Foreign Princes, O what
miracles of Victories and Deliverances would the Power and Purity thereof
produce! How would that make a Reformed Protestant Church Terrible as an Army
with Banners. Cant. 6. 4.


Doubtless, when our Ways thus please the Lord, this will make our Enemies be
at Peace with us, Prove. 16. 7.
lest happily they should be found to fight against God, as Gamaliel said to
the Jews, Acts 5. 39. Peace with All men, Heb. 12. 14.
and Holiness, they are joined together in the Holy Gospel of Peace. And if any
Professors of Holiness have been turbulent and Rebellious; it was not because
of their Holiness, but because they were but Professors. Religion that is Pure,
(Pure for Faith, not Faction) it will be also Peaceable, Lactan.
James 3. 17. it has its Name a Religando, and binds men (more than All your
Laws) to their Good-behaviour, in that it puts an Awe upon their Consciences;
and sweetly constrains them to Obey for the Love of Christ; 2 Cor. 5. 11, 14.
working in them also a Fear, not only of Temporal, but Eternal wrath. Whatever
you do then, suffer not this Sacred Bond to be it self broke in pieces; neither
let Religion lose its due Reverence and Dread, in being sported with, and
scoffed at, by the profane Drollers of this Age, whose wit lies in all
wickedness, and whose mirth is nothing but madness. The Jews have a Proverbial
saying, Migrandum est ex loco in quo Rex non timetur. There is no staying in
that place, where the King is not Feared and Honored. They knew such a crying
sin would be Echoed with some roaring Judgment. And what then shall we think
will befall that Kingdom, where God is not Feared, nay, where he is Reproached
and Dishonored? Righteousness (says Solomon) exalts a Nation, Prove. 14. 34.
(be it never so mean and poor) but sin (especially that sin of Reproaching the
holy things of God) it is a Reproach to any People (be they never so great and
mighty.) And if you think to have true Honor, and lasting Peace and Safety,
without being serious and sincere in Holiness, truly you had as good resolve
you will have These things whether God will or no. 2 Chronicles. 15. 2.
The Lord is with you, while you are with him. And he that does not account his
Presence the best Protection, and looks not upon Godly Prayer, and Holy Living
as the best Procurers of his Presence, let him go like an Atheist as he is,
Hos. 9. 12.
and live where he may feel the woes of Gods departure.

I might show you in the next place, how Godliness has the Promises also in
this Life, of Spiritual Blessings, such as Forgiveness of sin, Peace of
Conscience, Assurance of Salvation, and sweet Communion with God, whose Grace
is better than Gold, and whose favor and loving kindness is better than Life.
Psalm. 63. 3.
But further, Its greatest Gain is in Reversion, in that it has the Promise of
Life, after Life. The Lord (says David) is a Sun and a Shield, Grace and Glory
will he give, Ps. 84. 11.
and no good thing will he with hold from them who walk Uprightly. It is
reported of Alexander the Great, that having conquered this world, he wept
because there was no more left for his Valor to overcome. But Gods Servants
are better provided for than that Great Monarch was, in that they have a life,
and a life; a world, and a world; one present here, and another to come
hereafter; so that to them, not only life is sweet, but to Die is Gain. Phil. 1.
21.

Godliness (you see) it is that, which will improve your Estates, Preserve your
Bodies, Keep the Kingdom in Peace and Safety, yea, and save your Souls into the
Bargain. And now, when all things are yours, 1 Cor. 3. 21, 22
whether Present or to come. When you can say I have these and these Jewels,
and heaps of Gold; and the goodly Pearl of the Gospel is mine too; when you can
say I have such and such Ships and Lordships; and the Kingdom of Glory is mine
too: in brief, when you can say I have such and such Dignities, and Honors,
and the Lord has accepted me too, Psalm. 16. 5.
and is become my Portion and inheritance for ever. When thus, all is
prosperous on Earth, and all is right and sure in Heaven also, what can the
most large and Noble Soul desire more! Having opened the Rich Mine, or Treasure
of my Text in the Doctrinal part, I shall now crave your Patience whilst I make
some Application.

And here my Humble Address shall be, to you, the Worthy Magistrates here
Assembled, that you would for the Health of your Souls and Bodies, yea, and of
the Body Politic too, Use the Exercise, enjoined in my Text.

There are none that have stronger, and more pressing Engagements upon them to
be Good, than those whom the Lord has made Great. It Is all the Equity in the
world that those whom God has most Honored, should most Honor God. It Is fit
that they Return, as they have Received, and not be like some
Gentlemen-Servants, and Tenants, who do the least work, Quo majores terras
possident, minores census solvunt. Paerisien.
because they have the greatest Wages, and pay the smallest Rent, when they
have the largest Farms. They, who are first in Dignity, should have a Holy
Scorn in them, to let others go before them in Duty. I know your Employments
are manifold and weighty, and so certainly were King David's, yet he served God,
not only on the seventh Day, Psalm. 119. 164.
but seven times a Day. Let not then the multitude of your Agencies be your
Apology for neglect of Godliness, from which Crowns are no Excuses. He that
pretends Business to keep him from the Exercises of Religion, makes his Affairs
his Idol, and says (in effect) that something is more necessary than
Salvation, and more Worthy than God himself. Again, I know your Authority and
Place is High, your Births and Educations are Gentile, but he that thinks it
below a Gentleman to be Righteous and Religious, may think also into the
Bargain, that it is below a Gentleman to go to Heaven. Greatness, without
Godliness, it is but like the Greatness of a Gouty, or a Dropsical man, which
is his Disease and Deformity rather than his Ornament, and Honor. Besides, a
profane Magistrate, is not only a Sinner, but ( Jeroboam-like) a Sinner-maker;
2 Kings 10. 3^
in that he puts Virtue out of Countenance, and brings Vice into Request, and
Fashion; the Common People will think they may then Sin by Authority, Damn
themselves with Credit; yea, and they will make it their Way of Flattery, and
Complement, to go to Hell with such Brave Company. -- Tutum est peccare
Authoribus istis.

But now, on the other side, when Greatness and Goodness, Power and Piety,
Height and Holiness, meet and match together in Governors, as (Blessed be
God) they do here, in an Upright and Pious Judge; and an Active, and Religious
Sheriff: This will strike an Awe and Terror into the boldest Sinner, this will
rectify and reform a crooked and perverse Generation, yea, and this (if any
thing) will propagate Godliness and Virtue in a debauched, Atheistical Nation.
There has been much talk (with some) of a Fifth Monarchy, and Christ's Reigning
here on Earth; and now, may your Exercising your selves unto Godliness, Awake
those men out of their Dream, and make them see, Christ does Reign, in your
Righteous and Christian Government. We may say of Godly Magistrates, in a
better sense than the men of Lystra did of Paul and Barnabas, They said the
Gods, but we may say, God, Acts 14. 11.
is come down amongst us in the likeness of Men. And may You (through his
Grace) God-like diffuse your Goodness, and make others like You, in what You
are like God. As it is your Care, to have all things well in your Consciences;
so let it be your Endeavor to have All well also 1. In your Courts, and 2. In
your Country.


Since God himself has Honored you with the Title of Gods (as you your selves
will do nothing Unworthy that great Name) Ps. 82. 6.
so your Courts should be like Heaven, without Corruption, and all your
Officers and Attendants, like Saints and Angels, without Guile.

1. Then, If any corrupt Counselor, supposing that Gain is Godliness, 1 Timothy
6. 5.
shall with the Flowers of his Art and Eloquence dress up and maintain a Bad
Cause, and be so Ingeniously Injurious, as to frame Mischief by a Law, Psalm.
94. 20.
running down Innocence, and Right, with Noise, and Passion, instead of
Evidence and Reason, by which (though he cannot bias and delude prudent and
discerning Judges, who can see through all his Flourishes and Fallacies) yet he
may strangely Impose upon and beguile poor Ignorant Jurymen, who are commonly
so little Learned, that if they should be Tried for Felony, they would scarce
be saved by their Book.

If then (I say) any shall thus Praevaricate, rather than Plead, and be his
Clients Advocate and Champion, when his Conscience tells him, the Cause is
False and Unjust, I might at large show you, how sharp and severe the
Schoolmen, Aqu. 2a. 2a. qu. 71. Ar. 3. Scot. in 3. sent. did. 15.
Casuists and Fathers, are against this Quaint Cozenage, this Learned Wrong,
and trim Artifice of Injustice which some make a semblance of the Offense of
Judas, Hierom. in 15. Psalm. v. ult. Isidor. p^lusi. l. 4. ep. 60. 67.
and a tincture of the Rhetoric of Hell. ( Francis Spira, (that sad example of
Despair) he tells us, it was his first step thither.) But for have I shall only
let you know, Aug. Conf. l. 3. c. 3.
that this their vicious Skill (as Plato calls it) it is inconsistent with the
Exercise of Godliness, Bern. de Cons. l. 2. c. 10.
and contrary both to the Holy Precept, and Praecedent of God, 2 Chro. 19. 2.
who expressly says, -- Thou shall not speak in a cause to wrest Judgment. Keep
thee far from a false matter, the Innocent and Righteous slay not thou; for I
will not justify the wicked. Exodus Job 8. 20.
23. 2, 7. It Is said in Job, He will not help the evil doers; Non p^^rigit
manum malignis, Vulg. Non murus impii accipiet, Sep.
according to the Original, it is, He will not put forth his hand to them, or,
he will not take them by the hand, no, though there be a great Gift or Offering
in it. The Prophet Esaias pronounces a Woe to them, that Plead for, or Justify
the Wicked, for Reward, and take away the Righteousness of the Righteous from
him. Esaias. 5. 23. Solomon also tells us plainly, That He that justifies the
wicked, and he that condemns the Just, even they both are Abomination to the
Lord. Prove. 17. 15. Yea, and further chapter 24. 24. He there says, He that says
unto the Wicked, Thou art Righteous, him shall the People curse, Nations shall
abhor him. And therefore a Godly Lawyer, who is a good Practitioner in the
Gospel as well as Law, and daily consults with him who is called The
Counselor* Esaias. 9. 6.
He will seriously weigh the merits of the Cause, and not engage in all Trials,
Right or Wrong, Vir bonus non agit nisi causas bonas, Quintil.
Sacred or Sacrilegious; (like Soldiers of Fortune who are ready to Fight in
all Wars, whether the Kings or Usurpers) Again, as Queen Elizabeth styled her
self the Poor man's Queen, Cambd.
so, he will be as Ambitious to be the Poor man's Advocate, as the Rich; and
zealously Plead for the Widow, Esaias. 1. 17.
without having a design upon her Joynter, and be a Father to the Fatherless
without hoping to Marry their Mother. In brief, when a Fat wealthy Client shall
come to him with his Gold and Guilt together, and desire his Advice and
Assistance to defend an unjust Title, Urging him to stretch his Wit, to strain
a point in Law, and show his Reading in strengthening his Iniquity, He will say
to such a Simoniacal Retainer, as S. Peter said to Simon Magus, Thy Money perish
with thee. Acts 8. 20.
He will say also with S. Paul, I can do nothing against the Truth, 2 Cor. 15.
8.
but for the Truth; and will resolve with Faithful Abraham, that it shall never
be said, Genesis 14. 23.
The King of Sodom has made him Rich. No man shall Tempt him to open his Mouth
against his Conscience, or to put so much as a fair Gloss upon a foul Cause,
unless he be offered such a Fee, as is more Precious than his Soul, more worth
than Heaven, and better than all the things of the Life that Now is, and that
which is to Come.

2. For the Witnesses. They are summoned hither for the same end, that Christ
came into world, viz. Joh. 18. 37.
To bear witness to the Truth; And now, if any man shall be so Impudent, as to
establish Falsehood with an Oath, his False swearing, is worse than the others
Fraudulent Pleading, in that as the one makes the Law, this Man makes the
Gospel Patronize a Lie; yea, and further, he goes about to draw in God to Abett
his wickedness, saying in effect, Thou, O Lord, who love Righteousness, and
Hate all Iniquity, Grant me thy Testimony to help me in my Villainy. Hide my
Injustice under the shadow of thy Name, and of thy Goodness Countenance my sin.
Thus at the same time taking the Holy Bible in his Hand, and Renouncing it in
his Heart, and betraying the Truth (as Judas did Christ) with a Kiss. Luke 22.
48.
Knights of the Post (who may well be called the Devils Martyrs) they truck and
bargain one with another, saying, according to that shameful Greek Proverb,
(...), Lend me a Testimony; Swear for me this Assize, and I Will swear for you
the next, having no other way to gratify their Neighbors, and express their
mutual Friendship but by sinning for each other. And now, if such Witnesses
were slain (instead of those mentioned in the Revelation) The dwellers upon
Earth might indeed have cause to rejoice over them, Rev. 11. 12.
and make merry. A Perjured person (who by a False Oath, in the Face of his
Country, between sun and Sun, takes away the Goods, Estate, or Life of his
Innocent Neighbor) being as Bad, or worse, than any other Thief, or Murderer,
Ad Douat. l. 2. ep. 2.
in that (as S. Cyprian speaks) Inter leges ipsos delinquitur, inter jura
peccatur, nec Innocentia, illic, ubi derenditur, reservatur. In the midst of
Laws, he Sins against Law; and does unjustly in the Courts of Justice; Stealing
in the Presence of the Judge, and Killing, even in the Sanctuary, or Solemn
place of Refuge, where every one presumes on Safety and Protection.

3. A word Thirdly, to the Jurymen, who are commonly (like Christ's Disciples)
Twelve in number, and too, too commonly too, One (or more of them) is a Devil;
Joh. 6. 70.
who betrays Causes, and Corrupts his Brethren, being more swaid by the
Plaintiffs, or Defendants Acquaintance, Alliance, or Bribe, than by the Arguing
of the Counsel, the Decision of the Judge, or the Evidence of those that are
Sworn. These Men, they sometimes wait for Empanelling, and lie leidger at the
Bar, as the Impotent Cripple did at the Pool of Bethesda, till some good, or
rather evil Angel Troubles the Waters (that Justice may not run down as a
nighty Stream) and then they step in to Fish in them and to Heal their Friends
Lame Cause, Amos 5. 24.
or their own broken Fortune, being ready, not to Give, but to Sell their
Verdict to him that offers most. You shall have them Creep and Insinuate into
Sollicitors, Atturneys, and such others as are concerned in Causes; and then
they cunningly intimate their Quid dabitis? Matthew. 26. 15.
What will you give me, and I will deliver him unto You? Thus in a most Foul,
and shameful manner, prostituting their Souls and Consciences (as the Harlot
does her Body) for a little, 1 Timothy 3. 3.
filthy Lucre.

And now, These are Heinous Crimes to be searched into, and Punished by the
Judges, Job 31. 11. And it would be well, if those who have the Office (not of
Packing) but Empanelling Juries, would diligently look into their Lives, as
well as Lands or Livings; and choose men that are known in their Country to have
Free Hearts, as well as Free-holds, and not Record such whom either Baseness,
or Necessity, may render pliable to be molded for the Impression of a
Mercenary Injustice.

And Happy also would it be, if the Gentlemen of the Grand Inquest, would
repent of their Omnia Bene's, and Present the Defects of their former
Presentiments; and begin now to be as Zealous against the Violations of Gods
Commandments, as of the Kings Statutes; Indicting Blasphemy as well as Treason;
and the filthiness in the Inns, as well as foulness of the Road; Prove. 22. 14.
the Cheats, Debaucheries, and Deep Pits in the one, being as dangerous and
injurious to Travelers, as the Robberies and deep Sloughs in the other. In
brief, If they would be as forward to Exhibit Bills against the Breaches of
the Sabbath, as of the Peace; and be as careful to have the Downfalls of
Churches repaired, as they are about decays of Bridges; and once more, lastly,
If they would be as earnest to have Laws put in Execution against a Grand
Atheistical or Papistical Recusant, as they are to prosecute a poor sneaking
Anabaptistical Separatist, This would speak them, Prove. 24. 21.
to be men Fearing God, 1 Pet. 2. 17.
and Honoring the King; both which are joined and enjoined together; and if
they do not do both, they can do truly neither; it being infallibly true, That
from the Neglect of Divine Laws, flows all the contempt of Humane; which made
Constantine the Great say, He that is False to God, can never be Firm to me.

I have done now with the Enormities of your Courts; let not my Lord be Angry,
and I will speak but this once, Genesis 18. 32.
of one Grand Misdemeanour in the Kingdom, and so Conclude.

Your Wisdoms judge it not fit, to let every one set up what Religions they
will. And your Piety (I am sure) will much less suffer you to give way to any
men, to set up what Sins they will. Down then with the Devils Vitiosi's, who
study the Mysteries of lniquity, Invent new Modes of wickedness, and Exercise
themselves unto all Ungodliness. If Latitudinarians in Opinion are not to be
tolerated, much less are Latitudinarians in Practice, who walk the Broad way to
Hell, Matthew. 7. 13.
and strive to set up as many strange Devils, as the other would set up strange
Gods. Never did Heretics more mischief in the Church, than Hectors (if
Unrestrained) are like to do in the State. If a Hook be not put into the Noses
of those Leviathans, Job 41. 1.
They may (happily) unhappily put something into Yours, and Mark Magistrates,
as your Laws do sometimes Malefactors. I wonder (in the Name of God) under what
Capacity they dare give these Affronts! Is it because they are, or have been
Soldiers? surely no: Men of that Great and Generous Calling, will attempt more
Noble and Heroic things. I confess indeed, the Poet said of old, Nulla Fides,
Pietasque Viris qui Castra sequuntur. They made, Graviter peccant and hac se
prima voce excusant quod militabant.
as if Piety was inconsistent with the Military Employment, Amb. Ser. 7.
and the profession of Arms was a sufficient Excuse for an Irregular and
Irreligious Conversation. But if you look into the Book of Truth, you will find
that the Camp was to be Holy, as well as the Church, Deuteronomy. 23. 14. and Holiness
to the Lord, it is to be written upon the Bridles of the Commanders Horses, as
well as upon the Pots of the Lords House, Zach. 14. 20. And why else do the
Penmen of Holy Scripture delight to set forth the Graces of the Spirit in
Military terms and weapons? S. Paul alludes to, Ephesians. 6. 13.
and Spiritualizes their whole Armor. And certainly, he does not mention the
Shield of Faith, 16.
that they who Use Shields may be Infidels. He does not therefore speak of the
Helmet of Salvation, 17.
that they who wear Helmets should laugh and make a mock at Heaven. Nor does he
call the Word of God, the Sword of the Spirit, that they which draw the one,
should slight and throw away the other. Valor with some, is raised to that
High pitch, that they think it a disparagement to have the Fear of God; instead
of taking Heaven, they strive to take Hell by Violence; and make it a piece of
a Great and Gallant spirit, to dare to be Damned; and hence it is, that they so
often call upon God to do it. But let such know, that no man is truly Valiant,
but he who is Afraid of Sin more than Hell; Virtus est vitium um fugere.
and Flies away from it, even when it looks most Amiable and delightful; and
again, no man is Christianly Courageous, but he who dares be Good, even when
the Times are Bad, yea worst; and't should be neither Safe not Honorable to be
Honest. None so fit to Fight the Lords Battles, as a David, who is a man after
Gods own Heart. Psalm. 144. 1.
For how can Ungodly men imagine, that God should Teach their Hands to war,
Verse 2.
and their Fingers to fight? How can they expect, that He should be their
Fortress, High Tower, and Deliverer; when at the same instant they Fight
against God with their Sins, open their months against Heaven, Psalm. 73. 9.
and wish themselves Confounded by him every hour? Job 22. 30. We read there,
Manus purae sunt opera inculpata. Drufius in locum.
that The Innocent shall deliver the Island, and it is preserved by the
Pureness of their Hands.

May then the Lord our KING be as an Angel of God to discern between Good and
Bad; 2 Samuel 14. 17.
to separate the Precious from the Vile; jer. 15. 19.
and scatter the wicked with his Eyes, Prove. 20. 26.
and (if men will be rifling Chariots) bring the Wheel over them. That so there
may be no more Binding of our Nobles, no Leading into Captivity, no Complaining
in our Streets, but, All his officers may be Peace, and his Exacters
Righteousness, Esaias 60. 17.

And, may All You that are in Authority under him, be a Terror to Evildoers,
and a Praise to them that do Well, 1. Pet. 2. 14.
that so Scribes and Hyppocrites, Publicans and Sinners, may no longer be
Synonoma's, and signify the same things; but All that Write in your Courts, or
Sit at the Receipt of Custom, may be Merciful in their Fees, and Faithful in
their Trust; and not make Law be sold as dear as Land, nor fill their Private
Purses with the Public Tribute; That they, and all others Under You, leading a
Righteous and a Sober Life, 1 Timothy 2. 2.
in All Godliness and Honesty, May with you be made Partakers of All the
Promises of the Life that Now is, and of that which is to Come. Which God of
his Infinite Mercy, Grant, for his Son Christ Jesus his sake, To whom with
Thee, O Father, and the Holy Ghost, be Ascribed All Honor, Power, Praise,
Might, Majesty, and Dominion, now, and for evermore. Amen.

THE END.

