A DISCOVERY OF SATAN.
Who has in Man Covered Himself, by persuading Men, that Original Sin is the
Corruption of the Nature of every Man, that is engendered of the offspring of
Adam: Also, a Demonstration of the Messiah in Man, to whom the gathering of the
People shall be, of whom Moses in the Law and the Prophets did write, Genesis
49.18. Isai. 11.12.

Written for the use of such that denies not themselves the use of Reason and
Sense, and that are not wedded to their own Persuasion.

An Epistle to the Reader.
I Charge thee Reader, not to spend thy censures on thy loving friend, whose
great desires for nothing more, than that Light should unmask the Whore, and
tear away her painted dress, that all may see her nakedness; then introduced
there shall be, new Heavens and Earth, that all may see, admiring much the
glorious Frame, and strange composition of the same; then truth and justice
shall appear throughout the World, without all fear; Darkness shall cease, and
Light break forth, from East to West, from South to North: this is the time I
long to see, till then we never shall be free from envy, malice and oppression,
and what so ever is called transgression. The Author fain would teach all Men,
the ground of things by word or Pen, that they may knows, (live, and not die,)
Christ in their Flesh, Gods mystery.

WHat have been talked of in times past to be Original sin?

Pelagians talk, Original sin stands in following of Adam, as it is noted in
the Ninth Article of the Church of England; but the Church of England, in that
Article says, that it is the fault and conruption of the nature of every man,
that is engendered of the offspring of Adam: This have been talked of to be
Original sin. Mark, according unto holy Scriptures, that which moves in man, to
move man to sin, is not the corruption of our nature, [for that is passive] but
the power or motion of Satan in our flesh, which is active: This is the
Original of Sin, for as it is written, sin is of the Devil, 1 John 3.8.

Is the motion of Satan, which is in our members, sin?



Shall not. the motion of Satan, which is sin, be imputed to man, if man obey
not?

Joh. 3.8 Joh. 8.44.

Is the motion of Satan in the Flesh of innocent mankind; if so, then may it
not be in the flesh of little children?

was in the flesh of innocent man kind, Paul the Apostle says, When I would
do good, evil is present with me; Again, he says, I find a Law in my members
warring against the Law in my mind: Again, In me, that is, in my flesh, says
he, dwells no good thing, Romans 7. James says, Know ye not, that the spirit
that dwells in us, lusts to envy, James 4.5. that it is, I am a witness;
for I find by the Law, as it is written, that when I would do good, evil is
present with me, Rom 7.21.

If the motion of sin be in the flesh of innocent mankind, is not that Adam 's
transgression?

Adam's sin, but the Serpent, that moved them to sin.

Are not little children conceived and born in sin, as it have been conceived,
declared, and believed?

Jer. 10.16. and that in wisdom (which is contrary to sin) has he made them
all, Psalm. 104.24. and his work is perfect, Deuteronomy. 32.4. Christ Jesus says,
touching little Children, of such is the Kingdom of Heaven. Luke 18.16. Math.
19.14. Again, he says, Verily, verily, I say unto you, except ye be converted,
and become as little Children, ye shall not enter into the Kingdom of Heaven,
Mat. 18.9. Again, it is noted in the common prayer Book, in public Baptism,
that little Children are innocent; and in the Collect for Innocents Day, see
then, according to Moses, the Prophets, and Christ's sayings, little Children
are innocent, and not born in sin.

What is Innocence, and what is degeneration?

Adam was in it, the Lord made man upright, Eccl. 7.29. Degeneration is
transgression, the Lord made it not, nor man in it, Wisd. 1.13.

Have not Christ by his death destroyed the power of sin, and satisfied the
wrath of God for all transgressions? there are many that do believe that
Christ, by his death, has satisfied the wrath of God for all sins present,
past, and to come, and has by his death destroyed the power of sin?

God's wrath for all sins, and has by his death destroyed the power of sin: Is
to believe against Holy Scripture and knowledge, because we find in our flesh
the power of sin undestroyed: Again, when we were the servants of sin, then as
it is written, Romans 2.8, 9. Upon our souls was tribulation, anguish and wrath:
Again, if all sins present, past, and to come, was satisfied for, by the death
of Christ; then there remains no place for preaching his name, for repentance
and remission of sins, nor for Christ's Intercession. Mark, according to Holy
Scripture, the ministry of the Gospel of God is to be preached among all
Nations for obedience of faith; that they may come to repentance, and receive
remission of sins, Luke 24.27. Except sinners repent, they shall all perish,
Luke 13.4. Christ tasted Death for every man, for the redemption of the
transgressions that was under the first Testament, Heb. 2.9. and 9.15. But for
the sin of not believing the second Testament or Covenant of God, of that men
must repent, or else for that they shall perish, and dye in their sins, as the
Lord has said, John 8.24. Luke 13.3.

What is the first Testament?



What is the second Covenant of the Lord, and where is it to be witnessed?

Jer. 31.33. Heb. 8.10. That lights every man that comes into the World.
John 1 9. It Is perfect converting the Soul, making wise the simple, Psalm. 19.7.
The same to day as it was yesterday, and for ever; under differing names or
sounds declared to us, he that does believe have the witness in himself; 1 John
5.10.

Is the Gospel of the Kingdom of God the matter or substance of preaching, to
beget faith in all men or mankind, to wit the World?

Christ says, this Gospel of the Kingdom shall be preached for a witness in
all the World, Math. 24.14. Again, he says, behold the Kingdom of God is
within you, Luke 17.21. It Is written, the Word is nigh thee, even in thy mouth
and in thy heart; this is the word of faith we preach, Deuteronomy. 30.14. Romans 10.8.

Is that holy thing in man, by which comes the knowledge of sin, the Word of
God that lives and abides for ever, the substance or matter of preaching to
beget the lively faith? Martin Pereas, and many others says; the matter or
substance of preaching to beget faith, must be the written Word, or Scriptures
of the old and new Testament, which by faith, (...) indeed the lively seed and
firm foundation of faith: Wilson 's Dictionary, page 378.

Romans 10.17. and that God was the Word, John 1.1. As it is written, nigh thee,
in thy mouth, and in thy heart, the word of faith the holy men preached, was in
man, not Scriptures without man for a foundation of faith; no other foundation
do the holy Scriptures witness unto, but to that which is already laid in thy
heart, to wit, the Lord, who is as a Law to man, by whom comes the knowledge
of sin, to him gives all the Prophets witness, that whosoever believes in him
should receive remission of sins, Acts 10.43. and not perish, but have
everlasting life. John 3.15.

What might be the cause that devout and great learned Men, pitched upon the
Holy Scriptures for the matter or substance of preaching to beget faith?

within it; and there came a great King against it, and besieged it, and built
great bul-works against it; now there was found in it a poor wise man, and he
by his wisdom delivered the City: mark, yet no man remembered that poor man;
the poor man's wisdom is despised, and his words are not heard, Eccles.
9.14.16. Thus form was set above the Life; which was the cause of so much
strife.

May the wisdom of God, which makes manifest things to man, be despised, and
yet the things that are reprovable, retained in knowledge, and the Scriptures
that do witness to them: If so, then may not a form of godliness be held by
such that denies the power, and preached, and yet they perish in their sins?

Esdr. 9.33. A man may in his knowledge retain the work of the spirit of God,
and the Scriptures that do witness to it, and preach upon it the conceiving of
his own brain: mark, and yet not retain God in his knowledge, but despise his
wisdom, as before is written: mark that, ye Teachers, for ye that do so, the
wrath of God is to be revealed against you from Heaven: Romans 1.18. You are them
that are not sent of God, neither shall your ministry profit the people at all:
your ministry is considered perfectly, as the Lord has said, it should be in
the latter days; Jeremy 23.20. The anger of the Lord is gone forth against you,
and it shall not return, until he have executed, and till he have performed
the thoughts of his heart: mark, by that we know false ministry, we know the
latter days is come.

If all things, when they are rebuked, are made manifest by the Light, and that
Light is the Lord. Why then was the Holy Scriptures written, and whereunto do
they serve?

Romans 15.4. and are God's witnesses to men, that they may believe, that he
which tries the Reins, and searches the heart, is the Lord, that so men
might come to him and be saved; hereunto serves the Holy Scriptures, 1 Chro.
28.9. Psalm. 7.10. Jer. 11.20. Rev. 2.23.

It the spirit of God, and the grace of God, and the righteousness of God, and
the word of God, and the Son of God, one?

John 5.7. Joh. 10.30. Hos. 13.4.

Why does the Apostle Peter say, Acts 4. that there is no other name given
among men, whereby they might be saved, but by the name of Jesus Christ, if
Grace and Christ are one?

Acts 15. we believe through the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, we shall be
saved; Paul the Apostle says, ye are saved by grace, through faith; not of
your selves, it is the gift of God, Ephesians. 5.8. Names or Sounds gives not a
being unto Substances, but demonstrates them according to their nature,
offices, operations and virtues: there are differences of administration, and
diversities of operations, but it is the self same Lord: 1 Cor. 12.5. besides
him there is no Savior Hosea 13.4. Esa. 44.6. Romans 1.17. The sound Jesus and
Savior is one.

Is this the Testimony of God and his Prophets, and of wise men, to wit, that
the Lord is in men, and searches all hearts?

Hos. 11.9. 1 Chro. 28.9.

What then is the saying of the Fool, and of them that are in the Tire of an
Harlot?

Psalm 14.1. and them that are in the Tire of an Harlot says, the good man is
not at home, he is gone a long Journey. Prev. 7.19.

Are there three spirits in man, to wit, the spirit of God, Man's spirit, and
the spirit of the wicked one; if so, what is their natures, properties, or
qualities, and their workings in man?

2ly. The nature of the spirit of man singly considered, is mutable, the
quality or property of ill in its working, is, its simple, fierce, furious;
they that follow their own spirits, as its written, have seen nothing: Ezekiel.
13.3. 3ly. The nature of the spirit of the wicked one is irreconcilable to any
good, the property or quality of it in its working, is, Its subtle, envious
and mischievous always in his working in man: he moves to man to do things
contrary unto the being of God in man; whose being, to wit, God's in us, is,
as a Law, by which Law, we know, that when we would do good, evil is present in
and with us, according as its noted in Scriptures of truth without us, Romans
7.21. mark, the spirit of man is not begotten by man, or gendered of man, as
some in Print have affirmed, then it would be mortal; neither is it that breath
which God breathed in man, by which man became a living soul, as others in
Print have affirmed; but man's spirit is given him of God, and is of the same
substance that the created Angels are of; and its that feeling sensible
spiritual part in man by which we receives the things of the spirit, or breath
of God: That man's spirit is not the breath of God, it may appear thus, by the
breath of the Lord was the Heavens made, and all the Host of them, Psalm. 33.6.
and by the breath of his mouth, he will slay the wicked. Esa. 11.4. 2 These. 2.8.

If there be three spirits in man, Is not there also three estates of man?

Joh. 5.14.

Seeing that there is a threefold state of man, in which may a man abide and
walk, and not commit Sin?

Isa. 35.8. Whosoever abides in him, sins not, 1 John 3.6. Righteousness
exalts a Nation, sin is a shame to any People, Pro. 14.34.

What is the ministry of them that walk, and abide in Christ, and wherein do
their worship consist, and in what do they worship, and what is the effects
that follows of their ministry to them?

knowledge of God, which is life eternal, John. 17.3. which no changable
ministry can do, and by it in our hearts, as its written, Math. 5.8. we have
seen God, to whom be glory for ever.

Why have, and do not God's People worship, and walk with sinners in their
worships?

Isa. 55.2. Now Christ have forewarned his people to beware of men, that teach
for Doctrine, the Precepts of men, Mat. 16.12. But in vain, says he, do they
worship me, teaching for Doctrine the Commandments of men, Mat. 15.9. Mark
7.7. Again, by his Apostles, we are forewarned to turn from them that have a
form of godliness, and do deny the power, 2 Timothy 3.5. Again, we are forewarned
by the Wise man, Prove. 19.27. to cease to hear the instruction that causes to
err from the words of Knowledge: so likewise by the Lord of Hosts, in Jeremy
23.16. Now blessed is the man that walks not in the counsel of the ungodly,
nor stands in the way of sinners, Psalm. 1.1.

To all Rulers whom it may concern; A few words to consider of, seeing there is
a time that one Man may bare rule over another unto his own hurt. Eccl. 8.9.
IN the Apostles Days, they exhorted the Saints to be subject unto every
Ordinance of Man, for the Lord's sake; to the King, to the Rulers, to all that
was set in Authority under him; for said they, the Powers that are, are of God;
the Rulers that then was, did not judge men for questions, and names, and words
that related unto Religion, as its noted in the Scriptures of truth, Acts 18.
When the High Priests brought Jesus Christ before Pilate, and accused him of
Blasphemy, producing their Law for it, John 19.7. Pilate denied them to give
Judgment in that case, John 18.31. Again, when Paul the Apostle of Jesus
Christ, with others, was brought before Galio the Governor of Acaya, about
words, and names relating to Religion; Galio said, if it were a matter of
wrong, or evil deeds, reason would that I should bare with you; but if it be a
question of words and names, or of your Law, look ye to it your selves, for I
will be no Judge of such matters, Acts 18.16. Mark that: Again, the 20th
Article of the Church of England says, its not lawful for the Church to
ordain any thing contrary to Gods word written, neither may it so expound one
place of Scripture, that it be repugnant to another: Again, the 2d. Collect for
Peace in the Common Prayer Book, says, The service of God is perfect freedom;
this saying is true. Is not compelling to worship contrary to perfect freedom?
judge in your selves the things that are meet; for we who fear the Lord, are to
prove all things, and do by the spirit of truth, which is within us, find, and
according to the Scriptures of truth, that the sayings of many, and their
doings, do not agree; Consider of it, I pray you, that so you may do things
worth to be called by us, who fear the Lord, Noble, as the Roman Ruler was by
Paul, Acts 26.25.

A few Words to those that may endeavor to oppose what is before written,
touching little Children being born in innocence, and not in sin.
IT may be conceived from what is written in Psalm. 51.5. that little Children
are shapen and conceived in sin. Mark. Thomas Wilson, that learned Man in his
Dictionary, Page 602. says on that place, sin entered with us into the World:
This saying is true; but that little Children are shapen and born in sin, is
contrary to holy Scriptures; which says, In wisdom (which is contrary to sin)
has he, to wit, the Lord, made all his works.

If Satan, or the motion of Satan, which is sin, entered, or is born with
little Children, Is it not all as one, as though little Children was shapen and
born in sin?

Heb. 1.2. Again, it may be conceived from the 2 Ephesians. 3. That by nature, little
Children are Children of wrath. Mark, the 3d. Verse of that Chapter depends on
the 2d. Verse. where its written (that was spoken of such that walked, not of
passive Children) according to the course of this World, according to the
Prince of the power of the Air, the spirit that now works in the Children of
disobedience: Mark, by following the Prince of the power of the Air, they are
by nature the Children of wrath, but not as they was formed by the Lord, of the
nature of mankind. Again, it may be conceived by what is written, Joh. 3.3.
That little Children are born degenerated, that Scripture points unto Man
degenerated, not to little Children; little Children are formed in
righteousness, and born in innocence, as before is noted.

If any Query, whether there be any saved by Jesus Christ, but those for whom
Christ dyed; and whether he dyed for any but sinners; and then conclude, that
little Children are born in sin, or the sin of Adam is imputed to them, or else
Christ dyed not for them, and so conceive that little Children are not saved by
Christ, if born in Innocence.

Joh. 2.27.) but as the anointing teaches us, the manifestation of it is given
to every Man to profit withal; the anointing which is in us, convinces us
not, nor charge us not with the transgression of Adam, nor any of our
Forefathers; because, for the Redemption of the transgressions that was under
the first Testament, Christ tasted death for every man, Heb. 2.9. and the 9.15.
So that little Children shall not answer for the sin of their Fathers, as the
Lord has sworn, Ezekiel. 18. but are guided in youth, Prove. 2.17. and are saved
by the life of Jesus, Romans 5.10. if they dye before they transgress against the
second Testament. Mark, its the Soul that sins, its written, shall die,
Ezekiel. 18.20. Hos. 13.9. These things are written to stop errors, because an
error in its beginning is next to the Serpent, the cause of all error and
confusion, that have been upon the Earth unto this day; by the Light according
to what is written, Jer. 16.19. It may appear, that our Fathers have inherited
lies, vanity, and things wherein there is no profit.

O Satan, old and subtle too, thy ways is hard to find,
How thou do work in Sons of Men, their Childrens minds to blind.
Know Satan, thou Unvailed must be: No cover shall thee hide,
Though thou moves Men, professing Christ: To judge that they may ride,
Upon the truth, and her Children: a place not fit for Man.
Know of a truth thy time is short. Yea, even now is at hand,
For to be bound not to deceive, the Lord will do the thing,
And we that do God's Name profess, will to Him for it sing.
Finally, Because amongst the many thousand witnesses, I do testify that the
true Light which lights every Man that comes into the World, is the matter
or substance of Preaching to beget faith; some Men may think and say [as some
have] that I do deny the Holy Scriptures. Know all Men, that I do own the Holy
Scriptures, for they do testify that the searcher of all hearts is God, and
that God is Light, and that all things that are rebukable, when they are made
manifest, is manifested by the Light. Again, know that I am a witness, and do
think of Holy Scriptures above Men, as its written, 1 Cor. 4.6. But I may not
think of Holy Scriptures above God in Man, or the Testimony of Jesus, which is
the spirit of Prophecy: for, as its written, 1 John 5.10. The witness of God
is greater; he that do believe the Testimony that God gives of his Son, have
the witness in himself; but every spirit that confesses not that Jesus Christ
is come in the Flesh, that Spirit is of Antichrist, 1 John 4.3.

Written by R. W. in the Year 1668.
THE END.

