

In' s own defense the Author writes
Because while this foul Maggot bites
He nere Can rest in quiet*
Which makes him make* So sad a face
Heed beg your worship or your Grace
Vnsight unseen to buy it*
Maggots: OR, POEMS ON SEVERAL Subjects, Never before Handled.

By a Scholar.

LONDON, Printed for John Dunton, at the Sign of the Black Raven, at the Corner
of Princes Street, near the Royal Exchange. 1685.

To the Honored Mr. H. D. Head-Master of the Free School in D --, in the
County of D --.
THE great Cowley forgets not to acknowledge his Master's Care and Kindness
while at Westminster; nor, to come nearer, was Mr. Creech much tardier in
publishing his grateful Resentments of the same Obligations from Mr. Curganven.
-- You may, Sir, justly wonder what makes me drag in such Names into a Piece
where there is hardly like to be besides, one word of Earnest, and perhaps not
many of Sense: You may be apt to judge me worthy not much less Punishment than
that Comoedian who stole matter from the Sacred History to patch up his Farce.
But here I must unavoidably take Refuge at the old thumb'd Scrap, Sic parvis
componere magna -- Or, to be more sincere; this seemed a pretty way of
beginning; I was fond of the Fancy, and knew not where to get a better.
However, though I have been bold enough to make the Similie, I hardly dare be so
saucy, I mean of my side, to apply it; nor, though Mr. D -- may be as noble a
Field for Panegyric as any, venture to disgrace him with prefixing here his
Name, or my little Praises. It Is enough that all who knew me when under his
Tuition, know what a fair share I enjoyed of his undeserved Favors; and that
all who know so many famous Men as have had the happiness of their Education
there, are satisfied it is my own fault I have not made suitable Proficiency to
what might be rationally expected from such an advantageous Foundation. -- As
to my addressing these to you, though I can have no full Excuse, yet my
Presumption or Vanity may admit, I hope, some Alleviation. This is my first
formed Birth, of which, though generally partaking all the Parent's ill humors,
the greatest part of the World uses to be, if not most fond, yet most
concerned; and no wonder therefore, abstracting from its Value or Defects, I am
willing to provide for it, and prefer it, But though Gratitude commanded you
should know the Author, and that exact Respect he is still obliged to pay your
former goodness; yet ^ was too conscious of the mean way I testified it in, and
the unworthiness of the Acknowledgment, and had too tender a sense o^ your
Reputation, to let your name publicly appear here, before I knew what
Reception these true Trifles might find in the World. The most, the best, the
all I can say for 'em, is what I remember many a fair year past on such a kind
of occasion: -- Accept my Heart for Gift, and all, which will be the highest
Honor can be pretended to by,

Sir, Your Obliged Scbollar, and Humble Servant, etc.

THE EPISTLE TO THE READER.
Gentle Reader,
IN the first place, pray take notice this is addressed only to those that buy
the Book, for such as only borrow't, my good Friend the Bookseller and I will
have nothing to do with 'em: For is there any Reason or Conscience in it that he
should write so many Letters to me about the business, and I take so much pains
for him, besides some appurtenances of Money for Copy, Printing, etc. only for
a mere How do you? -- In the next place, since it comes uppermost, I am to tell
ye bona fide, that is in English in verbo Sacerdotis, that all here are my own
pure Maggots, the natural Issue of my Brain-pan, bred and born there, and only
there. -- Nay the Bookseller and I would have you to know, these are no Scraps
or Remains of I know not who; which if you question, or doubt, you are to be
fobb'd off again with a Prisoners-Basket of Collections; I do ye to wit you are
egregiously mistaken in the matter, and prove it by a couple of sturdy
arguments. One -- that never a Subject here was ever treated of, at least in
this Method, by Man, Woman, or Sucking Child, from the beginning of the World
to -- this present writing, and so downwards: The Other argument, which you 'l
find concludes very strongly* is, -- Because here wants a hundred and fifty
Copper Plates precisely, (curiously engraven, etc.) which any that is but
ordinarily verst in modern History, knows to be as inseparable a mark of an
omnium gatherum as the Cloven foot is of Mephistophiles. If you have therefore
the Luck to see one gaudy picture at the beginning, which is even as it
pleases Painter, and Printer, set your Heart at rest there, and hope not for a
scrap of one more between -- Gentle Reader and Finis. -- But this is n't a
Quarter of what you and I have to say to one another: I should be an hard
hearted Bruit of a Father indeed, if I could be so cruel as to send this poor
Brat of a Book abroad into the wide World, without speaking so much as one good
Word for it. What may be objected against it, is either as to the matter, or
manner of 't; and here, though with Mr. Rhombus I should cut my Cheese into two
particles, yet since my Readers naturally fall into three parts, I cannot
helped, to save my Life: They are either the Wise, or Fools, who it is likely
may be disgruntled at the first -- or the Trimmers, a Little of one with
the other, who may be offended at the Latter. -- Now, Quo' the first, -- It Is
light, vain, frothy, airy, -- here is Time misspent, and may -- be some pains on
Subjects below the Gravity of a Man, at least of a Christian, to employ himself
about. So much for Ob: enter Sol. -- If those Gentlemen will do me the favor
to lend me an handful or two of Beard, and be at the charge of grafting it ^n,
I Will oblige my self to a speedy, and thorough Reformation in that case. Some
time is no doubt allowable for mere Recreation, this is certainly harmless; I
hope nothing will be found here that may either make me justly blush to own, or
another to read; and I hope they 'l grant this kind of diversion a little more
excusable than fooling away two or three years, and it may be as many Reams of
Paper, in doleful Dittys of Philander and Phillis, which uses to be the general
work of all that are Prentices to a Verse-wright -- They have, I believe, heard
of the Great St. Basils Encomium on a Pismire, as well as the Diversions of
many famous Persons on as Inconsiderable Subjects. I dare not before them quote
the Authority of the ingenious Preface to the Valentinian, (though hardly one of
'em but must own when young they have read both Plays and Romances:) But here is
somewhat I some time ago cabbag'd from Osborn, that will I think help as well
at a dead lift. -- [ Advice to a Son of Studies -- page 11. parag. 17.] The way
to Elegance of Style, is to employ the Pen upon every Errand, and the more
trivial and dry it is, the more Brains must be allowed for Sauce. Thus by
checking all ordinary Invention, your Reason will attain to such an Habit, as
not to dare present you but with what is excellent.]

Well! If all this will not satisfy, what think ye of a knocking Argument,
hight-necessity? Who knows but my Shoes may want dearning, or my Stockings
happen to be a little out at Elbows, (no Miracles in a Rhimester let me tell
ye) and in this case a Recruit of as many yellow Ones as the Bookseller and I
can agree upon, will be no false Latin. They may rejoyn, -- Why not something
serious then, and worthy my own pains, and others perusal? It Is easily
answered, That though such a design should suit with my present Years and
Inclinations, yet who would be the Customers? Alas, their Party is but weak and
small in the World; which leads me to the second Part of my Text. -- As
concerning Fools, the Proverb is, -- A Word to the Wise; but of the contrary, I
hope to dispatch these more reasonable Gentlemen a great deal sooner; their
Objections sure cannot be very material, nor will their Weapons make very deep
Impressions, though soon shot: However, being the greatest, the most
considerable, jovial, complaisant, agreeable part of Mankind, 'twill be no
small part of my Interest to oblige 'em. And why may'n't I have my chance as
well as others? If I take the same Method by which another has pleased 'em: If
I write silly enough, why may not my Book sell as well as any Christmas Tales
and Wonderments that has been clapped into Fist since Bills were invented? I Am
sure my Verses -- dribble down daintily, as Bro. Bunnyan has't, as well as the
best Sing-song in e're a Pilgrim's Progress of 'em all. But since these are
great words, and Comparisons are odious, I Will make an end of 'em, and only
assure those whom it may concern, -- That it is all perfectly new; it is all
mirth, -- and I know not what else it is recommends a Rattle to Children, and
Bartlomew* Fair to Fools. But if any chance to stick somewhere or other on
something that looks like Reason, which I Will engage shall not fall out often enough
to choke 'em, why it is but taking a small leap, and They 're safe and sound
upon the Terra firma of Nonsense again. -- But now for the middle-siz'd man,
just in the Center of Gravity, between wise and fool, -- that cruel
Indifferent, which not a whining Lover in Chistendom but shall tell you, is a
thousand times more unsupportable than flat and plain hating. What Is to be done
with this most unhoopable Reader? I doubt he will make as doleful a clatter among
my poor Maggots, as Lucian's Colossus, quarrelling and hunching about for
Elbow-room in the Parliament of the Gods, who broke holes in the very Roof of
Olympus with his Steeple Crown. This is that dreadful sort of Animal, as
common, and teasty, and mischievous in the Playhouse, as the Mesquito in
hotter Countries, or Gnats in the Fenlands. By this time I suppose you know
what I mean by all this clutter; neither better nor worse than that sort of
Creature called a Critic: And he it is likely Tooth and Nayl falls abord the
manner of my work. Right Worshipful. -- It Is strained, -- affected, -- full of
Longe-petites, store of Incongruities, -- Uncorrect, -- Tedious -- Digressions,
long-Comment run away with the Text, etc. If you have any thing more Mr.
Critic! pray speak now, or for ever after hold your peace! No: This some will
say is more than enough, because unanswerable. But softly; One's Tale's good
till another's is told. Is any thing strained or obscure? In such uncommon
Subjects, so purely out of the Road, how can the Superstructure be otherwise!
Pray what Author could I consult ^o pillage a sparkling Verse from here and
there, or, like some Chymic Angel (as a late Author or two have it) to nimm a
golden Fancy, on such Themes as these? Would some good Body would advise what
Shop in Paul's Churchyard, Duck-Lane, or Little-Brittain, I should consult to
find a Treatise of the Causes, Essence and Property's of a piece of
Ginger-bread, or in what part of the Transactions of the Royal Society, I
should find how many yards a nimble Louse reaches at Hop-Stride-and-Jump? This
too, by the way, may in some measure excuse my Digressions, though even those
may, like an Episode in a Play, be so managed as to become a Grace, rather than
a Blurr to the design, if they ben't too many; -- if proceeding naturally from
the main design, and all helping toward it; -- if not over-tedious; all which
Requisites, or most of 'em, will, I hope, square with mine. For the filling so
much of the Book with Explanation, -- Let Us discourse here for a while very
gravely. Is It not better to do thus than leave the Grammarians a thousand year
hence to scratch, and bite, and break one another Heads about one's meaning,
as they do now about Perseus's, where, may be, like the Quakers, we deny
meanings, and have, in that place, none at all. How would poor Homer bless
himself, were he, like his own Ulisses, to return, and find how he is, since
his Death too, improved into a Statuary, a Captain, a Moralist, a Politician,
and would you think it? a Divine too, and a thousand other things he never so
much as thought or dreamed of, poor old-Fellow, since the hour he was born! But
supposing the worst, or, if you please, granting it, that Roguy Time should be
so sacrilegiously hungry as to devour all these fine things in a Twelvemonth
and a day, (as 'twould be a great Temptation, I Will assure ye, to one sharp set
to find 'em under Pyes;) Yet, when for the reason before alleged, it is
impossible to have every where common Notions on so uncommon Subjects, I have
by these Notes endeavored to make all plain to the meanest Capacity, with as
much brevity as could consist with clearness. Nor in this very case is a noble
Example wanting, were it not against the Rules of Decency, to defend so little a
thing with such great Authority. For the Incongruities, which I doubt not may,
if any whose Eyes are sharpened with Prejudice, or Judgment, look close on 'em,
be easily observed, (besides the Carelessness and undress with which in many
places the Verse appears:) First, I remember I Am neither writing a Supposition
in Philosophy, nor a System of Divinity, nor an Epic Poem, where indeed all
ought to be most religiously observed. What was said by a person, however by
Wits of a greater Genius exposed, yet certainly, if thirty Years Experience be
any thing, no Fool in Poetry, has certainly a great deal of truth in it. -- He
that servilely creeps after Sense,
Is safe, but never shall reach at Excellence.
-- Or somewhat like it; though perhaps he may be as apt to censure others in
that case, as many have him. If this ben't enough, I would desire such as are
yet dissatisfied, to take notice, that though for Reasons told half-an-hour-agon,
this was printed, yet I could never be vain enough to think 'twould procure the
Author much Reputation; and therefore, as I wa'n't over ambitious of seeing my
worthy Name adorning a Pissing-Post, or glittering in a Term-Catalogue, so nor
did I think it worth the while to throw away better time in making it more
correct, or showing it to any person, not troubling my few Friends with my
Resolution to publish it. If any are so unconscionable, that all this will not
satisfy '^m, but either for old Acquaintance, or new Remembrance they must be
finding or making faults, the comfort on it is, I have the same liberty, and am
as free to think what I please of theirs, if ever they have or may come under
the Predicament of the Author* -- I cannot remember any thing more, but, -- You
're very welcome Gentlemen! And therefore to conclude, with the help of the
Accademy of Complements, and my Book-seller's Epistle,

So I rest, Yours, Yours, Yours, In ten thousand Obligations of Love and
Service, etc.

Books lately published by J. Dunton.
A Very delightful and useful Treatise, Entitled, Heavenly Pastime, or
pleasant Observations on all the most remarkable passages throughout the Holy
Bible of the Old and New Testament, newly Allegoriz'd, in several pleasant
Dialogues, Poems, Similitudes, Paraphrases, and Divine Fancies: To which is
added, (1) The miraculous manner of the production of our Old Grandmother Eve,
with the supposed manner of Adam's first Nuptial Addresses to her, and the
pleasant Circumstances of their Marriage. (2) You have an Account of Eve's
first Addresses to Adam, and her Industry in making a Garment for her Husband.
(3) You have a pleasant Account of Adam and Eve's Winter Suits, their Lodging
and first Building, with an Account in what pretty manner they first invented a
fire to warm them. (4) You have abundance of supposed Dialogues, very full of
delightful reading, etc.

The Pilgrim's Guide: To which is added, The Sick Man's Passing Bell. Both by
John Dunton.

A Continuation of Morning-Exercise Questions and Cases of Conscience,
practically resolved by 31 Reverend and able Divines in the City of London. In
a large 4to.

The Progress of Sin, or the Travels of Ungodliness, in an Allegory. As also
the manner of his Apprehension, Arraignment, Trial, Condemnation and Execution.
The second Edition: To which is now added, Vngodliness's Voyage to Sea, with
many pleasant Additions besides. By B. Keach. Illustrated with five lively
Cuts. Price bound 1 s.

The Travels of True Godliness, in an Allegory. The seventh Edition: To which
is now added five lively Cuts, together with True Godliness's Voyage to Sea,
with many new Additions besides. By B. K^a^h, Author of War with the Devil.
Price Bound 1 s.

Maggots,
On a Maggot.
THE Maggot Bites, I must begin:
Muse! pray be civil! enter in!
Ransack my addled pate with Care,
And muster all the Maggots there!
Just at the Gate you 'l bless your Eyes,
To find one of so large a Size:
It Is true he is hardly full as tall,
As the two striplings in Guildhall;
Yet is he Jolly, Fat, and Plump,
With dainty Curls from Snowt to Rump:
(a) And struts, says Jordan what he can,
As goodly as any Alderman.
The Law of Poetry's not broke,
If, since an Horse in Homer spoke;
I steal, for my dear Worms Occasions
A scrap of Livy's fine Orations:
(b) (And 'twill, no doubt, as much be said,
By him, as them for whom 'twas made.)
Within a Nut-shells Pulpit large,
As grave as Judge that is giving charge;
Swelling as big as Iustled Bully,
Thus he holds forth like to other Tully:
Take notice all that hither come!
(c) Romanus ego civis sum.
'Twas I my self, 'twas I possessed,
Scaevola's mighty Brain, and Breast;
I was the Worm in's Crown, that made,
The Hec. Porsenna's camp invade:
I did the' Heroic Iobb: 'twas I,
(d) That made his Paw, like Drum-stick fry:
'Twould make the dullest Maggot smile,
To' observe his pretty motions, while,
His Mutton-Fist did Hiz, and Broil:
Of which I an account could give ye,
(e) Truer by far than Goodman^Livy.
When the Spark Tarquin did prevail,
For all ^^oretia's Tooth, and Nail;
And, which if true were ungenteel,
Kiss't her, poor Soul! against her will:
Was It not a very pleasant Whimm,
(f) That she should kill her self for him?
When, I that saw it, durst have sworn,
She was as Innocent as Child unborn;
Pray let not Livy's Shams prevail!
I was the Worm, in Pate, and Tail:
That made the Matron bravely dye*
A Sacrifice to Chastity.
(Good Folks that Love your Necks, stand clear*
(g) For I must leap five hundred Year:)
'Twas I brought down that Rampant Gypsy,
(h) Whose Love and Pearls made Tony tipsie:
And, when she him no more could clasp,
(i) The Maggot bit, as well's the Asp;
I stood at the Beds-feet, Intent
On her Last Will, and Testament:
I come she cried, I com' dear Honey!
And then kicked up with Tony! Tony:
But I Am not only bold, and valiant,
For Wit, an't please ye! too's my Talent;
And by a better Title, I
May plead for God of Poesy.
Than those whom each dull Thief abuses,
In Dogrel Phoebus, and the Muses:
When Virgil all day long did write,
(k) And lickt his pretty Cubbs at night;
I rolled about his Brain, and there
Aeneas Good, and Dido fair,
Now placed a Scolding, now a Billing,
(l) Sometimes begetting, sometimes killing.
What e're he of old Sybill prate,
'Twas I that propt his H^roes Fate;
And when Posthorses he did lack,
(m) Lugg'd him to Hell a-Pick-a-Pack.
I am the very God, and like ye,
That fell in Love with Mrs. Psiche;
Let none my just pretensions scorn,
For Cupid was a Maggot born:
Then thrived, and grew, and by degrees,
Like his harmonious Brother-Bees,
Thrust out a Leg, and then a Wing,
And Bow, and Arrows for a Sting.
(n) And when I please my self to Dart,
Into a ravished Lovers Heart;
It Is I who all their Souls inspire
With soft Wishes, gay Desire,
Melting Looks, and amorous Fire.
Hold! hold! it is time to grow more humble,
(o) Least I like Phaeton, should tumble;
I Will Mount no more, but here sit steady,
Since I Am a Goddikin already.
NOTES.
(a) [And strut, say Jordan what he can,
As goodly as any Alderman.]
The Incomparable Mr. Jordan, (quem honoris causa nomino) who has made London
as famous by his Lord Mayors day Poetry, as ever Pryn did Mount Orgueil.

(b) [And 'twill, no doubt, as much be said,
By him, as them for whom 'twas made.]
I suppose few Consciences but are a little too Costive in this Case, and for
all Mr. Livy's Authority, are apt to believe Scaevola had other things to mind
than making fine speeches, and round Periods when his Fist was frying.

(c) [Romanus ego Civis sum.]
The beginning of Scaevola's Oration in Livy.

(d) That made his Paw, like Drum-stick fry:
It Is a known Story, when Rome was besieged by King Porsenna, Mutius Scaevola
went to the Camp, intending to stabb him, but mistook a Nobleman of his Train
for the King, for this had his Hand broiled over a Chaffing-Dish of Coals,
(like a Pullets claw) but held it all the while unconcerned and immovable: see
the Story in Livy's Decades, Vol. 1. Book 1. p. 78.

(e) [Truer by far than Goodman Livy.]
For there would not be half so many prodigies in it. -- He somewhere or other,
makes an Ox speak -- and why not my Maggot as well?

(f) [That she should kill her self for him.]
Lucretia's Death, the cause, and manner on it is at every Schoolboys fingers
Ends -- She killed her self because Tarquin's Son Sixtus had ravished her.

(g) [For I must leap five-hundred Year.]
Supposing 'twere more from Lucretia to Cleopatra, yet that is a good round
Number, and Poets have seldom been old excellent at Cronology. -- Witness
Virgil.

(h) [Whose Love and Pearls made Tony tipsie:]
Cleopatra dissolved in a Draught of Wine, gave Mark Anthony a Pearl worth -- I
don't know what.

(i) [The Maggot bit, as well's the Asp.]
To avoid her being exposed to the Conquerers Mercy, she clapped Vipers to her
Breast, and died.

(k) [And lickt his pretty Cubbs at Night.]
Virgils Commentators mention that as his custom, to compose some 40 verses,
and reduce 'em all into 8, or 10.

(l) [Sometimes begetting, sometimes killing.]
This must be taken Sano Sensu. Take notice I mean Aeneas for one, and Dido for
to other.]

(m) [Lugg'd him to Hell^a-Pick-a-Pack.]
Aeneas his descent into Hell takes up a fair Cantler in Virgil; nor I believe,
though the learned differ here, will any quarrel about this Circumstance; whither
he rode thither on my Maggot, or Old Sybilla's Broomstaff.

(n) [And when I please my self to dart,
Into a ravished Lovers Heart.]
And no doubt will be as good Company there as the Fury's Snakey Worms, which
they are bound to throw into every one they bewitch.

(o) [Least I like Phaeton should tumble.
Who fairly broke his Neck from his Fathers Coach-box, like Crashaws Dwarf from
the Pismires back.

On two Soldiers killing one another for a Groat.
FUll doleful Tales have often been told,
By Chimney warm in Winter cold,
About the Sacred Thirst of Gold;
To hear 'em half 'twould mad ye.
To Jayl how many Headlong run,
How many a hopeful Youth's undone,
How many a vile ungracious Son,
For this has murdered Daddy?
Yet those that tumble Books, may find,
Unless (as who can helped!) They 're blind,
That Silver comes not far behind,
But's e'ne as bad as t 'other:
For this, who'd of such luck have thought?
For this, though not above a Groat,
Two Valiant Soldiers lately fought,
And murdered one the other.
Well! who can tell how soon he' may dye?
Both, as good Friends as You and I,
Their hungry Wembs to satisfy?
Scale an enchanted Castle:
Painted without some think it a kin,
To that renowned Fort wherein
Quixot the Great such fame did win,
And with fell Giants Wrestle. (a)
As kind as ever in their Life,
As kind they sat as Man and Wife,
O! who among 'em scattered Strife;
That Petty fogging Fury?
But this is plainly proved by all,
Some Viper to their Hearts did crawl,
And so they 'l find it if you call
An Honest Poets Jury. (b)
A Groat was dropped upon the Board,
This takes it up, That draws his Sword,
And tells him it must be restored,
Or else expect what follows!
Each gives the Lie, and at that Word
Each runs upon the t 'other's Sword,
And each, stretched fairly Under-board,
In Blood and Liquor wallows.
So Aruns, and great Brutus fell, (c)
And so they fought, tho scarce so well,
So to Elysium, or to Hell,
They sunk, I know not whether:
So on New-markets Jolly Heath,
The Hawk, and Hearn struggling for Breath*
Tho not in Life yet joined in Death:
Come tumbling down together. (d)
Both grin at their expiring Foe,
With Sword in Fist both Huffing go,
To fright the trembling Shades below,
Bloated with Martial Glory:
Both in the Bed of Honor rest,
With Laurel bo^ghs, and Garlands dress't,
Perfumed as sweet as Phenix-Nest:
And there is an end of the Story.
Yet take good Counsel, Courteous Friend,
And learn by their untimely End,
Not about Trifles to contend,
Or with another grapple:
Since Carrion-Strife has often wrought,
Such mischiefs as you would never have thought,
And murdered for a Silver Groat,
As well's a Golden Apple. (e)
NOTES.
(a) Quixot the Great such fame did win,
And with fell Giants Wrestle.]
Vid. Book the p. the of the renowned History of Don Quixot. Where the Knight
was in great Peril by three dreadful Leather-Bottles of Wine, whom after a sore
Battle, he at last Valiantly hewed all to pieces.

(b) -- [An Honest Poets Jury.]
-- It Is notorious how necessary Actors in any Poetical Murder, or Mischief, a
Fury, and a Viper are -- Vid. Virg. Aenead. B. 7. p. l. and if I may profane
that great Name so much to quote it here, Mr. Cowleys Dav. B. p. l.

Virg. Huic Dea caeruleis unum de crinibus anguem
Conjicit, inque Sinum praecordia ad intima subdit.
Cowley. (c) [So Aruns, and great Brutus fell.]
Livy relates it in Book 1st. of 1 st Vol. p. 72. (...) the first encounter,
Aruns and Brutus both fell dea^ from their Horses, pierced quite through with
one another Spears.

(d) [The Hawk and Hearn came tumbling dow^ together.]
The Custom of the Hearn when she sees the Hawk stooping at her, and no way of
escape, is (...) turn her Long Bill upwards, upon which the Hawk not being able
to stop, runs it self through, and so bot^ often drop down dead together.

(e) [As well's a Golden Apple.]
The Story is worn thed-bare of the Golden Ap^ple which was the cause of the
Wars of Troy.

The Argument.
A Tame Snake left in a Box of Bran, was devoured by Mice after a great Battle.
Written An. Dom. 1681.
NO Monarch's Death, no fall of Prince or King,
My humble rural Muse intends to sing.
Let others strive in everlasting-Verse,
First to make Hero's, then t'adorn their Hearse.
Of stranger Tragedys I will complain;
Low Subjects best befit a lowly Swain.
Immortal Maro did immortal make
The loving Gnat that saved him from a Snake:
The Theme's inverted now, why should not I
Give my poor harmless Worm an Elegy?
Why should not I his luckless Fate bemoan,
Wronged and abused by all, but wronging none?
Bred in the Fields, he often was bruised and broke
By every cross-grained Traveller's cruel stroke;
At length he leaves the unhospitable Air,
And to the Town's Asylum does repair;
There all his Tricks and all his Slights imparts,
^o to revive his Patron's drooping Hearts:
Now through a Ring he 'll softly gliding pass,
Now weave a thousand Circles in the Grass;
Now in a thousand folds himself he 'll tie,
Which with the Oraculous Gordian Knot shall vye:
This Alexander needs not cut in twain;
Next moment finds it all dissolved again.
Him no proud Louvres, nor Escurial's Hide,
What has a humble Worm to do with Pride?
A little Box which his kind Master gave,
His Palace was, and would have been his Grave;
But sacrilegious Mouths him thence did tear,
And made their Guts his loathed Sepulcher.
Epicurizing there on homely Bran,
He Gluttony upbraids in wiser Man;
As happy as a harmless Snake could be,
Happy as Cadmus or Hermione.
Erinnis saw, and foamed, and raved, and grieved,
My Snake better than her black Vipers lived:
Unto great Moustapha she does repair,
With leathern Wings forcing the burdened Air;
Moustapha, cruel, secret, bold and wise,
Redoubted Monarch of the well-teeth'd Mice,
Approaching his proud Palace, she put on
The form of Mab, Empress to Oberon:
When the stern Prince of Mice in slumber lay
Tired with luxurious Revels of the day,
The Fury envying him so calm a rest,
Enthrones a Viceroy Viper in his Breast.
Then thus accosts him, -- Wake, lost King, awake,
Unless your last long Sleep you mean to take:
That Traitor who your Brother once o'repower'd,
And on yon fatal Lake his Limbs devoured,
When with Physignathus he went to view
Regions before unknown to him and you;
The treacherous Water-Snake hard by does rest,
And will, I fear, attempt your sacred Breast:
Rise then, if you 're a King, and guard your Throne,
Revenge your Brothers Quarrel, and your own.
Thus said, no longer she above abides,
But down again, a-down to Hell the Fury slides.
Up starts the Micean Prince, and stares around,
And with his Cries the ecchoing Walls resound:
Off from his Bed he leaps, and takes his Lance,
A piece of an old Needle found by chance;
Then with another skip he nimbly flees
To his tough Shield made of the Rind of Cheese:
A Guard he cries, with Scrieches shrill and long,
And his bold Subjects to the Presence throng,
Like walls of Brass they all around him stand:
When Silence was observed at his Command,
He thus bespake his Princes, --
-- Shall we be
Always content with sordid Slavery?
Not Long ago stern Jove fierce Tybert sent,
Who all the Flower of our sad Nation rent;
When freed from her a while we breathed in peace,
New Foes, new Rebbels every day increase.
And is this all the Guard my Princes keep?
Thus could you kindly let your Sovereign sleep,
Whilst a fierce Viper does in ambush lie?
Thus could you undiscovered pass him by?
Upon you Cliff, my Genius found him out,
With feeble -- wooden Walls inscons'd about.
There needs no more, if ye are Mice, begin,
Stand to your Arms, and take the Fortress in.
That happy Mouse that brings the Traytor's Head,
With Garlands Crowned, shall round our Streets be led,
And my Fair Daughter grace his Nuptial Bed.
A dreadful new-form'd Army strait appears,
Bright numerous Troops of eager Volunteers:
Unto the Castle their joint Forces drew,
All Pioneers, and all Assailants too:
Its feeble Walls they madly undertake,
And quickly the too weak Foundations shake.
A spacious Breach but too too soon was made,
But my Snake knew not how to be afraid;
Raised his blew Crest, with Hisses filled the Air,
And bravely does for brave defense prepare.
Artophagus, the Young, the Fair, the Stout,
Get's over the Rampire first of all the Rout:
But the Defendant nimbly thrusts him down,
And on a Rocky Mountain splits his Crown;
The fall does all his well-head'n bones displace,
His Brains Spurt out and stick upon the face
Of sad Sitaphagus, who was combined
By Friendship to him, as by Nature joined:
Upon his bleeding Relics down he fell,
Wishing for ever only there to dwell;
He Would his desire, for, crushed with a huge stone,
Even as in Life, so they in Death are one.
Their fates enraged the bold surviving Crew,
Who to the Breach like Bees in Clusters flew;
With Ivory Spears some lance his checkered Breast,
Some scaling Ladders raise, and mount, the rest;
Undermine all the avenues, and some,
Bring in Reserves, (without or Flute, or Drum
All their Efforts as yet are spent in vain,
Unmoved he like a Rock does still remain:
Huge weights the Ladders crack, he sees his foes,
Mangled, and crush't by their own party's blows.
Great Moustapha himself does now draw nigh,
And his glad followers voices rend the Sky;
His Ianizary's to the assault he calls,
Who like themselves assailed the tottering Walls;
Swarms of four-footed Warriors now had set
Their Arms upon a lofty Parapet:
A natural counterscarp of living store;
The Assailants strove at first to mine't, but they
Discouraged with the Labor went away:
Here the Sly Snake swift through a Port-hole goes,
Unfear'd, unmarkt by his presumptious foes:
With various windings he attempts to shock
The now more than Half undermined Rock;
No little Prudence, and no little pain
Now loosed the stubborn Earth which did retain
The unwieldy stone; the stone which now did bear
Innumerable Warrior, who repair
To the free breach, does on a sudden fall
And in Inevitable ruin plunged 'em all.
Loud shreeks here scale the Heavens, and a warm flood
Springs up from the poor mangled Miceans blood.
The horrid paint press't from the reeking Dead,
Soon turns the Living's sable hiew to Red.
Heart-chilling fear, and black despair around,
The fearful, desperate Micean camp resound;
They cannot for the retreats late signal stay,
He Is the best Soldier thought that fastest runs away.
The Mighty Dragon he has hired they cry,
And raise a formidable Mutiny:
Moustapha from his Tent does hasten out,
By Love, or fear to stop the murmuring Rout;
Now he persuades, and now enraged does stamp,
Bidding his Guards kill all that leave the Camp.
A greater fear prevails with some to stay,
Though envying such as ran betimes away:
The enraged Tyrant of proud Micea's Lands,
Mounted upon a Captive Moustrap stands;
His furious Eyes sparkle with boiling Ire,
He breaths Destruction, Blood, Revenge, and Fire.
Then thus Accosts his Army.
Can it be!
How long have Micean Soldiers learned to flee?
Degenerate Mice! to lead you I disdain,
Throw down your Arms, and e'ne sneak home again!
Where are those Heroes who with me could dare,
And beat the Elephant, whose shoulders bare,
Without a Trope, huge Castles in the Air?
One of your Valiant Ancestors, in strife
With Man himself did save a Lions Life,
And for his lawful Guerdon did possess
By her great Parent's Will the Lyoness;
Though some may his too luckless end deride,
Like Phaeton in great attempts he died.
Was it indeed so long ago, when we
Took noble Arms against the Tyranny,
Of cruel Puss? (a Curse upon the Name!)
Where are your Souls? where is your dear-bought fame?
Well may the Rebel Frogs rejoice to see
How their brave Conqu'rers poorly conquered be.
Well may they rise against us, well may they
Chase their poor low-soul'd, little Lords away.
Shall one weak foe or forces baffle thus,
And shall a Worm contend with Mighty us?
O Rowze your Souls, and wake your Rage and Hate,
Poor Wretch! Valiant he is not, but desperate;
See where your mangled Fellows gasping lie,
The Tryumphs of his Viperous Cruelty!
Be ready to revenge your Kindreds falls,
As soon as the too tardy Trumpet calls!
On then like Mice! the Manes of the Dead,
Call for Revenge upon his guilty Head.
A joyful Hum ran round the Camp, they shake
Their dreadful Arms, and preparation make
For General Assaults. This from on high,
The pensive wounded Snake with Grief did Spy;
His Walls were gone, his feeble Curtains rent,
His food, and all his Ammunition spent:
There Is no hope; dye he must, yet e're he dies,
Amongst his Friends he 'll leave some Legacies:
His battered Castle which must be his Grave,
To his kind Master once again he gave.
His Bones, if reserved from the murdring Hand,
Of the fierce Mice, to make his Hat a Band;
His Brains, if them some generous Mouse would bring,
To them he gives who say he has a Sting:
Who 'll give their sense the lie in mere despite,
Although they see he will neither sting, nor bite.
This done, he scorns to sneak into his Grave,
But will at least a noble exit have;
Unto the Castle Wall he seems to grow,
Ready to meet his Death, to meet his foe:
Hundreds in Crowds over crushed hundreds come,
Some to meet Conquest, most to meet their Doom.
Wearied with Death, and tired with killing now,
The Champions Body, not his Mind must bow;
Now first his Enemy's weak hopes begin,
And Floods of desparate foes all round come rolling in:
All round he glides, and be they never so strong,
Their Death he hasts, and does his Life prolong.
But when ^he still increasing Enemy,
Like a swollen Torrent does all stops defy;
His nimble Tail about their Legs he twists,
In vain his Fury every one resists:
Then from on high a-down himself does throw,
At once expiring with the expiring foe;
Encompass't round with Trophys, there he lies,
And in the Bed of Honor bravely dies.
A Pindaricque,
On the Grunting of a Hog.
FReeborn Pindaric never does refufe,
Either a lofty, or a humble Muse:
Now in proud Sophoclaean Buskins Sings,
O^ Hero's, and of Kings,
Mighty Numbers, mighty Things;
Now out of sight she flys,
Rowing with gaudy Wings
Across the stormy Skys,
Then down again,
Her self she Flings,
Without uneasiness, or Pain
To Lice, and Dogs,
To Cows, and Hogs,
And follows their melodious grunting over the Plain.
2.
Harmonious Hog draw near!
No bloody Butchers here,
Thou need'st not fear,
Harmonious Hog draw near, and from thy beauteous Snow^
Whilst we attend with Ear,
Like thine pricked up devou't;
To taste thy Sugry voice, which here, and there,
With wanton Curls, vibrates around the circling Air,
Harmonious Hog! warble some Anthem out!
As sweet as those which quivering Monks in days of Y'ore,
With us did roar;
When they alas,
That the hard-hearted Abbot such a Coyl should keep,
And cheat 'em of their first, their sweetest Sleep;
When they were ferretted up to Midnight Mass:
Why should not other Piggs on Organs play,
As well as They.
3.
Dear Hog! thou King of Meat!
So near thy Lord Mankind,
The nicest Taste can scarce a difference find!
No more may I thy glorious Gammons eat!
No more,
Partake of the Free Farmers Christmas store,
Black Puddings which with Fat would make your Mouths run over:
If I, though I should never so long before the Sentence stay,
And in my large Ears scale, the thing never so discreetly weigh,
If I can find a difference in the Notes,
Belcht from the applauded Throats
Of Rotten Playhouse Songsters-All-Divine,
If any difference I can find between their Notes, and Thine:
A Noise they keep with Tune, and out of Tune,
And Round, and Flat,
High, Low, and This, and That,
That Algebra, or Thou, or I might understand as soon.
4.
Like the confounding Lutes innumerable Strings,
One of them Sings;
Thy easier Musick's ten times more divine;
More like the one string'd, deep, Majestic Trump-Marine:
Prithee strike up, and cheer this drooping Heart of Mine!
Not the sweet Harp that is claimed by Jews,
Nor that which to the far more Ancient Welsh belongs,
(a) Nor that which the Wild Irish use,
Frighting even their own Wolves with loud Hubbubb^boos.
(b) Nor Indian Dance, with Indian Songs, Nor yet,
(Which how should I so long forget?)
The Crown of all the rest,
The very Cream of the Jest:
Amptuous Noble Lyre -- the Tongs;
Nor, though Poetic Jordan bite his Thumbs,
At the bold word, my Lord Mayors Flutes, and Kettle-Drums;
Not all this Instrumental dare,
With thy soft, ravishing, vocal Music ever to compare.
NOTES.
(a) [Nor that which the Wild Irish use,
Frighting even their own Wolves with loud Hubbubbaboos.
It Is the Custom of the Irish, when any thing is stolen, or other sudden
accident, presently to set up that note, [Hubbubbaboo] the next that hears it
does the like, and so Intelligence is conveyed swifter than by any Hue-and-Cry
with us.

(b) -- [Nor Indian Dance, with Indian Songs.]
A Taste of whose Humor, and Harmony has been often enough presented at the
Playhouse by the Indian Girls.

To my Gingerbread Mistress.
DEar Miss, not with a Lie to cheat ye,
I love you so that I could eat ye.
It Is not that Gold that does adorn
Your Bosom like the rising Morn,
When dropping dry from watery Bed
Sol shakes his Carrot-Loggerhead:
It Is not your Gold I mean to woo;
Alas, it is You, and only You.
It Is not that Coronet which does shine
With Beams not half so bright as thine,
Which scatter Glories that excel
The Nose of Zara's Dowzabel. (a)
It Is not the Rose of lip-like hiew,
Nor Virgin-Plumb's Caelestial blew,
Nor all the Nuts that plundered be
From the sad Squirrel's Granarie;
Nor Pears long crammed in faithful store,
As yellow as the Golden-Ore;
Nor Crumpling sweet, with Cheeks divine,
Yet not so fair, my Dear, as thine;
Nor Custards stuck with Plumbs and Flies,
Nor Heart-reviving Pudding-Pyes,
Though queasie Stomach's them contemn,
Bake't on thy n'own dear Granny's Wemm. (b)
Ah! it is not, it is not this, nor all
The Goods in Cellar, Pouch or Stall,
Which Apple-Woman does provide
For such as make her Child their Bride:
King Harry Groats with Rust o're-grown,
And Edward Shillings more than one;
I Will say it, my Love, and say it again,
'Twas none of these that caused my pain:
'Twas first thy goggling, Egg-like Eyes,
Like those in Mahomet's Paradise, (c)
Which did my Iack-with-a-Lanthorns prove,
And mir'd me up to the Ears in Love.
Then all thy Dotes came^powdring in,
The Mother's manly Nose and Chin,
Thy Nose which (not thy Faces Friend)
Keeps a poor Lover at Arm's end;
Thy Chin which with kind Curl does grace
Thy n'own dear Father's Wainscot Face;
A Mouth which should with Mopsa's vye, d
Although Pamela's self stood by;
Lips which like Paris Casements show,
Still opening with a Guarda vou'z; e
There Caravans of Spices meet,
Not Western Civet half so sweet, f
Nor mellow Ducks in Claret stewed,
When Atoms were in Altitude. g
But not to stay on every Charm,
In Iar-like Leg, and May Pole Arm;
Nor how my Conquress did prevail,
And wound with every Tooth and Nail:
Ah! 'twas, as too-too well you know,
Your Hand that struck the mortal blow.
That Mutton-fist, like Bolt of Thunder,
Poor Lover felled as flat's a Flounder.
Under a Willow I complain,
And grunt, and cry, and roar in vain;
And, as mad Lovers use to do,
Pick straws, and -- what a F -- care you?
From side to side I loll about,
Idle, ungainly, lazy Lout,
That was, e're you I saw, in sooth,
(Although I say it) a dapper Youth.
Here every hour with dreary Frown,
I lay my Head on Elbow down:
Help, or this Love will quite undo me!
Hark how it runs clean through and through me!
The sighs which up and downwards go,
That I am near the Rattles, show:
Think not that I false grief pretend!
Alas, I weep at either end!
My sweet Sweetheart, how is it you are
So foolish? sure you be'n't so fair.
O be'n't so hard! what e're you grow,
The Baker sure never made you so.
My Heart, not only with your stroke,
But my few Teeth will all be broke.
Melt then to cure my horrid Drowth;
O melt, although it is in my Mouth,
Which waters at you; for it is true,
Nothing can quench my thirst but you.
Now my cold Fit is more severe,
I shall kick up with mere Despair.
These nipping Mornings pinch, and you,
To me^d the matter, freeze me too.
Dear Girl, for once, at my desire,
Prithee, from Ice be turned to Fire.
(What e're my Readers Judgment be,
I Am sure I here mean honestly,
Such a kind, harmless, lambent Flame,
As from Ascanius Temples came.)
O warm my Soul, for Cupid's cold-Iron-Dart,
And your more frosty frowns have kibe'd my Heart.
NOTES.
(a) [The Nose of Zara's Dowzabel.]
Vid. -- The famous and renowned History of Don Zaradel Fogo; -- the Lady of
whose best Affections, (a piece of purtenance as necessary to a Knight Errant,
as Mambrino' s Helmet, or the Parallel of this Lady [Dulcinea de'l Foboso] to
Don Quixot) whose Damsel that had woefully besmitten the gentle Knight, was,
after all the Parentheses, Yclept -- Dowzabella, -- Of whom the Poet thus,

" -- Whose gallant gray Eyes, like Stars in the Skies,
"Denoted, etc.
(b) [Bake't on thy n'own dear Granny's Wemm.]
-- A Scotch Oven. -- A Traveller eating some Cake on the Road in Scotland,
complained 'twas not well bake't: 'Twas replied, that was impossible; for 't
had been all night baking upon the Hostess's warm Wemm.

(c) -- [ Thy goggling Egg-like Eyes
[Like those in Mahomet's Paradise.]
Among the other pleasures in the Heaven of his own building, Mahomet's Alcoran
promises the Mussal-man Bed-fellows with Eyes as big as Eggs; esteemed as great
a piece of beauty, it seems, by the Asiatick's, as great Lips by most of the
Africans.

(d) [A Mouth which should with Mopsa's vye]
Although Pamela's self stood by.]
See the Description of charming Mopsa, in an ingenious drolling Poem at the
End of Sir Philip Sidney.

(e) [ Lips which like Paris-Casements show,
When opening with a Guard^ vou'z!]
Such as walk late at Paris, and when the Windows open with that sound, avoid
not in time, will soon, by their bounteous benevolence, smell out the meaning
of the Allusion here.

(f) [Not Western Civet half so sweet.]
Paracelsus is reported, (with a great deal of washing you may think) to have
reduced no better nor worse than a Sir -- an't please ye, into an excellent
Perfume -- Balsamum Apoplecticum, but Assa foetida to it, -- and afterward
christened it by the cleanlier name of Zibetum Occidentale.

(g) [When Atoms were in Altitude.]
Willis in his Book de Fermentatione, gives that account of Putrefaction of
Bodies; He says, the blood, etc. ferments, and the Particles are highly
agitated, -- (and a great deal more, which, if you have not enough for your
money, you shall have in the next Edition.)

On the Bear-fac'd Lady.
TOo charming Maid, whose Viznomy divine
Shoots Darts around like any Porcupine! a
Who give to Cupid's Arrows new supplies,
Heading 'em from your Face, and not your Eyes,
Like Cleavland's Lover, Pallizado'd in, b
And fenc'd-by the sharp Turn-pikes of your Chin.
Happy the Man to whom you must disclose
The flaming Beauties of your Rainbow Nose!
What though in vain to approach your Lips he seek?
He may with leave come near, and kiss your Cheek;
If, as when Turks expect they should be heard
At Prayer, you will but turn aside your beard: c
All this were true, though Art should you disgrace,
And show her own, instead of Nature's Face.
But you discreetly choose the Russian way, ^
And closely veyl it till the Wedding Day;
Not Stega-like, by too sincere a carriage, e
Your Imperfections show, and mar your Marriage.
You are resolved that Faith and Stomach too
Shall meet in him who must be blessed with you*
And by so just a Touchstone mean to prove
The Metal of his Courage and his Love:
Nay, Joan, her self, whom he will in the dar^^^ embrace*
When the Light comes, may have my Lady's Face*
He has his Chance, it may be good enough*
For all Love's but a Game at Blind-mans-buff*
He who to meet a Devil does prepare,
Like Spencer's Knight, may find an Ange^ there. ^
Missing a Snake, he may at last prevail
To hold a fat, though slipry Eel by the Tail.
When Psyche through the Air to Cupid rode,
She feared a Dragon, but she found a God. (...)
Suppose the worst, a Rival's spite has sed*
Here Is Spouse enough, though she had never a^ Hea^
A just proportion every where behold,
And Gold, the Cream of the Jest, remember Gold;
Gold! Gold! those subtle Charms must needs prevail;
Gold! Gold! enough, had she nor Head, nor Tail.
Sure this must even the flintyest Heart subdue;
Those Chains, those Pearls, those Lockets, all for you!
What if no Cubbs bless the ill-natured Joys?
Look, she is already stocked with yellow Boys;
And she
May live like Etheldreda, undefiled, h
While you
Lie with her Coin, and get her Bags with Child.
NOTES.
This Story, and the Lady's Picture -- appertaining thereunto, -- are notorious
enough about London, without Explication of the Subject in general.

(a) [Shoots Darts around like any Porcupine.]
She Is pictured with a Bear's-head, and consequently, her face all hairy.

(b) [Like Cleavland's Lover, Pallizado'd in.]
Alluding to that in Cleavland's Soldier;

"[O let the Turn-pikes of my Chin
"Take thy Half Moon Fortress in.
(c) [If, as when Turks expect they should be heard ^
At Prayer, you will but turn aside the beard.
A late Traveller, and ingenious Observer at Constantinople, in the Relation he
gives of their Customs in Devotion, has this among the rest; That when in the
highest fit of Zeal, and Top of their Service, for an Amen, they are to manage
their Beards, or else the work is left uncompleat.

(d) [But you discreetly choose the Russian way,
And closely veil it till the Wedding Day.]
In the Description of Russia, among Struys's Voyages, he describes this for
one humor religigiously observed in all their Marriages; -- They never see one
another till made fast.

(e) [Not Stega-like, etc.
This old Lady, in the Play, out of sincerity used to let her Courters see all
her Imperfections, -- as her No-Teeth, No-Eyes, One-Leg, and so frighted 'em
all away.

(f) [He who to meet a Devil, etc.
Like Spencer's Knight, etc.
See Spencer's Fairy Queen; In one of the first Canto^s -- instead of an
old-Witch, the Knight found a brisk young Lady.

(g) When Psyche, etc.
She feared a Dragon, etc.
Psyche was required by the Oracle to be exposed to a Dragon, as Andromeda to
the Whale -- When in pops Cupid, like Perseus himself, sets her at liberty,
carrys her home, and all that --

(h) [She -- may live, like Etheldreda, undefiled,
Vid. Fuller' s Church History, p. 91. This Etheldreda, would you think it, was
married to a Prince, and a King, and yet, by her own desire, lived still as
pure a Virgin as ever -- her Mother was when she was born.

An Anacreontique on a Pair of BREECHES.
GEntly flow, my easy Strain,
Smoother than Tempe's Heavenly Plain,
Smoother than e're Anacreon sung,
Anacreon sweet with silver Tongue,
When he by fair Bathillus lay, a
Melting his softer hours away.
No rough harsh sounds to gagg the Voice,
Nor hoarse Pindaric's grumbling Noise,
^oft as the amorous Turtles call,
^mooth as the whispering Waters fall;
Smooth as threadbare Breeches be,
Soft as the Fustian round my Knee.
Where shall I my work begin,
And stick the Muse's Needle in?
The Muses, which if Fame says true,
Were Sempstresses and Tailors too:
Where shall I use my artful Hand;
At the Knee, or at the Band?
Fruitless labor, fruitless pain!
All my skill and time's in vain:
Never will my Trouble end,
I eternally must mend;
For one hole starts out two more,
Hydra-like, or three, or four;
Patch on patch are new laid on,
Till the old, like Iason's Ship, are gone. b
Matched full lawfully they 've bin,
For sure none were too near a kin.
From how many a narrow Hem
Has my Botcher cabbag'd them?
Spoils of Nations far and nigh,
Mere Babel of good Husbandry!
Not the Iay could Feathers boast
From so many a different Coast.
But since Friends at last must part,
Adieu, adieu, with all my Heart;
I^ll, as Friends to Poets use,
Give y' a good Name, and turn you loose*
Take your chance, your Fortune try,
Pray beg or starve, as well as I;
Trouble me with your Rags no more,
Here Is your Pass, and out of Door.
Ever honest, ever true,
You Have stuck as fast as Shirt can do;
Which soon, if you no longer stay,
Will drop loose, and run away.
Long did your lean Pockets stare,
Like Camelions, fill^d with Air;
And what ever place were torn,
They be sure were ne^r o'reworn.
Generous Sixpence born with Pain,
Have often made 'em gape in vain;
Now they 'l save that dreadful Charge,
They can far cheaper starve at large:
Take this Groat, and do not prate;
Take the half of my Estate:
Scamper now as well as I,
To the barren Indys fly,
And see if e're a Slave that is there,
Is Master of a lighter Pair.
Never fear where e're you go,
You 're sure never to fall more low,
Till your selves with Earth you trust;
Ashes to Ashes, Dust to Dust.
NOTES.
(a) [When he by fair Bathillus lay.]
See Mr. Creech' s admirable Translation of Horace; Epod. 14. " Thus soft
Anacreon for Bathyllus burned,
" And often his Love he sadly mourn^d.


(b) [Patch on, Patch are still laid on,
Till the old like Iason's Ship are gone.]
The Story of Jason's Ship is almost as much worn, as its Subject; which was so
often mended, and vampt up again, till not one plank of the Original-primitive
Wood was left; though neither did that suffer so many Transmutations as the ol^
Gentleman's Knife that had had five new haf^^ and seven new blades.

A Tobacco Pipe.
IN these raw mornings, when I Am freezing ripe*
What can compare with a Tobacco-pipe?
Prim'd, Cock't, and Touched 'twould bette^ heat a man*
a Than ten Bath-Faggots, or Scotch-warmin^ Pan*
Let others vamp their foundered Strength an^ Age*
With Porringers of double brewed Pottage!
And those who thus to charge themselves (...) loath*
Breakfast upon a Quart of Barley-broath!
Fireballs of liquid flame; Death in each drop
Let others guzzle at a Brandy-shop;
Till all their moisture, all their Treasure spent,
They stand, scorcht Scheletons, their own sad Monument!
Where each of these accustomed Cordials fails,
Let others Bite, and others blow their Nails!
I have an Universal Medicine chose,
Which warms, at once, my Gutts, and Hands, and Nose.
b Which like the noble Coco-Tree, is good
For Physic, or for Raiment, or for Food:
c All you experimental men of Thought,
Who ever Whirligigs to Gresham brought;
Which London with implicit Knowledge sees,
d Made up of I's, and O's, and A's, and B's;
Show me one Engine which your Stores enshrine,
That shall Pit, Box, and Gallery with mine?
When your rackt Brains to birth some Embryo bring,
That Is often for nothing Good, but mine for every Thing,
Ungrateful silly man, who makes divine
e Those who at first invented Corn and Wine!
Nay he is begodded too whose casual Knocks,
f On the Anvil, first found out a Tinderbox.
Ungrateful Man! whose memory slips that Name,
From whom Tobacco pipes Invention came!
But his more bulky worth's too big for fame.
Whose Trump would crack with that vast work alone,
Nor any Pipe can sound his praise besides his own.
His Brother- Glyster-pipe, that does ascend,
And almost meet halfway at to other end;
(New method for Impaling!) never could do,
That good of one side, which this can of Two:
My Ambodexter either way will go,
Now Struts above, now humbly creeps below;
Above its Virtues, never admitted strife,
Below it is said that once it saved a Life.
For, when One in that speaking Trumpet spoke,
He laughed so long till his Imposthume broke:
Up to its proper place we 'll now return't,
(But wipe it first, or if you please, let^s burned!
For the Tooth-ake it is a specific aid,
g For every Amorous Boy, or Lovesick Maid:
An hundred Med'cins us^d and us^d in vain,
By each Old Woman taught to' assuage the pain;
By each Old Woman, who their Virtues tried,
Forty' year ago, when her third Husband died;
Apply the Pipe! this Instrument will cure,
h The Surgeons Fire, or Pincers scarce so sure,
Though they the most effectual Method take;
Cut off the Head, I Will warn't no more 'twill Ach,
This gently heals, while Crystal streams distill,
As from the Mother-Rock some plenteous Rill,
(Tho not, like that, enough to drive a Mill.
Thence Chrstal Streams with gentle murmures flow,
i Where little Nimphs may play, for ought we know,
Fine Tod-pole Nymphs soon rotten and soon ripe,
With tapring Tails like Sire Tobacco-pipe;
k Like those which Virtuoso Glasses spy,
A thousand times less than a lusty Lowses eye:
Sometimes another way to work 'twill go,
Up spouts a Deluge from the Abyss below;
This Physic is more safe, (though not so fine,)
Than Bumpers, crowned too often with sprightly Wine:
A Glass is not a better cure than that,
For Care, or Toothach, both of which would kill a Cat;
But if we sad experience credit may,
The Pipe's of the Two by far the surer way.
No Brawls, no Wounds, nor Bangs, nor Scars appear,
With such as will discreetly frollick here:
But Wine, confounded Wine one cannot miscall,
Wine on a Poets word, 's the Deel and all; (...)
That Fiend, when conjured up, I tell you true,
Even with Tobacco-pipes can murders do.
Wine, that mad Bully, for a painted Drabb,
With these blunt swords e're now has given a Stabb.
When such as use my Pipe but wisely will,
Employ its Aid to cure and not to kill;
Not Bezoar stone, nor that miraculous Horn,
Which decks the strange Invisible Unicorn:
Can deadly Poisons subtle streams, as well,
As my Tobacco-pipe, when charged expel.
l The long-liv^d Hearts medicamental Breath,
Gives himself Aid, and the blew Vipe^ Death;
So, if this Sovereign Antidote you try,
On Spiders, straight they swell and burst, and Dye;
To what e're luckless Post the Plague advance,
m 'Twill chase it thence, like Tires of Ordinance:
n Though all around with bloomy Deaths beset,
Here is the never failing Amulet;
Though in the Cart with bloated Corpse you lay,
o Like the blind-Piper, you might rise, and play:
Fenc't but with this Tobacco-pipe, --
And when long hence you bless the welcome stroke,
Then, when the Pipe is out, your Glass is broke;
The Pipe, the immortal pipe if used before,
To after-Years transmit^ your Glory's over;
For that can best (as you may quickly prove
Settle the Wit, as Pudding settles Love.
^Twill fix your Judgment, render grave and sage,
And make the Reason overtake the Age:
For this his wondering Servants used to lay,
p Before a Lord full thirty Pipes a Day;
With this was Herebord acquainted; when
He smoakt, and writ, and spit, and smoakt again.
Poets the Glass with Fancy does inspire,
The Pipe mounts our Philosopher far higher;
And moulds him Syllogisms, tough, and strong,
And polishes his Labors all along.
Demosthenes his works of the Lamp did smell,
His of the Tobacco-pipe, and that is as well;
And least he should be idle forced to stand,
When for a prop, it asked his Helping hand;
Like such a Scholar, he, with wondrous skill,
q Did a fine Hole through greasy Beavor drill;
And when the' ^ngenious Mechanism was done,
Upon that Rest in (...) plants his Gun.
Sure when Prometheus climbed above the Poles,
Sliely to learn their art of making Souls;
When of his Fire he fretting Jove did wipe,
He stole it thence in a Tobacco-pipe:
Which predispos'd to live, as down he ran,
By the Souls Plastic power from Clay was turned to Man,
And what, even now will make it seem more like,
r Some sparks remain in it still, if you 'l but strike:
This had, in the dark the smoking Drunkard known,
That he would so much about him of his own;
He never would for the cold Glowworm grope,
s Puffing his Pipe in vain with Fire I hope!
Not only with dull usefulness content,
This Engine too is fit for Ornament:
When wooing Cockny's Locks will curl no more
Than his Good natured Fathers horns before;
When Christmas Box with little Wool is big,
And Barber will not trust him for a Wig:
When all means fail, what think ye in the end,
But the Tobacco-pipe must prove his Friend?
On this, till Half-asleep, with pains, and care,
Ten-times as long as at his yawning prayer,
In dainty Frizz he twists his frighted Hair.
Hair, which would make Alecto's Vipers start,
With whose sure Ropes he will noose his n'own sweetheart:
Whether she rolls to Hampton in a Boat,
With gaudy-yellow-Tabby-Petticoat;
Or mounting the Exchange, she bridles in
The dainty Dewlaps of her portly Chin;
Still younkers charming, dangling Locks inspire,
Like any Squibb, whole streams of amorous fire;
And the warm wamblings of unnam'd Desire.
Peaceful Tobacco-pipes none ought to scorn,
Which can defend, and not alone adorn;
When unprovoked it is true, They 're soft, and tame,
And only big with calm, with Lambent Flame:
So does the Jolly Cannons cheerly roar,
On bright high-days salute the clustered Shore;
But in stearn war spews loads of deadly flame,
As much a Lion now, as once a Lamb.
So these when with no other weapons sped,
Have many served instead of murdring Lead;
'Twill either lead, or drive, and makes with ease,
Either a Mould, or Bullet, which you please.
When Hercules at old Evanders house,
Reformed from cutting Throats, to keeping Cows;
t Cacus thought it not fair one should have all,
And kindly dragged some of his Heard to Stall:
The Hero swears to find his Victuals stole;
And tracks at last, the subtle Fox to Hole:
u Whose charged Tobacco-pipe as soon as come,
Smoaks even his Hunter out of house and home;
This was his Sword, and this was his defense,
Frighting poor Hang-dog, Club and all from thence:
x Heroic pipe! worthy both Pipes and Tabours!
You Are Cock of Hercules and all his Labors.
And now to relish a long Winters Tale,
O for a Nut-brown Cup of Christmas Ale!
But all the craft's in getting it; it is froze,
And drops scarce half so fast as Moyster Nose:
The Pipe to Pot was ever kind and true,
And that or nothing must the business do;
Heat it Red hot and change it for a Tap,
'Twill quickly through the Crystal force a Gap.
Now bring the Boles, drink in your own defense!
For now a new born River bubbles thence;
This ever has the safest Course been found,
To giv't a Gl^ster, when the Hogs-heads bound.
Let stiff Don-Diego load the lousy Brush,
That hedges in his mouth with snotty Snush:
In vain he the far nobler smoaker mocks,
And in one Knick-knack wears both Pipe and Box,
New fangl^d London thus perhaps may do,
And ^^ke old Misses, leave old Friends for new:
The West is the Tobacco-pipes chief Throne,
He there like Saxon Monarchs reigns alone:
Wild-Irish-Brats, as soon as Breath they draw,
Are dos'd with a kind Cup of Vsquebagh.
Discretion bids us learn where e're we can,
Since wiser Brutes have often tutored Man;
y Thus Western Children, though not quite so ripe,
As theirs, are weaned on a Tobacco-pipe:
This does the Sucking Bottles place supply,
It Is Pap-Meat when They 're hungry, drink when dry;
When hot this cools, this warms when They 're a-cold;
z A perfect Kolmacho for Young, and Old;
The Child with never a Tooth, and the Old Crone,
Whose two black Stumps check such as say she has n^ne:
Who, crept through fourscore year, with care, and pain,
Has made a shift to grow a Child again.
The Miner there, with an Implicit Faith,
a Credi^ing what his Vpper-neighbour says;
Who seldom taking pains to Look abroad,
Believes a Sun as he believes a God:
For the Companion of his Hopes and Fears,
Takes a Tobacco-pipe, ^well struck in years;
b O^d as himself, lamed by some Hurle^s rage,
Short, and (...) repid grown with nameless age,
Still like some Sea-worn Cliff, it lesser grows,
Just matched at last to his Commodious Nose:
With this, nor was sweet Orpheus armed a well'
With Harp, with this he si^ks almost to Hell.
By some strange chance, from an old plundered Vein,
c Like Tyrian Pick-axe, brought to Light again:
See where it is fallen among a Ring of Boys,
Who from it blow thin worlds of gaudy Joys.
Fine, soon-ripe Bubbles, Alamode, and Gay,
Dress't in the Glory's of the blooming Day:
Bright as Court-Madam, though they hardly be,
Perhaps as tender, or as frail as she;
Created both by Breath, both upwards born,
Proud in the Beautys of the Rainbow Morn:
And thus, when sailing through the heavier Skys,
By Breath 'twas made and lived, by Breath it dies;
And that same Blast on which it self it rears,
Dasnes^ the airy Jewel into Tears.
A Wondrous turn! my pipe at last (You see!)
Is Pulpit grown, and preaches Vanity;
It Is sign he is sick -- Rogues at the fatal day,
Thus curses use to' unlearn, and learn to pray:
Then from some careless Boys's loose hand he flies,
And tumbles down, and Breaks his Neck, and dies.
NOTES.
(a) [Than ten Bath Faggots, or Scotch-warming Pan.]
The Bath Faggots are so notorious for their exceeding Littleness, that two of
'em were carried thence in a Gentleman's Portmantean as far as Cornwall for a
Rarity, one of which, to this Day (or very lately) hangs up there for a Sign.
[Scotch- warming-pan] is the Hostesses brown Daughter.

(b) [ Like the Coco-Tree, is good, --
For Physic, or for Raiment, or for Food.]
See the Divine Herberts Poem on Providence. [ The Indian Nut alone -- Is Meat,
Drink, Cordage, Sailing, all in one.]

(c) [All you experimental men of Thought.]
Sowse! comes the Critic with a Dilemma a top of this poor Verse; if
[Experimental] quo' he; how [Men of Thought]? Why to give a civil Answer to a
civil Question -- The Experiments must be thought on, and scolded, and
quarreled for too, both before and after they are made.

(d) [Made up of I's, and O's, and A's, and B's.]
Letters often put for References in Engines, from the Picture to the
Explanation, -- and here, Mr. Reader, take notice, were I in my Sobers Senses,
writing Reasonable prose, I should not be so saucy to reflect on those great,
worthy Persons; But 'twill here I hope be taken only for a little Spice of
Furor Poeticus.

(e) [Those who at first invented Corn, and Wine.]
Ceres, and Bacchus worshipped in most places of the Pagan World.

(f) [Whose casual Knocks, --
On the Anvile, first found out a Tinderbox.]
Vulcan, who being the god both of Fire, and all Iron-work, it is to be supposed
invented that necessary piece of Household Stuff; at least there is as good
Record for his making this as Aeneas's Armor.

(g) [For every Amorous Boy, or Lovesick Maid.]
Among other new Discoveries in Philosophy, this is universally now received --
That Love is the cause of Toothache.

(h) [The Surgeons Fire, or Pincers scarce so sure.]
For the Toothach, (besides the present Remedy sold under the Exchange) some
burn a Vein in the Ear -- and if that fails -- Out with it!

(i) [Where little Nymphs may play for ought we know. --


(k) [Like those which Vertuoso Glasses spy,
A thousands times less than a lusty Lowses eye.]
This is not to be understood, without stepping into the new World of
Microscopes: where among the rest, One Mr. (what is his hard name?) Lewenhoec, a
Dutchman, discovered in Rainwater Animalentes consisting of six Globubs, two
horns, and a tapering Tail; one of 'em, a thousand times less than the eye of a
Fat Louse: vid Transactions of Royal Society. -- Vol. eleventh, p. 821.

(l) [The long-lived Hart's medicamental Breath.]
Natural Historians report of the Heart, that by the force of its Breath,
Serpents are ferretted out of their holes, on which it feeds for Physic: vid.
Guillems Heraldry.

(m) ['Twill chase it thence, like Tires of Ordinance.]
At a certain City, either in Germany, or France (Tournay or Towers I think
'twas) when the Plague was begun, by the command of the Magistrate all the Guns
on the Walls were several times discharged together, which purified the Air,
and removed the Sickness.

(n) [Tho' all around with bloomy Deaths beset.]
I have heard of one, in the great Plague at London -- 65. That going over a
pit where many of the Dead were heap't in, perceived a bloomy smell to arise
thence, faint, like that of White Roses -- He went home, told the story, made
nothing often, but in a day or two sicken'd and died of the same disease.

(o) [Like the Blind-piper, you might rise and play.]
His story is known to most, sure, that know London: Lying dead drunk he was
thrown up in a Cart of the dead, in the Plague-time; when he woke he fell a
playing, just as he was tumbling into Pit-hole, and so scape't.

(p) [Before a Lord, full thirty Pipes a day.]
A London Lord, who every Morning made his People fill him thirty Pipes, and
lay 'em for service in his Study.

(q) [Did a fine Hole through greasiy Beaver drill.]
The famous Herebord is reported to be a great Friend to the Tobacco-pipe: but
wanting his Hand to turn the Leaves, invented a way to rest his Pipe through a
Hole in the Brim of his Hat.

(r) [Some Sparks remain in it still, if you but strike.]
A Tobacco-pipe strikes fire on a Cane -- But that is not all -- In the
Translation of the Academy del Cimento, p. 159. Tobacco-pipes, if broken in the
Night emit sparkles like a Flint.

(s) [Puffing his Pipe in vain with -- Fire I hope.]
A drunken fell^w riding home by night with a Pipe in's Mouth, at last spied a
Glowworm on the ground, and when his Pipe was out, alights, and holds it to the
Glowworm to light it. [In dainty Friz he hoists his frighted Hair,]
-- Experto creed Roberto?

(t) [ Cacus thought it not fair one should have all:]
See Virg. Aeneads. Hercules turned Grazier, and fed his Cows near Cacus his
Den, who dragged some of 'em backwards into his Hole: -- Hercules, as an honest
man should, very careful of his Cattle, makes a Shift to track him, by the help
of the Calves. What do me Cacus but as you 'l find next note.

(u) [With charged Tobacco-pipe, as soon as come.]
This is the most probable conjecture to be made of Cacus his defense -- it is
plain he smoak't Hercules away -- It Is very likely 'twas with a pipe of of
Tobacco. See Virgil else. Faucibus ingentem fumum mirabile dictu,
Evomit, involvitque domum caligine caeca,
Prospectum eripiens oculis. --
A very Periphrasis for Tobacco.

(x) [ -- Pipe worthy both Pipes and Tabours.]
Cry ye mercy for the Pun! but I could'n for my Heart get e're another Ryme.

(y) [Thus Western Children, etc.
Are Weaned on a Tobacco-pipe.]
It Is common in some parts of the West, for Children, no higher than their
Lace-peels, to sit Working and Smoking.

(z) [A perfect Kolmacho for Young and Old.]
Kolmacho is an hard word -- (In English (all heal) given to a new invented
Cordial.

(a) [Crediting what his Vpper-Neighbours says.]
It Is the Custom among the Spaniards, for their Slaves to continue ever in the
Mines. Every body knows not to the contrary of the Cornish Miners -- such as
do, I Would entreat 'em to hold their peace and not spoil a fancy.

(b) [Lam'd by some Hurlers rage.]
Scarce ever an Hurling but some or more are lamed or killed -- (Ware Critic
here!)

(c) [Like Tyrian Pick-axe, brought to Light again.]
Here Is a fair opportunity to show ones Learning, and read half an hour on
Barat-anack, and Cassiterides, but I shall only tell such as don't know it
better than my self, that the Tyrians came hither for Tin, and some of their
Brazen Instruments have been found in Old Mines.

On a COW's TAIL.
THou who did round Cecropian Pastures rove,
Turned Bull, an horny and an hairy Jove! a
(Though sure that shape had better served than now,
When beauteous Io was transformed to Cow) b
Who a mere Brute did of mere Thunder make,
A four-leg'd Lover for Europa's sake;
And when thy purchase was from shore conveyed,
(The shining Cargo of a Royal Maid)
Did to a Rudder turn thy well-hung Tail,
Whilst her loose flowing Garments served for Sail:
Pilot my tottering Bark with Aid Divine,
Vent'ring through Seas far more unknown than thine!
Help me in my Cows Tail, the rest shall be
Part of a grateful Hecatomb to Thee. c
The Tail full often above the Head prevails,
And Heaven and Earth resound the Praise of Tails.
See where in Heaven the Dog's bright Tall does shine,
A Cynosure not half so long as mine:
On Earth walk where you will, in every place,
One Tail or other slaps you over the Face.
The Kingly Lion whirls his Sceptral Train,
Roaring at the encountering Gnat in vain;
The Victor Gnat in the next Fight does fail,
And drops beneath the Cow's all-conquering Tail;
That Tail which kills whate'r it is force withstand^
As sure's a Club, -- in Hercules's hand's.
When the mad Dog Star scatters sultry Bea^^
And drives the tossing Herd to shades and Streams;
Armies of Flys, of different Notes and Wings,
Goad 'em all ore with their vexatious stings;
Vainly does now the bare-dock't Horse complain,
And wish for his dismembered Tail again;
Who of his Freedom used before to boast,
Then gained, when such a Burden he had lost.
(So the sly Fox, who of his Tail could mak^^
Hook, Net and Line, at every Brook and Lake*
And when too faint he the hot Hunter flyes^
With pissen Tail strike out the Terrior's Eyes (...)
When not so well he from the Trap had fled,
But with his Tail compounded for his Head;
To escape his salt Companions Mockery,
He Would have 'em tail-less all as well as he.) e
But now the Cow with brandished Tail falls on,
Proclaiming open War with Accaron;
Millions of Insect-Warriors at her fly,
Millions of Insect-Warriors murmuring dye.
So falls a murdering Chain-shot whizzing round,
(Amazing, like less dreadful Thunder's sound)
When through a Troop of Iron Horsemen born,
Beneath the Reaper's Hook so drops the Corn.
So when the scaly Lord of fruitful Nile,
The dreadful Spear-contemning Crocodile,
Is by his trembling Enemies beset,
Trusting in vain a feeble Dart or Net;
With his Tail's Whisk he long-long Ranks o'rethrows, f
And stalks in Triumph over his prostrate Foes.
The Turks when they 'll their Enemies assail, g
For a red Flag hang out an Horse's Tail:
Unjustly done, when it must be confess't
From this, the Cow's the far more valiant Beast.
But if from cloudy Wars we start away
To downy Pleasure's happy Sunshine day,
There the Cow's Tail does other Tails surpass
As far as the brisk Horse the lazy Ass.
This the sage Priests of mighty Apis knew,
What ever the rude unthinking Vulgar do.
Apis is gone; hark the lamenting Crowd
Raving about, bellow his loss aloud:
Apis is gone, nor can their Tears prevail; h
Yet they would not care, had he but left his Tail. i
Priests, Prince and People search the Stalls around,
Until the happy, happy Tail is found,
Whilst every trembling Son of Nile prepares
To Adore the sacred Tail with two white Hairs. k
Nor less should the Indian this blessed Relic prize,
Without whose kind support he sinks and dies.
Where Orellana's Sea-like Waters lave l
The steepy Banks with a resounding Wave,
Or De-la-plata's headlong Floodgates roar, m
Rolling fresh Oceans down each mouldring Shore;
Where no proud Bridge dares the wild River ride,
At a Cow's Tail the Indian stemms the Tide; n
Ferry'd without expense of Coin or Breath,
Safe, though but a hairs length 'twixt him and Death:
Safer than Damocles, when at the Board o
A single Hair sustained the shining Sword.
Ladys by the soft Magic of their Eyes,
Like Angels, wafting through the scattering Skys,
Weak prostrate Mortals dazzle and surprise.
From Head to Foot, their Charms, their Port and State,
A Cow's Tail to the life does imitate.
Have you e're seen a Nymph at some bright Hall,
In a Triumphant Masquerade or Ball,
Move soft and smooth like Gales of Western Wind,
Whilst her loose flowing Train sweeps far behind;
Even so, believed, the Cow's Tail dangles down,
Like supernumerary piece of Gown:
The Ancients or Historians Lies have told,
p Pure Carrots called pure Threads of beaten Gold:
Though Goats Pulvilio's hardly ranker smell,
Nor any wrizzled Succubus of Hell:
But all which to our nicer World appear
^or Marks of Beauty, all concenter here;
The Tail's Complexion is a lovely Fair,
Shaded around with charming cole-black hair.
Now, Tail right Worshipful! I Will lead thee home,
As great as conquering Scipio entering Rome;
Thee to a place of rest I Will calmly bear,
Like Turkey Rams in a triumphant Carr. q
For such as faults with my Cow's Tail have found,
Here Is a fair Rump; -- Genteels! you 're welcome round*
Hur Cow shall now with any Cow compare;
Let any say hur Cow is hurs, that dare. r
NOTES.
(a) [Turn'd Bull, an horny and an hairy Jove.]
See the Tale of Jupiter' s transmogrifying his Divinity into a Bull for the
love of Europa, (...) every Post-dawber's in Town! -- but rarely described in
Lucian, in a Dialogue between Notus and Zephyrus. Quaere, in this case, as was
said in another of the fighting Bishop: If ^ Butcher had here sawcily knocked
down the Bull, what had become of the God-ship?

(b) [When beauteous Io was transformed to Cow.]
Related in the authentic Chronicle of Ovid^ Metamorphosis. -- The Chapter and
Vers^ you may find at your leisure.

(c) [Part of a grateful Hecatomb to thee.]
This -- Hecatomb is an hard Greek word, usually taken for a Sacrifice of an
hundred Oxen. -- But though mine be a Cow, every body will not see the Bull in the
case.

(d) [A Cynosure not half so long as mine.]
The Constellation called the little Bear, in Greek is Cynosura, which is in
plain English, Dogs-Tail.

(e) [Proclaiming open War with Accaron.]
The God of Flies, -- The same with Beelzebub in sacred, and Muyoides, and
Jupiter Apomuyus in Profane Authors. Vid. Cowley' s Annotations on Plagues of
Egypt, p. 82.

"And Accaron, the Aerie Prince, led on their various Host.
(f) [With his Tail's whisk he long-long Ranks o'rethrows,
That Creature is reported to have a prodigious force in his Tail, with which
he sweeps down whatever comes near.

(g) [The Turks, when they 'l their Enemies assail,
For a red Flag, hang out an Horse's Tail.]
This is a Custom common with them to the Tartar, and many other of those
barbarous Nations. If I misremember not, they deduce this Custom from their
great Ottoman, the top of the Oguzian Family.

(h) [ Apis is gone, nor can their Tears prevail,]


(i) [Yet they would not care, had ^e but left his Tail.
The Egyptians worshipping an Ox, is not orious; nay, that was one of their
Di majorum Gentium; their Saints and little sucking Gods, were Rats, Birds,
Cats; and Leeks, Onions, ( Welsh Deities.) But the manner of Devoti^on to their
Ox, under the name of Apis, Serapis, Isis, Osiris, -- made even that too as
extravagant as all the rest. Among other Perquisites necessary for the Election
of a new God, which was every year after they had drowned the old; one
indispensable was, -- Two peculiar Hairs, and no more, on the Tail; -- But why
no more, nor less, as Dr. Fuller says, the Devil knows. This too explains the
Verse following;

(k) [T'adore the sacred Tail with two white Hairs.]


(l, m) Ovellana, and Delaplata, Two famous Rivers in the Indys.

(n) [At a Cow's Tail the Indian stemms the Tide.]
Thus Peter Martyr in his Decads. -- He says, it is common with the Indians to
tie a Stick cross-ways at the Tail of a Cow, and seating themselves thereon,
drive her into the water; who being used to the sport, swins very faithfully
with the Cargo behind. -- If any doubt of the truth on it, it is but stepping
over for a day or two to the Indys, and they may be speedily satisfied.

(o) [Safer than Damocles, when at the Board,
A single Hair sustained the shining Sword.]
Damocles one of Dyonisius's Flatterers, admiring the Tyrant's felicity, was by
his order to taste what 'twas, adorned with the Royal Robes, and waited on as a
Prince; but for the sharp sauce with his sweet meat, when thus in all his
Grandezza, at Table, a naked Sword was hung over his Head, tied only by a Hair,
which soon spoiled his sport, and made him glad of liberty again.

(p) [Pure Carrots called pure Threads of beaten Gold.]
Yellow hair was accounted a great piece of Beauty, not only by the old Romans,
and that part of the World; but here in England too: Among other Receipts for
finifying the face, etc. in an old English Book, there is a way to make the Hair
yellow.

(q) [Like Turkey Rams in a Triumphant Carr.]
Mr. Sands and others that write of the Eastern Countries, describe a kind of
Sheep there, whose Tails weigh forty-pound a piece, and are always drawn after
'em by a little Cart.

(r) [ Let any say hur Cow is hurs, that dare.]
Alluding to a Story of a Welch-man who stole a Cow with a cut Tail, and
brou^ht it to Market, but artificially sewed on anther Tail; -- The owner sees
it at the Market, lo^ks wistly on it, and concludes, if it had not a Ta^l too
much, he durst swear 'twas his own: At this hur Welsh Plud draws hur Knife,
cuts the Tail off above the place where 'twas sowed on, throws the other piece
into the River, and bids him now own it if he dared.

The Liar.
FOR Naked Truth let others write,
And fairly prove that Black's not white;
Quarrel and scold, then scratch and bite,
Till They 're with Cuffing weary:
Give me a Lie, trickt neat and gay,
As fine as any Hedge in May!
Most think so too, although they 'll say,
Perhaps, the clean contrary.
The Courtier first is counted rude,
If he is with Lying unendu'd;
Nay, when he is in his Altitude,
He gives it Oaths for Clenching:
The brisk and young sour Truth despise,
And kick her back to the Old and Wise;
Wenching's the Gallant's Life, a Lye's
The very Life of Wenching.
Room for the Man of Parchment next,
Whose Comments so confound the Text,
And Truth's High-road so much perplexed,
One scarce can e're get at it;
With his own practice not content,
He 'll either quote, or he 'l invent,
He 'll find or make a President,
And gravely lie by Statute.
Next the poor Scholar laden comes
With packs of Sentences and Sums,
Scratches his Head, and bites his Thumbs,
For Truth is all his vigor;
Like Lynceus self, O who but he a
The Essences of things can see;
When he deceives but orderly,
And lies in Mood and Figure.
Who but the Poet ought to appear
In The end? who should bring up the Rear,
But he who without Wit or Fear
Lays on his Lies by Clusters?
Never of sneaking Truth afraid,
He Will her with open Arms invade,
And dreadful Armies in his Aid
Of his own Hero's musters.
Well, since on all sides it is confessed,
A quiet life must needs be best;
Who'd think it hard to purchase rest
By such a small complying?
Let him that will speak Truth for me!
Truth the worst Incivilitie!
I Would rather in the Fashion be,
Since all the World's for Lying.
NOTES.
(a) [Like Lynceus self, etc.
This Mr. Lynceus was, you must know, a mighty quick-sighted fellow; -- He
could see through Walls, Houses, -- and Ships at Sea, at the greatest distance,
and -- But that is enough already to believe at once.

On a Hat broke at Cudgels;
"And then like greasy Coraubeck,
"Pinned up behind -- no scabby Neck
To show Sr. -- ( The Ramble.)
NO silly Frog, nor Mouse, no Snake nor Gnat,
Hag-rides my Muse, it is an unlucky Hat,
Whose sudden Rise, and Fall I mean to tell:
O for a Dose of the Castalian Well, a
The Tunbridge of Olympus! well may I
My whistle wet, for sure the Subject's dry.
At School of Hat I Have made a Pitcher trim,
And sucked sweet Water from its greasy brim;
But though it ^ent ^o the Well so often before,
At last it is crac^'t, alas! and holds no more.
Of all the Coverings which have e're been found,
Or black, or blew, or green, or square, or round,
Crowns lined with Thorns, (with Reverence be it sed,)
Beavers with Wigg, a Felt with Logger-head;
High Cap of Maintenance, low Cap of Fool,
High Cardinals Cap, low Cover of Close-stool;
Little or great, broad, narrow, course or fine,
Never was such an unlucky Hat as mine.
When Mr. Haberdasher was content
For many a supple Cringe and Complement,
To trust me for it at Interest twelve per Cent.
From some good-natured Friend, I know not who,
I made a shift to wring an Hat-band too.
Now all that see me wondering round me stand,
Like Nunckle quite disguised in a clean Band.
As if to N. or M. I backwards came,
They on me stare, and ask me what is my name?
They dream I Am grown pileo don^tus, free b
From rusty Chains of lousy Poetry:
But all their kind surmizes were in vain;
Nature held fast, I soon grew Cat again. ^
A Cudgel splits the Brim, new Lights surprise
The sudden Breach, and blind my dazzled Eyes;
Then lest the Fissure should a mark be sed
Of Satan's cloven Foot upon a Poet's Head;
Some gentle Lad an't please ye! overkind,
Like Bully- Hec's, buttons it up behind.
Well, he deserved each angry Muses Curse,
For this but made the better side the worse.
'Twas tuckt so close, My Honor seemed to be
One of Quevedo's Knights of the Industry. d
Thus had you seen't, you might be bold to swear,
Armies of hungry Rats had feasted there.
Since Charity saves him from just Vengeance, all
My teen on the unlucky Hat must fall,
Whose Traytorous Ancestors by Kings command,
Were with the Cardinals exiled the Land. e
Those golden days, those happy days of Yore,
When honest Caps the brightest Courtier wore,
May they come in again, and quite displace,
With luckier Omens, all thy luckless race.
May thou, if that be possible, sink down
Below the Scandal of a Poet's Crown,
In Healths toss't up, pawned e're the Reckning's paid*
Then in the Kennel by thy Master laid:
Then cried about with an old Coat or Shoe,
Be ever traveling, like the wandering Jew! f
Nor will I ever call thee back again,
Till Poets are made Lords, or Aldermen.
NOTES.
(a) [O for a Dose of the Castalian Well!]
In Poetical Jargon this is only a Variation of Helicon; but the downright
meaning is, -- a Glass of good Canary.

(b) [They dream I Am grown pileo donatus.]
To give the Slave liberty of wearing a Hat, was either a Token or Formality of
his Freedom.

(c) [Nature held fast, I soon grew Cat again.]
Alluding to the Fable of the Cat turned into a Woman, who running even then
after Mice, was again returned to the place from whence she came.

(d) [One of Quevedo's Knights of the Industry.]
In Quevedo's [Buscon,] or a kind of a Spanish Rogue, he has a pleasant
description of a Fraternity who honored another with the most Noble order of
Knights of the Industry. Among other fancies this was one; -- They buttoned
their Hats of one side, only because the Rats had eat away all that Brim.

(e) [Werewith the Cardinals exiled the Land.]
In King Henry eighth's time, either an Order, or an Act was made, that none
should presume, what ever figure he bare, to wear any Hat, but only woollen
Caps then all in use.

(f) [Be ever Traveling like the Wandering Jew.]
This wandering Jew, (if there be any Truth in Ballads, as I hope none that
reads this questistion) ever since the Death of Christ has been trotting round
the World: For fuller satisfaction consult the Penny Chronicle of his Life.

A Covetous old Fellow having taken occasion to hang himself a little; another
comes in, in the nick, and cuts him down; but instead of Thanking him for his
Life, he accuses him for spoiling the Rope.
YOu Dog! y' have spoiled my Rope! 'twas strong, and tight,
And cost I Am sure a Groat but to'ther Night;
A good substantial Rope to give its Due,
'Twould hold an hundred heavier Rogues than You.
I Will swear the Peace! I stood in fear of my Life;
He vi and armis came; he brought a Knife;
With which, though I for certain cannot know it,
I doubt the Villain meant to cut my Throat.
How e're he spoiled my Goods, the best I had,
He cut my Rope IN me sure, and that is as bad;
I Will trounce the Rogue; I Will try from Court to Court,
If there be any Law in England for it:
Must such an Arbitrary Cur as he,
Divest one of ones Right, and Property?
No -- if the Judge such tricks as these allows,
A Man shall not hang himself in his own House:
And who dreads not such presidents as that?
Nay, it is in vain! I Will never referr't, That Is flat.
When sweetly dangling 'twixt the Earth and Sky,
I was rappt up in Hempen-Extasie;
(Which all who viewed my lovely Snowt might know,)
When all my dreggs of Man were dropped below:
The envious wretch dragged back my Stareing Soul,
Just clambring up against the steepy Pole,
And when with Liberty grown free and Wild,
Chained it to a Corpse, (an't please ye!) all defiled,
What Soul alive for both the Indys riches,
Would e're descend to such a pair of Breeches?
Lets hang him up for saving me, and then
If e're I cut him down, e'ne hang me up again!
(a) On a Supper of a Stinking Ducks.
COme all you brisk Lads that have ever been seen,
At the place that you wot of hight* -- Clerken-well-Green!
b First of all Merry Mac come and taste our good cheer,
For our Hearts will all vibrate thy Lyricks to hear.
One and all run and Saddle your Cane, or your Beast,
And hasten full speed to the bountiful Feast!
In powerful Gambado's, or finical Boot;
In a thrid-bare old Cloak, or a new Sur le tout!
Or flaming with Fringe, or meek Kid on your Hand,
With blustering Cravat, or reverent Band!
Both peaceable Hazle, and Kill-devil Steel,
Both Tory-Bamboo, and Fanatick-Brazeel!
c Remember Batts Axiom, your Curtlass prepare!
Whet Stomachs, and Knives! Here Is a Bill of the Fare;
Here Is Duck upon Duck, for no more you must look;
If you 'll have any more you must go to the Cook.
I tell you the Truth, and I tell you no lie!
They shine and 'twere Butter, or Stars in the Sky:
Zich glorry-vatt Ducks but zildom are zean,
d Whore should they be bore but about Taunton-Dean.
If they stink Mrs. Muse your nice Nose you may hold!
Disparage 'em not for They 're bought, and They 're sold;
e Consider as cheap of the Poulter they had 'em,
As e're of the Higler -- (the Servant!) etc.
Here Dick, Black -- Bess for thy absence should frown,
f Look over thy Shoulder, and 'tweak off their Down:
But prithee deal gently, for 'twould be no Wonder,
They 're so soft, and so young, if they fall all-asunder.
It Is true I confess, if my Nostrils can tell,
They send out a kind of a Civity smell:
Yet more then a Bustard the Poulter might prize one
Like them, for their flavor like pasty Venizon*
Some will say they 've a whiff like a Wormeaten Bitch,
g Or a Tartar R^goo, ready dresst in a Ditch:
h Or a cleanly blue-Pig -- but never keck honest fellow!
For They 're wholesome enough, though a little too mellow.
i They 're black, but where Indians do paint the De'el White,
That color be sure's most heavenly sight:
k They dropped from the Moon out of Breath, and the Thumps
Which they took on the Ground have discolored their Rumps.
l Cozen John! 't had been better if y' had not been so fickle,
But in our Garden-Cellar had laid 'em in pickle*
Though the Cook says They 're sweet, I Will venture engage her,
That the Ducks should have stunk with the T -- 's for a Wager.
Pothecary's Bills have full often half broke us,
m With chargeable Vomits of Cardu^s and Crocus:
When these Ducks from the Bum-gut to Keckhorn would draw,
And like a Turned -- Pudding-bag empty the Maw;
O Spirits of Armpits, and Essence of Toes!
O Hogo of Ulcers, and Hospital Nose!
O Devils Dung fragant, and tarrifi'd feather,
With Snuff, and with Carrion, Ana, jumbled together!
n O Jelly of Toads! India's hasty-Pudding!
O Playsters of Issues champt down of the sudden!
With fat blubby Pease, that are grimy all over,
Thick buttered with delicate matter and Gore!
Well! If these you survive, I Will believe it is no Fable,
o That Indians gut Adders, and bring 'em to Table:
But after, if your Pest' lent^Breath sally on us,
We 'll get to the Windward, or Mercy upon us!
p Hoyst 'em up with a Rope at the Fire! it is no matter,
Though they drop in the dripping, and crawl in the Platter;
So does the sweet Phaenix on Frankincense-Faggot,
q Sit roasting her self till she turn to a Maggot.
NOTES.
(a) [On a Supper of a Stinking Ducks.]
The story thus -- At a Clubb of Younkers, after a Frost a couple of Wild-Ducks
were bought. A thaw coming the day after, these having before been frozen hard,
fell in, appeared all black, and stunk most harmoniously -- yet, that nothing
good might be wasted, the Purchasers dress't 'em, and eat the first pretty
nimbly, not staying to taste it; but by that time, C^lon being a little
pacified, advancing to the second, it drove 'em all off, and was given a decent
burial at last in the Boghouse.

(b) [First of all Merry Mac come and taste our good cheer!]
The name of one Gentleman belonging to the Club, old excellent at Lyric verse,
which you may learn from the next line.

(c) [Remember Bats Axiom, etc.
In the ingenious Dr. Bat upon Bat -- it is thus --

"It is a Law that holds with Saint, and Sinner,
"That he that has no Knife should have no Dinner.
(d) [ Whore should they be bore but about Taunton-Dean.]
The Ducks were caught in a decoy-pond in Sommerset-shire, and that Country
having, it is probable their Bellys, or Noses full of 'em, were transported to
London for Sale.

(e) [Consider as cheap of the Poulter they had 'em,
As e're of the Higler -- (the Servant,) etc.]
Here is certainly some mistake in the Copy, and something or other is wanting
to Rhyme to [Had 'em] which the Reader is desired, (if he can) to correct with
his Pen.

(f) [Look over thy Shoulder, and ^tweak off their Down.]
For had he looked foreright his Nose had been so egregiously affronted there
could be no enduring it.

(g) A Tartar Ragoo, ready dress't in a Ditch.]
A Dead Horse, on which, after 't has been airing in a Ditch for a Fortnight,
or a Month, the Tartars will revel, as if 'twere the fattest old Barren Do in
Christendom.

(h) [Or a cleanly Blew-Pig.]
For satisfaction in that Story consult the Poem concerning it!

(i) [They 're black, but where Negro's do paint the De'el White.]
A humor of theirs notorious, of whom the Poet -- "Who, in contempt, will
paint the Devil White:
Though by his leave and mine too, whatever they think of White Devils, or White
Men, it is certain they are old Dogs at White-Women, who, for some certain
Reasons, (such as made Apuleius gracious) best known to themselves, are not
behind hand in Loving them, perhaps because their Complexions differ.

(k) [They dropped from the Moon out of Breath.]
It Is the opinion of some Learned men, (too great and grave to be affronted
with seeing their Names here) That Wild-fowl, Storks, Woodcocks, etc. fly away
at the Winters end to the Moon, or some Islands in the Air near it; and thence
at Winter return again. Who knows what may be?

(l) [ Cozen John, 't had been better, etc. --
Garden-Cellar had laid 'em in pickle.]
One of the Company, sometimes known by that Name, was at first for giving 'em
their Nunc dimittis into Boghouse.

(m) [With chargeable Vomits of Carduus, and Crocus.]
I thought I should catch you napping, cries Mr. Critic, (or he may if he
will) how long has Carduus-posset been so wonderful chargable? Ans. 1. If not
chargeable Simpliciter, it is Secundum quid -- There Is a Pothecary's large bill,
and Paracelsian Conscience in the Case. Is that Insufficient -- why have at
another of 'em -- It Is true in sensu composito, though not diviso, as the learned
have it -- thus though one alone be n't dear, both together may. If neither of
all this pother will satisfy, why I can easily stop your Mouth with Bays's
answer, which if thought on sooner might have saved all this.

Why it is Sir -- because Sir -- why what is that to you Sir? Rehearsal.

(n) [O Jelly of Toads! India's hasty-Pudding.]
It Is their custom to get a great Iar, and among other Ingredients, as Wine,
Chamber-pots, Tobacco, Spittle, they clap in three or four good sizeable Toads
-- this stopped up till all is dissolved, is their very Nectar, with which they
'l be as drunk as a Prince -- a Beggar -- a Tinker -- a Wheel-barrow, or David's
Sow. -- It Is no Fable, but credibly related by most that write of 'em -- as
Baratti's Travels, Gages Travels, etc.

(o) [That Indians gut Adders, and bring 'em to Table.]
Snakes are a Princely Dish in those Countries.

(p) [Hoist 'em up with a Rope at the Fire!]
They were roasted in a String.

(q) [Sit Roasting her self till she turn to a Maggot.]
In the Fable of the Phaenix, it is reported, that after the old one is burnt, a
Worm first comes out of its Ashes, and so -- and so -- and so.

To the Laud and Praise of a Shock Bitch.
a LEt lofty Greek and Latin go,
And Priscian cracked from top to Toe,
Since he at School full often so Misused us;
From High and mighty Lines I fall,
At powerful Shock's imperious Call,
And now in downright Doggrel crawl My Muse does.
Though my froze Hogs-head e'ne is burst, b
I Will do what none before e're durst,
And on her Praises make the first Adventure;
O for some Album-Graecum now!
'Twould clear my musty pipes I trow;
Then would I yelp as loud as thou, c
Old Stentor!
Come hither Shock; I Will never complain,
Nor kick thee from my Lap again,
Though other Lips thy Mouth so dainty touches;
Give me one Buss, I Will prize thee more
Than tinsil'd Lord does brazen Whore;
Or then -- or then -- or then -- or then^ Nobody.
Let lousy Poets sit and chat
Of Money, and they know not what!
Of Love, and Honor, and all that So silly!
Let Play-house-Hero's live or die,
Or spew, or stink, or swear, or lie,
To court the Glance of one bright Eye From Philly!
Let the entranced loving Ass
A Picture woo, and buss the Glass,
Covering his Mistresses surpassing Beauty!
Then steal from Cowley, or from Don,
(Since none will miss 'em when They 're gone)
Two hundred thousand Stanza's on d
Her Shoo-ty!
All other Fairs avaunt, avaunt,
For Shock's sweet praise my Muse must chaunt,
And sweat, (ah, would she would!) in Rant e Extatic.
It Is Shock alone is my desire,
She does my addled pate inspire,
As much as any Muse, with Fire Poetic.
View every Limb in every part,
From Head to Tail, from Rump to Heart,
You 'll find she not one Pin from Art Has gotten;
When Courtly Dames so gaudy, though
They dress their mouths in pimlico,
A Dog will not touch 'em, they are so Ripe-rotten.
Muse, what do you mean? what Flesh can stay,
And dive in Helicon to day,
Or swim in any Streams but Aqua-vitae?
Put up your Pipes, to dinner go,
Whilst I dismiss the Guests below:
You 're welcome Gentlemen! and so, Good-buy-t'y'e!
NOTES.
(a) [Let lofty Greek and Latin go.]
And here let me tell ye, is a fair occasion to give you to understand the
Author has a smatch of Latin Verses too -- for some were made before these
English on the same Subject: But for fear of clapping in a false Concord or
Position, or so, (the very thoughts whereof will be dreadful, as long as I can
unbutton my Breeches) I think e'ne best as it is.

(b) [Tho' my froze Hogs-head en'e is burst]
See the Academy de'l Cimento, and others, about the Nature of freezing, which
rarifies and dilates, not condenses or lessens the Water. Thus a Vessel stopped
close, with no vent, when frozen, if precisely full, will bu^st out the Hoops
for Enlargement.

-- 'Twas in the middle of the great frost these were wrote.

(c) [Then would I yelp as loud as thou, Old Stentor!]
Stentor was a kind of a City Crier in Homer, -- A speaking Trumpet was but a
Bagpip^ to him, (for all by their Names they should be Cousins) he would lift
up his voice just a^ loud as fifty men, not one more, nor one less.

(d) [Two hundred thousand Stanza's on Her Shoe-ty.]
Just so many in Quevedo's Buscon, the Poet makes on a Pin dropped from his
Mistress's Sleeve -- I think sincerely a greater Maggot than all nine put
together.

(e) [And sweat, (ah would she would) in rant Extatic.]
Once more, lest you should forget it, 'twas very cold weather when this was on
the Anvile.

An ELEGY
On the untimely and much lamented Death of Poor Spot, as loving a Bitch as
ever went upon two Legs, who departed this Life, An. 1684.
O Spot! how dull a Dog am I,
That cannot for thy Murder cry,
Nor whimper?
Though thou full often on thankless me,
Now from the ground, now from my knee
Did simper.
How e're, accept this grateful Verse,
To pin on thy untimely Hearse
Provided.
Even so Renowned Bat of old, a
A poor good-natured Hound condol'd, b
As I did.
Tell me, O tell me, you that know,
How Spot the higher Powers so
Offended?
What was the pretty Traytor's Crime,
That her fair Days in Beauty's prime
Were ended?
She, ever vigilant and brisk,
Her nimble Tail around would whisk,
Like Fan. Sr.
With Vmph she never went away,
But, by her mumping mean'd to say
Anan Sr.
She was not ugly, rank, nor old;
Though she never sung, she was no Scold
Uncivil:
Sweet-Hearts she had, Him, Him, and Him,
O Envy! Envy! O thou Limb
O the Devil!
With Mouth and Tail, come when you will,
She smiled, and would endeavor still
To please ye;
Although it is true, she was not Fair,
Her Cheeks never shined, her Muzzle never
Was greasy.
One fault alone in her we find;
Were she not pleased, she must be kind
To Neighbors;
Which brought poor Tray to a sad pass, c
When he, to please the Lovesick Lass*
O're-labours.
Well, gone she is, and who can helped?
Ah! gone she is before she whelpt;
Ah cruel!
Let none at too just Sorrows scoff,
Now cross-grained Fate has robbed us of
Our Jewel!
But since poor Spot must go and buss
For our brisk Lord, old Cerberus d
So musty;
Come Lads, let us bid her all adieu,
And own never died a Bitch more true,
And trusty!
Go Spot, to the Elysian Plain,
Go Spot, and meet thy Tray again
Far kinder!
What though Erynnis on thee scowl,
And make her Snakes about thee howl?
Never mind her.
There Spot, be ever brisk and gay;
There thou, without the Bans forbid, thy Tray
May marry;
In Fields gilt over with many a Flower,
In Walks as fine as those of our
King Harry.
NOTES.
(a) (Even so renowned Bat of old,)
Bat Kempster of eternal memory, -- who has in like manner -- (as Sternhold
says) immortalized the memory of Captain Narbourn's Dog, which now must live as
long as Bat in spite of Envy.

(b) (A poor good-natured Hound condol'd.)
Good-natured, because, -- because, -- It Is but looking in the Book, and you
'll know all better than I can tell you.

(c) (Which brought poor Tray to a sad pass,
When he to please the Lovesick Lass, O'relabours.)
Tray was one of Madam Spot's most obsequious and most humble Servants, but by
being too complaisant and obliging, had almost killed himself. This is no Tale,
but a sad Truth, -- Ask all the Neighbors else.

(d) (For our brisk Lord, old Cerberus.)
My Lord was Tray's Successor: of him see more, and Spot too, in the (Carmen
Cynegeticon.)

A Box made like an Egg, was between Jest and Earnest, between Stolen and
Borrowed; but at last, (see the Honesty!) after a Year's Possession, restored
with this in the Belly on it.
AS an Egg is Full of Meat,
So, in sooth, am I of Sorrow,
That your Box so fine, so neat,
I without your leave should borrow.
Now I sigh, and now I groan,
Over and over the Crime repented;
Moan and sob, and sob and Moan,
To my very Gu^s tormented.
How did I in Doggrel Rhymes,
Mind my fault, and wail and grieve it?
Should I tell you twenty times,
Never the sooner you would believe it.
But since your Box has, fie upon it!
Brought me to so much Confusion;
To the lawful Owner on it
Thus I make a Restitution.
Down to Dinner now they call,
Gizzard now begins to grumble;
Pray my Service unto all,
So I rest,
Your Servant Humble, etc.

The Beggar and Poet.
HAppy the Man who free from Care and Strife, ^
With Dog and Bell gropes through the Road of Life!
Beggar at large, without o^ Fear, or Shame,
He Will all the World his Benefactors name.
He, like the famous ancient Scythian Race, b
Shifts not himself as often as his place.
Tired with the pillage of one fruitful Plain,
He and his Cattle soon decamp again:
He with a proud Repulse when warmly vexed,
Throws you a hearty Curse, and tries the next.
No long Harangues to squeeze the stubborn Pence,
No Oratorical Impertinence,
Nor grateful murdering both of Truth and Sense.
He Will in two Lines compendiously impart
The System of his truly Liberal Art;
Pray Sir, the Gift: And when the Farthings stir,
I hope you 'll never live to want it Sir!
When Beadle Death does him at last attend,
Let him go where he will, in this he is sure to mend:
Death kindly Land and House provides him, more
Besides the Cage, than e're he had before.
Thrice miserable they whom want and Fate
Eternal Mumpers made at Learning's Gate:
Their Souls indeed they cram with notions high,
But let poor Colon live by Sympathy:
To Honorable Beggars they give place,
Lean younger Brothers of the lousy Race.
NOTES.
(a) (The Beggar, and Poet.)
I confess I cannot very well get clear of a Tautology in this place: But for
the defense of my Title; though many will tell me it is some kin to Idem per Idem,
and that Beggar and Poet are the stark-self-same-specifical-numerical thing:
Yet let 'em consider 'em as I do, ( sub diversos formales conceptus) as the
Learned have it; and then all is well again.

(b) (He, like the famous ancient Scythian race,
Shifts not himself as often as his Place.
The manner of living practiced by the old Nomades, and the Tartars, their now
Successors, is much alike, if not the same: In olden times they used to remove
Bag and Baggage from Post to Pillar, as often as the Pasture was eaten by their
Retinue. Some of the Fathers that have traveled into Tartary of late Years to
make one Pro^elite, give just the same description of their Manners. -- See
Hackluit's Voyages.

Plures aluit Aristoteles quam Alexander.
a THe Great Grecian Robber of his Household was careless,
Compared to his bountiful Tutor old Arles,
Whose Barns, it is no wonder, grow fatter and faster
Than his, since their Diet was Meat for his Master.
b An hungry starved Army over Deserts and Stones,
This lead till he fought 'em to nothing but Bones.
But far more are the Slaves whom his Tutor does fetter;
And you 'll see by and by how he feeds 'em far better.
Like Tantalus, One his poor Soldiers did mock,
And fed 'em with nothing but a Bit and a Knock:
Sure they leapt at a Crust, since to frighten poor Strangers,
c He built up their Cupboards as high as their Mangers.
Tho it is true, they as well as their Captain did fare;
He forsooth was a God, and could live upon Air!
When his Army's all mortal, and poor hungry Sinners,
Must eat up their Foes if they 'll get any Dinners.
A hunting lean Glory through the World he does roam,
While the subtle Philosopher batters at home;
d Nor had all his Soldiers, though they escaped from the Faggot,
One Mouthful of Flesh to oblige a poor Maggot.
But Learning, though Envy unjustly does charge her,
Crams all her coop^ Household, though a thousand times larger:
He could not afford all his Army one Suttler,
She makes the fat Stagyrite both her Cook, and her Butler.
See what a large Drove, which his Power confesses,
Humbly ga^e at his Hatch for Commons and Messes!
He kindly provides gaudy-dayes all the year,
And this is a Bill of their prodigal Cheer.
e A Scholar's light Egg picked as clean as a bone,
f Or a worse than a Scholar's, a Logical one:
Chymerical Pullets, digested too soon,
g Dressed at his own^Fire by the Man in the Moon.
Such Dishes as these, it is confessed, are designed
For Stomachs abstracted, and Palates refined.
For your poor duller Mortal other Provenders found,
And Coquu^, if he is able, will please 'em all round.
Broth which for mere Element one may mistake,
It Is smaller than Tiff, and as lean as a Rake;
So pure, and so clear, that 'twould Crystal disgrace,
If you heave't to your Nose, you may see all your Face.
When at last the whole Hogs-head of Porridge is over,
And Colon still swears and grumbles for more,
Sometimes you have a Commons, and sometimes you have none,
The fat greafie Flap, o^ the Prentice's bone.
When they have served out their time, and at last are got free,
Their Table advances, as does their Degree:
There Is Pudding, and Pudding, and Pudding, and then
h Like Aesop's Tongues, Pudding, and Pudding again.
Let no man then envy the Schollar's renown,
Since ^ewer are fed by the Sword, than the Gown;
Since the more They 're the merrier, as ever they were,
(Though the less there be of 'em, the better (they fare.
NOTES.
Plures aluit Aristoteles quam Alexander. In plain, sober, earnest English, [
Aristotle feeds more than Alexander.] Which is to be proved.

(a) (The Great Grecian Robber, etc.)
So called from the Story of the Pyrate, who being taken by Alexander's
Captains, and brought and accused before him, answered, undauntedly, that
Alexander was the greater Thief of the two, who robbed with whole Armies, when
he himself only with two little Ships.

(b) (An hunger-starved Army over Deserts and Stones,
This lead, etc.)
See Quintus Curtius's History. He lead 'em over vast Deserts to the Conquest
of the Indys.

(c) [He built up their Cupboards as high as their Mangers.]
When Alexander had conquered the Indys, at his departure he built Mangers for
his Horses as high as a man could reach, and other things proportionable, to
amuse posterity, and make 'em conceive a nobler Image of him and his Army:
though, as one says wittily, if his horses had eat no Oats* but out of those
Mangers, they would not have been very fit for Service; for such feeding would
soon have starved even Bucephalus himself.

(d) [Nor had all his Soldiers, though they escaped from the Faggot,]
The Funeral-pile; it being the Custom of the Ancients to burn, not bury their
Dead.

(e) [A Schollar's light Egg picked as clean as a bone,


(f) Or a worse than a Schollar's, a Logical one.]
Either the Egg made with the Scrapings of the Egg-shell, Bread and Butter,
etc. or that appointed to the Scholar, who proving two Eggs were three; -- One
and one's two, and one and two's three, -- had only the third allotted him for
his share.

(g) [Drest at his own Fire by the Man in the Moon.]
Aristotle's own Fire, (which since he found, he is like to keep) dreamt of in
Concavo Lunae.

(h) [Like Aesop's Tongues, Pudding, and Pudding again.]
Aesop feasted his Master with nothing but Tongues, when ordered to buy the
best and the worst of Meats.

(a) A King turned Thresher.
FArewell ye gay Bubbles, Fame, Glory, Renown!
Farewell you bright Thorns that are pinned to a Crown,
Your little Enchantments no more shall prevail;
Look, look where my Scepter is turned to a Flail!
O who can the Bliss of a Monarch discern,
Whose Subjects are Mice, and whose Palace (a Barn?
In spite of cursed Fortune he Kings it below,
While he looks all around him, and sees not a Foe.
The groans of the murdered in Death and Despair,
Never reach his calm Kingdom, but dye in the Air:
Fierce Battles roar on; but too weak is the voice,
For he threshes and threshes, and drowns all the Noise.
b The Soul of Domitian sunk into a Clod,
c Dyonisius his Scepter was as light as his Rod;
d And the Little-Great-Charles with his Shovel and Spade,
Dug a hole, and lay down in the Grave he had made.
But a thousand times brighter my Stars do appear,
And I never was a Monarch in earnest till here:
On a heap of fresh Straw I can laugh and lie down,
And pity the man that is condemned to a Crown.
No Armies of Frogs here croak by my Throne,
I can rise, I can walk, I can eat all alone:
Relieved from the Siege of importunate men,
I enjoy my Original Freedom again.
Scarce peeps out the Sun with a blushing young Ray,
e E're my brisk feathered Bell-man will tell me it is day;
Proud with his Serallio behind and before,
He cheerly triumphing, struts along by the Door.
Here Is an honest brown George which my Scrip does adorn,
Here Is a true Household Loaf of the hiew of my Corn;
Here Is a good Rammel-Cheese, but a little decayed,
As fat as the Cream out of which it was made.
f When Death shall cross Proverbs, and strike at my Heart,
When the best of my Flails is no fence for his Dart;
I Will open my Arms, not a Groan, not a Sigh,
Dropped soft on the Straw, with a smile I will dye.
NOTES.
(a) A King turning Thresher.
I think I may venture to pronounce this purely, a Maggot, and so others that
know no better may be apt to think too; but I can assure 'em the Foundation of
the Story is as infallibly true, as any in -- Lucian's true History.

(b) [The Soul of Domitian sunk into a Clod.]
When his Envy could not be sated on the Christians, he left the Empire in
Discontent, and retired to the Salonian Gardens, -- as Cowley^

(c) [ Dyonisius his Scepter was as light as his Rod.]
That Tyrant driven from his Kingdom, traveled into Greece, and set up
Schoolmaster; where his Cares are here affirmed as heavy as when a King.

(d) [And the Little-Great-Charles with his Shovel and Spade,
Dug a hole, and lay down in the Grave he had made.]
Charles the fifth Emperor of Germany, who after as great a Rufflle in the
World as has been made this several Centuries; after War, not only against most
of Europe, but Argi^rs, in Africa too; at last on some discon^ent, or the
unpleasing face of his business, resigned the Empire, and retired to a little
House and Gard^n, which he cultivated with his own hand, and there lived and
died.

(e) [E're my brisk feathered Bell-man will tell me it is day.]
Meaning Chaunticleer, -- as Gransire Chaucer has it; or in new English, no
better nor worse than a Cock, -- that Baron Tell-Clock of the Night, -- as
Cleveland christens him.

(f) [When Death shall cross Proverbs, and strike at my Heart,
When the best of my Flails is no fence for his Dart.]
The common old Proverb here mean^, is, that -- There Is no Fence against a
Flail.

On a Discourteous Damsel that called the Right Worshipful Author -- (an't
please ye!) Saucy Puppy.
A PANEGYRIC.
UGly! ill-natured! impudent, and proud!
Sluttish! nonsensical! and idly loud!
Thy Name's a ranker Scandal to my Pen,
Than all thy words could be spewed up again.
Yet will I do thy Vgliness the grace,
To touch thee, though I Am forced to turn my face;
Touch thee as Surgeon touches rotten sores,
Touch thee as Nur^es T --,or Beadles Whores.
Belch of a Toad whom Hell to Mortals sends,
a Vampt up from Bottle-Ale and Candles-ends.
Had thou no Dick with whom thou might be free,
Thus to let fly thy Whetstone-jeers on me?
What Skip-kennel without his eyes offense,
Taught thee all this Dog-and-bitch Eloquence?
b Thou for Doll-Troop, had ended Ragoo's strife,
He Would hvng'd, and never ventured such a Wife.
That thick deformity which daubs thy Snowt
Would make a Hell-soul'd Ravisher devout.
An Incubus from such a Face would flee;
'Twould baulk a Satyr more deformed than thee.
E'ne get a Mask, or with thy Visage daunted,
The Londoners will swear their Streets are haunted:
Below the Plague, below the Pox and Itch,
Take your own Farewell, You 're a saucy Bitch.
NOTES.
(a) [Vampt up from Bottle-Ale and Candles Ends.]
Not much more honorable than the Rehearsal's Parthenope. --

-- Whose Mother, Sir, sells Ale by the Town-Walls.

(b) [Thou for Doll-Troop had ended Ragoo's strife,
He Would hanged, and never ventured such a Wife.]
Monsieur Ragoo, an Officer in a Troop of Horse, having taken occasion to step
aside a plundering, was to be hanged a little: But however the chance turned,
he had choice given him, either to take a virtuous Lady called Doll Troop, to
be his Wedded Wife, or else to snickle up: after deep consideration upon the
case, and weighing the Circumstances, etc. he resolved to cast Lots; the Lay
was so even, to decide what himself could not do, and so got the worse end of
the staff, without Redemption to be all-to-be-marry'd.

On a CHEESE.
Pinguis and ingratae permeretur Caseus Urbi. Virg. A Pastoral.
AMoret and Strephon lay
On a Couch of downy Hay,
In the withered Age of Day:
Blessed that one the other sees,
Blessed with a spicy western Breeze,
a Blessed with a noble Rammel Cheese.
Each at to other darts their Eye;
Each at the glittering Treasure by.
A sight that Strephon's passion moves;
Scarce Amoret he better loves:
To Amoretta's Heart so near,
Strephon's self was scarce more dear:
Scarce the Pride of the blooming Vale,
Woven around her May Day Pail;
Nor could either prove ungrate
For such a Gift to smiling Fate:
Often with Vows and Flowers they ran
To smiling Fate, and smiling Pan;
Thus they pray, and thus they sing,
While all the answering Valleys ring.
Strephon. Sprinkle all the dappled Mead!
Round the Turfy Altars lead!
Every Nymph and Fawn invite
To laugh and revel here at Night!
Jolly Toasts shall never fail,
Quite drunk with nappy nut-brown Ale:
Here Is a Cheese would make a Feast
Where a King might be a Guest.

Amoretta. Stay my Strephon! it is in vain;
Too low and humble is your strain:
You the Gift must higher raise,
Or you 'll Satyr while you praise.
Let stiff Princes dream alone
On their steep unenvied Throne!
Our brighter Cheese out-shines their Crown,
And weighs the gilded Bauble down:
We'll a nobler Note begin;
Call and rouse the God within!
Sing the Cheese, and by his Aid,
Whence it came, and how 'twas made.

Strephon. Each Flower that e're in Garland grew,
Amoretta! move for you,
And every Herb that sipps the Dew;
Each their distant Influence join
To an Invention of Divine:
The Daisy's pretty twinkling Eye,
The Infant Violet blooming by;
Primrose of refreshing smell,
And the Cowslip's spotted Bell.
Fragrant Time, and newborn Grass,
Where no rude Feet did ever pass;
All their Essences combine
To an Invention so Divine:
Each of these transfused, agrees
First in Milk, and then in Cheese;
In the Cow's Alemby^* wrought,
Whence, when to perfection brought,
Amoretta's whiter hand
Springs of Nectar can command;
b Cataracts which often prevail
To overflow the largest Pail:
And when the laughing Virgins come
With their newfound Treasure home,
Amoretta shall declare
How the Miracle they rear.

Amoretta. Soft as Wool, and white as Lambs
Lickt by their Officious Dams;
White as those fair Lillies grow
In our Copps, -- as white as Snow,
Next the Creamy Curds arise,
And with calm Glories greet the Eyes:
He that sees 'em dawning, sees
The Image of an Embryo Cheese.
c So from Clay Prometheus can
Mould the mighty Form of Man:
So the rising Vision shows,
As when the World from Chaos rose.
Then it is bruised, and pressed till all
The pale Tears around it fall.
Thus when Jove intends to mould
A Hero out of purer Gold,
He Will shut him up in pain and Care,
And like Alcides, pinch him there;
'Till he by kind Afflictions trod,
Emerges, more than Half-a-God.

Strephon. Thence in happy Triumph born,
Like groaning Loads of Welcome Corn,
On a cleanly shelf it is placed,
With so rich a Burden graced;
Or, lest the Foes its Walls attacque,
On a well-munited Rack.
d Like Atlante's Palace fair,
Towering high in yielding Air,
By Ariosto built aloft,
All the Walls of costly Thought,
Or that sturdy Indian Rock
e Which Ammon's Son so long did mock;
There it reigns, and there defies
Feeble Hosts of Rats and Mice:
Up they squint, but all in vain,
Up they leap with fruitless pain,
Down they drop, a-down again.
Reynard so with longing Eyne
Views the Clustered laden Vine;
So when the Wolf a Fold has found,
Fenc't with Quick-set -- Turn-pikes round,
About he stalks, and grinns, and scowls,
About he stalks, and vainly howls.

Amoretta. f So the Titans hizzing f^ll,
When of old they dared rebel:
Olympus they on Ossa pack,
Both on Pelions craggy back;
And, against the Thunder hurled
Half his own dismantled World:
g On the calm Couch of golden peace,
In undisturbed eternal ease;
He scorns their Plots, and laughs above;
So sits my Cheese, and so sits Jove.

Strephon. This dear day the happy birth
Of Amoretta bless't the Earth;
All the Lads of Mirth and Song,
Over the Plains shall Dance along:
And he that best can sing each Grace,
In my Amoretta's face,
Shall have the present Jove has given,
h Shall have the Ancile dropped from Heaven.
This praised, this loved, this envied Cheese,
For a Reward shall all be his.

NOTES.
(a) [Bless't with a noble Rammel Cheese.]
( Rammel) is a word, I think not much used about London, but common in the
West, op^^sd to Skim-Cheese. Thus you find it pretty ^ften in Mr. Creeches
Theocritus.

(b) [Springs of Nectar can command.]
Honey soit qui male y pense.

(c) [So from Clay Prometheus can,
Mould the beauteous form of Man.]
Prometheus, being it is likely used to build Gae^les, and Dirt^pyes in his
Youth, when he came (...) Age, set up the Trade of a Man^founder, for (...)*
Jove was so ^angry (as well he might, (...) to 'ther took his work out of his
hands, without ever serving his time to the Trade) that, what do me he but
trusses him up, rive^s him on Mount Caucasus, and sent an unconscionable
Vulture to tear out the Heart of him. See more in Tobacco-pipe. Read the story
in Lucians Dialogues, Book 1. p. 48.

(d) [Like Atlante's Palace fair.]
A gaudy Magical Palace in Orlando Furioso, which cost Poet and Painter, and
at least Engraver, a great many fine strokes to express it. The Louvre, or
Escurial are but Hog-styes to it, as any body may be satisfied that will but
take the pains to compare 'em.

(e) [Or that sturdy Indian Rock,
Which Ammons Son so long did mock.]
A Fortress long besieged by Alexander, in Sagitiana, I think 'twas, but it is
good* to be sure, and therefore ask Quintius Curtius, who knows better than any
of us!

(f) [So the Titans hizzing fell.]
Qu. Pray Mr. Author why is your Shepherdess so learned here, and in other
places? how comes she to talk against decorum in Pastorals, and to fly upon the
high^ropes at this rate?

Answ. Because all things here are designed (...) be alike extravagant^ -- let
this serve once for all for I Will trouble my self no more about it!

(g) [On the calm Couch of golden peace.]
Any one may discern this is a stroke of Lucretius, alluding to that first
Principle of the Epicureans, so well expressed by that Poet, and so much better
made English by Mr. Creech -- thus. "For what so ere's divine must live in
peace,
"In undisturbed, and everlasting ease, etc.
I have forgot the rest, but you shall have it all as soon as I can get it my
self.

(h) Shall have the Ancile dropped from Heaven.]
The Ancile was a certain very holy Relic among the Romans, being the very
handiwork of Jupiter himself: but least this precious business should be stole
from the Temple, while Gods and Men were asleep, two more were made so exactly
like the right, and one another, that a Thief must have very good luck to be
able to distinguish the original from the counterfeit. In the safe keeping it,
they believed the Cities safety consisted.

A Full and True Account of a Journey with its Appurtenances.
a NOw Heavens jolly Carman left weeping and whining,
Scrubb'd up Sunday face, and fell fairly a shining;
The Cits are alive, and to -- they run,
As Flies from a Cow-turd will swarm in the Sun.
Spouse Rampant takes Arms, Coucht Cuckold she tells,
He must get her a place to go visit the Wells;
Not a Pothecaryes Wife that is leaving the Town,
But will pawn all her Glyster-pipes for a new Gown.
It Is the Devil that drives, and needs Travel they must;
A long comes the Coachman with Bring out your Dust!
So sweet is his Load, and so neat, and so pure,
Yo^'d swear he was under-commission'd in the Sewer.
Not a Fop of the Pit, or a Jilt of the Box,
b But dresses, and crawls to the Wells with a Pox;
So thoroughly the Waters have purg^d all the City,
c That They 're strangely reformed, and grown civil, and Witty.
Least the Dunns my poor Carcass to pieces should tare,
I^ll ene like my Betters take Sanctuary there;
For melting, or getting, or spunging a Penny,
As poor, and as dull, and as saucy as any.
But the walks were bepester'd with Cravat, and Fan,
And Beaver, and Wigg, and sometimes a Man:
For curing old Aches, and getting new pains;
For cooling and heating the blood and the reins.
Old Sol from Aurora's Alcove newly peeping,
While more than three Quarters lay grunting and sleeping:
When routed Cravat-string, and Ruffles I Would rallied,
From Dog-hole of Lodging one Morning I sallied,
I walked, and I strutted along like the rest,
And I thought hard of nothing as well as the best;
Till a Bevey of Ladys swum hastily by,
All finer than ^ippence, they dazz^'d my Eye.
I follow the Track, and the Vision pursue,
Meditation farewell, now the Game is in view:
Though I quickly got up they were entered before,
And cruelly shut the unmerciful Door.
Though my Eyes kept a Fast, yet my Ears I could treat,
And yours shall take part while the Tale I repeat*
But Madam, says one, while They 're chatting together,
If one may be so bold, pray what Wind blew you hither?
She replies, with a Sigh drawn up to her Chin,
It Is a weakness, Obstructions, and weakness within.
My Husband's as likely a Man as you 'll see,
A Man every Inch of him, take it from me!
Ay and I Will assure ye -- etc.
Nay! never despair, Madam, it is not too late:
Your changing of pasture may make you grow fat;
I speak by experience, stay here but a Little,
And I warn't you return as round as a Kettle.
No doubt on it, says one, but if ever she will,
She must take a good dose of a Soverain Pill,
That cured me -- Hold there says the next, I deny't to ye;
d I was helped by some drops of Specimen vitae.
They stirred, and I fled for my Ears, and my Eyes,
Since a noble Retreat with a Victory vyes!
I retired in spite of my Foes and my Fears,
And bravely brought off both my Eyes and my Ears.
Now Reader, by a Figure which Poets may use,
Pray suppose it is Evening! -- If you wont you may choose.
As Lasses and Lads do advance in Decorum,
When Crowder at Christmas hops squeaking before 'em;
So Tag-Rag, and Bob-tail to dancing do throng,
And the Flower of -- come flaming along.
Here a Hell-full of Hogo's comes driving just on us,
e Let Us get the wind side on it, or Mercy upon us;
A Plague's on the Green, and it newly arose
From -- Some-body's -- powerful Armpits and Toes.
Have a care of the Lad with his hair in his Hat,
As you value his anger touch not his Cravat!
Pray keep your distance, with Reverence stand,
If you ruffle his Ruffles, his Cane is at hand.
Sirrah Jack! rub my Shoes with the Napkin, with Care,
Your Master commands you, refuse if you dare:
Unmannerly Winds the sweet Curls to displace
Of so pretty, so lovely, so charming a Face!
But hang a good Face, that is a womanish toy,
Give me such a shape as this Lad does enjoy!
But speak not a word as you value your life,
Of his Buttocks and Shoulders, and the thing called his Wife!
If you love your own Ribs, stand further good Friends,
Room, Room for a Pudding tied up at both Ends!
Whose goodly large Belly struts crowding before him,
No less than a Lady behind does adore him.
Make much of him, Madam, and use him in haste,
Or quickly his Service alas will be past;
For if half an inch further his Paunch does but come,
f You must e'ne be content with the deaf and the dumb.
Here creeping and cringing to a thing of a Fortune,
That weighs fifteen thousand, stands hopeful young What-d'ye-call-him!
And e're he does live on the Land, it is but reason
If he take for Security Liv'ry and Seisin.
A Knighthood comes next with a finical face,
And a couple of Arms which he moves with that Grace,
That he thinks his deserts will have cursed ill hap,
If some Lady Fair don't fall in his Lap.
Now the sport is all over, all travel that can
To the place whence they came, with their Whore and their Man;
And I when my Guinys and Credit were spent
Sneakt home in the Crowd, like a Fool as I went.
NOTES.
(a) [Now Heavens jolly Carman left weeping and whining.]
The Journey was at the beginning of Summer, after a great Rain.

(b) [But dresses, and crawls to the Wells with a Pox.]
There Is many a true Word spoke in jest.

(c) [They 're strangely transformed, and grown civil, etc.]
Very good news, if it be'n't too good to be true.

(d) [I was helped by some drops of Specimen vitae.
The Dispensatory wherein that Cordial is to be found, is, -- 2 d part of the
Soldiers Fortune.

(e) [Let's get the Wind-side on it, or mercy upon us!]
In the Plague time, in London, people would tack about one another to get to
the Wind-ward, lest that should bring the Disease on them by the breath of any
infectious.

(f) [For it half-an-inch further his Paunch does but come.]
Some persons have been reported of that vast and irregular bigness, that they
have not been able with one part of their Body to relieve the other.

The Leather Bottle.
MR. Jove! though your Chittiface Ganymed skink,
I scorn to exchange or my Plate, or my drink;
For without fear or wit the Immortals will hector,
When out of thy Bole they are fuddled with Nectar.
Whatever your Cronys the Poets have spoke,
Your Godship, when here, were a notable Soak;
And when from your Gang you were spirited up,
a In the midst of the Stars you planted your Cup.
b As a Lady of Rome, in a great deal of State,
Produced all her brats for her Cupboard of Plate;
So if for the sight of my Treasures you call,
Here Is my dear Leather-bottle, my one and my all.
c Gigantic Borrachio's Sir Quixot did fright,
And maugre poor Squire, made an Ass of the Knight;
Had my Bottle been there, 'twould have been more compliant,
For he never could mistake such a Dwarf for a Giant.
My Vessel though little, dim Envy may see,
Is as neat and as pretty as pretty may be;
d When the Heidleburg Tun is an ill-contriv'd Sloven,
Though its Vent-hole's as big as the mouth of an Oven.
How cool and how sweet is the Liquor that is here,
e It dribbles down daintily, lively and clear!
Not Ice can preserve it as well from the weather,
Nor Water, nor Sand, as a Bottle of Leather.
f Oraculous Bottles inspired of old
Each worm-eaten Witch that Wonderments told:
g This Engine cursed Sycorax her self could subdue*
And this did a Viceroy out of Trincalo hew.
When the Sun does with Thirst the poor Hay-maker throttle,
And tann all their Faces till they look like the Bottle;
It Is this sets 'em right, it is as speedy and handy
As old Mother Midnight's kind Bottle of Brandy.
Let others plod on, till they are crazie and brainsick,
h For malleable Glasses, like the Consuls of Dantsick:
Let this fall where you will, all its thumps are in vain,
You may bulge it, and bulge it, and out with it again.
My Bottle besides is old Dog at Dispute,
And can Suarez, and Scotus, and Occham confute:
Nay, his own Couzin Bellarmin too must go down,
And if e're he get up, he will have him by'th' Crown.
When Semele in Lightning and Thunder did fry,
Jove feathered her Bastard, and sheathed it in's Thigh:
But no doubt but he thrived in that Climate far worse
Than if in a Bottle he had put him to Nurse.
Some Pigmy Diogenes here might retreat,
And make it his spacious and worshipful seat;
One Room of a Floor, for a Cellar he might spare it;
It Is needless, as well as a Chamber or Garret*
Like Maggot in Nutshel he might revel with glee,
And none be so happy, so happy as he:
Nor need he to fear that he there should be Foxed,
Tho he drank up at once both the Cellar and Hogs-head.
NOTES.
(a) [In the midst of the Stars you planted your Cup.]
A Constellation called the Cup.

(b) [As a Lady of Rome --
Produced all her Brats for her Plate.]
A famous Story -- When one Lady had shown the other all her Jewels and fine
things, she carries her home, and for her Jewels, shows her her Children.

(c) [Gigantic Borrachio's Sir Quixot did fright.]
See the Notes on the Soldiers Duel.

(d) [When the Heidleburg Tun, etc.]
The great Tun of Heidleburg, with a Ladder of many rounds to ascend it.

(e) [ It dribbles down daintily.]
I have taken care that should be set in other Characters, as a most
considerable Flower borrowed from my good friend John Bunnyan.

(f) [Oraculous Bottles inspired of old.]
The Spirit of Ob, Webster and his Followers say, was only a Bottle, etc.

(g) [This Engine cursed Sycorax her self could subdue,
And this did a Viceroy out of Trincalo hew.]
See the famous History of the Tempest, or the Enchanted Island, where this is
explained.

(h) For malleable Glasses, like the Consuls of Dantsick.]
It Is reported an ingenious Man had at Dantsick; (or somewhere there abouts,
te'n't much odds) a Glass which after he had drunk, he would throw on the
ground, bulge it, and hammer it out again.

(a) Out of Lucian's true History, Part the First.
b -- AND now on a fair starlight Noon
Our Ship launched off, and gently left the Moon.
c So stoops the Sun to kiss his watery Fair,
And with bright Footsteps paints the ambient Air.
Boreas had locked his Bullys in their Cave,
d And Birds of calm brood over the marble wave.
But ah! how treacherous are the smiles of Fate!
How slippery treads the blessed and fortunate!
Twice the kind Sun had warmed the cheerful Skys,
Nor does less bright the third black day arise.
All dreadful bright it rose, the Air was spread
Far, far around with ominous gloomy Red.
Sad hollow Voices by the Pilot past,
e And one pale Light glar'd over the trembling Mast.
When such dark Bodings called for Aid Divine,
f We vowed a Bull on Neptune's oozy Shrine:
Though Fa^e was cross, yet he so far did hear,
We were no longer rackt with doubtful fear. For see!
Whole Herds of Whales make the white Ocean roar,
New Seas they spout, and drive new Seas before.
The Tide they brought had washed us far away,
But one Leviathan's Charibdis made us stay.
He, like some Tyrant- Gudgeon, floated by
Amidst the little Minews trembling Fry:
Like Lacquys by with finny feet they ran,
Lean Poets all the rest, he some fat Alderman.
And when the vast Abyss around him curled,
They seemed but Mountains, he alone a World:
We took his Latitude when sailing in,
g Full fifteen hundred Leagues from Fin to Fin:
His dreadful Iaws, for our destruction bent,
Had Teeth, each larger than the Monument,
And sharp as Needles near in Crooked-Lane,
h Set on some Diamond Island of the Main:
And now there is not so much as room for Prayer,
The last sad refuge of the Mariner.
These, O my Wife, these, O my Children cry!
Then all shake hands, and drink, and bid Good-b'w'y'!
Here, had we been with such Provision stored,
i We should have thrown some Hogs-heads overboard:
k But here though we had robbed the Moon and Sun,
An hundred Delos's had hardly done:
The Monster gapes, unfinisht shrieks begin;
We sink, we sink, his Whirl-pool rolls us in!
Oceans are after Oceans on us hurled,
We shoot the Gulf, and down we sail to view the under World.
NOTES.
(a) Part of Lucian's true History.
It Is paraphrastically done; tho I dare undertake, the Original is followed (at
least) as close by the Transverser, as Truth by the Author.

(b) [ -- And now, on a fair starlight Noon.]
Lucian and the Ships Crew had taken a Voyage to the Land in the Moon, (without
the help either of Domingo's feathery, or others Crystal or Brazen Chariot, or
so much as the French Smith's Wings;) and after many strange Adventures met
with (you need not question) in so strange a place, is now just bound for Earth
and Sea again.

(c) [So stoops the Sun to kiss his watery Fair.]
Apollo's pretty Hostess, whom he uses a-nights to call in to; -- But they are
both very civil persons, and certainly mean no manner of harm in the World. --
I forgot to tell you her Name is Thetis.

(d) [And Birds of calm brood over the Marble wave.]
These are a kind of Creatures the Poets have had the happiness to discover, as
Harpys, Chymaera's, etc. when all the other less inquisitive, or less lucky
part of the World know nothing of 'em. They are said to brood on the Sea at a
set time in the year; and Neptune while they are hatching, is so complaisant to
give 'em all fair weather. If any would see any more of 'em let 'em enquire at
Lucian's true History, Second Part, and they shall know farther.

(e) [And one pale light glar'd over the trembling Mast.]
Two Lights appearing on the Ship in a storm, are counted good Omens, one
single, bad.

(f) [We vowed a Bull on Neptune's oozy Shrine.]
As common an Offering to Neptune of old, as now a wax Candle to-my Lady of
Loretto.

(g) [Full fifteen hundred Leagues from Fin to Fin.]
I quote my Author: I have it from Lucian himself; and we must say of him here,
as he a little before of Aristophanes, [that he speaks like a learned Man, and
would not tell a lie for all the World.]

(h) [ Set on some Diamond Island of the Main.]
One of those Phaery Islands the Whale might know, though we don't.

(i) [We should have thrown some Hogs-heads overboard.]
As is the Custom for Mariners when a Whale is near.

(k) [But here, though we had robbed the Moon and Sun.]
Delos being their Free-land, settled in the Sea on purpose for the Birthplace
of Apollo and Diana.

An Elegant Letter, with a Copy of fine Verses by a London Wit, in answer to a
Lampoon.
Right Reverend Knawpost,
YOur Prodigious Chaos of Nonsense (composed, and wright by the Spawn of a
Moabite) I received, and am satisfied, that the Latitude of your Troble exceeds
the Demensions of mine, or you need not have given your self so much
unnecessary labor to prove your self an inconsiderable Coxcomb. The perusal of
your Satirical Rhetorical Lines made me admire to see so excellent a parrable
[1] in your Parts and Person; for as your Person is monstrous without the Aid
and Assistance of modeish Accouterments, (were your Nose and Chinn an inch
shorter) so is there such a Chimaew [2] in your Disposition, that without the
assistance of good Literature, the sense of your heroic Lines had rendered your
Ape-ship more rediculous then an Ass. Thus admireing the work of Nature, which
has created your Face so much like a Sunn-Dial, that were it equally divided
into twelve parts, and as truly seated toward the South point, as you^
Affections are toward your Mistress; the shade of your Nose would certainly,
when the Sunn shines, descover the true time of the Day.

So I rest, Your Servant.


So much for the Epistle; the Poem follows, (so much of it as the ill-natured
Mice have left legible.)

How does the learned Critic stand,
Pensive and mad, with Pen in hand,
Fraighted with store of amorous Wares,
Which many an Author owns for theirs!
He is a Fool that thinks it good
To laugh at all that is made of Wood; [3]
And eke in time may lifted be
Unto the fatal wooden Tree.
In the Spark's Letter observe, it is spelled in the same manner that 'ti^
printed: For the word marked with the figure [1] and wrote [parrable,] I
suppose he would have said [parallel;] and figure [2.] for Chimaew, -- he means
either Chymaera, or nothing at all. In his Verses, fig. [3.] -- That Is made of
Wood,] For this block of a Lover, Poet, Scrivener, etc. was by Occupation a
Ioyner, or some such wooden Trade, of which he had a touch in a former Lampoon.
In answer to his Letter he had this following.

An Answer to the Ioyner's smart Letter.
Why Lad!
HOw now Lad! witty these cold mornings! It Is well if this don't prognosticate
some Plague; for certainly a Comet is n't half so prodigious. But indeed,
Friend Thomas, it terrifies the Coccles of my Heart, lest thou should at
this rate run out in a little time longer thy Right Reverend Master, and Right
Worshipful Self with Charges to Scrivener and Schoolboy. I think thou'st
clawed it off Lad! and the Mallet of thy Invention joined with the peaceable
Chizzel of thy pestilent Wit, has for once obtunded the Cerebrocity of every
saucy Rogue of a Rival. In good sober sadness there is Nonsense enough to persuade
one it came all, every bit and scrap, and Chip of it out of thy n'own dear
Noddle; but that, as the black old Gentleman, thy Friend, would have it, who
owed thee a spite for once in thy life courting virtuous Women, it is writ and
spelt at such a rate, none but such an incorrigible Blockhead could ever
blunder on. -- But who can helped? We must e'ne take it for better for worse,
seeing there is no Remedy; and therefore, -- Here Is to ye again! alas poor Thing!
Is your queasie Gu^ surfeited with all the Tripe-women, Kitchin-stuff-wenches,
Hogs-feet -- Butter-Whores and Scullions in our Street, that you have all so
sudden such a muckle mind to what is meat for your Masters. 'Twould be worth the
while now to launch out into the due Applause of thy portly paunch and person,
but only thy sweet Face, my joy! is so much like a Slough, that I Am already
foundered Horse and Man, and therefore lest I should mar thy Marriage,
thinking one cannot pick and choose in the case, e'ne best recommend thee to an
honest Cindar-woman, or the Tankard-bearer's hump-backt Lady, with whom, as I
am credibly informed, you used to have intimate familiarity and converse in the
corner of the Cellar.

So I rest, Yours.


DIALOGUES.
I. Dialogue,
Between a Thatcher and a Gardener, for Precedence, on occasion of a Pot of Ale
with this Inscription; Detur Digniori.
Thatcher. DOwn, down to the Clod out of which thou art made,
Nor with Tinder-box-hoof my Ladder invade!
The Pot shall be mine in spite of thy Spade.

Gardener. And dares the poor Thatcher with the Gardener vye?
Sure his Noddle's grown giddy with sitting so high;
Let our Titles be tried by the next that comes by.

Thatcher. Content! (Gardener,) And content; and look over the plain,
Where Cuddy the Shepherd comes trotting amai^:
Who but he should decide which is best of the twain?

Thatcher. Though a Shepherd may be partial, he is honest and true,
He Is old, and he is grave, and he Justice will do,
And Cuddy will be equal to me and to you.

Gardener. ^ut look, he is just here: pr'y thee tell him the Tale;

Thatcher. ^ay, Cuddy, and judge whether Trade must prevail,
^or the best of our two wins a Pot of good Ale.

Cuddy. ^ll stay while I can, but then quickly begin,
(...) either expect the Honor to win!
(...) my Landlord in haste has sent for me in.

Gardener. ^ce straining of Complements now would be vain,
(...) eldest and noblest of Trades I Will maintain;
(...) Gardener was Adam, but a Thatcher was Cain.

Thatcher. Not so fast Mr. Gardener! with Reeds and with Boughs
His Father before him had covered a House:
b Sure you dare not deny what Dubartas avows.

Gardener. The Hero's from Gardens and Solitudes came,
And sallying from thence filled the World with their Name;
But who ever heard of a Thatcher of Fame?

Thatcher. c Epicurus indeed from a Garden did rise,
But Atheism never can a Thatcher surprise,
d Since he always is viewing the Sun and the S^ys*

Gardener. From the tops of their Houses Aegyptian^ must ow^
e To the rest of the World Idolatry's flown*
And too many Gods are scarce better tha^ none*

Thatcher. If you 're driven into Egypt, and fly from the Greek*
Very far from your Lodge, one need not (...) see*
f To find out the omnipotent Onion and Lee^

Gardener. Their Trophies Kings, Captains and Emperors bring,
And all overboard for one Shovel they fling;
But who ever heard of a Thatcher a King?

Thatcher. The Gallows and Garden when all other means fails!
Thus Dennis when escaped from Si^ilian Jayls,
g Fell from cutting of throats to cutting of tails.

Gardener. Each Beggar the name of the Thatcher can tell,
For nothing you 're fit but a Cottage and Cell;
I with Princes and Lords by their Palace^ dwell.

Thatcher. Thatch keeps out all Care as well as all Cold.
Besides by my Grandsire I Have often been told,
h That Straw has been Covering for Churches of old*

Gardener. Scarce once in a Moon you mount from the ground,
And another Trade too, or you 'll starve, must be found,
I have still pleasant work that holds all the year round.

Thatcher. No doubt on it; and Winter must never infest
Your fortunate Regions with Summer still blessed,
Nor fix you like a Cuckoo clung up in his Nest!

Cuddy. Brave Boys, both! so well you each other abuse,
There Is hardly between you a halter to choose:
I j^dge that to make one another amends,
I drink off the Ale, you shake hands and be Friends.

NOTES.
(a) [A Gardener was Adam, but a Thatcher was Cain.]
Thus demonstrated. -- Cain built a City before any Iron-work was invented; he
could not therefore have Tiles to cover it: -- Ergo, 'twas done with Thatch, or
somewhat equivalent.

(b) [Sure you dare not deny what Dubartas avows.]
Dubartas in his Poem of the Creation, describes Adam's rude draught of
building in that manner.

(c) [ Epicurus indeed from a Gardener did rise.]
Epicurus his Study and Schools being in a Garden, was so notorious, that his
Principles are thence called, -- The Doctrine of [the Garden.]

(d) [But Atheism never can a Thatcher surprise,
Since he always is viewing the Sun and the Skys.]
This even the Epicureans confess a strong Inducement to the belief of a
supreme Being, the Author of the World; and therefore give their Followers a
Caution against it. So Lucretius, Book 5. p. 141. For even those few exalted
Souls that know
The Gods must live at ease, not look below;
Free from all meddling Cares, from hate and love;
If they admire, if view the World above,
They wonder how those glorious Beings move.
They are entrap'd, they bind their slavish Chain,
And sink to their religious Fears again.
Mr. Creeches Translation.

(e) [From the tops of their Houses Egyptians must own,
To the rest of the World Idolatry's flown.]
If the Gardener puts a fallacy on the Thatcher, let him look to it himself; I
only am to explain his meaning thus far, -- That in Egypt, from the tops of
their houses the Egyptians frequently used to view the Heavens, living in a
Champain Country. -- Hence Astronomy, and as some say, Idolatry.

(f) [To find out the omnipotent Onion and Leek.
Part of the worshipful God-heads of Egypt, which, though of the two more
tolerable than the Crocodile; yet, had Horace lived there, or many others, they
had certainly, as to that point of the Compass, turned Atheists.

(g) [Thus Dennis, when escaped from Sicilian Jayls,]
Fell from cutting of throats to cutting of tails.]
When Dyonisius the Tyrant of Sicily was expelled, he went to Corinth, and
there set up Schoolmaster.

(h) [That Straw has been Covering for Churches of old.]
The Church of Glastenbury, the ancientest certainly in England, if the Monks
do'n't lie, was built, the sides with Hurdles, and thatcht with Straw.

The Second Dialogue,
Between the Herring, and Whale.
a Whale. I Am the bold Whale. (Herring:) -- And the brisk Herring I.

Whale. Through the Ocean I roll. (Herring.) Over the Shallows I fly.

Whale. b Per fidem be gone from my presence! How dare
The ridiculous Mouse with the Mountain compare?

Herring. Take my Honor, take my Life! to my Post I Will abide,
Now I find such Authority plain of my side,
Though you swell, yet, unless the Rehearsal does lie,
c There Is ten times more Beauty and Shape in a Fly.

Whale. Though with ease I could breath thee to nothing again*
Or spout thee a Mile, to thy Enemies, Men;
d Like Phoebus I Will stoop from my glittering Throne,
And even descend to dispute for my own;
A couple we'll choose, who the Umpires shall be,
The Dolphin is mine. (Herring) -- The Shrimp my Referee.

Whale. e When in the Abyss I no longer did sleep,
But kind Mother Nature called me out of the deep;
What a Gulf did I leave in the space whence I came?
What a Can^le^ of Chaos was spent in my frame!
When Nature the Whale into Being did bring,
She smiled, and she cried -- He is made for a King.

Herring. Though a World of dull Bullion your essence does hold,
Scarce an Atom of Soul was cast into the Mould,
Room enough, and to spare lavish Nature allows,
But provides not a Tenant to suit with the House:
As for me, though she veils me with Flesh, and with Skin,
Yet my Form's little else but pure Spirit within:
And in vain you your Bulk for your Monarchy bring,
f For if the Ocean were Goth-land who but I should be King.

Whale. Not alone on my Bulk I intend to rely;
My Strength, and my Courage with my Magnitude vye:
My side is too thick for a Spear or a Dart;
g Huge Rafters of Ribs barricado my Heart.
Even Neptune himself is afraid when I roar,
And his quivering Court dive away to the Shore.
With a courage undaunted I Will a Navy assail,
And disorder whole Squadrons by a brust with my Tail.

Herring. Your strength and your Valor must needs be Divine,
h When you 're caught, like a Gudgeon with a Hook, and a Line:
i When spite of Dame Luna, at Ebb 'twill be flood,
And you make a Springtide all around with your Blood.

Whale. The Laws of hard Nature forbid to withstand,
That Forreigner Man, the fierce Tyrant of the Land:
It Is the Sea is my Kingdom, and the Waters must own,
At home I have ever been Monarch alone.

Herring. k Yes, as often, as the Sword-fish, and Thrasher will please
To leave off their Sport, and allow you some ease:
On your Noddle and under your Paunch they are set,
While one Reyns you in, 'tother makes you Curvet;
Then Neptune indeed may shake when you roar,
Though you 're Nine-mile at Sea, they can hear you ashore.

Dolphin. All to Arms! all to Arms! while we scolding sit here,
Look! look where the Enemies fleet does appear:
The Fishermans Navy with sail, and with Oar,
That has often among us made Havoc before.

Shrimp, Herring. I boil -- and I broyl till my Ierkin does crack.

Whale. And I feel barbed Irons like a Grove on my back:
It Is in vain with such Odds for the Combat to stay,
All shift for your selves, and I Will lead you the way.

NOTES.
(a) [I am the bold Whale -- and the brisk Herring I.]
First and foremost, (and before I tell you by what Art I make these Gentlemen
speak) it is the part of an Honest man to acknowledge, and repay what he has
borrowed. This Line is but little altered from that in Rehearsal. "I am the
bold Thunder -- the brisk Lightning I.
In the next place -- By what Art Magic can I persuade Fishes to speak, who
are mute to a Proverb, and no more inclined to prating than Friar Bacon's
Brazen-Head? Why, first take notice that is a Vulgar Error, and a scandal on
the free Citizens of the Ocean: they are silent indeed when dragged into our
Element, nor should we much, I believe, be more inclined to Oratory, if Head
and Ears covered in theirs. Again, it is plain they have a voice, proved from
the Whale, who in his Battle with the Sword-fish and Thrasher, described below,
roars with such an audible voice, he may be heard three Leagues off. If all
this ben't enough, I Am sure they may as well pretend to speech as Lucians Bed,
and Lamp; by which Figure I shall introduce Chamberpot and Drying Pan, two or
three pages henc^.

(b) [ Per fidem be gone from my presence!]
By this Verse you may learn, if you understand Logic -- first that the Whale
understands Latin; and secondly that he is Proctor of the Ocean.

(c) [There's ten times more Beauty, and shape in a Fly.]
Vid. Rehearsal. " I Would sooner have a Passion for a Whale,
" In whose vast bulk tho'store of Oil does lie,
" We find more Shape, more Beauty in a Fly.


(d) [Like Phoebus I Will stoop from my glittering Throne.]
Once upon a time Phoebus having nothing else to do (perhaps when Jupiter gave
him a Holiday) descended to some Wake or other, and undertook the Fiddler for a
Wager; but being like to be baffled, he had no remedy but to call his Godship
in, and fright the Poor fellow so (whose name I should have told ye was
Marsyas) that he made him leapt out of his Skin.

(e) [When in the Abyss I no longer did sleep.]
How should the Whale know that piece of Philosophy? Why might not Aristotle
teach him when he leapt into the Water, as wisely as Empedocles into Fire? But
it is contrary to his Hypothesis, who denied a beginning of the World, and
consequently the Chaos, etc. Why then Arion when cap'ring on the Dolphins back,
instructed that* Dolphin, that Dolphin his Son, and so down to the Whale^and
there is the short and the long on it.

(f) [For if the Ocean were Gothland, who but I should be King?]
'Twas the custom among the Goths to choose a little man for their Prince.

(g) [Huge Rafters of Ribs barricado my Heart.
If you wo'n't take the Whales word, it is but stepping to Rumford Road, or the
Physick-Garden in Oxford, where a couple of Whales Ribbs are to be seen,
neither inferior in bigness to a lusty Rafter.

(h) [When you 're caught, like a Gudgeon with a Hook, and a Line.]
One way of Whale-fishing is striking at him with an Iron fastened to a long
Rope, then letting the Rope loose, the Whale beats up and down till it for loss
of blood yields up the Ghost.

(i) [When spite of Dame Luna, at Ebb 'twill be Flood.]
By this compared with what went before, it is probable that though the Whale was
for the Neotericks, the Herring keeps close to the old Philosophy, and
according to that, holds the Moon to be the cause of Tides.

(k) [Yes as often as the Sword-fish, and Thrasher shall please.]
The Story is thus. The Thrasher and Swordfish are two Fish, the Whales
implacable Enemies. The Sword-fish having a sharp bone in his Head, gets under
his soft Belly, and makes him rise to the Top of the Water; where the Thresher
with his Wash-beetle Tail, beats him down again, and between them both they
Thump him so unconscionably, that he cries murder so loud you may hear him three
Leagues off.

The Third Dialogue,
Between Chamber Pot and Drying Pan.
Chamber Pot. STand off! nor with rude Smut disgrace
a The Glories of my brighter face!

Drying Pan. Tho not so glib my Face be seen,
Yet all I Am sure's as sweet within.

Chamber Pot. You in the Kitchen drudge alone,
None handles you but greasy Joan!

Drying Pan. I always lend, but you receive;
Which is most brave, to take, or give?

Chamber Pot. Often Maid and Mistress fetch me ont,
To wash their their Lilly- hand and Snowt.

Drying Pan. You 're civil sure, and use I hope
With Water to allow 'em Soap.

Chamber Pot. Yes, such as never, at worst, indures
To scowre so foul a Mouth as yours.

Drying Pan. O what a fragrant Hogo rose
But now, to twinge a swounding Nose?

Chamber Pot. Such as when you were made a Tool,
b To Fry the Breakfast for the Fool.

Drying Pan. All bulg'd and yellow you must fall
At last behind some ruined Wall;
Or melt, and to your Masters loss
Leave both at once your stink and dross.

Chamber Pot. Take then, since me you 'll thus Incense,
These marks of my Benevolence:
Such Water as if Fame says true,
Diana on Acteon threw;
Which as some learned men surmize,
With flap of Fox put out his Eyes:
And least of Rary show he brag,
c Bewitched poor Hunter into Stag.

NOTES.
(a) [The Glories of my Brighter Face.]
Hence take notice, to the Honor of the Poet, 'twas a Pewter Chamber Pot, and
to the Honor of the Maid, 'twas newly scoured.

(b) [To Fry the Breakfast for the Fool.]
A known story of a Lords Cook and Fool.

(c) [Bewitch't poor Hunter into Stag.]
Diana, on his viewing her Dimensions, and the rest of her Virgins, as naked as
ever they were born, sprinkled him with some of her own Holy Water, and turned
him into a Stag.

Against a Kiss.
A PINDARIC.
1.
CHarming Destroyer! whither will thou roll,
The tumbling Soul?
When Sylvia smiles with all her Sexes Arts,
And Angles for loose wandering Hearts;
Sweet lovely Poison from her Lips she breaths,
Soft subtle Darts,
And dear bewitching Deaths;
Smiling Plagues she throws,
Golden Granado's sowes,
And into Air the tortured Soul with Loves white-powder blows,
Presents with painted Vipers gay, and crowned,
And scatters Heavenly Hells around.
2.
A Kiss! there is Magic in the Name,
What Amulet against its force can Arm;
The willing Letters of themselves forbidden sounds compose,
And leap into a charm,
And plunge the Hearer in blew Waves of Flame,
a Such sulfurous liquid flame as flows,
From Aetna's everlasting Womb:
Which often e're now over proud Towns weak Walls arose,
b And brought to Cities, and to men, both Death and Tomb;
Where Crystal Lakes for long long Ages stood,
c Supplyd from the Abyss with an eternal flood,
For long unnumbred Ages past,
Scarce Ice more cold, or chaste;
There, over all the mouldring Banks red Surges pour;
There does hot Vulcan ravish all, and all devour,
d And even vitrifies the Mud.
With much ado, to their great Fund some straggling drops retire,
Close at the Heels pursued by swift prepost'rous Waves of Fire.
3.
A Lip's the Devils Tinderbox,
Whence by soft repeated strokes
Lusts lurking Lightning flies,
And blasts the unhappy Soul that pryes,
With rash unwary Eyes.
A downy Pillow where the firmest Heart is broke,
(Be It Heart of Flint, or Heart of Oak!)
With a sly never-smarting stroke:
A Kiss that Traitor in an Angels dress,
From bad Good-offices will never cease,
But ever seems to bring fair Overtures of Peace,
When its Commission speaks of nothing less.
At the Mouths tot'tring Gate it parlys Sin
Slides through a strong reserve,
To invested Lust, which else must quickly starve,
And gives Intelligence to every Enemy within.
4.
It Is Death, it is Poison all!
Slow, sure Italian poison, 'twill
e To a Year, an Hour, a Minute kill;
Dead without Hope the infected Wretches fall:
One Kiss will raise
f More Frenzies than a score Tarantula's.
The tickling Venom through each secret path will run,
Till its mortal Errand's done,
The pungent Atoms search the Body over,
Infect each drop of putred Go^e,
And chase the quivring Soul through every winding Pore:
And see the cursed Enchantress smiling by,
Glares with a sharp unlucky eye,
Hind'ring the very wish of Remedy.
g Music the common countercharm,
Can only here increase the Immedicable Harm:
And raise ten thousand Devils more,
To all the unnmber'd Legions revel'd there before.
NOTES.
(a) [Such sulfurous liquid Flame as flows,
From Ae^na's everlasting Womb.]


(b) [And brought to Cities, and to Men, both Death and Tomb.]
At the Eruptions of that famous Sicilian Volcano, the melted Minerals broke
down all opposition, and ran for many Miles a continual stream of Fire; when it
came to any Houses, it burst all down though never so strong, and buried the very
Walls in heaps of Pumice Stones, and such kind of matter.

(c) [Supplyd from the Abyss with an eternal flood.]
Among many other learned men's, it is the immortal Cowleys opinion, that under,
or in the middle of the Earth, there is a Fund of Concreated water (as well as
Fire) called -- [The Fountains of the great deep.)

(d) [And even vitrifies the Mud.]
Vitrification is the last degree of Heat, in plain English turning into Glass.

(e) [To a Year, an Hour, a Minute kill.]
Some of the Italians are reported so skilful at the hellish Art of Poisoning
(well reckoned together, if not sometimes the same, with Witchcraft) that they
'll kill ye a man to any precise time, as certainly as a Clock; and temper the
potion so devilishly exquisite, it shall till such a time suspend its operation.

(f) [More Frenzies than a score Tarantula's.]
The Tarantula is a Spider found in Apulia in Italy, whose Poison is so
peculiar, that the Person bitten by it falls incessantly a Dancing, nor is to
be cured but by --

(g) [Musick the common Counter-charm.]
Which dissipates the Venom, and makes 'em, (I cannot tell how) sweat it out
again.

On a certain Nose.
ROom for a Nose (think what you will,
It Is true) as High as -- High-gate Hill:
Turn't to a Bridge, 'twill ease the Feet,
a And reach from thence to Fryday-street;
(If you 'll set under for a stay
The man in Chains at Holloway.)
Steeple crowned Nose, who thinks it scorn
To be by any Spire o're-born;
b (Fell Dragon-nose held up you know,
Disdainfully a top of Bow;
A Nose which would not be content
If meted by the Monument;
So scorns the May Pole in the Strand
To measure with a Fishing-Wand:
This with the Top of old St. Poll
Had easily stood Cheek by Ioll.
(Tho^ neither of their cloudy Spires
Were proof against invading Fires:)
Nor now is it afraid to show
c For ^igness with the Cupulo;
Bright Gorgeons Nose, which stoopeth not
d To that of the Rhinocerot.
And, if some Madman were his Friend,
Would yield as much by Candles-end:
But, ah! unless it self 'twould come,
One Fleet could never lug it home;
Unless packt up in several Loads,
d Like the fat Stradling God at Rhodes.
A Voice it has; a Voice so swingeing,
f It drowns with ease Sir Morelands Engine,
g And may be heard to Red'riff Shore,
In spite of bawling Scull or Oar.
Thence larger fall, and louder Streams
Than those of roaring-Through-Bridge- Thames.
A Boat; a Boat! or I^am drownded,
In The Eddy of its Wave confounded;
Land me! that I may see my Dearest,
Land me at Queen-hithe! -- sure that is the (nearest.
Where I Will to Nose compar't again,
In Head of Neighbor Saracen;
And sure the Painter could not err,
Who Copyd Face and all from Her.
NOTES.
(a) [And reach from thence to Fryday-Street.]
Why Friday Street? It Is reason enough if it ^^lls up the Verse.

(b) [Fell Dragon-Nose, which mounts you know,
Disdainfully at Top of Bow.]
Alluding to that Dragon which is the Vane of Bow-Steeple.

(c) [For bigness with the Cupulo.]
The four Towers, to be joined together, like that at Wool-church.

(d) Like the fat Stradling God at Rhodes.]
The Colossus at Rhodes was broken down and carried away by degrees. 'Twas of
that vast bulk that Ships sailed into the Haven between its Legs.

(e) [It drowns with ease Sir Morelands Engine.]
The speaking Trumpet, invented by Sir Sam. Moreland.

(f) [And may be heart to Red'riff Shore.]
One of these Trumpets had words pronounced by it at Gresham College, which
were heard distinctly and wrote down, a'tother side the water.

In Praise of Horns.
ASsist ye gentle Powers that can,
Assist some blind good natured Man,
All the Nines aid I Would now refuse
For one kind smile from Iordans Muse.
It Is done! it is done! and by her power,
At Feet of Prince; or Emperor,
Transformed, with voice, and visage mild,
I sit like any Pageant Child:
First mannerly I bowed my Head,
Then perkt it up again, and se'd:
First Wheat and Barley shall be sown,
And sprout again on London-stone;
First Cure for Corns! in the Stillyard range,
And Thro'-bridge-hoa! roar round the Change:
And Guild Hall cross the Thames be born,
E're I forget renowned Horn:
When late with Ribbons all bedress^t,
So gaudy, at the Cockney's Feast,
Each little-Master struts along,
Shouted by the Blew-apron'd-Throng,
Which of the pretty Lads confess't
Amongst 'em all their Fathers Crest?
^ho' many a One his Glory owes
unto the Sweat of Mothers brows;
^ho by the Childrens looks could find
^e ever was to others kind?
The Calf is still without it born,
^ho' Parent- Bull wears dreadful Horn;)
^is Wardrobe, when set out in State
^rops from his Fathers fertile Pate;
which does whole Cornucopia's shed,
^o finifie him, round his Head.
What glorious Things! what Trinkets rare,
Forest Cart when joulted there,
(...) yearly bought at Charlton Fair.
^^^n-fair that better Tricks can show!
^^an Green-goofe, or than Bartlomew.
^hen Mistress drinks, and John does thank her,
(...) the King's Head, or the Blew-Anchor;
^ow harmless does she smiling come,
^o bring best Husband Fairings home!
^^^rings to make him fine and gay
against next Training Holyday?
which more than Silver Headpiece grace
(...) brazen brow, and Copper Face:
^atural Half-pikes which more adorn
^^an that upon the Unicorn;
^one such famous feats can do,
that Miracles are found in Two?
Two, grafted in the place of frontlets,
A Princely pair of large Brow-antlets:
Which if the Herald plays his part,
And draws his Hatchment out with Art;
Though Fields of Gules should overwhelm it,
Must peep at Top of Argent Helmet:
The Motto -- Decus and Tutamen,
a And I Will for Rhyme, write under
-- Amen.
NOTE.
(a) [And I Will for Rhyme, write under
-- Amen.
If this seems a little of the dullest, consid^^ what Muse I Am through all this
Copy inspired wit^^

Advice to Monsieur Ragoo, (...) had his choice either to be Hang (...) or
Married.
TAke Courage poor despairing Lover!
Walk up! walk up, and e'ne turnove^
Who Mounts the Brida^^Bed is madder
By far, than him that Mounts the Ladder.
What Man in's Wits wo'n't rather choose
The Hempen, than the Marriage Noose?
Or in fo plain a Case would faulter,
And take the Ring to leave the Halter;
Since you perhaps slight my Authority,
Look back! look back on beauteous Doroty!
Who often without Wit or Fear,
Bids a whole Troop- Come on if they dare!
Come on! she cries, nor should they scare me,
Though Xerxes 'twere and all his Army.
There Is Doll: who knows what mischief follows?
Here Is nothing but a single Gallows.
His prudence who would not admire,
That leaps from Drying Pan to Fire?
See if you dare, you quivering Booby,
Those Lips of Pearl, that Snowt of Ruby:
Within, (I would not do her wrong)
There hangs a Clapper-alias- Tongue,
It shakes the Church, and rives the Steeple,
And when it Rings -- beware good People!
Then, though perhaps you 'll at it wonder,
Sowres all the Neighbors Ale like Thunder:
As Lions roar to Mouses squeaking;
b So Christ-church Tom, and Tom of Pequin
(Though we in this the Jesuits anger,)
Are both but Saints-bells to her Twanger:
To Hell she scorns to be beholding,
She deafs the Devils Dam with scolding;
Her face still Lavers when she washes,
c Her Face which sneaks behind Proboscis.
Bring the Commissioners oth' Sewer,
And ere you Kiss her let 'em view her:
They 'll fifty Dung-carts round her place,
To clear the ^^nnel of her Face;
But all in vain since all too late,
The Dirt is now concorporate:
Inveterate Dirt of sev^n years standing,
That scorns to wagg for their commanding
And all her Frame you now may call
Without a Figure -- One Mud-wall.
Which this great Rule to'th' Life expresses,
It Is Uniform -- In Vglinesses.
But O! what Sea-weed may compare
With her strong Onion-Ropes of Hair.
Step back a little! call the Thatcher,
No Peruke-maker e're could match her:
No Nets are they, no Cupids fetter,
But Halters plain; nor worse, nor better.
If thus her upper features show,
Thy Mermaid sure's mere Devil below;
If all this in her Wast-coat's noted,
O how is she Be-petticoated!
Now of two Ills choose you the least,
(And which that is may soon be guest)
Woo you the Rope, and not the Beauty,
And bid the Hangman do his Duty.
NOTES.
(a) [Look back! look back on Beauteous Doroty!
Doll-Troop, or Doll-Common, Laundress; (and somewhat into the Bargain) to a
Troop of Horse: her Mr. Ragoo, when condemned for Plundering, was to marry, or
be hanged.

(b) [So Christ-church Tom, and Tom of Pequin.]
The Jesuits relate at Pequin in China is a Bell weighing twelve hundred
thousand pound weight.

(c) [Her Face that sneaks behind Proboscis.]
The Proboscis is the Trunk, or Nose of an Elephant.

On a pretended Scholar that would have had some Verses he had stolen from
another Book inserted into the Maggots.
HA! then it is Time! affronted Muse begin!
Rouse each ill-natured sleeping Thought within:
Purse thy dark Brow! thy trembling Sinews strain,
And swell the angry blood in every Vein!
Has Fortune dragged thy Vengeance from her Throne,
Crushed out thy wonted Sting, and called thee Drone?
No! here is a Pen does manly spite revive,
Jogs me, and lets me know my Soul's alive;
And tells the wretch that urged a Poets frown,
He has roused a Lion that will rend him down.
Was I so easy grown, so tame a Tool!
Had fate the power to cramp me into Fool?
That this to me? and was my Stock so low,
I must for scrapps of Wit a Mumping go?
What! Thief at second hand! doubly the world abuse,
And robb that Spittle of thy hungry Muse!
Since one good turn another does require,
Industrious Hackney these shall be thy Hire:
This Load of Curses which would make thee crack,
Though vampt with Porters, or with Camels back.
What College Sir? where took you your Degree?
Bridewell or Bedlam -- University?
No doubt thou there were bless't with due applause,
For decent beating Hemp, and picking Straws;
In one of them (you see I don't collogue
With Friends) commencing Fool, in to'ther Rogue;
But ah! at last the better party failed;
The Fool went down, the Rampant Rogue prevailed.
Long thou in Bridewell with fell fate did wrestle,
Like Hudibras, locked in enchanted Castle;
What Devil against the Gates a Whirlwind hurled,
And let thee out again to Plague the World?
Of old ye out-ran the Constable, it is true,
But sure my Verse can run as fast as you:
What though unknown? I dare thy shade arraign,
For Poets are not Prophets called in vain:
Here take this Pass e're we for ever part,
Then run, and then Farewell with all my Heart.
The Poets pride, and Beggary, and Lies,
The Cit^ kind Wife, and fear, and avarice:
The Lawyers yelling in their feigned debate,
And the fleeced Clients wisdom all too late;
The keeping Cully's Jealousy, and Care;
The slighted Lovers Maggots, and Despair;
A Woman's Body every day to dress,
A fickle Soul, little as theirs, or less.
The Courtiers Business, the Impudence 'o'th' stage,
And the Defeated Politicians rage;
A Clock-work Spouse, with loud eternal Clack,
A Shop in the Change, still damned to What do you lack!
Worse than these Last, if any Curses more,
a Ovid e're knew, or fiercer Oldhams store:
Till not one part in Body, or Soul be free,
May all their barbed Vengeance shower on Thee;
Press't with their weight long may thou raving lie,
Envying an Halter but not dare to dye,
And when condemned thou do thy Clergy plead,
Some frightful Fiend deny thee power to Read.
Madness, Despair, Confusion, Rage, and Shame,
Attend you to the place from whence you came;
To Tyburn thee let Carrion Horses draw,
In jolting Cart without so much as Straw.
Jaded may they lie down in the road, and tired,
And, (worse than one fair hanging) twice be mir'd:
b May thou be mauled with Pulchers Sexto^s Sermon,
Till thou roar out For Hemp sake drive on Carman!
Pelted, and cursed in the road by every one,
E'ne to be Hanged may thou the Gauntlet run!
Not one good Woman who in Conscience can
Cry out -- It Is pity Troth -- a proper Man!
Stupid and dull may thou rub off like Hone
Without an open, or a smothered Groan.
May the Knot miss the place, and fitted be
To plague, and torture, not deliver thee!
Be half-a-day a dying thus, and then
c Revive like Savage to be hanged again!
In pity now thou shall no longer live,
For when thus satisfied, I can forgive.
NOTES.
(a) [ Ovid e're knew, or fiercer Oldhams store.]
Ovids curses on Ibis, and Oldhams on the Woman who ruined his Friend.

(b) [Mayst thou be mauled with Pulchers Sexton's Sermon.]
The Sexton of St. Sepulchers Church, makes a kind of a preachment to such as
go by to be hanged.

(c) [Revive like Savage.]
One that was hang^d twice.

A Pindaric Poem
On Three Skipps of a Louse.
1.
QUeen of all harmonious Things!
Cap'ring Words, and frisking Strings,
What Hanged Hero will thou sing?
What lowsy Rogue to equal Glories bring?
Ah! what could man do more? I strove
To teach my Strings of Thundering Jove;
Of long-nail'd Juno, Scold Divine,
Of Cerberus and Proserpine;
But all in vain, for in a Trice
My mighty Hero's dwindled down to Lice:
Go Charioteer! the Coach prepare!
(Or call a Coach if any's there!)
My Muse forsooth must take the Air;
And we intend to rove
Beyond the narrow Bounds of Nature, and of Jove.
We 'll take a race
Where light-cloath'd Nothings, and thin fantoms dwell,
Beyond the narrow Bounds of time and place,
Beyond the out-strecht Line of Farth, of Heaven, and Hell.
2.
Pindaric Pegasus! advance
Now with the lofty Barbary proudly waving prance,
And amble now
Like a Galloping Cow!
But if thy Cross-grained Ladies will not l^nd*
Their winged Saddle-nag to 'blige a friend,
If they lock up their Cellar all-divine,
And will not spare one soop of Aganippe- Wine,
Tell 'em I Will get assistance nigher
That soon shall mount me higher;
In Bedstaffs-twinkling I Will be gone
a To better Streams at Islington,
Inspired from Sadlers Pump I Will do, and dare
As much as any motly drunken Doctor there,
There boles of Helicon my Horse and I Will carouse,
And for the foundered Jade mount my curretting Lowse.
3.
So rides the great Mogul in State
b When at proud Agra's trembling Gate,
Met by each humble, as a Potentate;
With Flowers the Roads are paved, with Flowers the houses crowned,
And brutish Mirth, and barbarous joy runs all-along,
Whilst he uplifted high
Like a New Titan, scales the Sky.
From that wild Mount of Flesh, whose Shoulders bear,
Better than Aesops Eagles, Castles in the air.
So a tall Ant in days of yore
c A Bold adventurous Pigme bore.
So, on my fair-neckt Louse securely set
d Like great Astolfo, or little Pacolet,
With Spur and Switch I make my Steed curvet.
Hold, hold! I Am gone! I Am gone! that leap has lost us:
So Old-Nick sored away with Doctor Faustus.
4.
Beyond the attraction of dull Earth we are born,
Near the purple chambers of the Morn;
Now less, and less the lengthened Species grow;
Now, credit me,
We hardly see
Athos and Tenariff, and Michaels Mount below,
e In Glass or brazen Chariot scarce so soon,
f Nor with Domingo's Ganza's had we reached the Moon.
There we discover
Over and over
g What e're quick Azant or Hevelius saw;
Without their Glasses
Her Lunatic Faces,
Aetna's, and Land, and Sea, we in a Map could draw.
But my poor Lowse more of its kind
h Above could find,
For all the Lousy Woodcocks still were left behind,
And therefore calmly dives to Earth again;
So Angels think themselves down through the airy Main.
5.
Over Hedge and Ditch, a Scholars, or a Hunters pace
We run our hare-brain'd Race.
From Post to Pillar I Am like Epicurus hurled
By all the Flaming Limits of the World.
Where e're we go
By Friend, or Foe,
We my Majestic Lowses Subjects found;
Armies of Beggars gay
In Endless Sunshine play,
And Lice, as blithe as they
In jolly Squadrons dance around.
Thus did the Sprightly Youth, but those whom hoary age
Had formed more wise and sage
Upon a Captive Comb placed round in State
Declaim among the unexperienced Fry
The Nitty Auditory listening by;
And all their Great Forefathers Deeds in greater Verse relate.
6.
Then to my Lowses Palace we draw nigh,
(For sure by all this it may with ease be understood,
Mine was a Lowse of princely blood)
Where he in triumph still remains
Dragging Pilgarlick Death in Chains,
And even in Churchyards obtains the Victory.
When pale Death with harpy claws
(And huge unconscionable Jaws)
To the Sick the Curtain draws.
And the Nurses softly tell
Sad enquiring Friends- He Is well,
They to the Churchyard follow him, and there
With him they bury all their Love, and all their Care.
My kind Lowse more kind and bold
Hectors Death, and keeps his Hold,
Keeps his Hold, or what is as fair,
Comes again, and finds him there.
Drives Sir Rawbones from the Stone,
Claims the Marble all his own;
i (...) his own Substance quickens mouldring Men,
And makes 'em live, at least an Animals Life again.
7.
Now Heaven and Earth surveyed a dreadful leap we take
Over the Sooty Stygian Lake;
My Lowse my Sybill was, and all as well
I know not how
k Without a halfpenny, or a Golden bough,
I like Aeneas traveled Hell.
We looked, and looked again,
And looked, and looked with Care,
But looked, and looked in vain,
Nor could we find one House of Purgatory there:
Those old descriptions fail
Whose realms are changed
And in another Method ranged;
We Mountains find where we expect a flowery vale.
8.
Into the Gulf at last my Palfray plunged, to explore
Secrets to none but great Quevedo known before.
So brave Empedocles at Aetna's flaming Hole
(The sight enough to melt a common Soul)
Leapt smiling in, with this undaunted Cry,
To be a God it is worth the while to die.
So when the hungry Earth gap't wide
And let in hateful Light,
The trembling Ghost to fright
In their own Realm of Night;
Curtius all armed to the black breach did ride;
He saw, and smiled with an unbroken mind
Where all the quaking City sled, and scarce durst look behind:
In sprung the noble Youth with this undaunted Cry,
So Rome but live, and flourish, -- Thus let Curtius die.
9.
Where am I now? Bugbears, and sprights are there:
l Here Kelly's Devils buz round me,
Here Doctor Dees dumfound me;
Here Is Mephistophilus with Tail, and Horns, and Hair,
m And each foul Fiend in Bartlomew Fair;
Sights which a stouter man than me might scare,
But worse, far worse than Devils at the Gate,
n Bands of Quevedo's hungry Tailors wait;
From A^ropos each stole a pair of Sheers,
And gladly now to ensure his Head I Would give my Louses Ears:
Horridly gay their Teeth, and Nails were painted ore
With flesh confused, and Skin, and Brains, and mingling Gore.
Hunger, as well as Anger weapons makes;
His Bodkin this, and this his ponderous yard, and this his Thimble takes:
The Cannibals in dreadful order stood
To murder and devour even their own Flesh and Blood;
To murder and devour my Louse, so wise, so great, so good:
So conquering Indians feed, and hope to find
In their brave enemies broil^d Corpse the Virtues of his Mind.
10.
Yet my undaunted Louse can scorn 'em all,
He rears his strong Proboscis high,
And does the unmanly rage defy
Of each unequal enemy,
And like himself intends to fall.
o His Martial Soul peeps through his Alablaster Skin,
The bloody drop moves quick, and beats a point of War within.
Their tedious trembling Troops he does to Combat call,
Waits for each mortal blow, contemns each fatal pass,
p And cries, Pound on! it is but the husk of Anaxagoras.
Whilst quaking Hell does with concern the event attend,
Least the sharp Conqu'rors should too ravenous be,
And in the Carra^e swallow me,
I durst not stay the fight -- but waked -- and there is an end.
NOTES.
(a) [From Aganippe I Will be gone,
To better springs at Islington.]
The New Waters discovered there the last Summer.

(b) [When at proud Agra's trembling Gate.]
Agra is one of the Great Moguls Royal Cities; he uses to ride on a white
Elephant.

(c) [So a tall Ant in days of yore,
A poor adventurous Pigmee bore.]
Read the story, thus ingeniously described in Mr. Crashaw. -- "High mounted on
an Ant, Nanus the Tall,
"Was thrown alas! and got a deadly fall:
"Under the unruly Beasts proud feet he lies,
"All torn; with much ado before he dies,
"Yet strains these Words -- Base envy do! laugh on,
"Thus did I fall, and thus fell Phaeton.


(d) [Like great Astolfo, or little Pacolet.]
A couple of expeditious Gentlemen (as well mounted as the Witch in
Paudaemonium) Astolfo in Orlando Furioso on a Griffith: Pacolet in the famous
and renowned Chronicle of Valentine and Orson, on a Wooden Horse.

(e) [In Glass or Brazen chariot scarce so soon,


(f) Nor with Domingo's Ganza's had we reached the Moon.]
You see Reader, other folks have had their Maggots as well as your Humble
Servant. Two Bishops have wrote expressly of this new Plantation, and the way to
sail thither. One by making a Globe of Glass, or Brass lighter than the
Atmosphere, which must therefore naturally ascend: The other by a way perhaps
as practicable as the former, by harnessing a certain number of Fowl, called by
the Spaniards [ Ganza's] on which he makes Signior Domingo hoisted thither.

(g) [What e're quick Azant, or Hevelius saw]
Two famous Astronomers, one in France, the other in Denmark.

(h) [For all the lowsy Woodcocks still were left behind]
Vid. Where you can find it, this account. When any of the Woodcocks remain
behind, the main body returning at Summer to the Land of the Moon, they are
reported to be all lowsy.

(i) [In his own Substance quickens mouldring men
A vulgar observation -- that dead Bodies in time turn all to perfect Lumps of
Lice.

(k) Without a Sybill, or a Golden bough.]
Both which are necessary to one that intends a visit to the Infernal Regions
-- ask Virgil else.

(l) [Here Kellys Devils buz round me,
Here Dr. Dee's dumfound me]
See Dr. Casauban's account of those Spirits with whom Dr. Dee and Kelly had
contracted so intimate a Correspondence. Very good natured Devils it seems, for
they persuaded the Conjurers to sw^p Wives, as a necessary Ceremony in their
Magical operations.

(m) [Here's Mephistophilus with Tail, and Horns and Hair.]
A Thundering Devil that, Dr. Faustus's familiar. See his Life.

(n) [Bands of Quevedo's hungry Tailors wait.]
Scarce any body but has read Quevedo's Visions of Hell, nor can any that have
read 'em sure forget how over^stockt he m^kes the sooty regions with that kind
of Cattle.

(o) [His martial Soul peeps through his Alablaster skin,
The Bloody drop -- ]
No Creature in the world so testy as a Lowse. In a Microscope, one drop of
Blood is seen passing up and down very nimbly in the nature of a pulse.

(p) [And cries, pound on! it is but the husk of Anaxagoras.]
I would entreat any that know that hard-named Gentleman's right Name to keep
silence, for 'twould' spoil the Rhyme sadly if this should be blotted out, and
that inserted.

FINIS*

