SION SHINING IN Gospel-Glory: OR, The Churches Advancement and Saints
Engagement in Gospel Times; With some Hints of Thankefullnesse for Englands
Deliverance from the Popish Plot of the Powder Treason. Being the sum of a
SERMON Preached at St Michaels in Cornhill, London, upon the 5th of November.
1651.

By T. W.

PROVE. 4.18. The path of the just is as the shining light, that shines more
and more to the perfect day.

LONDON, Printed by A. Miller, and are to be Sold at the Sign of the Gun in
Ivy-Lane, 1652.

To the early Bud of real Piety Mrs E. H. increase of Grace on Earth, and a
Crown of Glory in Heaven.
THe sweet Discoveries you were pleased to make unto me of a gracious work upon
your Soul, have exceedingly engaged my Heart dearly to love you, as a Child of
God, highly to prize you as a Pearl in Grace, and really to respect you as an
Heir of Glory. Truly I cannot but with dearest affections embrace the Darlings
of Gods Bosom, and heartily love them whom God sets his Heart upon, and Christ's
sets as a Seal upon his own Heart. The Impression of Gods Image upon the Soul,
renders it truly amiable and excellent to a spiritual eye. Sweet Saint! Me
thinks when I see you, I cannot but look upon you (with admiration of the
Riches of Gods Grace) as one whom I shall once behold blessed with the
bosom-embraces of Jesus Christ, and shining with an excellency of Glory, far
surpassing the glorious luster of the purest Sunbeams in the Kingdom of
Heaven. Happy Soul! seeing God has crowned your tender years with Grace, you
have an assured Title to Eternity of Glory. The Spouse of Christ is spotless,
all-fair, all-glorious within, her clothing also is of wrought gold. And he
that looks upon you with a spiritual eye, may he not behold you as a bright
spark of the Spouses beauty? yea, is not all the Spouses beauty and excellency
yours, while Christ is yours, Christ the Crown and glory of the Spouse and
every Saint? Having therefore methodiz'd a few sweet Meditations upon the
shining excellency of the Church of God, the smiling Glory of Christ's Spouse, I
have presumed to make them public, that I might present them as a poor Pledge
of that dear Affection and cordial Respect which my Heart bears unto you. Read
them therefore as written to, and of your self, as one through the Grace of
Christ interessed in the Churches Glory. What Christ speaks to his Spouse, that
apply to your own Soul, as if you heard a voice from Heaven saying, ARISE
SHINE. Bless God with your whole Heart, that He has invested you in the
Churches Privileges, and labor to find your self quickened thereby to all
Christian Performances. Take heed of Pride, take heed of Self-love, take heed
of Hypocrisy. These are the cankers that will eat out the very heart of your
comforts, and vex your soul with restless torments. Humility, Self-denial and
Sincerity, will beautify the Beauty of all your Excellencies. Continue still
to seek your God daily in secret. Present Him with an humble and empty Heart,
and He will fill it with his saving Grace and sacred Comforts. Secret
Refreshings are marvellously sweet to the Soul. Walk humbly with your God
throughout the day, as seeing Him that is invisible, and your Soul shall be
more fit to maintain a Holy, Spiritual, Evangelicall Communion with God in
Duty whenever he shall call you thereunto. Labor to grow in Grace: 'Be not
ashamed of Holiness: Study in all things to please God. The more Holy you are,
the more Happy you shall be, the more of Heaven you shall have on Earth, and
the more Assurance that you shall at length change Earth for Heaven. Now that
the God of all Grace and Glory would enrich you with his saving Mercy, refresh
you with his sweetest Comforts, and at length advance you to his glorious
Kingdom, is the sum of his hearty Prayers for you, who is

Yours in Christ Jesus, T.W.

To the Ingenuous Christian Reader.
SEe here a few Meditations which having been offered to the Ear, are now
presented to the Eye: I have adventured them forth to try the Temper of the
Times, the genius of this Generation. If they shall gain the Approbation of
those who love the Lord's Sion, and the Lord Jesus ( Sions glorious
Guardian-Angel) in sincerity, I shall find (I hope) my Heart warmed and
enlarged into further Meditations of the same kind, and shall be also
encouraged to a communication of them: yea and many Meditations which are
predecessors to these in birth, may then also (perhaps) become their
successors upon the worlds stage. If these be condemned (though I know them
innocent) to be burnt, I shall never willingly make any more of my Children
pass through the fire. If my Thoughts please not others, I shall be content to
reserve them for the future to my self, until it shall please the Lord to
enrich me with better Treasure. However, I have cast in this poor Mite into the
Lords Treasury, who graciously accepts of his servants, not according to what
they have not, but according to what they have. From him alone proceeds all
good, and to Him alone be ascribed all Glory by the Church of Christ,
throughout all Ages, and to all Eternity. Amen.

SION SHINING IN Gospel-Glory.
(...)

ISA. 60.1. Arise, shine.


GLorious things are spoken of thee, O City of God. Many gracious promises and
glorious privileges make Sion the glory of the world, and Jerusalem the praise
of the whole earth. The sweet Spouse of the great King is presented to us by
this Evangelicall Prophet in her rich Attire and excellent Ornaments for Beauty
and Glory. She that lay polluted with blood, and sullied with dust, being washed
in blood, and sanctified through grace, is prepared for the bosom of her
glorious Redeemer. Know ye not (O beloved) the beauty of her Grace, the
excellency of her Glory? Arise, be enlightened, come and see. This Prophet opens
unto you her well-furnisht Chamber, and her presents you with the golden Key of
her costly Closet. Here behold, 1. The glorious Lamp of the Gospel put into the
hand of the Church, who is commanded to hold it forth that it may pour out its
light to the world, v. 1. -- 3. 2. The mighty concourse out of many Nations of
Sions converts to this glorious Light, and the brightness of this burning
Lamp, v. 4, -- 14. 3. A glorious Crown of eternal Excellency set by the hand
of God upon the head of the Spouse of Christ, possessed of a blessed Paradise of
everlasting peace, v. 15. -- ult.


This is thine Excellency, O Sion, this is thy Glory, O Jerusalem: Arise,
shine, for thy light is come, and the glory of the Lord is risen upon thee.

Arise, shine.

Here Is a Precept pregnant with a Promise: The Spirit of God deals forth
comfort wrapped up in a command; For God assures that he will cause his Church to
arise and shine, in this that he commands her, Arise, shine.

Consider this in relation to the Church in general, and to particular Saints.

Considered in relation to the Church in general, it hints sundry particular
observations, which we shall briefly pass over.

Arise, shine. Then note, that

Church may be sometimes in a cloud,The Sun may for a time wear sackloth, the
Stars may loose their light, the Temple may be full of smoke, and the Ark wrapped
up in darkness. A mist may cover the face of Canaan, and a thick cloud may
rest upon Jerusalem. God loves to beautify the Face of Time with some spots of
darkness. God delights in chequering the world with interchanges of light and
darkness, day and night. The returns of darkness do illustrate the beauty of
light, That light is most beautiful, amiable and acceptable, that is born out
of the womb of the thickest darkness. The Sun shines forth most clearly when
it has washed its beams in the waters of the Clouds. Then let not any Star
think it strange that it is sometimes obscured, when the Sun it self may be
Eclipst, and the Constellations of Heaven masked in darkness.

Arise, shine. Then,

castings down before liftings up, Clouds before clearness, Darkness (as in
the Old so in the New Creation) before light. The Church is called to Arise,
therefore she was yet down; She is commanded to Shine, therefore she was yet
dark. Despair not then, poor dejected souls, who lie down in darkness and see
no light; when you have a while with sad hearts sorrowed for your sins, your
light will break forth as the morning, and you shall hear this sweet
Gospel-voice, Arise, shine.

Arise, shine. Then,

excellency in the Church of God,a bright and shining excellency. This is the
Sun of the lower world, which shall at length shine in the highest heavens. The
Saints have their luster, which is nothing else but the reflection of those
glorious beams of grace, which are shed from the Sun of Righteousness upon
them. This is the Woman clothed with the Sun, that has the Moon under her
feet, and upon her head a Crown of twelve Stars, Rev. 12.1. This is she that is
come to excellent Ornaments, and crowned with perfection of beauty, through
Christ's own comeliness put upon her, Ezekiel. 16.7, -- 14. She is all Fair, all
Glorious within, through the Glory of God arisen upon her, Cant. 4.7. Psalm.
45.13. The Church of God is the Crown of the earth, and the Glory of the world.
The world is wrapped in darkness till she Arise and shine. Horrible are the
attempts of the Churches Persecutors. Hellish darkness would soon overspread
the earth, if the Churches light were once extinguished. O ye strangers of the
world! You that lie muffled in midnight, even in the Gospels midday, lift up
your heads, behold and admire the Churches excellencies. Leave your dark dens
of sin and profanesse, and come to her shining light. Be ravished with the
beauty of her Grace, and admire the brightness of her Glory. Walk in her
light, and you shall partake in her brightness and beauty.

Arise, shine. Then take notice that

state is a glorious state,a Heaven upon Earth. The state of the Church of God
under the Gospel is more glorious then under the Law, Isa. 60.17. 2 Cor. 3.7,
-- ult. Herein are more clear and glorious manifestations of Christ,
dispensations of Grace, communications of the Spirit; more abundance of
spiritual and glorious mercies, gifts and endowments. The state of grace under
the Gospel is nothing less then the Kingdom of heaven upon earth, Mat. 3.2.
Heaven is opened under the Gospel, and Believers enter in, and are invested
with glorious privileges, and enriched with glorious enjoyments. This is that
Heaven, wherein God's Saints shine as so many Stars in the luster of that
glorious light which they derive from the Sun of Righteousness. This
Evangelical condition is an Angelical condition, wherein Gods Saints (those
bright morning-stars) sing for joy, and record the glorious praises of their
gracious Redeemer. Gospel- Times are glorious Times, Gospel- mercies are
glorious mercies, Gospel- graces are (as I may say) glorious graces, Gospel-
comforts are glorious comforts, Gospel- Salvation is a glorious Salvation.
Happy are we that live in Gospel- times, Oh that we could but embrace Gospel-
Truths! happy are we that have Gospel- seasons, Oh that we were but Gospel-
Saints. O how are we to admire the riches of Gods grace, that he is pleased to
vouchsafe us his glorious Gospel. Let us then labor to adorn this glorious
Gospel by gracious courses. The dayspring from on high has visited us, and
the glorious light of the Gospel shines round about us; let us then cast off
the works of darkness, and put on the Armor of light; let us cease to sin,
arise and shine in the luster of this light that shines upon us.

Arise, shine. Know then,

Church,she must pour it out into the world. When Christ puts a burning Lamp
into the hand of his Spouse, she must give light to the Nations that sit in
darkness and the shadow of death. The Sun pours his light upon the Moon and
Stars, and these pour it out with many precious influences upon the earth. When
Jesus Christ the Sun of Righteousness pours out the light of the Gospel, with
influences of love upon his Church and Saints, they must likewise pour out the
same upon the world and sinners. When God sets up his Golden-candlestick at
Jerusalem, it is that it might give light to the Cities round about. O then let
every Star shine to increase the luster of this light, and let sinners come to
the brightness of this shining, that they may see the way of life, leading to
eternal Glory, lest otherwise they be shut up under everlasting darkness and
damnation, See Mat. 5.14, 15, 16.

Arise, shine. Now let us consider the words as they bear reference to,
particular Saints, and they will import thus much; The Saints of God in
Gospel Times shall and must Arise and shine.They shall, for this Precept
implies a Promise: They must, for this Promise is locked up in a Precept, Arise,
shine. This is the Saints Dignity, this their Duty.

darkness, when the light shines, and the Spirit says, Arise, Arise from the

Pit of horror and the dungeon of darkness, whereinto they have been cast by
conviction: God does indeed cast down, but does not keep down his Elect in this
dark and sad condition. God brings sinners to Heaven by the Gates of Hell.
While they lie under conviction, their sins, like swarms of Bees, encompasse
them, armed with fiery, poisonous stings, the wrath of God flames against them,
the Terrors of the Almighty surround them, and the unspeakable Torments of of
Hell amaze them, their own Conscience (which should be a Port of Peace to a
troubled Spirit) being full of Horror and Confusion, is a very Hell unto them.
In this woeful condition when they are now ready to enter by the Gate of
Despair into the Kingdom of everlasting Darkness, God calls to them in the
sweet voice of the Gospel, saying, Return, Return, Repent, Repent, and believe
the Gospel, and live for evermore; your sins are pardonable, your sins are
pardoned. Christ, and Heaven, and Glory, and all are yours everlastingly. And
withal he breaks the Chains of their Corruptions, beats back the fiery darts
of their Temptations, takes them by the hand, and leads them out of the dark
Prison of sin into the sweet Paradise of Grace, and speaks Peace, Peace to
their souls, and so gives them possession of true, real, spiritual and
lasting Comfort, Contentment, and Joy.

Dust of affliction, and deeps of distress. God sometimes leads his people down
from the mountains of joy into the valleys of sorrow. He eclipses for a time
the light of life, and covers them with the shadow of death. God does not
always feed his children with the Honey of his Promises, the marrow of his
comforts, the sweetness of his love, but sometimes he gives them the bread of
adversity to eat, and the waters of affliction to drink, and causes them to
sit down in a state of darkness and desertion. But he is a tenderhearted
Father, his Bowels are soon moved toward them, and so he shows them his
pleased face, speaks to them in the voice of kindness and love, calls them to
his embraces, and receives them into the bosom of his sweetest and
soul-contenting mercies: He brings glorious Advantages out of these grievous
Afflictions to their immortal souls. See 2. Cor. 4.17.

Dunghill of Contempt, and mire of Disgrace. God raises his servants from the
Dunghill, to sit with Princes on the Throne. He washes off the mire from their
feet, and brings them up to his holy Hill Mount Sion. Wicked men who are as
Swine, rooting in the Dunghill of the Earth, trample Gods Jewels, his Pearls,
under rheir feet: but they are still precious in Gods account, and he will
cause their shining brightness to appear: Gods precious Saints are often
vilified by the vilest men in the Earth, they are made as the filth of the
world, and the offscouring of all things, 1 Cor. 4.13. But God will at length
clothe them with Excellency and Honor, and crown them with eternal Glory. The
world delights to cast the mire of Disgrace into the Faces of those that bear
the blessed Image of God himself: But he that will at length wipe away all
Tears from their eyes, will also wash away all such opprobrious Imputations,
and cause them to shine as the Stars in the Firmament for ever and ever. Wicked
men with the sharp Razors of their own malicious tongues wound the Names of
Gods dearest Saints, and labor to bury them in Ignominy and everlasting
Contempt, but God will heal their Names, give them a glorious Resurrection, and
an everlasting blessed Memorial: They study to cast the only Excellent down
from their Excellency, but God will advance them to eternal Glory.
Notwithstanding all the weight of Reproaches the wicked lay upon them, God will
put forth his Almighty Arm, and they shall arise: See Psalm. 68.13.

shining and a time of joy. They are commanded and shall and must shine in the

Spotless luster of Christ's Righteousness. Every Saint is clothed with the
Sun. God makes all his children Priests, and has provided for them holy
Garments for Beauty and Glory; He enstals them Kings, and clothes them with
Royal Robes, far richer, far purer then Cloth of Gold. These Robes are none
other then Gods own Son the King of Glory himself has worn on Earth. They are
the rich Robes of his perfect Righteousness, so pure, that Gods own
all-discerning Eye cannot discover one spot in them. Saints must needs shine
when they are dressed in such rich Apparel. The Sun it self the Fountain of
Light, whose face is too glorious for us mortals steadfastly to behold, is but a
darkesome mote in comparison of the bright and shining Luster of this rich
Attire. Glorious is the clothing of every gracious soul.

Excellent Ornaments of saving Graces. Every Saint is as a little Heaven full
of shining Stars. God clothes all his children with white Garments of
Sanctification, all-bespangled with sparkling precious Pearls of heavenly and
Divine Graces, as Faith, Repentance, Love, Hope, Obedience, Sincerity,
Humility, etc. There is not one of these but is worth ten thousand times more
then a world of Gold, being as it were a Ray of God, a Pledge of his eternal
Love, and a Character of Glory, stamped upon the soul. There is a chain of these
Heavenly Graces wherewith God adorns the souls of his Children, to which is
annexed Glory it self, as a Gem of infinite excellency and invaluable worth.
See 2 Pet. 1.3, -- 6. Now the united splendor of these Heavenly Graces must
needs beautify the soul with an admirable Excellency and shining Luster.

Beautiful garments of Salvation. Every child of God sits incircled with
eternal smiles from the Face of God, and thence has cause to be everlastingly
merry. All the Saints are welcome guests to the Gospels Feast, Isa. 25.6. where
that nothing may be wanting for their full Contentment and Delight, they are
clothed by Gods own hand with Festival garments, and anointed with the sweet
Oil of joy and gladness. O how can the Saints of God choose but smile and
shine in joy, who are admitted to such a Heart-contenting Feast. O what
immortal joys must needs spring up in the Hearts of Gods children, from a
lively apprehension of the infinite sweetness and excellency of the Love of
God, and the invaluable preciousnesse of his Grace which they enjoy, the
dreadful and everlasting Tormenes of Hell fire, which they have escaped, and
the incomprehensibly glorious and eternal Joys of Heaven, whereof they shall
shortly be possessed, besides those many sweet and gracious comforts wherewith
Jesus Christ has already crowned their thrice happy souls: Thus the
Day-stars-of Grace cannot but shine on Earth, which are already prepared to be
eternally fixed in Heaven.

Thus having past through these particulars, we come to the Use.

Saints of God, and Sons of the Most High. The Night is now past, and the Day
is come, yea, far spent, the Sun of Righteousness is drawing nigh to the
highest Point of his glorious Ascent, and darts forth his gracious, reviving
beams into the lowest and humblest hearts: Rouse up your selves therefore O ye
children of God, lift up your heads, Arise, shine.

Put on the Royal Robes of Christ's Righteousness. See your own nakedness,
and blush to behold the shame of your nakedness: See the Wardrobe of the
Gospel open, and Christ Jesus with his own hands offering you the rich Robes of
his own Righteousness: Put forth the hand of Faith, and put them upon your
naked souls; so Christ will embrace you as his Brethren, God will embosome you
as his children, the Angels of Heaven will at length with shouting entertain
you in the mansions of Eternity, as Heirs of Glory.

Deck your selves with the Pearls of Heaven. See Gods Cabinet is unlockt for
you: Get your Hearts furnished with sanctifying Graces, the souls Jewels. God
has given you the Key of Heaven, Prayer, and the wings of Faith and Love to
mount up thither: Away then, and fetch thence daily what precious Ornaments
soever you want to render your souls beautiful and amiable in the eyes of your
Beloved. Put on these Ornaments daily, and wear them continually. They Will be the
brighter for the wearing. So at length you shall put off some of your Ornaments
of grace, and put on ever-shining Robes of Glory.

Unmask your smiling faces, and send forth your Rays of joy; For God smiles and
shines upon you. Unlock your joyful Hearts, and pour forth your souls in
praises; for God has unlock't the Ark of his Covenant, and unfolded the Riches
of his Grace for your eternal Good. The Lord himself rejoices over you, and
calls upon you to rejoice in the Lord, Psa. 33.1. Phil. 4.4. Psa. 32.11. Serve
the Lord with Joyfullnesse and Gladness of heart for his abundant Goodness
and Love to you in the Lord Jesus Christ. Burnish your Christian Profession and
adorn the Gospel with Joyfulnes. Reflect the beams of Gods Love with Rays of
spiritual Joy. With Joy draw Waters of life out of the Wells of salvation.
With Joy walk on in the Paths of Righteousness, until you shall come to Sion
with singing Halelujah's, and everlasting Joys upon your heads.

rejoice when our sins cry? should we rejoice when Syon weeps? Can we, ought
we to rejoice when our sins and the abominations of the Land are daily
multiplied, and the wrath of God provoked against us? When the ways of Syon
mourn, and the gates of Jerusalem are desolate? does not God rather call to
mourning, and weeping, and lamentation?

heart with hearty grief and lamentation: And oh, that we could pour out our
hearts in abundant sorrows for these Abominations, and in melting Compassions
over the bleeding Miseries of Gods people! O that our Heads were Waters, and
our Eyes Fountains of Tears, that we might weep day and night for the slain of
the People of the Lord, and the Abominations that are be found in the City of
our God. These things are a Lamentation, and shall be for a Lamentation. But
yet withal consider;

These Clouds will not obscure your Clearness,These sorrows are consistent
with your joys. Sensual joy and grief mutually expel one another, but
spiritual joy and grief, as loving twins bred in the same womb, though
successively born, live together in the same sanctified soul. Yea, the more
your Hearts greve for sin, the more will your souls rejoice in the God of
your salvation.

These mourning Blacks will beautify your shining brightness. This spiritual
sorrow will increase the luster of your Evangelicall joy. These showers of
grief will beautify your beams of joy; your sorrowful sighs will increase the
beauty of your joyful smiles. Sad Tears dropping from such smiling Eyes, are
such Pearls, as God will treasure them up every one in his bottle. Sweet Smiles
shining through a shower of Tears, are such sparkles as will ascend to Heaven
and be crowned with Acceptance.

There Is light of joy sown in the darkness of these sorrows. Psalm. 97.11. The
blessing of God crowns the Heads, and the comforts of God shall fill the Hearts
of such mourners in Sion. Mat. 5.4. The precious seed of spiritual sorrows,
will bring a plenteous Harvest of eternal joys. Psalm. 126.5, 6. Who mix
therefore their mirth with mourning, shall have their sorrows concluded with
everlasting glorious joys.

Let Us close these Considerations with these Corollaries.

Weep your Beams.Dart forth streaming beams of joy, and pour out beaming
streams of grief. Rejoice with trembling, Psalm. 2.11. Sweeten your mourning
with mirth, and season your mirth with mourning. The Base of Godly Sorrow
joined in Consort with the Treble of Spiritual Gladness, makes the best
Melody in the ears of God.

Wash your Smiles in Tears, and beautify your Mirth with Mourning,the Beauty
of your Beauty. Bathe your shining Souls in Sorrows and they will shine the
brighter. The choicest Beauty consists of a pure whiteness with some mixture
of a clear ruddinesse, being actuated with a sparkling liveliness, the soul of
Beauty: so a serene and smiling soul with a bleeding heart enlivened by the
sanctifying Spirit of grace, make up the most perfect Beauty in the eyes of
God. Learn then so to temper your joy with sorrow, that both may be more
acceptable unto God.

Sow your Seed of Sorrows, that you may reap your Harvest of Joys. Sow your
Seed in the Night, and you shall reap your Fruit in the Morning. Fill Gods
bottle with Tears, and he will give you for every drop a Pearl. Let your Heart
bleed for your grievous sins, and God will at length crown your soul with
glorious joys. Weep for Jerusalem and you shall sing in Syon. Mourn for the
sorrows of the Saints, and you shall rejoice for joy with them. Lay a deep
foundation in sorrow for your sins, and God will crown your Building of Grace
with the Top-stone of Glory.

Thus far we have considered the words in reference to the Glorious Privileges
of the Gospel of Christ, wherewith God has crowned his Church and Saints; now
let us apply them to you that are the children of the Church, of the society of
the Saints in reference to the glorious Deliverance that the great God has
wrought for his English Sion, from the Popish Plot of the Powder Treason, a
mercy to be celebrated this day with Praises, and to be commemorated throughout
all generations. Behold, O ye Saints, the Lord of hosts has brought salvation
this day to Sion: Rejoice and be glad, Arise, shine. O let the high praises of
the most high God, be this day in your hearts and mouths. Take a large prospect
of the Lords mercies, and then lift up your voices in joyful acclamations of
Hallelujah. And that you may rightly celebrate the glorious solemnities of the
great King,

Lamps in your hands, and view that Den of darkness, wherein the hellish
Monster that would have devoured Gods holy Ones, was almost hatched. A dark
Vault there was under the Parliament House, where this deadly Monster brooded
by Popish Policy, should have been brought forth, had it not been stopped and
stifled in the birth, through Divine mercy, by the hand of the All-knowing, and
All-powerfull God. This was a work of darkness in a place of darkness, the
contrivance of the children of darkness, by the instigation of the Prince of
darkness, against the children of Light. Thus a Vail of darkness was drawn
over the foul face of this horrible wickedness. This was an hidden enterprise
against Gods hidden ones. Had this taken effect, hell had broken loose from the
bowels of earth. This was an attempt to have blown up with one blast from the
mouth of hell, the Parliament, Prince and Peers, and so suddenly to have
involved our pleasant and peaceable Land in confusion and blood. For had but
this Thundercloud burst, many showers of blood had been poured down upon
England. This was Satan's strange Engine, by which he would have attempted to
have sent up many bodies in a moment, nearer to heaven, that he might have
drawn down many thousand souls for ever into the bottom of hell. For surely, if
the Head had been cut off, the body would have soon died; if the Mother had
been slain, the children of her bosom, that hung at her breasts, would have
presently perished: If the Light had been put forth by this poisonous
earthdamp, the people of the Land would not only have been wrapped in darkness,
but have been stifled with this noisome Fog. Yet out of this Fog would have
issued that fire that would have set all England into a flame, and have burnt
up the bodies of Gods dearest and precious Saints. But Satan was chained up by
an Omnipotent hand that he could not so much as spit fire, to fright the
children of God.

shoes from your feet, and walk up to Mount Sion, and behold the Lord in his
Glory, who has vouchsaft this miraculous mercy and seasonable salvation to his
Saints. Lift up your eyes to the hills from which the help of Gods Israel comes
in all the times of their distress and danger. Get your souls sublimed in
heavenly contemplations of the wisdom, power and goodness of that great God,
whose wakefull Eye of Providence continually watches over his Church and
chosen Ones. He that sits upon a Throne of glory in the highest heavens, and
with his All-discerning Eye discovers the depths of darkness and the deeds of
men, brought forth this work of darkness into light, to the confusion of his
enemies, and the consolation of all his faithful Ones. This was the Lords
doing, and how wonderful should it appear in our eyes! O come with humble
reverence to the God of mercy, and cast your selves down at his feet with
lowliest admiration of his wonderful goodness to an excessively sinful Land.
O how ill have we requited the Lord for his love! And yet the Lord before he
vouchsafed this favor, knew what our Requital would be. O the admirable
Kindness of our God! The unworthiness of the sons of men does not obstruct
the way of those sweet mercies, that flow from the Fountain of free Love. O
prostrate your selves with humblest Adoration, at the footstool of the God of
Glory, who in his wonderful Works to the sons of men, acts merely out of free
Grace. The Lord saw when the Design was laid, and said, Hitherto shall thou
proceed and no further. It was the hand of God that drew the Curtain, and
discovered what wickedness was coucht in the dark. When the Land was ready to
be overspread with darkness, 'twas the Lord that covered it with Light. When
Popish Agents (those bloody Philistines) thought and hoped to have obscured the
Glory of Israel, the Lord still preserved the Ark of his Truth. When the great
red Dragon attempted to draw the Stars from Heaven, the great and mighty God
cast him into the bottom of hell. God caused the destruction plotted against
his own People to fall upon the heads of their enemies. This is thy God, O
Israel, this is thy Savior, O Sion; this is thy Lord-Protectour, O England.

Hearts (in stead of Harps) to join in a gracious Consort, to sing forth the
glorious Praises of the only wise and strong God, your Savior. Labor to wind
up your hearts to the highest pitch of hearty praisefullnesse and thanksgiving.
Say with Moses, Exodus 15.11. Who is like unto thee, O Lord, amongst the gods!
Who is like unto thee, Glorious in Holiness, Fearful in Praises, doing
Wonders! To heighten your hearts into spiritual Raptures of Angelical
Hallelujah's, consider that Religion it self, the Glorious Gospel and Precious
Ordinances of Jesus Christ, are particular privileges, which as to the
Continuance and Preservation of them, are wrapped up in this great Deliverance
wherewith the merciful hand of God has Crowned this sinful Nation. Had this
hellish Plot taken effect, Oh how had our precious souls been poisoned with
Popery! How had the Glorious, reviving, enriching, advancing Mysteries of the
Gospel, been locked up in an unknown Tongue! How had our Waters been embittered
with Gall and Wormwood, and our Rivers turned to blood! How had our immortal
souls been starved to eternal death, for want of spiritual food! Oh how had
we lived in darkness, died in sin, and dropped into bell! Now reckon up the
precious Mercies and glorious Favors that have been brought unto England, and
home to your own souls, by the door of this Deliverance, and you will see and
say that you have infinite cause to praise the Lord to eternity. O you that
have had your drooping spirits and dying hearts revived and wonderfully
refresh't with the precious influences of grace, falling in Gods Ordinances,
What are these Ordinances worth? You that have had your hard and sinful hearts
softened and sanctified by the distilling dews of grace in the Gospel of Christ,
What is this Gospel worth? You that have had your empty and humble hearts
filled with a Heaven of glorious Joys in Communion with Jesus Christ, What is
the enjoyment of such a sweet, Evangelicall, Soul-ravishing Fellowship with
Christ Jesus worth? O precious Christ! O incomparable Mercies! O unutterable
Joys! You would not, no (I know) you would not lose these glorious
Gospel-Favours, for ten thousand worlds of Gold. O precious souls, now you have
precious Christ, communicating himself to you in his blessed Ordinances! O ye
humble hearts, now you have the Spirit of God enriching you with saving Graces,
and breathing into the sweetest sacred Comforts. O happy Saints, now the
windows of Heaven are opened, and plenteous showers of Grace, infinitely more
precious then showers of Gold are poured out upon you. The dours of Gods House
stand open, and you may enjoy that one thing in which the desires of the Saints
are all summed up. You may dwell in the House of the Lord, happily all the
days of your life, to behold the Beauty of the Lord, and to enquire in his
holy Temple, Psalm. 27.4. Gods Treasury is wide open, you may store your selves
with blessings. Gods Cabinet is unlock't, you may enrich your selves with
Jewels and Pearls of price, with saving and sanctifying Graces. The Fountain of
Life is unsealed, and you may drink freely, and be satisfied with living
Consolations. Now God drops Pearls out of heaven, and strews the earth with
Mercies: O how pleasant now are the paths of salvation, which God has strewn
all along with the flowers of his love. Blessed are you Believers, you now have
a habitation in Jerusalem, who might have been slain in the streets of Rome:
You dwell now in Sion, who might have lived in Sodom: You are now in a Heaven
on this side Heaven, who might have been in a hell before you had been in hell.
Oh what shall we render to the Lord for this his wonderful goodness to us:
Let us even take up the Cup of salvation and praise the Name of the Lord. God
has inricht us with the gold of Sion, O come therefore and let us offer up
unto him the Incense of Praise. O ye children of the Most high God, Behold the
night is past, the darkness of Popery, and the mists of superstition are
dispersed and dispel'd, and the Sun of the Gospel (by a miracle of divine mercy)
stands still in our Horizon; your Light is continued, and the glory of the Lord
rests upon you, Arise, shine. Trim up this day your shining Lamps of Joy,
fill them with the sweet Oil of Love, and let them burn and blaze up to the
Heavens in a holy Flame of Praise: Set them burning upon the Altars of your
broken hearts, and they shall burn in the Temple of the Lord for ever. Arise
therefore ye Saints and shine on Earth: This Deliverance is but the shadow of a
greater: For though you lie down at length and sleep a while in your Graves,
yet you shall Arise and shine in Heaven with a perfect Radiancy of
incomprehensible Glory throughout all Eternity, Amen.

(...).

