The Welch-Mans COMPLEMENTS: OR, The true manner how Shinkin woed his
Sweetheart Maudlin after his return from KENTON Battle.

Also fair Maudlins Reply and answer to all Shinkins Welsh Complements, full of
merry wit and pleasant mirth.

I Thank you Welsh Ienken


God save you sweet mist^is.




Printed at London, 1643.

The Welch-Mans Complements, or the true manner how Shinkin wooed his
Sweetheart Maudlin after his return from Kenton battle, etc.
Sweet Maudlin.

AFter her return from Edg-hill, which her may speak with grief of heart, her
chanced to cast her eyes on your incomparable be^uties, by whose powerful
influences her was more wounded and killed and slain, then her was at Kenton
battle, and her did find that the sword wounds gently, but Love has no mercy
when it does once strike the heart with deep affection, so that her can get no
Surgeons in Hospitals or any where else, but only the favor of her beloved
Maudlin, must as it is the cause, be also the cure of all her grief and
forrowes. For when her first beheld her, your hair (fair Maudlin) seemed to
resemble the golden strings on her Harp, your eyes shined like bright stars,
and in your cheeks appeared more Roses and Lyllies then there be leek^ in her
gardens in Wales; whereupon, her was fully resolved to make you the Mistress of
her affections, and after many considerations of her own estate, and how fit a
match you would be for her in the honest ways of matrimony being a matter of
money; for now her will stand upon her high terms, having been a Soldier: her
thought with good audacities and boldness, to utter her mind in as good
languages as her could, desiring her not to look upon her with her Welsh frowns
(for frowns will spoil her beauties) but with a smiling countenance behold the
dolours and griefs which Shinkin sustaines for her sakes, and give her such a
favorable answer that her may be comforted, and cherish hopes and assurances
to gain her favor: will her, love Shinkin, what do her say?


Maudlins flouting reply to Mr. Shinkin. MAster Shinkin, I perceive you can
flatter exceeding well, but my eyes being full of my own wants, can see nothing
in me worthy your affection. The War is kinder then I can prove, from whence
by the nimble agility of your feet you returned safe and sound, and pity it
were that the sword should devour so brave a Gentleman as you, I mean when you
are well apparelld; your folly, not my beauty has wounded you, if Love do
occasion your sickness, wholesome kitchen physic will cure you, especially
Leek-pottage, for leekes be perfectly ripe on St. Taffies day, which will
cleanse and purify your blood, and purge out the wanton humors that disturb
your brains. Do not curse your self and me in welsh, if I refuse your offer of
marriage: for your suite purchased in Long-lane, and your mountainous language,
such as Goats would utter if they could speak, cannot move me: therefore be
patient in your new wooing apparel, for your love is bootlesse because you
come in stockings, and therefore trouble not your brain with studying hard
words and speeches, to demonstrate your affection, Welch-men were never true.


Shinkin scratching her head to quicken her invention, made this Reply to her
Sweetheart Maudlin. HOw! what vile indignities does her use upon her true
Britains. Sweet Maudlin, if her do distrust her fidelities or any other
abilities, her shall find her as true as her smock to her white pellies, or he^
backside, and her will stick unto her in all fortunes and courageous
magnamities, fight for her as long as her Welsh hook holds, let her but grant
her affections, and make Shinkin happy in the fruition of her Love, which her
shall esteem above all her dirty cattle and her lands and houses in her
possession in Wales.


Maudlins mocking answer to Shinkin. PArdon my rash words if they have
offended, I have read of the welsh magnanimity in old stories, but could never
understand it without book, it was reported unto me for certain, that your
crowns were terribly cracked at Kenton field, and I love you better then to have
you beaten again, or to see you throw away your arms, and confide in your legs
for my sake: Neither will I put you to that service which my smock does
under-goe, since your strong breath contaminated, does render you unworthy to
kiss my backside: As for your cattle I believe they are white, some of them
gray, and some with a black list down their backs; you have called them in
Welsh, Moabites, and Nittibites, and graze only in your bosom; and those great
pig houses whereof you boast are the buildings of your welsh conceits, and are
indeed nothing but Castles in the Air.


His answer, wherein Shinkin does make long Protestations of her love, with
many great and large promises. IF her doubt the words and affirmations of her
affectionate servant Shinkin, let her trample down with her into Wales, her
horse would be as proud as her self to carry fair Maudlin behind her, or if
her will her shall ride before her, but that her would not have the beast come
betwixt her mistress thighs, which place Shinkin only does deserve and merit:
but if sweet Maudlin would be pleased to guild over her sublunary buildings in
Wales with her presence, her would then when her eye does survey her house and
lands derived from her Ancestors, believe all her reports to be verities and
truth, and not coined out of her brains as her Welsh Almanacks and other
inventions by her lately produced, to keep people from talking of Treason
against the King: for her has in Wales great pig-houses, so that her may ride
in at the door with her pike upon her shoulder, and great ponds round about
behind her house, which are full of red herrings and other good fish,
especially round and sound trouts, and then her has a number of Outhouses in
her backside, besides her Tennants do pay her good pounds, shillings, and
pence for their Farms which they hold under her, being the Lord of all the
soyles and lands thereabouts, besides her has great store of goats and young
kidds, which her will bake in venison pasties, and Maudlin will say was
excellent good meat, and for her goats, they yield her good milk to make her
welsh cheese strong and fat, and toast the better, and from her sheeps back her
get good wool whereof her will make her petticoats to wear next her smocks, and
her self jerkins and doublets of freeze; Her have tame fowl, as cocks, hens,
geese, ducks, which walk about in her yards, and a Conny-burrough of her own
on her backside, but not so good as that which Maudlin has on her for-side.
And her is resolved to give Maudlin all her lands, her houses, her pig-houses,
her farms, all her goats, young kidds, and sheep, and all her Cocks and
Cocke-geldings, her Hens and all their eggs with chickins in them, her geese
and all her pretty ducks, nay, all her conies that ever her saw, felt, or
understood, so that Shinkin may enjoy and possess all her grounds and arables,
and all her other commodities, her will not say coneys though, if Maudlin would
be so pleased, her would convert her self into any shapes and figures, and for
her sake become a Warriner in green with a long staff on her shoulder, so
that sweet Maudlin would be the park and the coney, for then her would be the
cunny-catcher. Her crave pardon for her boldness, and if her tongue have
thrown out any rash or lewd languages, her will plead her cause in kisses, and
from Mrs. Maudlins sweet lips obtain a sealed pardon, which her could hardly
obtain if her should come before her Welsh Judges for felonies. Thus her will
give away all her has, and her self, and all about her, and make her self as
poor as any Britain in Wales, that her may purchase the Love and affections
of her dearest Maudlin^, give her therefore her pray you some good kind answers
that may comfort her despayrinng hearts as much as her own Country metheglin
does.


Maudlins scoffing reply to his great promises and protestations, with some
other jests. GOod Shinkin, I must desire you not to be offended, if I compare
your long speech unto your high mountains, the one is barren of grass, the
other without wit or sense: your promises are as long as your Welsh miles, you
know not what occasion maids have sometimes to step out into a corner: and if I
were not a Virgin, your long Orations would put me to much extremity: your
houses in Wales (as I said before) are nothing I believe but castles in the
air, and they smell so strong of leekes and toasted cheese, that the scent
thereof would make me loath all your pig-houses: And though your Welsh N^ggs be
beasts of better carriage then yourselfe; you shall not carry me like a
cloake-bag behind you, and your welsh Naggs are so small of stature, the people
seeing us ride through Country Towns, would think we rode double upon a
hobbyhorse. And for your conies keep them you have, for you are like to get no
more of me, though I believe you are an arrant cunny-catcher, therefore my
answer is and must be, I cannot love you.


Shinkin uses many other arguments and good sound reasons to persuade Maudlin
to love her and join with her in Matrimony. HOw! cannot her love Shinkin? call
back that word ag^ine, lest it make her mad and out of her wits, because her
cannot obtain her desires in her affections. Pray tell her Maudlin what was
hinder her approbations and good wills to Shinkin, was her not born a
Shentleman by many hundred descen^s, and derive her pedigrees from Adam, and
beyond too? and does her not bear her Schutchions charged with three woodcocks
to denote and signify the great wisdom of her families and Progenitors, from
her Forefathers and Fore-mothers: and therefore if Maudlin would be pleased to
join with her in matrimonies, her could not disparage her self, but her should
bring her a great deal of posterities of her own begetting, which should be
all Shentlemen of Wales after her decease, and her assure you Maudlin there was
great differences between rude Cotidons and clownes and her Shentleman of
Wales, for Shinkin though her say it, and may swear it, was bred up in all
good educations and qualities as well as her best Gentries: her can dance in as
good measures and fashions, and cut capers three yards above ground by the
magnanimities and agilities of her strong back: and was take her Welsh harp
between her legs and play thereon such sweet Dittyes and madrigalls and true
lessons, as would ravish her before her matrimonies, and if her could be so
happy as to have Maudlin between her legs, her would teach her a lesson that
should exceed all pricke-song, and make her better harmony and music then all
her harps could do, for her love no in^^^uments so well as Maudlins, which her
know how to stop and finger as well as the best musicians in the whole world.
Her would therefore desire her to join with her in matrimonies, and her will
play upon her instruments day night, if her would condescend to make marriages
with her true love and affection: besides, Skinkin has many other qualities
may induce you, dear Maudlin, to love her in all integrities: what say her now
to her wooing argument and reasons, Shinkin knows how to speak in complements
and strong languages.


Maudlins brief, but very scoffing answer. IF Shinkin be a Gentleman, let him
express it in generous qualities, I love not bragging, but perhaps Shinkin,
that is all you have to show to make you a Gentleman. Talk not to me of your
coat, which perhaps may lie at the Brokers as well as your other apparel
does, and for your arms, your legs (as I heard, proved your best friends at
Edg-hill) and for your skill on the Harp, the best music that you would make
me, would be silence, and so seem wise.


Shinkin. O be not so cruel and hard-hearted, sweet Mrs. Maudlin, that
physiognomy of yours promises better things. O that color in those cheeks
which strives to put down the ruby and obscure the rose and that for-head which
shine like bacon-rine, whose crooked nose which down to her chinne does bow,
which will save her many a penny in buying of shoo^ing-hornes when her wants
them to pull on her shoes withal.


Maudlin. Out you jeering Welsh thief, I hate thy flattering words, I cannot
endure thy face, much less thy rude expressions; I am sorry I have lost so
much time, and spent so much breath to answer thee in thy foolish propositions
and questions.


Shinkin. Her do owe her as many gratulations for her patience and favor
afforded her at this time in hearing her complements, as there be ^aicocks in
June, and as many thanks as there be roses in May.


Maudlin. You are mighty fluent in your eloquent tongue; but for all your fair
words you shall not make me yield my self to your goatish desires.


Shinkin. Sweet Maudlin, her do honor the very ob-umbrations of her shoo-ties,
her do reverence her very posteriours, and would salute her behind and before,
whenever her meet her, sweet Maudlin: O Love and Pease-pottage and garlic
are three strong things, her will be always her friend, and stand to her upon
all occasions, if her would but love her.


Maudlin. I think so too if you had power; I do imagine since you have lost
so much blood as you told me you did at Kinton field, that you have nothing
standing but your ears: I believe you may cry three times so ho, before it will
stand once.


Shinkin. Sweet Maudlin love her, and that without delay* And cast not with thy
crabbed looks, a proper man away.


Maudlin. How, do you call your self a proper man? by my troth Master Shinkin
I see no such matter about you, as either propernesse or comeliness, I tell you
plainly, I cannot fancy your person nor love your conditions.


Shinkin. If her will but love her, her shall have all varieties that her heart
can wish, and also sorts of foul and fish: As Duck, Mallard and Woodcocks,
Wigeons, and all dainty content; for fish, her have poor Shonn, Sprats, and
Bloat-herrings, and Red-herrings with bells about their necks, her shall have
good store of Welsh wine, as Perry and Cider ancient Cairiwhiblin and excellent
Ale, her shall have a mountain of Coul-bobby, which is in plain English good
cheeze ready tosted at her commands, and a huge hill of sheeze at her becks:
new sheeze as new as her moon: and old sheeze as ancient as the Creation; such
sheeze as is able to go alone: besides her shall have raw sheeze; then her
shall have warm or toasted sheeze; then her shall have baked sheeze, then fried
sheeze, then broyled cheeze, fod cheeze parboyl'd cheeze. and stewed cheeze,
all these her shall have if her will but love her: then her shall have her
Welsh Ambassador or her Welsh Fiddler every morning to bid good morrow to her
sweet Maudlin at her chamber-window.


Maudlin. Good honest Shinkin for bear your earnest suite of wooing; I tell you
I cannot love, nor do I care for your company; nor do I approve of any of
those things which are in your Country.


Shinkin. O that her were any thing that her Maudlin did love: would her were a
jackes, or her close-stool, or her close-stoole-pan; or the lock and key to her
close-stool, then her Maudlin would desire her sometimes: I would her were any
thing, so her might enjoy her corpusculum; then would her have about with her
Nunquam-Satis: O that sweet Angels face of thine, fair Maudlin has ravelled
me, I am enamelled with thy beauty; I am in love with thee over my high
shoes: your face is more fair sweet Maudlin, then Bro^k my faders cow; o
those hawke eyes which twinckle like the seven stars in Lumbard-street;
whose ivory teeth give light like the gloworme in a dark evening to Charles
his wane, when her moon is in the flock-bed.


Maudlin. Away with your cotton candle eloquence, I care not for your
Calve-skin jests, there is nothing in you but fustian and bum-basted
complements, full of froath and emptiness.


Shinkin. Good Mrs. Maudlin, grant her but one thing, and then do her
pleasures.


Maudlin, What is that? I would do any thing to be rid of a foolish, idle,
Welsh prating parret, that loves to hear himself talk nothing but pedle^s
French.


Shinkin. Do you caknow Pye-corner Law, or Pasty-nook Customs?


Maudlin. No not I: how should I know the Law or custom, who was never there
or ever heard of it.


Shinkin. Then her will tell her in rhyme, He that will woe a maid must cog,
lie, and flatter, And he that will woe a widow must down with his breeches and
at her.


Maudlin, Out you Capricornish, Goatish, baudy filthy Welch-man, I scorn thy
motion; I render thee odious in words; I could spit in thy face how dare thou
to be so bold to ask a Gentlewoman such a question.


Shinkin.. Her hopes Mrs Maudlin that her is not so angry as her seems to be,
her hopes it is but from the teeth outward.


Maudlins final and last answer. MAster Shinkin I am sorry you have placed
your love so unhappily, I must move in the obedience of a daughter, my father
would not have me match to a Welsh goat, and therefore I must tell you your
suite is hopeless, fruitless, and I am glad that I am to go into the
Country, that I may not be troubled with your Welsh complements comprised with
so much false English, and welsh wit, which is no better then English nonsense.


Shinkins answer and lamentation for the loss of his Sweetheart Maudlin
Sweet Maudlin, Shinkin know not whether or no her shall live to suffer the
injuries of her disdain; Has her spent all her wooing complements which her
studied with all her pains and diligence, to be scornfully rejected, refused
and abused? Her now perceives, and that all women-kinde do but put flouts and
jeeres upon her Contrymen for her bad languages and expressions of her
affections; well Maudlin, let her now at her departing be so kind and
courteous unto her to let her imprint a kiss upon her lips in the way of
salutations, and so farewell sweet Maudlin.


Maudlins answer. I Dare not, I am afraid your breath smells of toasted cheese,
farewell without a kiss.


Shinkin. One sweet kiss sweet Maudlin.


Maudlin. If you will needs kiss, take me about the middle and kiss the
heaviest end.


Shinkins conclusion and resolution. WEll, Her will in the absence of sweet
Maudlin excuse her cruelty, but not hang he self, though she be gone into the
Country.

But her will seek her out and all paths tread,
Till Shinkin be to Maudlin married.
Was find her I warrant her, and then have at her for a second part of her
complements and wooing languages, and this is Shinkins conclusions and
Resolution for this times.


FINIS.

